Skyline Stakes

Golden opportunity: Tommy Berry and Valentia take out the Skyline Stakes at Randwick. Photo: Jenny Evans

Tommy Berry lost one stallion prospect as his Golden Slipper ride when Fighting Sun went amiss, but he’s rusted on to another destined for stud duties in Valentia.

The $1.35 million Magic Millions sales-topper lived up to his price tag winning the group 2 Skyline Stakes and earning a spot in next month’s Golden Slipper.

‘‘You always want to see those horses come out and win black-type [races], and it’s exciting where he could go,’’ Coolmore boss Michael Kirwan said. ‘‘We don’t know about the Slipper at the moment, but he’s in it and we know he’s going to be better as the races get further.’’

The Skyline Stakes has developed a reputation as a stallion-making race with Choisir (2002), Snitzel (2005), Casino Prince (2006) and All American (2008) all on the honour roll since the turn of the century.

Advertisement

While Coolmore will wait until early this week before announcing a decision about Valentia’s Slipper intentions, an hour later they were scratching their heads after $2.4m purchase Wilderness flopped at Bendigo. The David Hayes-trained colt sat three wide, but found little in the straight to finish a well-beaten fourth behind Eloping.

Berry didn’t need convincing about Valentia’s chances in the world’s richest race for two-year-olds. The Fastnet Rock colt will be aiming to become the first horse to win the Skyline Stakes-Golden Slipper double since Dance Hero in 2004.

Valentia ($4.20) eased off the heels of stablemate Giuliani ($4) and Gold Force ($2.40 favourite) up the Randwick rise, breezing to a half-length win from Mr Bogart ($26) with Modoc ($12) the same margin further back in third.

‘‘He feels like he’ll be very impressive in a Slipper,’’ Berry said. ‘‘He’s got the right attitude. He was a lot sharper today and travelled a lot better for me in the run. He’s a lot stronger.

‘‘The other day he got to the front in the last 50 metres, but you could see today how much sharper he was. He got there in two strides, which I didn’t necessarily want, as I thought the leaders might take me a bit further into it than they did. He’s come a long way from where he was at the start of the prep.’’

Valentia didn’t have it all his own way before the race either, overcoming a pre-race drama. He was a victim of the well-backed Time For War’s antics in the barriers, triggering Valentia to burst through the gates before pulling up within 100metres of the start. Time For War was a late scratching after tossing jockey Nash Rawiller and running a crowd-pleasing lap before being captured by the clerk of the course.

‘‘He was actually quieter when he went back around to the gates the second time compared to the first time,’’ Berry said.

Valentia’s trainer, Gai Waterhouse, said: ‘‘He’s quite a lovely-natured horse. With that mess-up he came back around and walked straight in showing what a great temperament he’s got.’’

While Valentia has already booked his Slipper ticket, Anthony Cummings will send Mr Bogart to the boys’ version of the last chance saloon in the Pago Pago Stakes. ‘‘He’s just been a bit dumb, but is learning with racing,’’ he said. ‘‘He will be better again in two weeks and if he wins he’ll be great on the back up.’’