Holly Meyer cheers for the Green Bay Packers, eats a lot of cheese and tells stories about northeast Wisconsin.

Meyer, a reporter for The Post-Crescent in Appleton, Wis., splits her time between early-morning breaking news and the Godbeat.

Her religion writing earned her the 2014 Cassels Religion Reporter of the Year Award from the Religion Newswriters Association. That award honors excellence in religion reporting at small-sized newspapers.

She grew up in rural Illinois and started her reporting career at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville’s student newspaper.

"That’s where I learned you can get paid to do this really neat job," said Meyer, a 2009 graduate.

Her first professional gig was at the Rapid City Journal in South Dakota, where she spent about three years and covered everything from ranch families to police shootings. She joined The Post-Crescent's metro team in 2012.

Post-Crescent Media is a Gannett-owned newsroom that produces a daily newspaper with circulation of about 35,000 and digital platforms that account for about 7 million page views a month. It’s one of 10 Gannett-owned newsrooms in the state, "which means we do a lot of statewide collaborations," Meyer said. "Plus, USA Today frequently picks up our stories."

Q: What percentage of your time do you spend on the religion beat? What's a typical workweek like for you (and yes, I know it's humorous to ask a journalist that question)?

A: I spend about 50 to 60 percent of my time on the faith beat. I’m the newspaper’s early-morning breaking news reporter, which means I start my days at 6 a.m. making phone calls to police and fire departments and checking the Internet for anything that I might have missed. I chase after whatever breaks until about 11 a.m. when I pass the baton to my evening counterpart.

I work on faith stories when I’m not reporting on mayhem, which thankfully is a decent chunk of time since Appleton can be a sleepy town. My faith coverage usually shows up on the front page or featured spot on digital platforms in the form of enterprise pieces, or as an anchor on one of our key inside pages as a short faith-and-values column that runs every couple of weeks.

On occasion these roles mix, like the time I covered the controversy surrounding a rural Wisconsin church’s annual pig-wrestling event that was drawing national ire from animal-rights advocates.