Ricky Rubio picked a fine time to call out Minnesota Timberwolves teammate Kevin Love for his poor leadership. Just as rumors began leaking like an infant without a diaper concerning Kevin Love’s desire to get out of Minnesota, Rubio made some potentially inflammatory comments. On May 10th in an interview withEnrique Garcia of basketamericano.com, Rubio did the equivalent of calling out Love for not being the “kind of leader” the Timberwolves need.

In the end of the season conversation, Rubio was asked about Kevin Love. Although Rubio believes Love is an incredible talent who puts up team leading numbers, Love is not the kind of vocal leader the young Timberwolves need. In fact, Rubio believes that either he or Kevin Martin would be a better fit to lead the Minnesota Timberwolves.

The comments are sure to raise eyebrows while adding fuel to the Kevin Love trade rumors. According to sources, Love is ready to be traded to a hand full of teams this offseason, including the Lakers, the Warriors and the Chicago Bulls. While Love has proven to be an elite power forward in the NBA, he has yet to prove he can actually lead a team to victory. The Minnesota Timberwolves were built around Love and Rubio and never seemed to produce winning results. As Rubio said, Love can put up eye-popping numbers, but can he lead?

If the Timberwolves do not decide to trade Kevin Love, it seems clear that he will walk in the summer of 2015 when his contract expires. Their only hope is to look for a trade to gain draft picks and cap space. If they move Love, next season is probably a wash for the team. But a strong free agency class in 2015 gives them the chance to steal a player or two. However, they must first plug the gaping whole they have on the bench. When Rick Adelman retired at the end of the season, it left the Timberwolves directionless for the foreseeable future.

Another concern with Ricky Rubio’s comments on Kevin Love is the lack of proof that Rubio is ready to lead. The 2013-2014 season was his first healthy season in the NBA, and he still has not proven that he can score. While his passing and court vision are unmatched, teams are developing a better understanding of how to guard him. Unless he improves his shooting, Rubio will fade into irrelevance soon.

Do you believe Ricky Rubio is capable of leading the Minnesota Timberwolves if Kevin Love leaves?

[Image via thehoopsdoctors.com]