A decision to begin charging vendors for cart services at next year’s Denver Comic Con has been rescinded, according to fliers at the convention Sunday.

The Denver Post reported Sunday that moving materials into the Colorado Convention Center in 2015 might cost vendors $65 to $95 for 100 pounds of goods. One vendor said he would be paying more than half of his earnings from the show just to move boxes if the new fee were to be charged.

“We’ve heard your concerns about materials handling (drayage) and fully understand your apprehensions about the unknown dollar amounts,” the fliers said. “We’ve decided to act on those concerns and eliminate those charges from the 2015 contracts now and the foreseeable future.”

“The wildly successful Con we’re all experiencing this week is a collaborative effort,” said Christine Tubbs, one of the event’s lead organizers and the executive director of Pop Culture Classroom. “Our merchants are important to us, and they’re important to our fans. So it’s only natural that we would be responsive to their needs.”

Many vendors who spoke with The Denver Post said that despite the elimination of cart service fees, they are still frustrated with the costs of the event, especially the planned increase in booth fees.

Russ Tabor of AAAA Comic Book has been selling comic books since 1992 and has been a vendor at every Denver Comic Con. He said he’s angry about the increase, but “I’ll probably come back and pay it. Prices are still getting pretty high.”

Thousands flooded the Colorado Convention Center for the final day, boasting colorful costumes and eager to enjoy all things science fiction and fantasy.

Event organizers said 86,500 people attended this year’s convention, far more than the 61,000 who attended last year and the 27,700 who attended the inagural event in 2012.

“I like that there’s just so many people here who love nerdy stuff,” said 29-year-old Katie Hofgard. “I feel like I’m at home amongst the nerds.”

Jesse Paul: 303-954-1733, jpaul@denverpost.com or twitter.com/JesseAPaul

Staff writers Rex Santus and Korene Gallegos contributed to this report.