James Marienthal, founder of Silver Wave Records in Boulder, stands next to a wall of album art from the label's collection of artists. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

Since Boulder's Silver Wave Music was founded in 1986, each decade has brought a significant, transformational change to the independent music label specializing in Native American, World and New Age music.

In 1995, as the business experienced its heyday, Silver Wave founder James Marienthal bought a three-level commercial building off Broadway and Portland Place, where his company filled the top floor.

About six years ago, Silver Wave's physical CD distribution and the day-to-day administration tasks were merged with Spring Hill Music, a Boulder-based New Age label. Spring Hill manages those operations from its location in south Boulder.

"It was very synchronistic," Marienthal said.

In 2014, more shifts could come for Marienthal's one-man operation of overseeing the CD and digital distribution businesses — the latter of which is handled by a firm in Oakland, Calif. — and managing third-party licensing and publishing.

He is selling the box bay window-laden building at 2475 Broadway, and situating Silver Wave as a home-based business.

"It was the perfect size for the company at the time," Marienthal said.

At its peak, the eight-person Silver Wave filled the top floor of the building at 2475 Broadway. From the mid-'90s to 2003, gross sales topped or hovered around the $1 million mark.

As the CD industry suffered amid the rise of digital music, Silver Wave felt the decline as well — albeit not until about 2005. The Native American and New Age categories' drops were not as immediately sharp as other genres, he said.

Gross sales now are in the $250,000 range.

"Any time it's dwindled for us, it's dwindled for everybody," he said.

The licensing business remains fairly active, he said, noting he receives requests for songs to be used in movies, independent films, local TV commercials and even mobile apps.

Marienthal said he finds the licensing aspect of the business enjoyable.

It's fascinating to hear some of the stories behind the projects and then see how the music intertwined in the finish product.

It's also interesting to see new life for older titles, including songs such as "Sun and Water" by Danny Heines, the first artist signed to Silver Wave.

"It's a really beautiful piece of music," Marienthal said. "It has sort of a timeless quality to it."

The song was licensed for an iPhone app.

"A song produced over 25 years ago still has a little bit of positive cash flow coming from it and a new use for it," he said.

While the amount of new artists signed has tapered, Silver Wave has remained active in releasing some compilations that include a world music lullaby collection and titles such as Spirit Walk, which weaves together 15 tracks for a medium-tempo walking workout.

Marienthal said he expects Silver Wave's business to remain "status quo" for the coming years, but he hopes to focus solely on the business as opposed to also taking the role of property owner and manager.

The building, which has roughly 25 offices, currently is occupied by Marienthal, Public News Service and about 10 other tenants. Marienthal said that the Public News Service has expressed interest about forming an investment group to potentially purchasing the property.

Lark Corbeil, founder of the Boulder-based Public News Service, said her staff received notice of the potential building sale last week.

"We couldn't help but wonder about options," she said, declining to comment further.

Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332, wallacea@dailycamera.com or Twitter.com/dc_alicia.