Topics: AlterNet, Benjamin Netanyahu, IDF, Israel, Sharia Courts, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s speech to Congress yesterday marked a point of historic acrimony between our two countries, as it was the first time in modern history that a foreign leader spoke to Congress in a specific attempt to undermine U.S. policy. As former Bush ambassador to Israel Daniel Kurtzer admits, it was as if Netanyahu’s “arrogance [has] reached a point where he assumes Israel will ask and the United States simply [says] yes.”

But for many American conservatives, the Netanyahu visit was a moment of celebration; some even openly wished that Netanyahu was our president instead of Obama. Here’s one example, from Twitter:

Click to enlarge.

Public Policy Polling actually did a poll that found Netanyahu has a 57 percent approval rating among Republican voters, higher than any potential Republican presidential nominee.

But there are a number of reasons conservatives should be wary about wanting Netanyahu as president, ranging from Israel’s left-wing healthcare policy to its lack of a constitution to limit government power. Here are five:

1. Israel’s Universal Healthcare: While American conservatives rallied en masse in 2009 and 2010 to try to stop the modest Affordable Care Act, even Israel’s most right-wing parties don’t object to that country’s universal healthcare system. Healthcare there today is managed by the 1995 National Health Insurance Law, which mandates that every Israeli citizen has a right to be covered by one of the country’s four non-profit HMOs, with about 40 percent of the costs being covered through taxation from income and the state paying for the other 60 percent.

2. Israel’s Government Directly Pays for Abortions: In the United States, even most Democrats do not call for state subsidies for abortion and numerous other reproductive healthcare options. But Israel last year included abortion in the basket of health services covered under state-approved HMOs; the Times of Israelnotes that this makes Israel’s abortion law “among the world’s most liberal.”