Daily Journal

WASHINGTON – The Tennessee Valley Authority’s president and CEO Bill Johnson and other TVA executives visited the Nuclear Energy Institute’s Washington, D.C., office last week to answer questions about Watts Bar 2 – the first nuclear power plant granted an operating license by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission in nearly 20 years.

Johnson, TVA Chief Nuclear Officer Joe Grimes and Mike Skaggs, senior vice president of Watts Bar operations and construction, joined NEI President and CEO Marvin Fertel to discuss several issues, including the work remaining on Watts Bar 2 before it adds its 1,150 megawatts of capacity to the grid, and the present and future value of nuclear energy as a zero-carbon energy source.

Q: What is the future of nuclear energy for TVA?

Johnson: We recently completed a long-term integrated resource plan. One of the conclusions of that plan is that when we finish what we are currently building, we will not need to build any new baseload (capacity) until the early- to mid-2030s, really reflecting the potential retirement of some of our nuclear assets in that timeframe. So we have about 10 years to think about it. We have great interest in (small modular reactors). We are preparing a site that will be ready when the market has an offering to give us. So far, there is no SMR design to purchase. As for the unfinished Bellefonte reactor site in Alabama, we will not need a large baseload unit for the next 15 years or so. We will continue to keep that as an option but are not pursuing it actively.

Q: Do the nuclear plants shutting down in other parts of the country concern you?

Johnson: We do not see any immediate threat to our plants. We operate our own system; we have a public power model where our partners are pleased with the product they get and the price at which they get it. So I don’t worry about this issue at TVA. We do worry a lot about this issue in the country. The fact that we would let nuclear plants close because of market dynamics or other things in the short term is a tremendous threat. It is the only mass source of low-cost, carbon-free power. I really think it’s a mistake for us to close these plants because of the way the markets are designed.

Fertel: I couldn’t agree more. We’re closing very safe, well-operated plants because of market dysfunction. If we don’t fix the market we’ll be losing not only the (fuel) diversity and grid stability that nuclear plants provide but also their great environmental benefits – nuclear plants are not only our largest source of zero-carbon energy, they also emit no criteria pollutants. We’re looking at the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the states and the regional transmission organizations to help us in this regard, especially toward a more level playing field in the energy markets … Premature closures of nuclear plants also cause a lot of damage to the local community and the state, so this is not only an electricity issue but a human failure, too.

Q: How many construction employees are still at the Watts Bar site and what still needs to happen before you load fuel in the reactor?

Johnson: We have about 1,500 people still on the site after a peak of about 3,500. At this point, most of the work is painting, taking down scaffolding, working the “punch list.” That workforce will be demobilizing quickly, over the next several months. We are in the home stretch of finishing up the detailed work.

Skaggs: We will finish up the testing that still remains. Once that testing is complete, it will enable us to start the process of loading the fuel inside the reactor vessel. The initial phase will then be low-power physics testing within the reactor vessel and, over time, it will progress as reactor power increases. There is a prescribed test program that happens for power ascension testing, which includes increasing power from zero percent to 100 percent. Then there are three major evolutions that we will run the plant through that will involve tripping the turbine from the plant, then returning the turbine and the final phase is full-power operation of Watts Bar 2.

Q: Do you see enough stamina in the nuclear energy industry for expansion?

Fertel: There’s no question that there is plenty of stamina in the industry. About 80 percent of our operating plants have obtained or will obtain license renewals to go from 40 years to 60 years of operation, and we think a lot of operators will begin to apply for second license renewals to extend operating lifetimes to 80 years. We’re building standardized plant designs in South Carolina and Georgia for the first time, which if we continue to do, can bring construction times down to five to seven years. This will be a big game-changer. What we need now is a recognition of the value that nuclear plants provide as we begin meeting the carbon reduction goals of the Clean Power Plan – that you can’t meet those goals without a significant role for nuclear energy in the mix.

Q: When do you expect the unit to go on line?

Johnson: Some time in the first quarter (of 2016), but I’m going to evade this question because the important thing through this whole process, especially now, is that we need to be very deliberate (in how we approach startup). We have a test pattern laid out that will take us into the first quarter. The important thing for us is not when we get it done, but that we do it the right way. We will put power on the grid before we go to commercial operations, which is actually an accounting term.

Q: How similar are the two Watts Bar reactors?

Skaggs: One of the objectives when we started the process of finishing up Watts Bar 2 was to make Watts Bar 1 and Watts Bar 2 very similar plants. There are many advantages in that. One is the lessons learned by the industry – outside TVA, within TVA and at Watts Bar 1. That plant is run very well, very safely. So Watts Bar 1 and Watts Bar 2 are mirror images. There are some slight advancements in Watts Bar 2 over Watts Bar 1 that will be picked up on and both will advance to the same place. Our operators only require one license to operate both plants.

Q: How does Watts Bar 2 change the energy profile at TVA?

Johnson: When we put Watts Bar 2 online, over the next couple of years as we change our generating fleet, we’ll be getting about 40 percent of our energy from nuclear and we’ll have reduced coal from a historic 65 percent to under 20 percent. And that’s good until about 2032, when, under a 60 year license, the first of the Browns Ferry units (in Alabama) will retire. There’s a lot of work going on about extending their operating license from 60 years to 80 years. But under a 60-year license, we’ll close the three Browns Ferry units by 2037. That’s our biggest asset, about 3,500 megawatts of nuclear. So by early next decade we’re going to have to have a plan to do something about that.

Q: Does that mean you won’t take advantage of subsequent license renewal?

Johnson: There’s not enough known yet about going from 60 to 80 years. People are getting very interested in this. Not just by 2030 but by 2050, (to meet) the targets for the (Environmental Protection Agency’s) Clean Power Plan, we need what we have and more (emission-free electricity) to have any hope of meeting the plan’s targets. We don’t have the luxury of waiting until 2030 to figure out what’s going to happen in 2032, so by 2022 we need to focus on this question.

Fertel: We’re expecting to have a couple of lead plants that will announce their intention (to apply for an 80-year license extension) by the end of this year or early 2016. This will test the NRC’s second license renewal process (and allow other companies to learn from their experience). The industry has about 30,000 megawatts of capacity that will reach the end of their 60-year licenses between 2029 and 2035. Companies need enough lead time to make the right decisions on second license renewal. There (also) are about six to eight years of sophisticated technical studies on aging management that have been done by the Electric Power Research Institute and the U.S. Department of Energy’s Idaho National Laboratory that will inform companies looking to make this decision.