For a month, Thelma Chappell lived with a persistent toothache that eventually made it difficult to chew.

When the pain began spreading to her ear, Chappell looked online for affordable dental care and insurance coverage without much luck. At 65, Chappell is retired, living on a fixed income and without dental insurance. She found help at a dental clinic run by North Dallas Shared Ministries and staffed by faculty and fourth-year students from Texas A&M University Baylor College of Dentistry and dental assistant students from Concorde Career College in Dallas.

On a visit in March, Chappell had that troubled tooth extracted, providing her much-needed relief. She was grateful that the no-fee clinic was available for seniors like her.

“After doing everything else, there isn’t sufficient funds for dental care,” Dallas resident Chappell said after her treatment. “You decide whether you’ll do dental work or you’ll eat. It’s unfair, but I found myself in this situation. I worked all my life.”

Chappell is not alone. The lack of access to affordable dental care for older Americans is a growing problem in Texas and across the country as baby boomers retire and people live longer. Many adults 65 and older lack dental insurance, according to dentists, health care workers and senior advocates.

Medicare, the largest health provider for people 65 and older, does not cover routine dental care. Dental services under Medicaid, the federal-state health coverage plan for low-income Americans, vary by state because they are considered optional benefits. Texas, for instance, does not offer Medicaid-funded dental services for older adults.

“Dental care for seniors is one of the top three unmet needs in the Dallas area,” said Martha Blaine, executive director of the Community Council of Greater Dallas, an umbrella organization that oversees the Dallas Area Agency on Aging.

With a healthy mouth reflecting general well-being, regular dental care is especially important as people age. Chronic conditions such as diabetes affect oral health and vice versa. Because older Americans often take multiple drugs, they also are prone to dry mouth or decreased saliva, which increases the risk for oral disease, according to dentists.

Without regular and proper care, seniors face myriad risks, including decay, periodontal disease and the loss of natural permanent teeth, said Dr. Helena Tapias-Perdigon, assistant professor at Texas A&M Baylor College of Dentistry in Dallas who specializes in geriatric dentistry.

“We are right now experiencing a crisis with people facing this situation,” Tapias-Perdigon said.

Yet nearly 70 percent of older Americans do not have dental insurance, according to Oral Health America, a nonprofit advocacy group. That’s because many adults lose dental coverage when they retire. About 10 percent of older adults retire with dental benefits, according to Oral Health America.

What’s more, private insurance is often costly and the Affordable Care Act does not address dental needs for seniors, further limiting access to care, according to Oral Health America’s report, “A State of Decay.”

“People are left with decisions on how to spend scarce resources,” said Beth Truett, president and CEO of Oral Health America. “Without those resources, we know from other studies we’ve done that people, at best, prioritize their oral health in position No. 4, after nutrition and other chronic diseases.”

The lack of dental access is even more acute for low-income seniors. Almost half of older adults with a household income of $35,000 or less have not seen a dentist in the past two years, according to Oral America’s public opinion poll.

Oral care at nursing and assisted-living homes is also a major concern. Tapias-Perdigon is finishing a pilot study on the oral-health status of residents at various retirement facilities.

One way that Dallas nonprofit the Senior Source champions the needs of the elderly is through its Advocacy Group for Elders. During February’s advocacy day in Austin, the group added to its list of priorities a request that elders receive daily oral care and hygiene at skilled nursing facilities and assisted-living homes. It was the first time that AGE added oral health care to its priorities. Program director Lynda Ender said the AGE council would like to see daily oral health care for residents enforced by the Texas Health and Human Services Commission.

The “State of Decay” report, released in 2013, also examined public-health factors impacting oral health for older adults by state. The report graded states based on five factors: adult Medicaid dental benefits; inclusion of older-adult strategies in state oral-health plans; edentulism (being without natural teeth); dental-health professional shortage areas; and community water fluoridation.

Texas received a 62.9 percent, or a fair grade, putting the Lone Star State in the middle of the pack.

Unlike oral-health programs for children, which have been funded and championed by nonprofits and governments for many years, there is no comprehensive plan or policy for seniors nationwide or in most states, advocates say. Finding money is one major hurdle.

“Who’s going to pay for low-cost dental care for seniors?” said Blaine of the Community Council of Greater Dallas.

As a result, many older adults are left paying out of pocket or not seeking treatment at all.

In North Texas, uninsured seniors have few options for affordable dental care.

The Texas A&M University Baylor College of Dentistry, one of the largest dental providers in the Dallas region, gets 100,000 visits annually at the school’s various clinics. Students provide treatment under the supervision of licensed clinical faculty.

The cost for treatment at the Texas A&M Baylor College of Dentistry is 30 percent to 40 percent less than fees charged at private dental offices, according to the college.

At the general dentistry clinic, about 30 percent of patients are seniors, estimates Tapias-Perdigon, the geriatric-dentistry specialist.

Meanwhile, at the clinic for Advanced Education in General Dentistry residency, a one-year training program for dental-school graduates, about 80 percent of patients are 65 and older, said Tapias-Perdigon.

Jan Houchin, 76, of Arlington has been a Texas A&M Baylor College of Dentistry patient for several years. After retiring as a judicial assistant to a bankruptcy judge in Dallas, Houchin no longer has private dental insurance.

Houchin, who recently visited the clinic to get a routine cleaning, said dental care is important for her. That’s why she visits the clinic on a regular basis.

“I’ve seen too many people with false teeth and it’s uncomfortable,” Houchin said. “I want to have my own teeth to eat properly. Besides it looks better, too.”

Texas A&M Baylor College of Dentistry students also practice outside of the school’s clinics.

Last June, the dental school began staffing three community-based clinics around the Dallas region, augmenting existing dental services for uninsured patients, said Dr. Daniel Jones, professor and chair of the dental school’s Department of Public Health Sciences.

Jones’ department oversees the training of fourth-year students at the community-based clinics, which serve uninsured and low-income clients in certain communities.

Patients either pay nothing or $25 per treatment, depending on location.

Some common problems doctors and dental students see on geriatric patients at the clinics, Jones said, are gum disease, tooth loss and decay due to dry mouth.

All three community-based clinics are seeing more geriatric patients, Jones said. At the dental clinic at North Dallas Shared Ministries, for instance, patients 50 or older represent about 40 percent of patients the clinic sees weekly, clinic director Rachel Cowley-Portillo said.

The walk-in clinic sees about 30 patients daily on Monday, Wednesday and Friday, while Tuesday and Thursday are reserved for root-canal patients, averaging about 18 to 20 each day.

“We’re seeing more elderly patients as word of mouth spreads,” Cowley-Portillo said.

The clinic, which serves residents in the northwest section of Dallas, provides routine cleaning, filling, extractions and root canals. The clinic does not provide crowns or dentures because of the expense and time involved in those treatments.

A grant enabled the North Dallas Shared Ministries to partner with Texas A&M Baylor College of Dentistry to expand its reach, said Judy Rorrie, executive director of the nonprofit organization. The dental clinic saw 1,719 patients last year, compared with 483 patients in 2013, said Rorrie, who plans to publicize the dental clinic’s services to the senior population.

During one recent morning, senior patients occupied three of the four dental chairs at the clinic.

Dallas resident Benjamin Rocha, 67, said through a Spanish interpreter that he came to the clinic for a comprehensive exam. He had been at the clinic previously for an emergency tooth extraction. He was told that he would need to return to have another tooth taken out.

Had it not been for the clinic, Rocha said it would have been difficult to seek treatment because he lives on a fixed income.

Likewise, 78-year-old Eduardo Guerra of Dallas said he would not seek oral care if the clinic were not an option. Through the Spanish interpreter, Guerra said he received treatment for the first time in his life at the clinic two months ago. His daughter, a nun who works at a local charity, told him about the clinic and urged him to go.

During his latest visit, Guerra got a cleaning and a filling. “I want to keep my teeth as long as they stay on,” he said.

Chappell knows firsthand the challenges of finding affordable dental care for seniors like her. She would like to see more dental resources and benefits for older adults.

“You can go see all the doctors you want but as a long as your teeth are the problem you’re not going to get well,” she said.

WHERE TO FIND HELP

Oral Health America: It has established an online community for older adults called Tooth Wisdom, which has a state-by-state list of resources for older adults. toothwisdom.org

Dallas County Dental Society: It occasionally holds free screenings for dental care in partnership with Texas Mission of Mercy. tdasmiles.org/Programs/Texas-Mission-of-Mercy-TMOM

It also has a list of low-cost clinics for children, adults and seniors.

dcds.org/PDFs/dental-clinics_dfw314.aspx

Texas A&M University Baylor College of Dentistry clinic: bcd.tamhsc.edu/patients

North Dallas Shared Ministries dental clinic: ndsm.org/adult- dental-clinic-1st-3rd

Irving Community Clinic: 469-800-1000

Healing Hands Ministries clinic: healinghandsdallas.org