Advocates of the virtual-visit model argue that expanding access to telehealth services would reduce costs by heading off more expensive urgent care and emergency department care, and that consumers increasingly will substitute virtual visits for in-person visits so that the total amount of services will not rise. But critics question that assumption, cautioning that consumers may use telehealth in addition to traditional in-person visits, thus boosting total spending. They also worry about the quality of video and phone visits compared with in-person visits, and whether virtual care will be coordinated with patients' regular care.

Online visits using LiveHealth Online just got better. Now you can visit with doctors, therapists, and psychologists on your smartphone, tablet or computer with a webcam * . It's quick, easy to use and super convenient since you can get the care you need from the comfort of your own home! Sign up today so you can: * See board-certified doctors 24/7. No appointments or long wait times. It's a great option for care when your own doctor isn't available. Doctors can assess your condition and even send prescriptions to the pharmacy of your choice if needed 1 . * Talk to a licensed therapist or psychologist at home. If you're feeling stressed, worried or having a tough time, we're here to help. In most cases you can make an appointment and see a therapist or psychologist in 4 days or less 2 .

The Weekly Standard http://assets.weeklystandard.com.s3.amazonaws.com/tws15/images/logo-large.png

The Weekly Standard

2016

Washington, DC

Politics

http://www.weeklystandard.com/anthem-tells-customers-to-visit-virtual-doctors-therapists-and-psychologists/article/2000891

2016-02-03T15:09

2016-02-03T15:57

Anthem Tells Customers to Visit Virtual Doctors, Therapists, and Psychologists

A growing number of major insurers are pushing their customers not to visit the doctor in person, but via phone. United Healthcare was among the first major insurers to make the switch, and most readers will remember their humorous ad announcing the new coverage, but others are joining. Anthem Blue Cross / Blue Shield announced today an expansion in its coverage of virtual visits: Online visits using LiveHealth Online just got better. Now you can visit with doctors, therapists, and psychologists on your smartphone, tablet or computer with a webcam*. It's quick, easy to use and super convenient since you can get the care you need from the comfort of your own home! Sign up today so you can: * See board-certified doctors 24/7. No appointments or long wait times. It's a great option for care when your own doctor isn't available. Doctors can assess your condition and even send prescriptions to the pharmacy of your choice if needed1. * Talk to a licensed therapist or psychologist at home. If you're feeling stressed, worried or having a tough time, we're here to help. In most cases you can make an appointment and see a therapist or psychologist in 4 days or less2.

Jim Swift

http://cdn.weeklystandard.biz/cache/280x280-ee9ab3be4d0b6bb121c32f837584fbab.jpg