Sioux Falls, SD

South Dakota's newest state park will have to wait to get a visitor's center. Construction is on hold following a discovery at Good Earth State Park at Blood Run that could shed new light into the park's ancient past.

The early arrival of winter at Good Earth State Park at Blood Run is a welcomed seasonal change to this inviting wilderness southeast of Sioux Falls.

"The Farmer's Almanac is telling us it's going to be more than average snow this year so that kind of interests us," District Park Supervisor Eric Vander Stouwe said.

The white snow sharply contrasts with the dark soil that's yielding ancient secrets underneath a wintry blanket.

"Like right through here, and come right through that way," Vander Stouwe said.

Mysterious lines in the ground, difficult to detect with the naked eye, or even with camera closeups, have caught the attention of archeologists.

"And found some of these black trenches in the clay line below the topsoil," Vander Stouwe said.

The trenches could be the handiwork of humans who may have had a centuries-long head-start on the Native Americans who used Blood Run as a trading center some 500 years ago.

"The soil that found its way into these trenches dates back about 2,000 years ago, so it pre-dates some of the community that lived here," Vander Stouwe said.

The trenches could force historians to recalibrate Blood Run's timetable when humans first lived here by some 1,500 years.

"There's no telling how far past these lines go, but you stretch it all out and it's got to be thousands of miles of trenches," Vander Stouwe said.

So far, experts haven't been able to reach any definite conclusions about the markings, which could also simply be naturally-occuring patterns in the soil . But the park doesn't want to take any chances.

Whether it's man-made or if it's natural, regardless, I think its significance tells us that we don't want to build here," Vander Stouwe said.

The discovery means the park will have to find a new spot to build a visitors center.

"Good Earth State Park is over 600 acres, so trying to find 3-and-a-half acres for a visitors center and a parking lot should be fairly easy," Vander Stouwe said.

The park has installed hundreds of feet of fencing to make sure that nobody disturbs this important site.

"We've cordoned the area off with the idea that it is a sensitive area that we don't want the general public out here digging around, looking at it, or trying to protect the tribe's interest with that," Vander Stouwe said.

While Good Earth State Park scouts for a new site for a visitors center, the construction delay is a mere blip in time compared to the two millenia of prehistory that may be embedded deep below.

"If it takes longer than expected to get the story right and get the building placed right so it all ties together so we can tell that story and people can see some of those things as they're standing in the visitors center, all the better," Vander Stouwe said.

Markings that resemble drawings of bison and turtles are adding to the intrigue that the trenches are made-made and not natural.