Show me what democracy looks like? Not caucus.

Thank you so much to the many supporters who turned out for me Tuesday night, to my amazing team, and to the volunteers who did their best to execute a caucus under extremely difficult circumstances. Most of all, thanks to the voters who braved the lines to do the work of democracy and have their votes counted.

I spent most of caucus night outside, talking with the thousands of people in line at Centennial Middle School. Like many of them, I was angry. These were the ones who walked, biked or miraculously found parking and were willing and able to stand in line for more than an hour. They had a right to vote but were being told they might not make it inside in time to have their vote counted — if they were being told anything at all, as precious few volunteers were sent outside to help them. Most of the ones who stuck it out did get in to vote, thanks to the volunteers who kept registering people until the very end. There is no telling how many were turned away, gave up, or never even made it into the line.

Advertisement

As I told the Daily Camera, "people will be disenfranchised," and many were.

Inside, things were not much better. Votes were taken in chaotic rooms where real deliberation and conversation were impossible. In the case of the State House race, votes were not taken at all in many precincts. At Manhattan Middle School, voters heard from only one of the State House candidate campaigns — my representative speaker was still in line when my opponent's speaker took the stage.

Was this inevitable? Was it a failure of planning or leadership? These are questions to sort out over the coming weeks, but one thing is clear. It's time for change.

Colorado needs a direct primary system, one that provides our large and growing number of unaffiliated voters with a voice. The Secretary of State's website explains that Colorado eliminated the presidential primary in 2003 to save $2.2 million in the state budget. A bill to restore the presidential primary died last year state Senate. I believe democracy is worth the money.

I believe Colorado deserves more. That's why I spent caucus night with the voters outside and why I'm committed to putting my experienced leadership, policy insight and a broad network of professional relationships to the state House to work for my community.

Though we don't have any numbers yet on the state House race from last night, I am confident I will earn a spot on the 2016 local primary ballot which will go to voters in June. I promise that voting will be easier than caucusing.

We can do better for Colorado schools, make college affordable, go farther, faster on renewable energy, and tackle affordable housing and regional transportation challenges, and, oh yes, bring democracy back.

Angelique Espinoza is a candidate for the Colorado House in House District 10.