Oklahoma's Affordable Care Act health insurance market will soon see some big changes come January 1st. Fewer health care options will be available to those who have individual insurance plans.

One insurance company making changes is the Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Oklahoma. Starting in 2016, the insurance company will no longer offer the 'Blue Choice PPO' provider network to individual members. Officials of the company said 40,000 individual members statewide were notified of the change before the closing of open enrollment on November 30th.

The company could no longer pay for the choice network for individuals without increasing the rates extremely high. In a statement from the Blue Cross Blue Shield of Oklahoma, officials said, "The retail health insurance market has evolved significantly since the health insurance marketplace opened in 2014, and we must make adjustments that will allow us to continue offering sustainable and affordable health insurance options to Oklahomans. We had to make the difficult decision to no longer offer the Blue Choice PPO network - one of our highest cost options - to consumers in the Individual market beginning Jan. 1, 2016."

Insurance company officials further explained that some doctors and hospitals that are part of the Blue Choice PPO network today, may not be an in-network option for individual members starting in January. This means facilities, like the St. John Health System, could see a small decline in patients. In-network refers to health care facilities/providers that are part of an insurance/health plan's network of providers that have negotiated and established a discount.

More than 850,000 people in Oklahoma are insured by BCBS. About 10,000 people in Tulsa County will be affected by the change an estimated one-third of them use a St. John facility for their health care needs. In a statement from St. John Health System, officials said, "For 2016, BCBS opted to not offer plans to individuals and families in the St. John Network. The plans BCBS offered on the marketplace for 2014 and 2015 included St. John patients, and we are disappointed our patients aren't being offered that option for 2016."

Blue Cross Blue Shield said the new change does not affect anyone who receives insurance through their employer. The 'Blue Choice PPO' will still be available to them at facilities, including St John.

"Outside the Marketplace, St. John is in the network for many forms of BCBS health Insurance, as well as all Community Care health insurance product offerings and many other commercial plans, including those offered by Aetna and United Healthcare. If an individual seeks or receives non-emergent care from a St. John hospital or physician, he or she is encouraged to check with their insurance provider to determine whether St. John is in the network. Those who have a policy for which St. John is not in the network can still receive care at St. John, but they may be subject to higher out-of-pocket costs," said officials with St. John.

The insurance company said individual policyholders will be moved to a similar policy in one of two other networks. However, both have fewer participating doctors, hospitals and other providers.

Insurance officials said they want to stress this change will not affect members who receive their insurance through their employer. They said if policyholders have questions about how the change could impact their coverage, to call the toll-free customer service number on the back of their insurance card.