Volunteer profile: Barbara Altman

Volunteer trained to help people enroll in health plans through Affordable Care Act

What role does your organization serve in the community? Moraine Township government's mission is to provide efficient and compassionate services and support for residents in need. The township helps people with both direct assistance and accessing federal and state benefits to get them through difficult times; it provides paratransit for seniors and disabled residents; and with the help of volunteers, it runs an amazing food pantry. In line with its mission of helping residents, last year the township partnered with the Lake County Health Department and the Alliance for Human Services to recruit, train, mentor and oversee volunteers to help people navigate enrollment for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

What do you do? I help people obtain health insurance coverage through the Affordable Care Act. I also help with outreach so that people know about the availability of health insurance, the possibility of qualifying for financial help, and that the township offers assistance with the enrollment process.

I became a certified Navigator by completing more than 40 hours of training, passing comprehensive tests and undergoing a criminal background check. As a Navigator, I assist people with navigating federal and state websites to obtain health coverage either through a private health insurance plan or under the newly expanded Medicaid program. My role is to help the individuals and families I work with understand their options and obtain any subsidies they may be eligible for based on their income. Part of this process may include help with uploading any required documents, with understanding terminology and eligibility letters, or with appealing any eligibility determination that does not appear to be correct. Although I do not express an opinion about any of the Marketplace health insurance plans, I make sure people understand the differences between a PPO and an HMO; that they know how to check whether a physician or hospital is in-network for a specific plan; and that they understand how deductibles, co-pays, and coinsurance work in a given plan.

What made you want to get involved with this type of volunteer work? When I learned from Anne Flanigan Bassi, Moraine Township supervisor, about the possibility of becoming a volunteer Navigator, I was delighted at the prospect. I'm a lawyer, recently retired from a career with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. During much of my career, I worked closely with federal, state, and local public health professionals, including those responsible for administering the Medicare and Medicaid programs. I believe that access to health care is a human right that should be available to all, and the Affordable Care Act is an important step toward that goal. Helping people obtain health insurance under the Affordable Care Act seemed the perfect postlude to my career.

What surprised you about the work once you started? I was surprised at the number of people in our prosperous North Shore community who have been unemployed since the recession and have gone without doctor visits because they are uninsured. Also, despite being a longtime Highland Park resident, I was previously unaware of the many critical human services the township offers.

If you could offer local officials a piece of advice about how they could help the community you serve, what would it be? I have very little advice to offer Moraine Township officials. I am incredibly impressed by the services offered by the township and the dedication and efficiency of its staff.