Advalent Corp. announced today the Advalent ACO Solution, an ACO financial risk and ACO administration solution for Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs). Advalent healthcare IT solutions are based on a flexible and scalable cloud-based Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS). Configuration options and data mapping provided by Advalent make it easy to meet implementation schedules at a lower cost.

The Advalent ACO Solution focuses on ACO administration, including managing ACO financial risk and improving patient health with ACO care management, unlike other IT solutions for ACOs that are intended for use directly by providers.

“Advalent ACO Solution helps ACOs manage the health of their business, in addition to patient health,” said Sasidhar Parvatham, Founder & CEO of Advalent. “From the start, our platform uses standardization, high configurability, and reusability that scales to ACOs of any size and minimizes upfront and ongoing IT costs. Custom builds are unnecessary; the data interface is ready, and custom mapping is provided at no charge.”

Monitor the financial health of your ACO

ACO administration tools in Advalent ACO Solution let business administrators analyze ACO finances and profitability with predictive pricing modules. Predictive modeling and performance tracking on multiple levels lets you proactively monitor your ACO’s financial condition. In addition, the Advalent ACO Solution automatically identifies areas for improvement with comparisons of year-over-year results and better versus lower performers.

Care management workflows allow nurses to engage patients

ACOs must carefully manage care and costs, and the most effective model appears to be ACO care management, where nurses engage with high-risk patients to improve their health and avoid unnecessary hospitalizations. The Advalent ACO Solution automatically identifies gaps in care and classifies and assigns patients to disease/case registries. These registries help care coordinators manage their patient populations. In addition, Advalent ACO solution drives member health improvements with built-in workflows: the system creates daily work items and lists that help care coordinators close gaps in care and focus their time on the patients who are most likely to affect the bottom line.

Quality compliance and audit

The Advalent ACO Solution helps ACOs improve quality scores and ensures compliance with built-in quality measures, audit and compliance rules, and reporting. The Advalent solution keeps up with changes in ACO compliance and reporting requirements from Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Advalent ACO Solution meets CAQH CORE standards for interoperability.

Learn more at http://www.advalent.com.

About Advalent

Advalent is reinventing the way healthcare technology is acquired, delivered, used and paid for with innovations such as standardization, unification and the universal availability of tools at an affordable cost. Our team of experts has deep payer and provider experience and a full understanding of the technical and business requirements mandated by the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Accountable Care Organization (ACO) requirements. We are applying our skills and knowledge to make healthcare IT more widely available and affordable.

Founded in 2009, Advalent is based in Westborough, Massachusetts.

For more information on how Advalent can help your organization achieve its goals, contact us at 508.952.0808 or email us at info(at)advalent(dot)com.