SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

During a radio interview on Sunday, Paula Jones, the former Arkansas state employee who notoriously sued President Bill Clinton for sexual harassment, demanded Hillary Clinton personally apologize for “allowing” her husband to “abuse” and “sexually harass” women.

Speaking to weekend talk radio host Aaron Klein, Jones slammed Hillary as a “two-faced” “liar” who waged a war on women by trying to discredit “predator” Bill’s sexual accusers.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“And how dare her. You know what? She don’t care nothing about women. Because if she did she would believe what I had to say. She would believe what the other women had to say. ”

Jones further accused the media of practicing a double standard by “protecting” the Clintons while deservedly scrutinizing Bill Cosby’s alleged sexual assaults.

Stated Jones: “It’s really a sad, sad day if Hillary becomes president, because she has allowed her husband to get by with this type of stuff. Why does he have a right to be back in the White House, the people’s house?

“Why is he allowed to be back there with the track record that he has and his wife and the lying that she does and how she tried to discredit all of these women that her husband abused and sexually harassed?”

Jones slammed Hillary as “such a liar. And she’s so two faced. I never once was contacted by her. Not one time and apologized about what her husband did to me.”

Those remarks prompted Klein to ask specifically whether Jones thinks Hillary owes her an apology. Jones replied that “she needs to do a public apology or something or other (for) all the women who have come out and said publicly what her husband did to them. Yes, she does. I believe she does.”

Klein asked Jones to respond to a recent Clinton campaign ad in which Hillary insisted all women must be sided with if they accuse men of sexual assault.

“You have the right to be heard. You have the right to be believed. We’re with you,” Clinton said in the video, which she addressed to “every survivor of sexual assault.”

Jones responded: “She needs to support all of us and she needs to believe all of us if she says she believes women that claim sexual harassment and they have a right to be heard.”

“You know I wasn’t. I didn’t have a right to be heard, obviously. I had to be scrutinized in the media and I knew that I had God on my side. He knew what happened in the room. Bill Clinton knew what happened and he was never going to admit to it. The state trooper. He knew just a little bit of what happened. That was outside the door, you know.”

Hillary ‘would go out and discredit women, including me’

“Hillary is only out for herself,” Jones told Klein, who doubles as Breitbart’s Jerusalem bureau chief. “For money and for power, and she cares nothing about women at all.”

Ragarding Hillary’s use of womens’ issues in the campaign, Jones said that “it’s really, really sad that she is using that to gain popularity or whatever.”

“I don’t see how women would even be able to trust her if the man who is her husband who has abused and harassed and did other things to women and she knew about it.”

Jones laments the perception of Hillary as a woman who stood by her husband during all of the various sexual accusations.

“Well, she stood by her man, all right. And she allowed her husband to abuse women, to harass women, possibly other things that he did wrong to women. And she allowed it to happen. As a matter of fact, she would go out and she would try to discredit these women, including me.

“And called us the ‘bimbo eruption.’ You know, these ‘bimbos.’ Okay. For what her husband did to us. But she didn’t believe us. None of us women. And now she’s going to say what she did about Donald Trump?”

Jones was referencing Clinton’s charge that Trump has demonstrated a “penchant for sexism.”

Continued Jones:

And she wanted to discredit us and she would send people to try to do that. And how dare her. You know what? She don’t care nothing about women. Because if she did she would believe what I had to say. She would believe what the other women had to say. Did all us women just make this stuff up about her poor husband? No! We didn’t. Bill Clinton did it to himself. Bill Clinton was the one who was out doing that.

Jones told the radio host that there was information about Clinton’s alleged improprieties going around for years in Arkansas. “She knows about it, but you know what? He helps her. She helps him. And they are a perfect pair for committing all of this stuff and lies and cheating people. And just running over people for their agenda, for their power. Which they’ve got to have. It’s a sickness, I think. On both parts.”

Double standard on Clinton, Cosby

Klein asked Jones why she thinks the news media largely ignore the serious accusations against Clinton – including rape and sexual harassment – pointing out the same media are rightly investigating the Cosby rape charges.

“It’s like they are indestructible,” Jones said of the Clintons. “There are so many people, I think, in the media, and so many people out there protecting them for whatever reason. I don’t know if they are scared of them, or what?”

“If Bill Cosby, I mean, even if what he did was somewhat different, he still abused these women sexually and so did Bill Clinton. I’m not going to speak for all of them. But I know about me and what I heard about Kathleen Willey and different ones. I mean, he is a predator. I just don’t understand how he can get by with it.”

“And he is allowed to go out to speak and make millions and millions of dollars. And go to different universities and he’s asked to be a guest speaker at universities across this country. And go there and they look up to him. How could they look up to him with this on his record? How can anybody look up to him with this on his record? It makes no common sense to me whatsoever.”

‘He asked me to kiss it’

Jones recounted to Klein the details of her alleged incident that transpired on May 8, 1991, when Clinton was Governor of Arkansas. She has said that she singled out by Clinton and was escorted to the politician’s room in the Excelsior Hotel in Little Rock, Arkansas, where the future president allegedly groped and exposed himself to her.

Jones said Clinton also implicitly threatened her to remain silent about the events.

“I didn’t have any idea that anything was going to go wrong,” she said. “There were couches and tables, it wasn’t like a regular hotel room with a bed.”

Jones described what she says transpired after she and Clinton engaged in some small talk, when she says he “proceeded to, real casually, lean up against the chair. And maybe coming up toward me” and complimented her on her long hair. “And I thought, Oh wow, this was already happening.”

She continued:

What do I do here? Do I get out? What do I do? So I walked out to the window ceil and I was looking out to the river. Because we were right about near the river. And I thought, you know, I need to talk to him, get a distraction here. And I was looking right over the river and I was talking about that. And he came over there and he proceeded making faces at me then he started doing it again. And he pulled me kind of towards him and told me things and then he started kind of groping me. You know. And then I pulled away immediately and I walked toward the door. And I didn’t know what I was going to do. I just knew that I needed to get out of the situation. I started talking about everything and anything to get the attention of off what was going on. So I did that. Then he got a little closer to the door couches were at and we were talking about maybe political stuff or whatever. Because we had nothing in common. Nothing we could possibly talk about…. And the next thing you know he pulls down his pants, He sat on the couch and he was fondling himself and he asked me to kiss it.

“Um Hm, He asked you to kiss it. So what did you do?” asked Klein.

Jones recounted:

I jumped up. Because I was leaning, like on the side of the couch arm, with his arm of it. I was kind of leaning up against that. And I jumped over and said, ‘No I’m not that kind of a girl. And I need to be leaving immediately.’ So of course he was embarrassed. He turned red. He pulled his pants up. And I went up to the door and was trying to get out. And he momentarily put his hand on the door so I couldn’t completely get it opened. And he said, ‘You’re smart. Let’s keep this between ourselves.’

Klein asked whether she took Clinton’s alleged remark as a threat. “Yeah. Yeah. He said don’t tell no body. Well of course, He didn’t want no body to know.”

Jones said the room was protected by a state trooper and that, when she exited, the state trooper had a smirk on his face.

The lawsuit Jones brought against Clinton “almost brought down the president,” according to the Daily Mail. The paper recounts the tumultuous court saga:

It wasn’t until two years [after the incident], in 1993, when former Clinton bodyguards spoke in a magazine interview about escorting a woman called ‘Paula’ to his room in May 1991 that she was advised to go public. She hired a lawyer and in 1994 sued Clinton and asked for $700,000 in damages, claiming she suffered emotional trauma. Clinton denied the claims, or even that he had met Jones. He dismissed her as an opportunist out for money and to damage him politically. He asked that the civil suit be put off until he left the White House but in January 1997 an appeals court ruled the trial should go ahead. A year later Judge Susan Webber Wright tossed out Jones’s case saying she had not suffered any damages. She ruled that even if Clinton’s behavior had been ‘boorish and offensive’ it did not amount to sexual harassment under the law. Jones appealed and the Supreme Court reinstated her case leading to the unprecedented step of President Clinton being forced to make a deposition. While working on the Paula Jones investigation, independent prosecutor Kenneth Starr uncovered Clinton’s alleged affair with White House intern Monica Lewinsky… It was the president’s original statement to lawyers for Jones that almost led to hid downfall, as he had denied any improper relationship with Lewinsky, which was found to be untrue. Having been accused of perjury, charges were drawn up and impeachment proceedings begun. Although Democratic leaders preferred to censure the president, Congress began the impeachment process against Clinton in December 1998. A divided House of Representatives impeached him on December 19 and the issue then passed to the Senate, where after a five week trial, he was acquitted. Clinton survived the political fallout what became known as the ‘Lewinsky affair’. His marriage to Hillary also survived. By the time Lewinsky was headline news Jones had already reached an out of court settlement with the President.

War on women?

Klein’s show, broadcast on New York’s AM 970 The Answer and NewsTalk 990 AM, has become somewhat of a support center of sorts in which Bill’s female accusers tell their newly relevant stories.

In November, Juanita Broaddrick, the woman who famously accused Bill Clinton of rape and spoke out against Hillary’s candidacy on Klein’s show.

“I think she has always known everything about him. I think they have this evil compact between the two of them that they each know what the other does and overlook it. And go right on. And cover one for the other,” she said.

Kathleen Willey was a Democratic activist who, along with her husband Ed, founded Virginians for Clinton, which supported Bill Clinton’s successful 1992 White House bid.

Willey became a White House volunteer during Clinton’s first term. She says she was facing a tough financial situation, so she personally approached Bill about the possibility of a paid position. Instead of offering to help her, Willey says she became the victim of “nothing short of serious sexual harassment.”

Since Hillary’s campaign announcement in April, Willey has repeatedly come on Klein’s show to speak out against the Democratic front-runner.

“This woman wrote the book on terrorizing women, on terrorism,” Willey exclaimed in one of those interviews.

Willey refuses to watch as Hillary’s campaign accuses Republican candidates like Trump of waging a so-called war on women. In August, Willey announced the launch of a new anti-Hillary website called A Scandal a Day. A section of the site asks women who may have been sexually assaulted by Bill Clinton to come forward.

Willey also wrote the forward to a recently released book by bestselling author Roger Stone, titled The Clintons’ War on Women.

Gennifer Flowers, who says she was Bill Clinton’s consensual mistress for more than 12 years, told Kleinshe fears a Hillary Clinton presidency. In her only interview since Clinton announced her candidacy, Flowers in October accused Hillary of being “an enabler that has encouraged him (Bill) to go out and do whatever he does with women.” Clinton admitted in a deposition to one sexual encounter with Flowers.