To respond to the Do Now, you can comment below or tweet your response. Be sure to begin your tweet with @KQEDEdspace and end it with #WhereDoYouBelong

For more info on how to use Twitter, click here.

Do Now

How can California and other states address the need for affordable housing? What would happen if you suddenly lost your home? Where do you call home? Where do you belong?

Introduction

Identifying where we belong has always been a part of growing up. You identify with your neighborhood, your city, your state. We also seek to connect ourselves with people and places that have common beliefs and interests. This issue is becoming more challenging, particularly in urban areas where the cost of living has increased exponentially and families are being forced to relocate to other neighborhoods. This disrupts the feeling of belonging.

The problem of being priced out of a neighborhood is particularly bad in high priced cities such as San Francisco. Rents in the San Francisco Bay Area are soaring due the strong economy. And there are fewer affordable housing units. Several factors are contributing to the decrease in affordable rentals. San Francisco has strong rental control laws that cover 172,000 of the housing units in the city. But recently fewer new affording housing units have been built and some landlords are getting out of the business of renting to low income residents. Seniors and families are particularly hard hit. Three years ago the governor of California, Jerry Brown, eliminated the redevelopment agencies that used to help finance low income housing construction.

The private housing market isn’t creating enough homes affordable to low and moderate-income households. According to a recent report from the California Housing Partnership Corporation investment in affordable housing has dropped $1.5 billion annually. The report also points out there is a shortage of nearly one million home available to the lowest-income households.

Another law change in the mid-1980s is also affecting the lack of affordable housing. The state Ellis Act allows landlords to leave the rental business. They are then allowed to sell their properties. This forces thousands of people out of their rent controlled apartments. Speculators are buying the properties and selling or renting them at much higher prices.

One recently built affordable housing complex with 160 units, received 4,600 applications. The severe crisis is changing parts of the city as seniors, artists, and working families are priced out of neighborhoods they’ve lived in for years. It could be happening in your neighborhood. And it makes us reflect on where we belong.

Resource

California Report’s radio segment Did the End of California’s Redevelopment Agencies Hurt Affordable Housing?

There’s new evidence every day of the brutal housing market in parts of California. Many housing experts think the short supply of affordable rental units is likely to get worse, at least partly because the state did away with Redevelopment Agencies two years ago. For all their faults, the agencies were legally required to devote a fifth of their revenue to affordable housing — about a $1 billion a year. What happens now that the money is gone?

To respond to the Do Now, you can comment below or tweet your response. Be sure to begin your tweet with @KQEDedspace and end it with #WhereDoYouBelong

For more info on how to use Twitter, click here.

We encourage students to reply to other people’s tweets to foster more of a conversation. Also, if students tweet their personal opinions, ask them to support their ideas with links to interesting/credible articles online (adding a nice research component) or retweet other people’s ideas that they agree/disagree/find amusing. We also value student-produced media linked to their tweets. You can visit our video tutorials that showcase how to use several web-based production tools. Of course, do as you can… and any contribution is most welcomed.

More Resources

KQED News Fix article S.F. Artist Turned Housing Activist Describes His Eviction

San Francisco resident Benito Santiago, 63, lived in his Mission District apartment 37 years before getting his Ellis Act eviction notice in November 2013. Santiago is one of an increasing number of San Francisco seniors who are facing rising rents and eviction.

KQED News Fix article Campos Wants S.F. to Regulate Tenant Buyouts by Landlords

San Francisco Supervisor David Campos has introduced legislation aimed at regulating buyout agreements between landlords and their tenants.

KQED News Fix article Silicon Valley Trailer Park Residents Fight To Stay

Sunny Palo Alto, Calif., is awash in multimillion-dollar homes, luxury Tesla electric cars and other financial fruits from a digital revolution the city helped spark. The Silicon Valley city is home to Stanford University, at least eight billionaires, and one mobile home park. Now, Buena Vista Mobile Home Park — one of the largest and one of the few remaining affordable housing options here — is threatened with closure.