This map shows where UR Medicine has set up cancer care. The Wilmot Cancer Institute plans to team with Nicholas H. Noyes Memorial Hospital in Livingston County and Jones Memorial Hospital in Allegany County on a cancer center. Radiation oncology would be located at Noyes, and expanded services would be at Noyes and Jones. (Photo: Provided by UR Medicine’s Wilmot Cancer Institute)

If Carl Myers needs a hospital, he wants one that's close.

Keeping a full range of services nearby is one reason the Livingston County resident and his wife contributed a couple of years ago to the construction of a new emergency department at Nicholas H. Noyes Memorial Hospital and why they recently donated $2 million to help create a regional cancer center at the Dansville hospital.

"We see this as hopefully enriching the lives of everyone in the area," Myers said of the Ann and Carl Myers Cancer Center that will serve people in the Southern Tier and southern Finger Lakes regions.

The center is a collaboration among UR Medicine's Wilmot Cancer Institute, Jones Memorial Hospital in Allegany County and Noyes and was announced Wednesday.

The $10.4 million project has to be approved by the state Department of Health. It will provide new and enhanced clinical, patient support services at both rural hospitals, including the addition of radiation oncology at Noyes. It also will provide the opportunity for more patients to enroll in clinical trials.

The project also involves UR Medicine's Radiation Oncology practice in Hornell, Steuben County.

Services would be phased in, with medical oncology starting at Jones and expanded at Noyes by the fall. The construction to house the linear accelerator for radiation therapy is expected to completed by the end of next year.

Carl Myers of Springwater, Livingston County, and his wife, Ann, donated $2 million to a cancer center to be housed at Nicholas H. Noyes Memorial Hospital. Noyes Health, Jones Memorial Hospital and UR Medicine are collaborating on the venture. (Photo: Provided photo)

"This will mean people will get the majority of their care in Dansville," said Amy Pollard, president and chief executive officer of Noyes Health System. "I think the people in the community will be very excited about it."

She said that people do better and are more likely to stay with their regimen if they don't have to travel. Approximately 4,000 people a year travel from Livingston, Allegany and Steuben counties to Wilmot Cancer Institute for outpatient care, according to UR Medicine.

Some people will continue to go to Rochester, but "as much as can be done locally, that's the goal," she said.

Dr. Thomas Mahoney is chief medical officer of the Finger Lakes Health Systems Agency, the regional planner. It has an advisory role on projects that meet a certain dollar threshold.

"I think this is pretty clear. I think they have enough patients who are already in care at URMC cancer center who could then get service in the local community."

Mahoney said there is no competitor to UR Medicine in that area, and "this would solidify their position."

Wilmot has been growing for the past several years, in scope of services and geographic range. In late 2012, Wilmot acquired the Pluta Cancer Center in Henrietta. In 2013, Wilmot bought Interlakes Oncology, which had offices in Greece, Brockport, Canandaigua and Geneva. Last year, Wilmot bought a radiation oncology practice in Batavia and added chemotherapy services.

"We've been working very closely," said Dr. Jonathan Friedberg, director of the Wilmot Cancer Institute. "I think for us what was most appealing was the collaborative aspect. This wasn't us coming in and saying 'We're building this' or Noyes saying 'We're building this.'"

Noyes and Jones had been talking with UR Medicine about the cancer center for more than a year. Each hospital already receives some services from UR Medicine, and each is seeking to strengthen its connection to the medical center through a formal affiliation. Talk about the cancer center started before discussion about affiliations and its future is not dependent on the outcome. Each system is contributing $1 million and further fundraising will be a collaborative effort.

Moving care from centralized hospital settings to where people live and work is one of the trends driven in part by the Affordable Care Act. But it requires collaboration between large systems or several smaller organizations that couldn't afford the service on their own or have the expertise to set up the programs. Being able to offer more services also helps the financial situation of small hospitals.

"We look around and see hospitals that are struggling," Pollard said. "We feel very blessed here that we've done better than the average rural hospital. But I have to say a lot of that was building faith in the community and the community responding to that. The hospital is here because the community supports it in many ways. With their business and their donations."

Myers, who said he lives about 25 minutes from Noyes and has a farm even closer, said the cancer center could help promote the area as well as improve health care. "I think it will be a major contributor," he said. "My wife and I feel good about this donation. If I have to use it, it will be in an area I don't mind driving to."

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1FU4xZ6