Republican Gov. Bill Haslam addresses state lawmakers at the state Capitol in Nashville, Tenn., on Monday, Feb. 2, 2015. Haslam spoke to a joint assembly of the General Assembly to promote his Insure Tennessee proposal to extend health coverage to 280,000 low-income residents. (AP Photo/Erik Schelzig)

SHARE Republican Gov. Bill Haslam is greeted by lawmakers as he leeaves the House chamber in Nashville, Tenn., on Monday, Feb. 2, 2015. Haslam spoke to a joint assembly of the General Assembly to promote his Insure Tennessee proposal to extend health coverage to 280,000 low-income residents. (AP Photo/Erik Schelzig) Republican Gov. Bill Haslam is greeted by lawmakers as he enters the House chamber in Nashville, Tenn., on Monday, Feb. 2, 2015. Haslam spoke to a joint assembly of the General Assembly to promote his Insure Tennessee proposal to extend health coverage to 280,000 low-income residents. (AP Photo/Erik Schelzig)

By Richard Locker

NASHVILLE — Gov. Bill Haslam appealed to state lawmakers Monday night to approve his Insure Tennessee plan, saying that it’s “not Obamacare,” that Tennessee taxpayers are paying for it already and that it can help nearly 300,000 uninsured state residents get access to health coverage for at least two years.

After addressing one by one the political and financial arguments opponents have advanced against the plan — a market-oriented hybrid he negotiated with President Barack Obama’s administration as an alternative to the expansion of Medicaid provided in the federal Affordable Care Act — Haslam asked legislators to look deeper than “the easy political argument.”

“I think this is also an issue about who we are. My faith doesn’t allow me to walk on the other side of the road and ignore a need that can be met — particularly in this case, when the need is Tennesseans who have life-threatening situations without access to health care. Particularly when the need can be met like this one can, without cost to our state, with money that our state is currently being taxed for and is sent elsewhere,” the governor told a joint session of the House and Senate in a speech aired live statewide on public television.

The speech launched a special legislative session that Haslam called for this week to consider the plan.

Earlier Monday, battle lines were drawn when state Sen. Brian Kelsey, R-Germantown, and Rep. Jeremy Durham, R-Franklin, announced that 20 county GOP chairmen had signed a letter opposing the governor’s plan as “Obamacare.”

That followed the release, by advocates of the governor’s plan, of a list of 104 names of Republican activists from across the state, including 17 members of the state GOP executive committee and eight county chairmen, who support the plan.

The Legislature will begin committee review of Insure Tennessee on Tuesday.

Related: Insure Tenn. opponents plan protest

In trying to dispel the argument that the plan is “Obamacare,” Haslam said he began working almost two years ago crafting and negotiating an alternative to Medicaid expansion, the ACA’s preferred approach to health coverage.

“In Tennessee, we took time to evaluate our options to find the right answer for our state. In March of 2013, almost two years ago, I was in this chamber to tell you that Tennessee would not expand our Medicaid program. Expanding a broken system doesn’t make sense.

“But, I also didn’t think that flat-out saying ‘no’ to accepting federal dollars that Tennesseans are paying for, that are going to other states, and that could cover more Tennesseans who truly need insurance made much sense either. So we started the work to find a third way, a Tennessee Plan,” Haslam said.

“This is not Obamacare. If it was, it wouldn’t have taken us this long to negotiate. We have done what you asked us to do and what we said we would do. We found a unique, Tennessee solution.”

Related: More on Haslam's Insure Tenn. plan

Haslam described the plan as the kind of program Republicans would draft if they were handed the federal dollars otherwise intended to expand Medicaid.

The plan is a two-year pilot that requires legislative approval to continue past that point. He said the state can end its participation whenever it wants. And the state’s hospitals have agreed to foot the bill for whatever costs the state will incur.

Haslam told lawmakers how the double-pronged plan would work:

The Volunteer Plan will provide a voucher participants can use to take part in their employer’s health insurance plan, to pay for premiums and other out-of-pocket expenses associated with private market plans.

In the Healthy Incentives Plan, participants could choose to receive coverage through a redesigned TennCare option with healthy incentives accounts modeled after health reimbursement accounts and which could be used to pay a portion of the required cost sharing.

Reaction to the governor’s 15-minute speech itself was generally positive.

“I think the governor made the case that this is not pure Obamacare. I think he answered questions that are being raised,” said Rep. John DeBerry, D-Memphis.

House Majority Leader Gerald McCormick, R-Chattanooga, said it “was good that he brought the human element” into the speech. “He spoke to the heart. I thought it was the best speech I’ve heard him make. So we’ll see if it helps affect the votes and hopefully we’ll know in the next couple of days.”

House Republican Caucus Chairman Glen Casada of Franklin said: “The governor has got his work cut out for him. He’s going to have to convince 50 out of 99 and he’s not there today."