Raritan Valley Community College Planetarium will present a variety of star shows and laser concerts in July, including programs for young children

Raritan Valley Community College Planetarium in Branchburg will present a variety of star shows and laser concerts in July. (Photo: ~Courtesy of RVCC) Story Highlights 3 p.m. Sunday, July 12, Storybooks in Space, learn about the stars and planets

Enjoy a laser concert featuring the best of ELO, 9 p.m. Friday, July 10

The Raritan Valley Community College Planetarium will present a variety of star shows and laser concerts in July, including programs for young children. The following programs will be offered:

2 p.m. Tuesdays, July 7, 14, 21, 28: Perfect Little Planet. A family from another star system is seeking the perfect vacation spot. Fly over the surface of Pluto, our best-known dwarf planet; sail through the rings of Saturn; feel Jupiter’s lightning storms; and walk on the surface of Mars. Which destination will the family choose? (Recommended for ages 6-12.).

3 p.m. Tuesdays and Thursdays, July 7, 9, 14, 16, 21, 23, 28, 30: Laser Magic. Enjoy a laser concert featuring songs by a variety of artists including “We Are All Made of Stars” by Moby, “Jungle Love” by the Steve Miller Band, “Best Day of My Life” by American Authors, and “Let It Go,” sung by Idina Menzel. (Recommended for ages 6-12.).

2 p.m. Wednesdays, July 8, 15, 22, 29 and Sunday, July 12: Rockin’ Rocket Ride. Put on your space suit and blast off into outer space to visit the moon, sun and planets. The show offers a lively experience for young people with selected music from Journey Into Space by Jane Murphy. (Recommended for ages 3-8.).

3 p.m. Wednesdays, July 8, 15, 22, 29: SkyLights. The RVCC Planetarium’s youngest audience members can sing along with songs by mr. RAY (“Family Ride,” “Kalien the Alien”) and Jane Murphy (“Moon Rock,” “The Planet Song”). Some songs are illustrated with lasers, while other songs feature video images. (Recommended for ages 3-8.).

2 p.m. Thursdays, July 9, 16, 23, 30 and 7 p.m. Fridays, July 10 & 24: Magic Tree House: Space Mission. Young star gazers join Magic Tree House characters Jack and Annie as they discover the secrets of the sun, moon, planets, space travel and more. Who can help them answer the questions posted by the mysterious “M”? The show is based on the same-titled, best-selling series of novels. (Recommended for ages 5 and older.).

3 p.m. Sunday, July 12: Storybooks in Space. Enjoy story time in the planetarium as youngsters and their families learn about the stars and planets. (Recommended for ages 4-8.).

4:15 p.m. Thursday, July 23: Black Holes. Black Holes takes audiences members on a journey through one of the most mystifying, awe-inspiring phenomena in the universe: a black hole. The show takes full advantage of the facility’s AllDome High Definition digital projection system. Participants take a virtual tour through space and explore the science and mystery of black holes: Where do they come from? Where do they go? How do we find them? Is there one on Earth’s horizon? The Black Holes show is partially funded by NJ Space Grant Consortium. (Recommended for ages 10 to adult.).

7 p.m. Fridays, July 17 and 31: Exploding Universe. The universe we see today is the product of explosive events. As the universe has transformed into its current state, even the most elementary particles have endured. The show follows the path of one of these “particles,” a proton, as it participates in nature’s astounding events of rebirth and renewal. (Recommended for ages 10 to adult.).

8 p.m. Fridays, July 10, 17, 24, 31: Summer Skies. Discover what stars and constellations are visible in tonight’s sky. Learn how to find the Summer Triangle and the Big Dipper, as well as the planets Venus, Jupiter and Saturn. It’s also the “Summer of Pluto.” The New Horizons space craft is flying by the dwarf planet in July. Updates will be included in the show as they become available. The 3M Observatory, located right outside the RVCC Planetarium, will be open after the show, weather permitting. (Recommended for ages 10 to adult.).

9 p.m. Friday, July 10: Laser ELO. Enjoy a laser concert featuring the best of ELO. “Do Ya” like laser concerts? Want a “Ticket to the Moon?” Have you reached your “Point of No Return?” Then you must be ready for the ELO Laser Concert.

9 p.m. Friday, July 17: Laser Modern Rock. All songs in this laser concert were released in the last few years. Selections include “Radioactive” by Imagine Dragons; “A Sky Full of Stars” by Coldplay; “My Songs Know What You Did in the Dark” by Fall Out Boy; and “Best Day of My Life” by American Authors.

9 p.m. Friday, July 24: Pink Floyd’s Dark Side of the Moon laser concert. Enjoy a laser concert featuring songs from Pink Floyd’s classic album, including “Speak to Me/Breathe,” “Money” and “Brain Damaged.”

9 p.m. Friday, July 31: Classic Rock. Enjoy a laser concert featuring a variety of classic rock songs including “Touch of Gray” (Grateful Dead), “Houses of the Holy” (Led Zeppelin), “Another One Bites the Dust” (Queen), “You Took the Words Right out of My Mouth” (Meatloaf), “Come Sail Away” (Styx) and “Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band” (Beatles).

Planetarium show tickets cost $7 for one show or $13 for two shows on the same day. Reservations are strongly suggested for all Planetarium shows. For additional information, call 908-231-8805 or visit www.raritanval.edu/planetarium.

The Planetarium at RVCC is celebrating 25 years of bringing astronomy to the children and adults of New Jersey. Raritan Valley Community College’s main campus is located at 118 Lamington Road in Branchburg. Serving residents of Somerset and Hunterdon counties for close to 50 years, RVCC is an educational and cultural center that is nationally recognized for its innovative programming, service to the community and environmental leadership. The college offers more than 90 associate degrees and certificates, as well as career training, professional development and personal enrichment courses. The college also has a performing arts center and planetarium.

RVCC is committed to offering a quality and affordable education through effective teaching, liaisons with the community’s businesses and state-of-the-art technology. For further information, visit www.raritanval.edu.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1IBuyQc