Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Buffzone CU's Heisman winner: Rashaan Salaam's story of triumph, struggle and recovery Former Buffs star wants others to learn from his ups and downs

Twenty years after compiling perhaps the greatest season in Colorado football history and winning the Heisman Trophy, Rashaan Salaam is still a celebrity in Boulder. He was grand marshal of the CU homecoming parade in October. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera) Click photo to enlarge «

1

» One-on-one with Rashaan Salaam This week, the Daily Camera sat down for a conversation with former CU running back and 1994 Heisman Trophy winner Rashaan Salaam. Here are a few of his thoughts on various topics: On CU coming up short of the 1994 national title: "That still stings. To go into Nebraska and not pull that win out, that really puts a damper to the season, because that's what it was all geared for." On reaching the 2,000-yard mark against Iowa State on Nov. 19, 1994: "It was special, man. It was gratifying. My family was there, my cousins were there. It felt good." On Heisman week in 1994: "I was very excited to get a chance to meet a lot of these great football players you watched all year. You get a chance to meet them up close. You get a chance to meet some of your childhood heroes that you grew up watching, like Tony Dorsett." On his most disappointing moment as a pro: "The only time it really got bad was in 1999 when the Raiders cut me. That one hurt. That one really, really hurt. I love the Raiders. That was my team." On the current Buffs' team, which just completed a 2-10 season: "This team is on the way. Every game, they battled. The games were back and forth; there were no blowouts; there was no quit." Advertisement On CU having a "bad" year in 1993, by going 8-3-1: "We had one bad year; we were like 8-3 and (head coach Bill McCartney) was like, 'We don't have years like this around here, men!'" On turning 40 earlier this year, on Oct. 8: "My thing now, I want to learn how to work out every day and make it a part of my life. But, turning 40, it didn't bother me. The last thing that bothered me was in 1999 when the Raiders cut me. After that I don't have any feelings anymore (laughs)." On returning to the annual Heisman Trophy ceremony, which he's done a few times: "When you walk through the lobby, it's all of a sudden like you won the Heisman again." Walking into one of his favorite Boulder restaurants recently, Rashaan Salaam received a couple of hugs and handshakes, heard a "Hey, Rashaan!" or two, and displayed that trademark smile of his. Twenty years after compiling perhaps the greatest season in Colorado football history and winning the most prestigious award in college football, Salaam is still a celebrity in Boulder. "It put me on a level that's so big," Salaam, 40, said. "Winning the Heisman is one of those things, it's a dream come true. "I'm very blessed. I'm thankful for the people around me." On Saturday, the Heisman Trophy was presented for the 80th time. The award goes to the player voted as the best in college football. In 1994, that was Salaam. He rushed for 2,055 yards and 24 touchdowns that season, helping the Buffaloes to an 11-1 record. "It was a great year," he said. "I played with some great players, played for a legendary coach, a Hall of Fame coach. It was a special time at Colorado. Football was king in the town, we had some exciting games. It was a very exciting college football experience that I had." As a former Heisman winner, Salaam is invited to return to the ceremony each year. He's been back a few times and was planning to be in New York this weekend. In the 20 years since becoming the only CU player to win the award, Salaam has been through some ups and downs, but he's happy now and hopes that others can be positively influenced by his story. Humble beginnings Growing up in Southern California, Salaam always had the physical tools to be a great player. His father, Teddy Washington, was a star at San Diego State before having a brief stint in the NFL (he played one game for the Cincinnati Bengals in 1968). Salaam didn't always have the support he needed, though. Washington was in and out of Salaam's life and eventually moved several hours away to Las Vegas. "I had a Disneyland dad," Salaam said. "When he showed up we'd go to Disneyland. I love him for it; he tried." His mother, Khalada, provided for her son, but made it very clear how she felt about him playing football. "I didn't come from a soccer mom," he said. "She wasn't supportive of my athletic endeavors. She was just totally against me playing football, and it was a real battle for me just to get out there and play." Khalada enrolled Salaam at La Jolla Country Day School, and Salaam said, "She was hoping they didn't have a football team." Country Day did, in fact, have a football team, but it played 8-man ball, not the standard 11-man game. "I had to take advantage of it," Salaam said. He certainly did that, catching the attention of then-CU head coach Bill McCartney. "He was one of the only coaches that came for a home visit, because he really believed in me," Salaam said. Becoming a Buff Adjusting to 11-man football, Salaam struggled during his freshman year at CU. In fact, he didn't even play the required 100 plays to earn a varsity letter. "I never doubted myself," he said. "I just knew I had to get some reps. I couldn't wait for spring ball to go out there and show the coaches that year I'm ready." As a backup to Lamont Warren, Salaam rushed for 844 yards as a sophomore in 1993. Then, as a junior in 1994, he took off. Through seven games, Salaam had 1,256 yards, but there was no Heisman talk, he said. The Buffs were 7-0, ranked No. 2 and had a date at No. 3 Nebraska looming. "We were so focused on going to the national championship, that's what our goal was," Salaam said. "That's all we were thinking about. Our senior leadership was so geared in." After the 24-7 loss to the Cornhuskers — a defeat that still eats at Salaam and many others on that 1994 team — the Buffs fell to No. 7 in the national polls. All of a sudden the national title was out of reach and the Heisman Trophy and a 2,000-yard season came into focus. "We kind of knew that 2,000 number was the magic number to win the Heisman, and we pretty much felt we could run the ball on pretty much anybody we played against," said Tony Berti, CU's left tackle in 1994. "We knew that if we made the holes that Rashaan would run through them and he'd run hard." Salaam rushed for 665 yards in those last three games, finishing the regular season with 2,055 yards. At the time he was just the fourth player in major college history to hit the 2,000-yard mark in the regular season. The ceremony This year, there were just three finalists invited to New York for the Heisman presentation. In 1994, there were six. Along with Salaam, Penn State's Ki-Jana Carter and Kerry Collins, Alcorn State's Steve McNair, Alabama's Jay Barker and Miami's Warren Sapp were in New York. Salaam was well aware that the other three running backs to hit the 2,000-yard mark — USC's Marcus Allen in 1981, Nebraska's Mike Rozier in 1983 and Oklahoma State's Barry Sanders in 1988 — all walked away from New York with the Heisman. Because of that, Salaam said he wasn't nervous on the night of the presentation. "Not at all," he said. "I was excited. I couldn't wait. I was like, 'Who else could it be?' " It wasn't a landslide victory for Salaam, but he did win by a fairly sizable margin over Carter, who was the runner-up. "I got up and shook Warren Sapp's hand and he said, 'The spotlight's on you now,' " Salaam recalls. "To get a chance to go out there and play well and win the Heisman was very empowering, because growing up I had no support at all." Berti recalls Salaam thanking each of CU's linemen by name in his speech. "It's one of those things that as an offensive lineman, you don't win the Heisman, but you kind of do," Berti said. CU's sports information director David Plati tells the story of the return flight to Boulder. Plati had told Salaam that none of his teammates could make it to the airport to greet him, because they had classes to attend. That left Salaam bummed as they flew home. (The trophy, by the way, had its own seat in first class, Plati said). Upon arrival, Salaam and Plati were the first off the plane and they were greeted by several CU teammates. "He was a great guy. He was a great teammate," Berti said. "Nothing would have held us from being at the airport that day. We picked him up and we all went out and had wings and hung out for a while. It was a really special experience." Bumpy road After CU's Fiesta Bowl win against Notre Dame, Salaam decided to skip his senior year and enter the NFL draft, where the Chicago Bears drafted him 21st overall. He set a Bears rookie record with 1,074 rushing yards in 1995. Also that year, he won the Brian Piccolo Award, given to the Bear who best exemplified the traits — courage, loyalty, teamwork and dedication — of the late running back. From that point, Salaam's football career took a different path. He admitted in the late 1990s that he got hooked on marijuana. He also suffered a severe leg injury in 1998 and was a victim of his own laziness, he said. "I tried to get away with natural ability too much," he said. "I didn't build on it. I was lazy. My body started breaking down, I started getting hurt. I put the wrong people around me in my corner. It was just very immature things." After his great rookie season, Salaam managed just 610 yards the rest of his career, which included one game as a Cleveland Brown and failed attempts to make the rosters of the Detroit Lions, Oakland Raiders and San Francisco 49ers. He had a brief stint in the XFL, and in 2004 was signed by the CFL's Toronto Argonauts. Three months later, he was suspended and his career was over. "I had a chance to reflect on the mess I made with the opportunity I had, the people who I could have associated with and decided not to," Salaam said. "I just had a lot of mistakes, a lot of errors." Bouncing back For several years, Salaam beat himself up over those mistakes. Then, two years ago, he once again moved from San Diego to the Boulder area. Now, he's surrounded by positive people and he's enjoying his newest endeavor of running the Rashaan Salaam SPIN Foundation. "I'm just trying to help young people make the right decisions," he said of the mission of the foundation. "As a young person, you have to put the right tools around you. These young kids, they're getting bombarded by some crazy things out there. It's easy to get tripped up now." While he's trying to help kids, Salaam said his involvement in the foundation is helping him, too. Although he has regrets about his pro career, Salaam said he's learned to focus more on the good things he did. "Coming back here and living here the past two years, what I realized is that my whole career I've been too hard on myself," he said. "I did some great things. I made history. "I would love to go back and change some things, but I can't. I'm hoping to use my story to go and influence kids." Salaam's story, to this point, has been one of perseverance, triumph, struggle and recovery. As he celebrates the 20th anniversary of his greatest triumph, Salaam looks forward to what his future holds. And, he can't wait for the Heisman ceremony in 2019. "They do something special for your 25th," he said. Then he paused and flashed that smile again. "I've got five more years to get in shape." Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, twitter.com/brianhowell33