Dear Mayor de Blasio,

Let me be the first to congratulate you on your proposed ban on carriage horses. I understand where you’re coming from because I also love animals. In fact, I love them so much we even took our 110-pound dog to Italy — and we have photos of him in so many other places around the U.S. that we took to calling him Zelig.

So I agree with you about those horses. Why should horses, who are by most accounts beautifully cared for, be allowed to stay with their owners who love them, when they can instead be farmed out — if they’re lucky? And when you come right down to it, too much glue is never enough glue — especially when you need it.

Those radical activist carriage-horse owners have some nerve arguing about something as unimportant as their livelihood with anti-carriage horse activists like former parking garage king Steve Nislick. This is a man who knows that these animals are secretly abused, and that it’s all covered up. I guess you’d know this first-hand yourself, Mr. Mayor, but you haven’t had a chance to visit the stables yet. But I’m sure you will get around to it, at least before the propsed bill gets any further.

De Blasio proposed carriage horses be replaced with replicas of vintage cars. (David Handschuh/New York Daily News)

I believe that animal lover Nislick’s background and experience running parking garages is close enough to running horse stables to make him an expert. To defy such a good-hearted person would be ludicrous.

Just because he founded an “animal rights” group, NY-CLASS, that supported you and was behind the anti-Christine Quinn TV ads and is now involved in developing the fake antique cars that are going to be sold as substitute horses to the beleaguered, unemployed horse-and-carriage drivers for $125,000 to $170,000, should not be seen as a bad thing.

Those horses are in danger. After all, according to horse-and-carriage owner Colm McKeever, there have been six motor vehicle-horse accidents since 2007 involving a rotating group of 220 horses who made 300,000 round trips between the stables and Central Park.

OK, yes, I admit that in 2012 in New York City alone there were over 68,000 car crashes involving 128,000 vehicles and 170,000 humans with 271 fatalities, including 11,000 vehicle-pedestrian accidents, 3,639 bikes-car accidents, and 1,619 motorcyle crashes, but still.

Clearly, those out-of-work carriage drivers will be thrilled to pay up to $170,000 to replace their beloved animals with fake Model T electric cars.

That’s no reason that carriage horses should be exposed to a one in 50,000 chance of being involved in a horse-auto accident — is there?

With odds like that, who wouldn’t rather take their chances in a car than in a horse-and-carriage? Yes, I know you can ride around in a car anytime, but it’s obvious that these electric Model Ts will be fabulous replacements for the horses — despite the fact than none yet exist.

Clearly, those out-of-work carriage drivers will be thrilled to pay up to $170,000 to replace their beloved animals with fake Model T electric cars.

But where would these tourist Model T cars be allowed to go since cars, not horses, are banned from so many Central Park drives so much of the time that it’s become a paradise for runners and cloppers?

Not to worry. I’m sure the parking garage guy will figure it out.

Best, Linda

Teen porn actress and Duke University student Miriam Weeks says she’s been watching porn since she was 12. (Ken Murray/NEW YORK DAILY NEWS)

SEX, SEX & SEX

And you thought that cleaning up Times Square meant cleaning up New York!

Here then, a week in nasty N.Y. sex and slime: Sunshine Cinemas invited babies to a free showing of “Nymphomaniac: Vol. 1” — “must of course be accompanied by their caregivers.” Question: Will babies have to pay full price for “Nympho 2”?

Teen porn actress and Duke University student Miriam Weeks, who says she’s been watching porn since she was 12 (Where? In her devout Catholic parents’ home?), took to the stage in a city jiggle joint, but tragically ended her dance without many G’s in her G-string.

Giving a whole new meaning to “Glee,” two sex-romping Brooklyn teachers who’d been caught red, er, handed and fired for lesbian petting in a classroom in 2009 (while the annual school singing competition was going on, yet!) were legally reinstated, with full back and full frontal pay.

@LUIPartyStories, a Twitter account that posts photos of drunk Long Island teens having sex, throwing up and throwing punches went viral — and I’m not just talking about

Anderson Cooper leaves the "Late Show with David Letterman" at Ed Sullivan Theater. (Donna Ward/Getty Images)

ANDERSON COOPER 370

If Flight 370 is ever found, CNN is going to have to have to start hijacking planes to keep the good times going. The missing plane has been to CNN what Obamacare is to Fox — the gift that keeps on giving.

The mystery gave CNN such a ratings boost that anchors for weeks have spent 24/7 obsessing about every bit of flotsam and jetsam, and interviewing any “expert” willing to discuss every nut-bag scenario on the Internet.

The missing plane has been to CNN what Obamacare is to Fox — the gift that keeps on giving.

But on Wednesday night CNN turned so nut-bag itself that it actually caused TV news to die.

As the screen crawl underneath misread, “Lack hole?” (the only accurate statement of the night), anchor Don Lemon asked Mary Schiavo, former Inspector General for the U.S. Department of Transportation, “Is it preposterous to consider a black hole as a possibility?” Ah, yes?

Instead of running away to find her lost reputation, Schiano answered, “A small black hole would suck in our entire universe, so we know it’s not that.”

Really? Wait ’til she sees the black hole CNN gets sucked into when this story is finally over.

Actor Russell Crowe was shocked when he couldn't attract an audience of one at the Vatican. (AP)

NOTHING TO CROWE ABOUT

Russell Crowe, who’s used to attracting huge audiences wherever he goes, was shocked that he couldn’t attract an audience of one at the Vatican. This even after Crowe tweeted Pope Francis an offer for free! VIP screening tickets to “Noah.” Instead, Crowe and company only got to attend Mass at St. Peter’s, followed by (maybe) a hearty handshake from the pontiff.

20TH ANNIVERSARY OF GENOCIDE IN RWANDA

Next Saturday marks the 20th anniversary of the genocide in Rwanda, and activist Francine LeFrak, creator of Same Sky, which assists HIV-positive women and genocide survivors, will commemorate the anniversary with volunteer park cleanups, called “Umaganda” around our city and New Jersey to coincide with the international clean-up event. Volunteer at sameskyumuganda@gmail.com.

Anne Hathaway attends Miami Walk Of Fame Inauguration at Bayside Marketplace. (Aaron Davidson/WireImage) Anne Hathaway attends the "Rio 2" premiere at Fontainebleau Miami Beach. (Gustavo Caballero/Getty Images)

ANNE HATHAWAY

Anne Hathaway is lookin' hot in Miami "Rio 2" premiere and later makes a new friend.

EXPRESS LINES

How did a teen pull off a Philippe Petit and climb to the top of the World Trade enter unseen? Don’t know, but it definitely involved a coverup by the Port Authority and Gov. Christie’s staff ... UnVogue: Annie Leibovitz is now doing weddings? It’s tacky enough that Kim & Kanye forced their way onto the “Vogue” cover, but, wose, the end results look like every cheeseball wedding portrait ever taken, (well, except for the near crotch grab). ... Jet Flight: The Jets released Mark Sanchez, a guy who’d been arrested in 2006 for alleged sexual assault, and replaced him with much older Michael Vick, a guy who went to jail in 2007 for running an inhumane dog fighting ring. Who’s next? O.J. Simpson?

Hilaria Baldwin posted this photo of herself on Instagram on March 19, 2014. (Hilaria Baldwin via Instagram)

HILARIOUS POSING

They must miss avoiding the press while allegedly yelling “c---sucking f--.” This week, Alec Baldwin’s yoga wife, Hilaria, clearly in a bid to keep their much-deserved privacy intact, Instagrammed a pic of herself clad only in stockings and hooker heels with her legs wrapped around her head. Her note: “Wait until you see what #yogapostureoftheday we did today.” Ah, no. #TMI