WASHINGTON, D. C. - As voters in Ohio's northeastern corner decide whether to elect freshman GOP Dave Joyce to his second term in Congress, Joyce's campaign and that of his Democratic opponent, Michael Wager, are both running TV ads titled "Just Dave" that aim to better acquaint voters with Joyce.

The feel-good ad placed by Joyce features his wife, three kids, and their home in Russell Township. It describes him as a "regular guy fighting for regular people."

"With the kids in college, its a little quieter now," Joyce says in the ad. "But my wife's still a nurse and now I have to deal with the loudmouth politicians in Congress. They love the title 'congressmen.' I like my real name better. So when you see me around, just call me 'Dave.' "

His opponent's feel-bad ad, which starts airing today, shows Dave as one of the loudmouth politicians Joyce's own TV spot disparages.

"His ads call him 'Just Dave,' but in Washington, David Joyce is just another greedy congressman," the ad says, claiming that Joyce voted to "give taxpayer funded healthcare for life to Congressmen, while wanting to cut Social Security and Medicare."

"And Joyce voted to shut down the government, but make sure Congress could still fly first class," it continues. "He calls himself "just Dave" but he's really just looking out for himself."

The claim about Joyce's vote to give taxpayer funded healthcare to Congressmen for life refers to a measure he supported to repeal the Affordable Care Act, which put Congress members on health insurance policies created by the bill instead of their old federal insurance plans. PolitiFact rated a similar claim "Pants on Fire." Joyce also does not use federal health insurance. He is on a policy supplied through his wife's employer.

Its claim about Joyce cutting social welfare programs derives from his vote for House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan's 2015 budget.

"Michael Wager's lies know no bounds," said Joyce campaign spokesman Kevin Benacci. "Dave Joyce gave up his taxpayer supported health care and there are no first class seats from Northeast Ohio to Washington DC. Anyone who has taken those puddle jumpers knows that. This is just sleight of hand from a desperate candidate who exploits tax loopholes at home by incorporating companies offshore and supports Obamacare. However, Mr. Wager doesn't want to talk about any of those things."

Wager's ad will run on broadcast and cable TV stations starting today. His campaign declined to release the size or duration of the buy.

"Today marks the commencement of our television advertising and a new phase in our campaign," said a statement from Wager. "While I will continue to inform voters about my background and qualifications as well as my positions on the important issues facing Ohioans and the nation, our campaign also intends to inform voters about the failures of the U.S. Congress, including Congressman Dave Joyce."