Marty Grosjean lived in the technology and e-commerce world before he founded Only Natural Pet, a Boulder-based all-natural pet product company that offers everything from food and vitamins to chews, treats and grooming supplies.

So how does a tech and e-commerce guy become inspired to launch a pet product company? Grosjean says he was a pet lover and natural foodie in his own personal life, but it was much more than that.

We connected with Marty in Boulder.

1. We're into the start of the flea and tick season. Can all-natural treatments really work that well?

Yes, the all-natural treatments can work well, especially in a climate like Colorado where neither fleas nor ticks are severe. We usually recommend a combination approach, using something to work on the outside — like a flea/tick collar or tag - and something to work from the inside out — like our Brewer's Yeast & Garlic tablets. The natural treatments are certainly a lot healthier for your pet than the conventional "spot-on" treatments, which amount to putting toxic pesticides onto your pet's back, which is absorbed into their skin and remains there for several months.

2. What prompted you to start this company back in 2004?

Back then natural pet supplies were very new, and it was difficult to find them in stores or online. So we started our online business first and several years later opened our store here in Boulder. Along the way we have developed over 200 of our own products under the Only Natural Pet brand, which we consider the best of the best since we make them based on our experience selling all the other leading products.

3. Can you quantify the growth of your company?

Today we employ over 30 people and we are moving our warehouse into a larger, 17,000-square-foot facility. The Boulder store is thriving, and our online business is growing over 30 percent year over year. As more and more people see the appeal of using natural pet products, our company has continued to benefit.

4. Have you considered opening more brick and mortar stores? How many stores around the country might someone find Only Natural Pet products in?

We have considered it, but don't have any immediate plans for new stores. So at this point someone can only find Only Natural Pet products in one store — right here in Boulder. Most of our company's growth is coming from the e-commerce business right now.

5. Who presents you with the stiffest competition?

There are always other e-commerce companies pursuing the Pets.com strategy from the dot.com period in the late '90s — sell pet supplies at a loss and make it up in volume. They come and then they go, and we don't try to compete with them. So they always present a challenge, but our approach of having highly trained associates to answer questions and offer solutions will win out in the long run. In the store we use the same strategy, although our pricing is plenty competitive there because people don't sell at loss in the brick and mortar world.

It's been an exciting 11 years, and very rewarding. We love serving the Boulder community from our store, and even though it's a small part of the overall business, it's the most fun. There's nothing like switching people from an unhealthy conventional pet food to a truly natural food for their dog or cat, or helping them solve a problem like allergies or anxiety with a natural remedy — that's the stuff we really enjoy.

Learn more about Only Natural Pet at www.onlynaturalpet.com.

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel