Buy Photo The site of a proposed Wawa gas station and convenience store at Route 35 and Wyckoff Road in Eatontown. (Photo: Staff Photo Larry Higgs )Buy Photo Story Highlights Residents will have to wait until Oct. 27 for traffic experts to face off about whether a proposed Wawa, Chick-fil-a, offices and other stores are built on land at the corner of Route 35 and Wyckoff Road in Eatontown.

Concerned residents and business owners will have to wait until Oct. 27 to hear opposing traffic experts discuss whether a plaza proposed for the corner of Route 35 and Wyckoff Road will add too much traffic to the busy intersection.

A traffic expert for developer Fidelity Eatontown LLC was unable to attend Monday’s second hearing of the application after it was sent back to the borough Planning Board by a judge. The board also received a report by board Engineer Bonnie Heard of T&M Associates about revised plans for the project Monday afternoon. Officials said they did not have enough time to review and discuss it Monday night

Board chairman Carl Sohl said he hadn’t read the report.

Heard’s report is a review of revised plans submitted earlier this month to build a 24-hour, 5,051-square-foot Wawa gas station and convenience store and a 4,475-square-foot Chick-fil-A on 6.14 acres at Route 35 and Wyckoff Road. The developer also has plans for a 7,880-square-foot office and retail building and 3,600-square-foot drive-through bank in the rear of the property. The revised plans take into account how storm water would be handled on the site.

Heard said her review addresses new traffic information brought up by a traffic expert hired by the project’s opponents.

Last month, Gordon Meth, a traffic engineer for the opponents, said traffic from the development was “grossly understated” by experts for developer Fidelity Eatontown LLC.

The worst traffic effects would be felt by drivers traveling west on Wyckoff Road from the shopping area to make a left turn on Route 35 south, Meth said. Mid-day conditions would be worse when the amount of green-light time for Wyckoff Road is shortened, Meth said. Similar concerns were raised by residents during public hearings last fall.

Heard said her report noted Meth’s testimony, but it did not reach any conclusion about the validity of his numbers. His numbers were based on engineering standards for traffic that could be generated by different types of stores, which may not be identical to the stores proposed here, she said.

“There are a lot of variables,” she said.

The revised plans call for a left turn out of the site and onto Wyckoff Road and Route 35, Heard said. Those aspects of the plan have generated concern from residents and business owners, who fear the added traffic will make conditions worse.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1paOnFh