New York City hospitals seem to have a thing for suburban Westchester County.

First, Montefiore Medical Center decided to expand its stronghold in the Bronx across the county line, acquiring two bankrupt Westchester hospitals and then luring White Plains Hospital into an affiliation. New York-Presbyterian Healthcare System couldn't leave such a wealthy market to a rival, so it recruited Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville and Hudson Valley Hospital farther north into its competing alliance.

While consolidation has been an issue across the country, the pace of hospital mergers has accelerated in New York in recent years to create ever-stronger networks.

The key players are New York-Presbyterian, Montefiore, Mount Sinai Health System and North Shore-LIJ Health System. NY-Presby illustrates the scope of the consolidation because its affiliates include 10 acute-care hospitals (one in Connecticut), as well as specialty facilities, rehabilitation centers, nursing homes and two ambulatory care members.

The consequence of consolidation is clear from the chart. Health care costs are rising much faster in the New York area than in the rest of the country. Last year, medical inflation reached 4% here, much more than the overall U.S. figure of 2.6%. During the past five years, health care prices rose 15.3% in the New York metro area, compared with 12% nationally.

Health care inflation in the past five years

Inflation New York area 15.3% U.S. 12.0%

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics

More worrisome is that health care inflation is accelerating here while it is slowing elsewhere.

One reasonable explanation for this unhappy state of affairs is the continuing expansion of hospital networks.

The key reason hospitals surrender their independence is because they no longer have the clout to win what they consider reasonable reimbursements from insurance companies.

Of course, when hospitals command higher rates, premiums go up. Once, this meant pressure on employers, who absorbed some of the increases and passed others on to workers.

With the Affordable Care Act, higher prices are also showing up in the cost of insurance purchased on the New York state health-insurance exchange by individuals not covered at work.

Admittedly, patients can benefit from the medical discipline the area's leading hospitals eventually impose on their affiliates. Many smaller facilities need the access to capital and the financial management that networks provide.

In the end, though, it will be bad if consolidation continues to drive up prices in New York more than in the rest of the country.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments