Cupcakes are seen with the names of candidates, made by an employee for colleagues at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley, Calif. on Sept. 16, 2015 ahead of Wednesday's Republican party presidential debate. (Frederic J. Brown/AFP/Getty Images

With abortion, an international refugee crisis and racial tensions across America dominating the national news cycle, Republican presidential candidates definitely won't run out of things to talk about in Wednesday's debate (and the earlier four-candidate "kiddie table" forum).

In fact, there's so much going on, it can be hard to keep track. So we're here to get you up to speed on the 15 issues likely to come up:

1. Iran deal

U.S. diplomats and five other countries announced in July that they reached an agreement with Iran to try to make it more difficult for the pariah state to build a nuclear bomb.

Under the deal, Iran must reduce the number of centrifuges it has and allow for increased vigilance from international inspectors. (The idea is that Iran can still use nuclear power for energy and medical purposes -- just not a bomb.) If it complies, the U.S. and international partners will lift crippling economic sanctions on the country.

Congress had a say on whether the deal would be implemented as-is. In lawmakers' first two weeks back to work in September, Senate Democrats successfully blocked the Republican Congress from pushing through a bill that could derail the deal, even as the American public starts to sour on it.

But congressional budget watchers like Stan Collender don't think the debate's over: Some Republicans opposed to the deal could try to defund it in this month's budget debate, and you can expect candidates on Wednesday to promise they'll tear up the Iran deal once in the White House in 2017.

2. A government shutdown

Congressional budget experts say there's up to a 75 percent chance Congress will fail to agree on even a short-term budget extension by the Sept. 30 deadline, leading to a federal government shutdown (their hope is that a shutdown would only last for a few days).

That's because Congress is facing a nearly unprecedented number of deadlines and political dramas, not the least of which is a group of about 30 tea party Republicans refusing to vote for a budget that funds Planned Parenthood (see below). With four senators running for president on the Republican side (three on the main debate stage), expect this to come up Wednesday, too.

3. Planned Parenthood

A little-known antiabortion activist group released several videos in the summer showing Planned Parenthood officials talking casually about the procurement of organs from aborted fetuses. Planned Parenthood officials denied doing anything wrong -- the implication is the organs were being sold -- but apologized for their tone.

The videos have caused an uproar in conservative circles, with Republicans introducing bills in Congress to take away the $500-plus million in annual federal funding for the organization (money that, it should be noted, is already prohibited from going to abortion services in most cases).

The issue is likely to become one of the biggest sticking points in this month's debate to fund the government, where it could be a line in the sand similar to Obamacare during the 2013 government shutdown. An August poll, though, shows Americans approve of federal Planned Parenthood funding 49-39.

4. Syrian refugee crisis

Hungarian officials are firing tear gas and water cannons at refugees literally knocking on Western Europe's gates for asylum from war-torn Syria and (to a lesser degree) Iraq. President Obama has said the United States will take in 10,000 Syrians next year (this year, to date, the United States has resettled less than 1,400), while European Union officials debate quotas and border fences. The crisis has reinvigorated debates in Washington about national security and the U.S.'s role in Syria. Obama said the United States and its allies "may have to deal with the source of the problem, which is the ongoing crisis in Syria.”

Republican presidential candidates are all over the map on whether the United States should take in refugees or stay out of an international crisis that some candidates, such as Donald Trump, have described as Europe's problem. There have also been worries expressed that extremists could be among the refugees.

5. Income inequality

Trump has called for ending tax breaks for the wealthy, such as the carried-interest exemption that allows some hedge-fund managers and venture capitalists to pay a lower tax rate than average Americans. Former Florida governor Jeb Bush has said that some banks are too big. Sen. Rand Paul (Ky.) wants to end monetary policy that favors the wealthy.

In a moment where two-thirds of Americans (68 percent) believe our economic system favors the wealthy rather than being fair -- including about half of Republicans, according to a July Washington Post/ABC News poll -- the Republican party finds itself these days talking about income inequality almost as much as Democrats. And Trump's increasing populist bent makes this particularly timely.

6. Violence against police and racial tension in America

A Houston-area sheriff's deputy was murdered in August, prompting the county's district attorney to remark that it feels like there's open warfare on law enforcement. A week later, CNN reported, protesters at the Minnesota State Fair raised signs that read "Black Lives Matter" and chanted "pigs in a blanket."

Racial tensions and tensions between communities and police are dominating national headlines, and Republican presidential candidates like Scott Walker are calling for action and criticizing the president for not speaking out enough against cop killings.

7. Immigration

Unlike the 2012 campaign, there's no serious bid in Congress right now to reform our immigration system. Instead, President Obama has acted unilaterally to extend deportation relief to about 5 million of the estimated 11 million immigrants in the country illegally.

In 2012, he signed an executive action to protect many young people brought into the country illegally by their parents, and in 2014 he expanded those protections to undocumented parents of U.S. citizens and permanent residents. Both programs are on hold as a Texas-led lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the actions winds its way through the courts.

Separately, the GOP is still dealing with some urgency to do something about immigration -- in large part because the party is hemorrhaging Latino voters. But most Republicans who express support for a path to citizenship find themselves targeted by the conservative base. One of them is Bush, who has instead moved to calling for legal status -- rather than citizenship -- for undocumented immigrants. Meanwhile, Trump has called for ending birthright citizenship under the 14th Amendment -- something Walker briefly joined him on.

8. Obamacare

Americans have been able to buy health insurance on state- and federally-run private exchanges since October 2013, when the hallmark piece of the president's 2010 health-care law, known as Obamacare or the Affordable Care Act, went into effect. New federal figures announced Wednesday morning show that the number of uninsured in America has fallen after the law was implemented.

Meanwhile, the GOP-controlled House of Representatives has voted at least 50 times to defund or repeal the law and/or parts of it. But the law has been spared from court intervention. In June, the Supreme Court handed down its second decision on the law, ruling 6 to 3 that federal tax credits for low-income Americans to buy insurance were legal. The court previously ruled 5 to 4 in 2012 to uphold the law's mandate that everyone be insured or face punishment in the form of taxes.

Republicans are still pushing for repealing the law -- a position likely to be espoused by every candidate on stage Wednesday -- but there are varying degrees of resignation when it comes to how ingrained the law is now and how Republicans should deal with a potential alternative, should they win the White House in 2016.

9. The Islamic State

For the past year, the United States and its allies have ramped up targeted air strikes over Iraq and Syria to disrupt the terrorist group that calls itself the Islamic State. The group has beheaded many foreigners, including two American journalists, and controls an estimated one-third of the region. Americans are also trying to train Syrian and Iraqi fighters to battle the Islamic State on the ground. Pentagon officials have recently described this fight against the Islamic State as "a stalemate."

Politically, there is some momentum in Republican circles for a more involved U.S. presence -- up to and including ground troops. This has not been uniformly embraced, though, as Republicans recall the war weariness that marked the drawdowns in Iraq and Afghanistan.

10. China and other world leaders

Wednesday's debate will likely have a strong foreign policy focus thanks to syndicated radio talk show host Hugh Hewitt, who is co-moderating the debate and promises tough questions on geopolitics and world leaders. This is also an area of interest for lead moderator Jake Tapper.

Likely to be among those: Chinese president Xi Jinping, who is visiting the United States on Sept. 25 on his first official state visit amid plenty of acrimony. The two countries are trading accusations of hacking and spying, with Obama issuing sanctions against Chinese companies suspected of hacking into the U.S. Office of Personnel Management in 2014 and stealing sensitive information that affected an estimated 22 million people.

In addition, as U.S. stock markets plunged in late August due to economic turmoil in China, Republican presidential candidates like Walker and former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina urged Obama to cancel or downgrade Xi's state visit, one of the U.S.'s warmest welcomes for foreign dignitaries.

11. Common Core

On national K-12 reading and math standards known as Common Core, Bush and Ohio Gov. John Kasich stand out among the candidates. Bush is a big supporter of the standards, having served on a national education commission to come up with them while governor of Florida, and Kasich has defended implementing them in his state.

About 40 states and the District of Columbia have implemented the standards, but many conservatives on and off the debate stage consider them one more example of the federal government invading the classroom, doing things that should be left to local officials.

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, for example, supported the standards in his state then later said he had "grave concerns" about them. Walker, former Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee and Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal all had similar 180-degree turns.

12. Gun rights

A summer filled with mass shootings -- including two local Roanoke, Va., reporters gunned down in August on live television, a deadly Lafayette, La., movie theater shooting in July by a man with mental problems and another apparently racially motivated mass shooting at a black church in Charleston, S.C. -- has brought the gun debate back into the spotlight.

Polls consistently show that upward of 90 percent of Americans support expanding background checks, but a majority of Americans are doubtful that changing gun laws will help. And a new background checks bill failed in Congress after the 2012 Newtown massacre and hasn't really been resurrected since.

Still, there could be some movement in Congress in the fall; in August, the Senate's No. 2 Republican, John Cornyn (Tex.), introduced legislation designed to encourage states to send more information about residents with serious mental problems to the federal background-check system. As for restricting gun ownership, though, it's a complete non-starter for Republicans.

13. Export-Import Bank

This relatively obscure federal agency is at the center of a battle within the Republican Party about government's place in business. The government-funded, self-sustaining bank provides loans to U.S. companies making risky-ish investments abroad. In June, Congress let the bank expire and is currently debating whether to reauthorize it.

GOP presidential hopeful Sen. Ted Cruz (Tex.) has made keeping the bank shutdown a central tenet of his campaign, giving a fiery floor speech in July when he accused Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (Ky.) of being a "liar." Critics allege that the bank amounts to government welfare for big business. It could be yet another sticking point in this month's budget debate.

The debate, if nothing else, shows the impact of the tea party drawing a line in the sand; for years, reauthorizing the bank was little more than a formality. And then conservatives decided to pick this fight.

14. Climate change and clean energy

The American West is facing an epic drought and simultaneously burning up with what's expected to be yet another record-setting wildfire season -- extreme weather events that climate change activists say is evidence of the negative impacts of shifting weather patterns.

Most Republican presidential candidates now agree climate change is occurring, but question whether humans are the cause and whether we should do anything about it -- especially something that could hurt businesses. Meanwhile, the Obama administration released stringent rules in August designed to cut down on U.S. coal production.

The United States under Obama has invested heavily in alternative energy forms, such as solar and wind power, as well as expanded its natural gas production, extracted through a controversial process known as fracking, that detractors say pollutes the environment and causes earthquakes.

Relatedly, the next president will likely get to decide whether to build the fourth stage of the Keystone XL pipeline to ship Canadian oil to Nebraska -- something the administration hasn't yet done. Also on the table could be whether to lift the U.S.'s four-decade-old ban on exports of crude oil -- something House Republicans are pushing for.

15. Religious liberties

After the Supreme Court legalized same-sex marriage across the nation in June, the debate within the Republican Party turned toward protecting religious liberties among Americans who don't support it and don't want to participate with it in any way.

Many of the most socially conservative candidates, such as Huckabee, Jindal, Cruz and former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum, promised to use their increasingly limited means to fight for religious liberty laws like the one passed in Indiana this year that grants protections to Christian businesses who refuse to serve or work with same-sex couples -- particularly at weddings.

But the issue of supporting same-sex marriage is largely decided when it comes to public opinion, including the 61 percent of young Republicans who support it, according to a March Pew poll. Christie is one of the few candidates who has said he won't fight this new reality and would enforce the law.