Buy Photo Augusta Health’s main entrance in Fishersville. (Photo: The News Leader)Buy Photo

FISHERSVILLE – Augusta Health is one of a number of hospitals across the state supporting a new ad campaign to garner support for legislative changes to health policies that are “a root cause for hospital’s financial concerns.”

On Wednesday, the Virginia Hospital and Healthcare Association announced the launch of a massive ad campaign including billboards and television ads warning people of “traumatic repercussions for Virginians, the communities they call home and the state economy,” according to literature distributed by the group.

Augusta Health CEO Mary Mannix spoke at the press conference in Richmond, where details of the campaign were released. She said the hospital’s role in the community is important as both a major employer and as a rural hospital, calling it a “cornerstone of the community.”

Mannix said Augusta Health, along with most rural hospitals in Virginia, are one of the largest employers in their communities.

“We employ approximately 2,400 people,” she said during the press conference.

Mannix said Augusta Health is constantly evolving to make sure the services they offer meet the unique needs of the people in the community. She said “half of all hospitals operate at a loss and are challenged in terms of their stability,” but Augusta Health has recorded record gains since the Affordable Care Act went into effect.

According to the hospital’s financial records, Augusta Health has experienced steady growth and nearly doubled their assets in the last 10 years.

From 2013 to 2014, the hospital posted its largest growth of assets with a gain of more than $67 million.

Despite Mannix’s warning of dire challenges to the industry, Augusta Health appears to be experiencing steady financial gains. In 2007, Augusta Health filed its 2005, 990 tax returns claiming $287,327,614 in assets. In December of 2014, the hospital reported $530,311,493 in assets for 2013, an increase over its 2012 assets of $462,55,518.

Virginia hospitals have been pushing legislators to no avail to expand Medicaid for low-income patients to offset what they spend in free or discounted care for those unable to pay for health care. But the state says expanding a publicly funded health program is too costly.

House Speaker William J. Howell said he recognizes how important hospitals are to the state, but on Wednesday he reiterated his opposition to Medicaid expansion.

"The speaker is happy to have a dialogue about the role hospitals play, the impact Obamacare has had on them and how the legislature can work with hospitals in the future," Howell spokesman Matthew Moran said. "But Medicaid expansion is not part of that conversation."

The association said its new campaign, however, is not about the expansion of Medicaid, but is being launched to help educate people regarding the financial stress the government is placing on hospitals and why “elected officials, policy makers, health care professionals and the public” need to come together to promote “real policy solutions to the problem at hand.”

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: http://www.newsleader.com/story/news/local/2015/09/16/augusta-health-warns-hardships-posts-record-gains/32516085/