Eagles come out flat, play sloppy, still manage shootout loss

There's two ways to look at it, really.

The Colorado Eagles for chunks of the night played sloppy defense, had a terrible start and seemingly had the upper hand to win the game despite it all, but failed.

Then there's option No. 2: Colorado probably had no business even being in the contest by the end, and certainly stealing away a point from Ontario in a key series for position atop the Pacific Division was huge considering how poorly the Eagles looked at times Saturday night.

The truth lies somewhere in the middle and that's how the team chose to see Colorado's 5-4 shootout loss to the Reign at the Budweiser Events Center in Game 2 of an important three-game series.

Colorado Eagles forward Darryl Bootland (27) scored a game-tying goal to send the game to overtime against Ontario. The Eagles lost 5-4 in a shootout, but picked up a valuable point. (Photo Courtesy of Standout Imagery)

"Us getting a point is probably something that we deserved, but I think giving up the point we did, we deserved that as well," Colorado coach Chris Stewart said. "We didn't play 60 minutes. We have to play all 60 minutes."

Nothing captured the mood of the game quite like the third and final period in which the club went through a wide range of emotions.

Ontario (27-13-2-4, 60 points) scored 5:57 into the frame to push its lead out to 4-2, and the way Colorado was playing, it seemed the Reign would come away unscathed. But then the Eagles came out of the fog that plagued them for much of the contest to claw back in when forward Brock Nixon scored his second goal of the game.

With time ticking away, Colorado pulled goalie Clarke Saunders and were rewarded with a game-tying score off the stick of veteran Darryl Bootland with 1:11 left. Suddenly it look as though the Eagles might steal away not one, but both points.

Ontario's top netminder Joe Cannata went down with an injury at the end of the second period, leaving the duties to Spencer McLay, who hadn't appeared in a game yet. When the contest went to a shootout, Colorado seemed destined to come out on top.

"Anytime you get to a shootout in your own building we feel like we have the skill to win those," Nixon said, who also scored Colorado's lone shootout goal. "You have to give credit to their guy. I don't think he's played at all and he made some good saves."

Unlike the previous night, Colorado's (31-14-0-2, 64 points) start to the game was uninspired. Ontario took advantage of the Eagles' flat demeanor to score the game's first two goals. Finding that first score has been so important to each club's success this season.

Reign forward Maxim Kitsyn banged home a rebound 9 minutes into the opening period, and 4 minutes later Ontario won a battle along the side boards to set up a nice pass for Kitsyn's second goal of the period. He would finish the night with a hat trick.

Yet the Eagles didn't fold up their tent and relent. Instead they weathered the blow and countered back. Just 10 seconds after Ontario seized a two-goal edge, Nixon found himself the recipient of a pass following a Reign turnover in the neutral zone, streaked down the right side and sent a wrister to close the gap at 2-1.

Defenseman Teigan Zahn picked an apt time to record his first goal of the season (appearing in his 45th game) to tie the game at 2, unfortunately for Colorado, it couldn't get out of its own way, taking three consecutive penalties. On their third attempt, the Reign converted midway through the period to take a slim 3-2 edge into the final, decisive frame.

"It wasn't the start we wanted, certainly. That's not what we're about," Nixon said. "We have to respond. To come back late and get a point is obviously huge, but just not a full effort tonight."

The Eagles hold firm to the four point lead in the division, as Ontario moved into a tie with Ontario for second place with the victory.

Colorado and Ontario close out their battle for positioning atop the Pacific Division with a rubber match Sunday (3:05 p.m.), before the Eagles head back out on the road for six straight games.

Cris Tiller: 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/cristiller

Reign 5, Eagles 4 SO

At Budweiser Events Center

Ontario 2 1 2 0 1 — 5 Colorado 1 1 1 0 0 — 4

First period — 1. Ontario, Kitsyn 12 (White, Ezekiel), 9:04. 2. Ontario, Kitsyn 13 (Ezekiel), 13:08. 3. Colorado, Nixon 21 (Nemec), 13:18.

Second period — 4. Colorado, Zahn 1 (Rodwell, Bootland), 5:10. 5. Ontario, White 13 (Couture, Register), 9:44 (PP).

Third period — 6. Ontario, Kitsyn 14 (King, Ezekiel), 5:57. 7. Colorado, Nixon 22 (Kraemer), 10:01. 8. Colorado, Bootland 15 (Bowman, Moon), 18:49.

Overtime period — No scoring.

Shootout period — Ontario 2 (Kitsyn NG, King NG, Brown G, Kopitar G), Colorado 1 (Nixon G, Daavettila NG, Vause NG, Moon NG, Bootland NG).

Shots on goal — Ontario 30; Colorado 35.

Power plays — Ontario 1-for-3; Colorado 0-for-3.

Goalies (shots-saves)— Ontario: Cannata (24-22), McLay (11-9); Colorado: Saunders (30-26).