MemorialCare System Office is the No. 4 top workplace in the large-company category. Marcia Manker, chief executive at Orange Coast Memorial Medical Center, a hospital within the group that also is in the top 10, talks about serving the community:

Q. What does your company do that sets it apart from others in the field of medical care?

A. Orange Coast partners closely with our physicians. Our doctors form committees to help us decide what is the best practice for each of the services that we provide. We also have a fully integrated electronic medical record system that takes a lot of the errors out of health care.

Q. How do you motivate and recognize top talent at your company?

A. Because we are known for providing the highest quality of care, we're going to attract the physicians who want to practice in that environment — the ones who are continually striving to be at the top of their class. When you get physicians who are such high achievers, then you attract the same type of staff employee. It all builds on it self.

Q. What perks or benefits do you and your employees value most at your workplace?

A. One of the initiatives that we have piloted is the Good Life Program. Health-wise we all need to move more and eat better, and because people spend so much time here we've brought a lot of ‘good life’ aspects into our environment. We have a gym, an onsite Good Life coach, and a ton of fitness classes. There's zumba, pilates, yoga and body conditioning. We give out pedometers so people can track their steps. We have smoking-cessation classes and food and nutrition coaches available. We're trying to get people to participate and take accountability for their health. You're given your genetics, but there's so much you can do through your lifestyle. It's really shame-on-you if you don't take advantage of these programs.

Q. What have you seen and has your company done differently in the past year as the economy has started to improve?

A. We haven't seen the financial upside in the economy yet because patients still need the care, but we don't necessarily get paid for that. The overall economy may be improving but our reimbursements continue to go down. As people try to ratchet down costs, hospitals are a huge target in that area. We are continually challenged to do more with less. With the Affordable Care Act, we anticipate there will be more community members that have access to care. Hopefully, we can work out all the bugs in the enrollment process for the exchanges. Our role right now is really to help people understand what is available to them.

Q. What is your No. 1 tip for recruiting – and retaining – quality employees?

A. Our employees are our best recruiting source for high quality people. When you have highly engaged employees like we do, we want to make sure that anybody we bring in meets those standards. People stay because of the esprit de corps within their units. It's "Does my manager care about me as an individual?" And then there's how they are treated by the medical staff. It's the whole culture of Orange Coast that contributes to our retention.

Q. What motivates you to come to work each morning?

A. I spend most of my waking hours here, but once I set foot on this campus, I realize why I'm here. I work with some of the best people, and I learn from them constantly. It's a very challenging and intellectually stimulating environment. There's never a boring moment — although sometimes you wish there were.

Q. How does your company make Orange County better?

A. We're the only not-for-profit hospital in the (immediate) area, and we invest all our profits back into our facilities and care services. For instance, our planned emergency room expansion is very expensive and if we weren't reinvesting in the hospital those profits might go somewhere else. Instead, we're able to bring in state-of-the-art technology and give our employees the best training. But the most important thing is that we are here all the time and serve as the community safety net.

Contact the writer: jenelson@ocregister.com