The impact of The Affordable Care Act is still rippling through the healthcare industries. As a way to cope with the various changes that have affected providers, health systems and insurance carriers, mergers and acquisitions within the industry have been on the rise.

The trend appears to be making a broader sweep through the healthcare industries. The consolidation and mergers of health systems is still on the rise and seems to be spreading into the provider sector.

The Milwaukee Wisconsin Journal Sentinel (MWJS) reported in April 2015 that since 2013, there were “roughly a dozen mergers” within the Wisconsin health systems. The mergers consisted of “small rural hospitals” while others were “large health systems” (1).

According to the MWJS, the changes in healthcare motivated these mergers. “The mergers are part of a wave of consolidation that has taken place among health systems nationally in recent years.”

In Madison Wisconsin, the trend of acquisitions and mergers made its way into the three largest health care systems. It was reported in December 2014 that “Madison’s UW Health merged with Swedish American Health System in Rockford, Il.”

This wave of mergers was part of an effort to increase negotiating leverage with insurance carriers and also provide additional services to regions. Since the new payment systems have changed, most health systems have found it difficult to increase the cost of services and have sought ways to counter by lower overall costs of operation.

MWJS explains how the original focus of mergers over the past couple of years has changed. The current motivation appears to be mostly as an effort to lower costs (2).

Reasons Health Systems Are Consolidating

There are several major reasons why health systems seek to merge with other institutions. MWJS states, “The burst of deal-making stems partly from the pressure to make the health care system more efficient” (1).

One of the main motivations is to counter slower payments by Medicare. MWJS reported that Medicare payments are made at a “slower rate under the Affordable Care Act.”

So why is Medicare taking longer to make payments to providers? Medicare “increasingly” links the amount it pays to hospitals by “how well they [hospitals] perform on certain quality measures.”

For example, in 2015 this type of “measuring” health services resulted in a change how Medicare payments are made to hospitals. MWJS reported that in 2015 hospitals can expect a 3% reduction in Medicare payments if the hospitals experience “high readmission rates for certain conditions, such as heart attack, heart failure and pneumonia.”

Health systems are attempting to defray the financial losses of this and other payment systems being implemented through mergers and acquisitions. These mergers are being made in an effort to increase efficiency.

However, this can become a “Catch 22” since the newly formed system created through mergers and acquisitions will require a uniform consistency in following the same procedures and protocols.

It’s not realistic to expect this kind of change across the board to go smoothly. There will be a necessary learning curve. In many instances, mergers will require additional training of personnel acquired through acquisitions/mergers. This will delay continuity within the newly formed health system that could impede achieving the desired results, at least initially.

Many times, these mergers create additional expenses and financial losses. If the health system can recover from the cost of a merger, it can evolve into a more efficient system as well as possibly giving it greater bargaining power, although that is often debatable.