EPAY Systems The ACA Toolkit enables companies -- particularly those with complex workforces -- to game-plan around various scenarios and be fully prepared when the final guidelines are in place.

EPAY Systems (EPAY), a leading provider of time and attendance technology solutions, announces the ACA (Affordable Care Act) Toolkit, a dashboard that allows organizations to monitor their distributed workforces and assure compliance with the employer mandate expected to go into effect in 2015. The ACA Toolkit is integrated into BlueForce™, EPAY's mobile time and labor management system, and simplifies an otherwise complex and time-consuming process that enables organizations to more efficiently and precisely manage their mobile workforce. It also provides safeguards that eliminate the risk of expensive penalties for non-compliance.

The more complex an organization's labor environment, the steeper the challenge in tracking employee headcounts. The ACA Toolkit can gauge an organization's readiness for the employer mandates and give HR administrators a clear picture of their distributed workforce.

"A number of companies are already taking steps in advance of the guidelines that are expected to be handed down in 2015 and making pre-emptive policy and workforce changes to reduce health care costs," said Michelle Lanter Smith, Chief Marketing Officer for EPAY. "But the ACA rules around tracking employee ‘hours of service’ will be tricky, particularly for distributed workforces. The ACA Toolkit enables companies -- particularly those with complex workforces -- to game-plan around various scenarios and be fully prepared when the final guidelines are in place. The employer mandate will be costly and disruptive to companies that aren't prepared, and will exact ongoing costs to those that don't have tools to simplify compliance on a continuous basis."

The ACA Toolkit



FTE Calculator – With the push of a button, users can view their total FTEs (full time equivalent employees) at any given time, as defined by ACA regulations. In the event of an audit, users can print the results and document they're tracking FTEs.

Hours Worked Report – Who’s under/who’s over 30 hours of service per week? Details are provided in real time. (Even if an organization elects to ‘pay’ rather than ‘play,’ this data is required because penalties are assessed based on hours and headcounts.)

Employee Hours Alert – The system can be programmed to send real-time alerts to managers (in the form of texts and emails) when employees approach the 30-hour threshold.

Dashboard – The live Dashboard lets users monitor how FTE totals are trending, enabling them to plan for future exposure as well as review current status.

Premium Affordability Test – The ACA limits employee premium contributions to 9.5 percent of income. This can calculate each employee’s maximum health insurance charge, so users can set the right employee contribution and stay compliant.

And More – While ACA record-keeping requirements are still evolving, the system has the flexibility to meet them. When asked to provide documentation, users will have it readily available: automated, up-to-date, and right at their fingertips.

For organizations looking to compare their readiness for the ACA with those of their colleagues and competitors, you are invited to participate in EPAY's ACA Survey. The survey will only take a few minutes to complete, and will provide invaluable insights, including:

How far along your peers are with their ACA planning.

The types of solutions other businesses are choosing.

Whether companies in your industry are opting to “pay or play” (offer health insurance or pay non-compliance penalties).

What they expect the cost impact to be, and what they’re doing about it.

How your industry stacks up to others with a distributed workforce.

To participate, visit http://epaysystems.com/aca-survey/. Responses to the survey will be kept confidential. Each respondent who completes the survey will receive a copy of the results.

For more on the ACA Toolkit, as well as information and resources to help organizations prepare for -- and manage -- the ACA, visit http://www.epaysystems.com/managing-aca/.

About EPAY Systems

EPAY Systems provides a cutting-edge time and labor management system that keeps employers in control and in compliance with labor laws and union rules. EPAY’s uniquely flexible, web-based BlueforceTM system can adapt to the most complex labor environments and leverages biometric clocks, IVR and Mobile/GPS on smartphones and tablets. With headquarters in Chicago, IL, the company has offices throughout the U.S., Canada, and India serving 40,000 sites across North America. For more information, visit EPAY at http://www.EPAYsystems.com or call 877-800-3729 x9020.