Scroll down for video

President Barack Obama proudly declared 10 million jobs have been created during his tenure - but failed to mention that 4.3 million were lost in his first year.

In a speech at the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation in Washington, he addressed America's 'unfinished work' including racial divisions, education, healthcare, and international crises.

But he also declared 'there is almost no economic measure by which we are not better off since I took office'.

Forgotten something? President Obama gushed about the creation of 10 million jobs but neglected to tell the audience at the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation in Washington that 4.3 million jobs were lost

He said: 'After the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression, our businesses have created 10 million new jobs over the last 54 months.

'This is the longest uninterrupted stretch of job growth in our history.'

However, with a loss of 4.3 million jobs in 2009 following the economic crash, the net gain only amounts to 4.9 million jobs created - less than half the amount cited.

In 2012, Obama was criticized for failing to declare the 4.3 million job losses when he declared a net gain of 5 million jobs since he took office.

Now, with a net gain of 4.9 million jobs created during his presidency, Obama remains far behind President Bill Clinton, who created a record 22 million jobs between 1993 and 2001.

Reagan was the second most-successful president in terms of job creation, with a net gain of 16 million between 1981 and 1989.

Not so clear: The latest jobs report signalled a decline in the job growth rate as part-time job offers rocket

Analysts attribute the job losses and surge in part-time employment to Obamacare as employers find ways to avoid buying medical insurance for employees

The POTUS and FLOTUS greeted crowds together before Obama gave his 30-minute speech at the event

The latest job report by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, published on September 5, reported just 142,000 jobs created, down from an average monthly increase of 288,000 reported in June.

But that number includes a net loss of 523,000 full-time jobs and a net gain of 799,000 part-time jobs - the highest increase in part-time employment since 1993.

Analysts attribute the rise of casual employees to Obamacare, as companies do not have to buy medical insurance for workers.

The Federal Reserve Bank in Philadelphia wrote that its August numbers show 18 per cent of employers cut workers because of the Affordable Care Act, while just 3 per cent hired more.

More than 18 per cent said they have more part-time positions because of Obamacare, versus 1.5 per cent who said they had fewer.

In New York, The Federal Reserve Bank conducted two surveys in August which revealed 21 per cent of employers in the manufacturing sector said they had eliminated jobs because of Obamacare, as well as 16.9 per cent in service industries.

Mention: Obama paid tribute to the outgoing US Attorney General Eric Holder, who he called 'my friend'

In a 28-minute speech, Obama also issued an appeal to Americans to vote, as he highlighted the ‘unfinished work’ he has to complete, including gender equality, racial integration, and more widespread education.

He addressed the conflict in Ferguson, paying tribute to murdered teenager Michael Brown, whose family attended the event.

And he declared it is America’s ‘responsibility’ to ‘lead’ the world in tackling the conflict between Ukraine and Russia, combating Ebola, and breaking up the Islamic State.

He said: 'America is leading the effort to rally the world against Russian aggression in Ukraine.

'America is leading the fight to contain and combat Ebola in Africa.

'America is building the coalition that will degrade and ultimately destroy the terror group known as ISIL.