Mike Huckabee (Photo: Charlie Neibergall)

Washington is at war with American farmers and the rural way of life.

That's alarming because a country that can’t feed itself, fuel itself, or fight for itself can never truly be free.

It's no secret President Barack Obama’s radical mandates have been strangling farmers and rural communities. Worse still, some Republicans support policies that hurt Iowa farmers and kill Iowa jobs.

Enough hypocrisy. Republicans cannot attack Obama for punishing farmers and then support job-killing regulations or double standards that hurt corn-growers. Punishing ethanol and biofuels at the expense of other energy sources is not fair. Republicans should proudly support American farmers and the Renewable Fuel Standard.

I governed a rural state for 10 years, and 25 percent of our economy was agriculture. I was also born and raised in rural America. I know first hand, one-sized-fits-all Washington rules have been punishing rural communities for years. I also know ethanol makes sense.

Ethanol employs more than 70,000 Iowans and provides $5 billion in wages to workers across the state. Ethanol strengthens small towns, communities and economies across America. It has also reduced gasoline costs by at least 16 percent and decreased pollution.

With so much uncertainty around the world, we need an “all-of-the-above” American energy strategy that includes renewable fuels. Why would we import from Saudi Arabia and Russia basic energy necessities if we can produce them here at home?

Self-reliance is the best way to make America strong and ethanol reduces our dependence on foreign oil. Put another way, homegrown American-made energy means power and influence. Imagine America's strength if we were the breadbasket and the energy barrel for the world?

America's farmers never ask for handouts. In fact, farmers are usually the first to lend a hand to neighbors and strangers in need. Republicans who think Iowa farmers and ethanol producers want handouts should apologize.

Given a fair playing field, our farmers can compete with anyone in the world. Unfortunately many in Washington, including some Republicans, seem to be rooting for the wrong team. We cannot surrender more of our economy to Asia, Europe or the Middle East.

The stakes are too high. Since 2000, America has lost five million manufacturing jobs and closed 60,000 manufacturing plants. As we have seen in manufacturing, reckless policies kill jobs and punish rural communities. American farmers should not suffer the same fate. It’s time we stop the spin and end the hypocrisy: We must champion Iowa farmers and renewable fuels.

Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee is a 2016 Republican candidate for president. Contact: mikehuckabee@mikehuckabee.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1XM1glv