The fast-changing face of Denver presents its school district with an interesting problem.

Put simply, Denver Public Schools is gradually becoming richer and whiter.

What this portends for the district that has been the vanguard for education reform in the state is anyone’s guess.

Five years ago, 15,752 white students were enrolled in DPS, or 19.8 percent of the total student population.

Today, the district has 20,671 white students, or 22.6 percent — its fastest growing segment.

“By the end of the decade, white students will be closer to 29 percent,” said DPS Superintendent Tom Boasberg.

Along with the changing racial dynamic, DPS’s poverty rate is declining, roughly by 1.5 to 2 percentage points a year.

In 2012-13, about 73 percent of DPS was eligible to receive free or reduced-price lunches, a measure of poverty. It is predicted that will drop to 62 percent by the 2020-21 school year.

These demographic shifts may accelerate as housing prices continue to climb, Boasberg said.

“Tremendous numbers of families of color are being priced out,” Boasberg said. “You see it in Northwest Denver and around the Sloan’s Lake area and in Five Points. But we are beginning to see it in Elyria-Swansea. Those schools are losing families of color.”

Meanwhile, the district is seeing a decline in enrollment in the earlier grades.

Kindergarten enrollment is falling due to the decline in the number of births during the recession. That trend is expected to continue as families with fewer children are moving into the city and more couples are choosing not to have children or as many, Boasberg said.

Denver is not about to become Aspen.

DPS serves a large urban center that will still have a large minority and poor population for decades — even if gentrification accelerates.

The school district must not abandon its focus on helping disadvantaged children.

DPS reform efforts for a decade have been led by superintendents with big hearts and a committed vow to improvement.

It is imperative as the demographics of Denver change to not lose focus.

Future administrators must continue to speed up the narrowing of the achievement gap between minority students and their white peers.

Overall district achievement levels will likely improve as the district becomes wealthier. Affluence tends to mirror academic success.

But that doesn’t mean the game has been won.

In the meantime, nonprofit groups that have helped shepherd Denver’s reforms and have been focused on DPS’s struggles must begin shifting their focus outside of the city where many disadvantaged families are increasingly residing.

Thankfully, that appears to be happening.

A-Plus Denver, an organization created to “harness the power of Denver’s civic leadership” to push student achievement, recently released a report on the troubled Aurora Public Schools.

The Piton Foundation, which has been focused on improving educational opportunities for disadvantaged kids in Denver, also is now working on issues in Aurora and Adams County.

Denver is certainly changing, but the sad fact that too many kids are struggling in school hasn’t changed.

E-mail Jeremy Meyer at jpmeyer@denverpost.com. Follow him on Twitter: jpmeyerdpost

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.