Northwestern Memorial HealthCare, Cadence Health pursuing merger

Affordable Care Act makes health system combinations more appealing

The two sides Thursday signed a letter of intent to enter integration talks, a preliminary step to a possible combination that would include four hospitals, more than 1,300 employed physicians and combined annual revenue approaching $3 billion.

Northwestern Memorial HealthCare and Cadence Health said Thursday they are pursuing a merger that would create one of the largest health systems in the Chicago area.

Northwestern Memorial Hospital, the largest hospital in the area, could soon be part of a system that includes Cadence Health hospitals in the west suburbs. (Zbigniew Bzdak, Chicago Tribune)

Northwestern, parent of Chicago's largest hospital, the 894-bed Northwestern Memorial Hospital, and Cadence, the corporate parent created in 2011 after the merger of Central DuPage and Delnor hospitals, would combine under the Northwestern Medicine banner. Both systems are nonprofits.

The proposed merger comes amid a wave of hospital consolidation in the Chicago area fueled by the Affordable Care Act, which encourages combinations to improve coordination of patient care, integration of services and reduction of waste and duplication.

With major changes underway in how hospitals are paid for providing services, systems are seeking to broaden their reach, dilute costs and integrate technology systems that allow them to improve the quality of care they deliver.

The emerging model places greater importance on broader networks of health care facilities and physicians that will be counted on to act as a feeder network of patients.

The merger with Cadence would widen the pipeline of patients to Northwestern's flagship Streeterville academic medical center, which offers an array of highly specialized — and profitable — advanced medical treatment programs.

It also would strengthen the system's market power in the western suburbs, where Cadence has flourished since Winfield-based Central DuPage and Geneva-based Delnor combined.

Northwestern President and CEO Dean Harrison, who would lead the combined entity, said the merger would "create a pre-eminent integrated academic health system that benefits all residents, regardless of their ability to pay, by giving them increased access to physicians, clinical trials and Northwestern University research programs, as well as integrated primary, secondary and advanced tertiary services."

Mike Vivoda, Cadence's president and chief executive, would become regional president of the system, continuing to oversee Central DuPage and Delnor.

"We believe this merger will create a multiregional health system focused on the singular vision of providing high quality care with an unwavering patient focus," Vivoda said in a statement.

Officials from both hospitals declined to provide further details of the possible merger, including financial considerations and a time frame for when it could take place. Both hospital boards and state and federal regulators would have to approve the merger.