Health Reform: ObamaCare enrollment has fallen sharply since March, and that’s before consumers confront huge rate hikes for 2016. These are not the signs of a successful program.

In its latest enrollment report, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services says 9.9 million were still enrolled in ObamaCare exchange plans.

That’s almost 2 million fewer than the administration claimed in the spring, when it bragged that 11.7 million had signed up, and way below the Congressional Budget Office’s earlier forecast of 13 million.

And if this year is anything like last year, that 9.9 million will dwindle further as the year goes on.

Year-over-year growth isn’t terribly impressive, either. The CBO had figured sign-ups would almost double this year. Instead, they climbed 24%, when you compare the latest figures to those the administration put out in May 2014. Enrollment in big states like California and New York is virtually unchanged.

It would appear ObamaCare isn’t such a great product after all. And it’s about to get much worse.

Earlier this year, insurers started putting in rate requests for 2016, and in many cases they were gut-wrenchingly high — with some above 50%. Obama told the public not to worry, that state insurance regulators would knock them down to size.

But like every other promise he’s made about his namesake law, this one was phony.

In state after state, insurance commissioners are approving huge rate hikes, based on the fact that the people who’ve signed up for ObamaCare are older and sicker than insurers hoped.

By one estimate, the average rate hike in Oregon — a state that eagerly embraced ObamaCare — is above 24%. Average approved rates are 20% or higher in Alaska, Idaho, Iowa and Kansas.

An analysis by Agile Health Insurance found almost a third of all plans being sold through the federal Healthcare.gov exchange — which covers 36 states — had double-digit rate hikes.

Premiums for every plan offered in South Dakota, Delaware and West Virginia will be up by 10% or more.

These premium increases — combined with narrow provider networks and big deductibles — are sure to drive down the already low enrollment rates among the younger and healthier, and those who aren’t eligible for ObamaCare subsidies.

The CBO expects 21 million will enroll in the Obama-Care exchanges next year.

That’s increasingly looking like a pipe dream.