Buy Photo John Young (Photo: Coloradoan library)Buy Photo

I (state your name) hereby accept the responsibilities of the office of Colorado attorney general, and will to the best of my ability act out the desires of (state your political party) and (state any industries or special interests that were major contributors to your election) regardless of what the general interests of the citizens of Colorado might be, because I can; so help me God.

That wasn’t the oath Colorado Attorney General Cynthia Coffman took to become Colorado attorney general. It’s just what she was thinking as she took the oath, or at least we must assume.

It’s understandable, I guess. The “because I can” part and the partisan part have become endemic to the politically driven nature of the office of attorney general.

Coloradans, regardless of party, should hope Gov. John Hickenlooper, a Democrat, succeeds in a long-shot attempt to stop Coffman, or any other attorney general, from suing on behalf of the state without consulting with the governor.

Now, you might say that Hickenlooper exercises the “because I can” clause just like Coffman. Well, there’s a big difference. He’s the state’s chief executive officer.

The attorney general is the state’s chief legal officer. It shouldn’t follow that he or she can sue on behalf of Colorado whenever the urge hits.

Understand: Coffman isn’t breaking new ground. Her predecessor did the same. It just so happens that he, too, was a Republican.

Hickenlooper has asked the Colorado Supreme Court to put the clamps on the practice.

The roles could be reversed, and that would be no better. A Democratic attorney general could do his party’s or his donors’ bidding and say he or she was representing all of us. That wouldn’t be true, of course.

However, ask the political party, or industries with a stake in a certain matter, say the coal industry fighting President Obama’s directives on reducing greenhouse gases, and the word is, “Go get ‘em, Cynthia.”

Then-Republican Attorney General John Suthers sued to stop the Affordable Care Act even as the state was expanding Medicaid and as thousands of Coloradans were signing up for low-cost health coverage through http://connectforhealthco.com.

Coffman, meanwhile, has inserted Colorado into three lawsuits supported by energy industries. She joined a Wyoming suit fighting federal rules for fracking on federal lands. So, too, with a North Dakota lawsuit challenging federal clean air rules.

Now Coffman, on our behalf, has joined a suit challenging an Environmental Protection Agency directive to curb air pollution from power plants.

Colorado isn’t alone in having this problem. Governors in New Mexico and Michigan say they are committed to meeting the EPA standards. At the same time, Republican attorneys general in those states are suing to block them.

“The attorney general represents the state and not the governor,” Coffman told the Denver Post. She said her role is to be an “independent” agent for the state’s interests.

Once again, this isn’t just a problem associated with a rogue elephant. It could just as easily be a donkey with an independent (read “partisan”) streak.

The attorney general’s office shouldn’t be red or blue. It should be a neutral hue.

Until the state Supreme Court rules, however, Coloradans should know that the office holder can and will act according to party dictates, not general consensus. They should vote accordingly.

John Young is a Coloradoan columnist who writes about state and local issues. Email: jyoungcolumn@gmail.com.

Read or Share this story: http://noconow.co/1NRFuf0