The 13-year-old who made waves online with his conservative videos criticizing President Obama and others is now saying he no longer affiliates himself with the Republican party.

C.J. Pearson told CNN on Friday that he could no longer be a mouthpiece for conservatism due to issues he saw with the GOP’s viewpoints on racial and gender disparity and youth issues.

“I was tired of being a champion of a party that turned a blind eye to racial discrimination. Tired of being a champion of any cause that denies equal rights to every American. Tired of being a champion of a party that doesn’t care about the issues important to young people,” C.J.wrote in an email to CNN.

The black teen from Georgia said in an interview that he began reconsidering his party affiliation after having a conversation with another teen friend, who asked why he doesn’t speak out on racial discrimination. C.J. replied he was concerned his followers wouldn’t be pleased.

“Over the past few days, I thought about essentially how I don’t want people to follow me because I’m that anti-Obama kid, or who called out Hillary Clinton or who took Bernie Sanders to task,” He said. “I don’t want to be the conservative wonder kid that people follow because I make them feel good and like young people are part of their movement. I want to be followed because I’m the voice of a generation that doesn’t have a voice at the table.”

He said the video of Laquan McDonald being shot 16 times by a police officer in Chicago opened his eyes to the issue of systematic racial discrimination in America and the need to look at those issues objectively.

“My generation is one of the most politically diverse ever, and I’ll continue to be a voice but one that looks at issues objectively,” he said. “My views on the issues aren’t going to be dictated by one political platform or another.”

C.J. supported Texas Sen. Ted Cruz’s 2016 White House bid, but has now left his post as chairman of Teens for Ted and disconnected himself from the campaign at the beginning of the month.

He said Mr. Cruz was not doing enough to address issues affecting young people.

Mr. Cruz’s office did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

C.J. rose to fame on social media with videos criticizing President Obama, Hillary Clinton, and radical liberals.

When Mr. Obama invited Ahmed Mohamed — a 14-year-old who arrested for bringing a clock to school that resembled a bomb — to the White House, C.J. posted a video blasting the decision.

“When cops are gunned down, you don’t invite them to the White House. You never did. But when a Muslim kid builds a clock, come on by. What is this world you’re living in?” he said in the video.

In September, C.J. claimed the White House had blocked him on Twitter after he criticized Mr. Obama. The White House denied the claim and questions were raised about the authenticity of the screenshot the teen had tweeted showing he had been block.

C.J. later admitted that it was a hoax.