Many Halton residents are still without power in the wake of the nasty ice storm that hit southern Ontario — and beyond — overnight.

Countless toppled trees in both urban and rural areas of the region have knocked down numerous power lines, and — according to Burlington Hydro Communications Manager Christine Hallas — are making many roads inaccessible for restoration efforts.

“Some roads are impassable, and for our vehicles and with the wind expected to pick up later today there may be even more trees taken down,” she said, adding that roughly 1,000 Burlington Hydro customers remain without power — of the 7,500 originally hit early this morning — and that hopefully most of those will have electricity back up with 24 hours.

Hallas added, “In terms of damage from an ice storm, we haven’t seen anything like this in quite a few years.”

Lowville, Kilbride and Cedar Springs have been the worst hit areas in Burlington, while rural parts of Milton and Halton Hills have been greatly affected as well.

Efforts to contact Oakville and Milton Hydro have been unsuccessful, no doubt due to the influx of power outage calls.

“Transit routes may be delayed today. Some routes may be diverted due to down trees. Please be patient,” Tweeted Oakville councillor Jeff Knoll.”

Said Burlington City Manager Jeff Fielding, “City crews continue to sand and salt city roads, as well as clearing downed trees and branches from roadways. Roads are extremely hazardous and we suggest that residents stay off the roads.”

Residents using candles and generators during the power outage are asked to do so with extreme caution. Portable generators should only be used outdoors and be carefully located to ensure that exhaust fumes do not enter the home.

A flood warning also continues to be in effect, and residents are advised to exercise extreme caution near any waterways. Homeowners are urged to check catch basins adjacent to their property to ensure they aren’t blocked.

While roads continue to be especially slick, Halton Police have not reported any influx of accidents due to the storm.

Editor’s note: Due to early holiday press deadlines all InsideHalton.com Boxing Day (Dec. 26) print editions — including the Burlington Post, Milton Canadian Champion and Oakville Beaver — do not include coverage of the ice storm. Check your community’s Dec. 27 print edition for full ice storm coverage.