STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- A Wednesday night debate between Republican Rep. Michael Grimm and Democratic challenger Domenic M. Recchia Jr. was tame, even dull compared to the lively televised ABC debate last week, but Grimm (R-Staten Island/Brooklyn) managed to liven it up for a few moments by taking a couple jabs at his opponent.

Recchia, animated during the other debate, was calm this time around and didn't interrupt Grimm once, which was the source of most of the arguing on ABC.

The setting, taking place at the Richmond County Country Club and hosted by the Iron Hills Civic Association, may have played into the calm nature of the candidates, with guest wrapping up a swanky cocktail hour before the sit-down debate and asked to adhere to strict rules like no applause for the candidates. The candidates were held to strict time limits in their answers.

The questions focused on immigration, ISIS, the Affordable Care Act, the economy, term limits for Congress, Grimm's indictment and temper and Recchia's inability to answer questions in interviews and debates.

Addressing that last point, Recchia said, "I'm not a slick speaker" but said he knows how to bring people together. "I get results and make things happen."

There were several times when Recchia gave vague answers like "we'll work together," "we'll address that issue," "we'll get it fixed" or bring certain people "to the table" including for questions asking what he would do his first day in office, how to best fight ISIS and the Affordable Care Act.

He did have somewhat specific answers for how to grow the U.S. economy, saying middle-class tax cuts are needed, manufacturing jobs need to be brought back to the U.S. and Staten Island and a jobs bill must be passed in Washington. He said he would work with Gov. Andrew Cuomo to bring new businesses to Staten Island, including incubators for start-up companies to be housed.

It was here that Grimm got in one of a few jabs at his opponent, criticizing Recchia's answer as not "meaning anything."

He pointed out Recchia's votes while on the City Council in favor of congestion pricing for cars entering Manhattan and to raise property taxes.

Grimm said the way to boost the economy is to take advantage of America's natural resources, reduce regulations for businesses, repeal the Affordable Care Act -- "It's a disaster and it's a train wreck" -- lower taxes and reduce the national debt.

Regarding illegal immigration, Recchia said a path to citizenship is needed, the border must be secured and an immigration bill must be passed.

Grimm too cited a multi-pronged approach of first sealing the border, fixing the broken immigration system that allows people to overstay their visas without any checks and then deal with those here illegally, not necessarily through amnesty.

In addressing ISIS in Syria and Iraq, Recchia said, "Air strikes are the right thing." He added the U.S. should continue to work with a coalition of other countries and investigate arms that fell into the hands of ISIS.

The congressman said the ISIS situation is what it is because the president had no policy and waited too long to act.

He suggests ground forces be part of the equation, adding that it was a mistake to remove all troops from Iraq.

Asked whether there should be term limits for Congress, both candidates said 'yes' but Grimm again took the opportunity to point out that Recchia voted along with the City Council to extend term limits for themselves.

His comment got a scolding from moderator Judge John Fusco.

Grimm also squabbled with the audience member who asked the question.

"What part of 'yes' don't you understand? Yes. I said 'yes' three times.