By Chris Butler | Tennessee Watchdog

MEMPHIS — A nonprofit selected to hire Obamacare navigators in Tennessee has a troubled history in the state for another federal program on which it worked through a subcontractor in Memphis.

According to the New York Post, the federal government sued this nonprofit, Seedco, for faking at least 1,400 of 6,500 job placements under a $22.2 million federally funded contract with New York City.



But as the Post explained, the lawsuit didn’t stop the feds from giving Seedco a larger number of federal contracts to sign people up for Obamacare in other states. Those other states include Tennessee, Georgia, Maryland and New York.

The Post reported that Seedco’s Obamacare contract in Tennessee is worth $1.2 million.

Brian Robinson, spokesman for the New York-based nonprofit, told Tennessee Watchdog that Seedco doesn’t carry out all that work by itself — it also subcontracts some of that work to other agencies throughout the state.

Robinson said Seedco fully complies with Tennessee’s registration process for navigators.

Tennessee Watchdog asked Robinson if that registration process includes criminal background checks, as the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance requires.



“I don’t believe so, but I’m not positive. But I can tell you that we are abiding by all of the contracts that we need to be,” Robinson said.

As navigators, those employees have access to other individuals’ private medical and financial information.

That’s not the only work Seedco does in Tennessee, however.

Seedco’s subcontracting practices while distributing Temporary Assistance for Needy Families benefits in Memphis recently caught the attention of State Comptroller Justin Wilson.

As Tennessee Watchdog previously reported, certain Memphis residents participating in TANF falsified paperwork and wrongly received almost $30,000 in taxpayer money through a Seedco subcontractor.

The director for that now former subcontractor, the Union City-based Tennessee Community Services Agency, told Tennessee Watchdog that Seedco chose his agency even though he didn’t have enough employees to monitor possible fraud.

McWherter also told Tennessee Watchdog his agency and others rewarded with a subcontract for this work didn’t participate in competitive bidding to determine the most qualified vendor.

As for how Seedco chooses subcontractors in Tennessee to carry out Obamacare, Robinson said the nonprofit has upped its standards, but the process still isn’t based on competitive bidding.

“There is a regional aspect, and there are a number of other factors, all based on the subcontractor’s reputation and capacity to do the work necessary,” Robinson said.

As for the allegations in New York, Robinson said it was one instance and the employees involved are no longer affiliated with the nonprofit.

Columnist Michelle Malkin detailed other questionable acts by Seedco.

Seedco Mid-South Senior Vice President Lisa Pote introduced U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius at an event to promote Obamacare in Memphis this month.



Contact Christopher Butler at chris@tennesseewatchdog.org.

Get regular Tennessee Watchdog updates through our Facebook or Twitter accounts

Like Watchdog.org? Click HERE to get breaking news alerts in YOUR state!

Please, feel free to “steal our stuff”! Just remember to credit Watchdog.org. Find out more