Close schools on Veterans Day

Sgt. Joseph M. Nolan, U.S. Army, will not be in any parades. He will not return to his alma maters, Wolcott High School and St. Joseph's University in Philadelphia, to speak to students.

He will not grace the auditorium of his high school or college with his thoughts on war. Although he was severely wounded, a new house will never be built for Sgt. Nolan. He will never be married or raise a family.

For Sgt. Nolan, every day is Veterans Day. The reason is that Sgt. Nolan died about six hours after being wounded near Fallujah, Iraq, on Nov. 18, 2004.

For the fallen veterans and those other living veterans too traumatized by war, Veterans Day needs to be preserved in Connecticut as a reminder of all the sacrifices veterans have made for our country.

The law allowing school in Connecticut on Veterans Day needs to be repealed before the next November 11th rolls around.

Joseph P. Nolan

Trumbull

Shame on Post

for stances in Newtown case

When a few parents of the dead children at Sandy Hook Elementary School publicly pushed for tighter gun controls, you -- The Connecticut Post -- and Gov. Malloy backed them 100 percent because it supported your anti-gun agenda.

But now, when most of the parents of the children killed at the school are against making the details -- tapes and pictures -- public, you are opposed to these parents because it does not support your primary agenda, which is selling more newspapers by splashing the details on your front page.

Shame on you.

Paul Poeltl

Newtown

Column brings

back memories of Philippines

I was struck by Ken Dixon's column (Nov. 10, "The Philippines, the second time around") about his dad's World War II Navy experience in Leyte near Tacloban, where the deadly typhoon has just wreaked such havoc.

I, too, was at the Lingayan Gulf as a paratrooper in WW II, twice. First, in 1944, as we arrived just after Gen. Douglas MacArthur's historic return as U.S. troops began recapturing the Philippines. Later, after participating in the parachute retaking of Corregidor, I was returned to a field hospital near Tacloban in early 1945 with a case of "yellow jaundice," now more commonly known as hepatitis.

A sad memory of that hospitalization was the announcement of the death of President Franklin Roosevelt, the only president I had ever known.

Ken's column and the recent news of the typhoon brings back many memories. I'm happy Ken's dad, Claude, is alive and kicking, as am I.

Oddly, after VJ day I was stationed briefly in Sendai, Japan, where the crushing tsunami hit last year. A week without power during one of our hurricanes seems mild by comparison.

Peter Grove Weinberg

Stamford

The writer was a corporal in the 503rd Airborne Regimental Combat Team, U.S. Army

Habit for Heroes

a cause worthy

of your support

I have been a Habitat for Humanity volunteer for many years and have had a chance to work on many of the 177 homes built by Habitat for Humanity of Coastal Fairfield County.

As a Vietnam veteran, the project that has given me the most personal satisfaction is the recent completion of the first home built specifically for a deserving military veteran. To be clear, Habitat homes are not "free" to the recipients. Five hundred hours of sweat equity is required of the future homeowner and the home comes with a mortgage for the total cost of the construction.

Habitat homes are more affordable as the mortgage does not have an interest component and the cost is reduced by the volunteer labor used for most of the construction.

There are many people and organizations responsible for bringing the "Habitat for Heroes" program to fruition. Notably, the Habitat board and staff, the Trumbull Rotary Club, which got the fund raising underway with a substantial financial commitment, the many individuals and corporations that provided volunteer hours and financial support and especially Eileen and Frank Bakos, who as volunteer coordinator/Habitat for Heroes program director and site construction manager were instrumental in getting the home completed.

During the construction, I got to know and work with the future homeowner, an Army veteran who served in Iraq and Afghanistan and is very deserving of this home.

As Habitat plans to continue with the "Habitat for Heroes" program, I encourage all veterans and families of veterans to support future Veteran Build projects either with a financial contribution or swinging a hammer on the site. More information can be found at www.habitatcfc.org.

Donald F. Peterson

Fairfield

Lawmakers who backed health plan `clueless'

Connecticut's five members in the House of Representatives, all Democrats, voted as one in voting "Aye" for the Affordable Care Act, although none of them had actually read the bill. But, as clueless, party-first loyalists, they voted for it anyway.

Now these politicians, like the rest of us, are finding out, scandal by scandal, that "Obamacare" is a turkey. The five "honorables" are John Larson, Joe Courtney, Rosa DeLauro, James Himes and Elizabeth Esty.

The good news is that all five are up for re-election next November. There's an excellent chance that on that day all five will walk the proverbial plank. Let's hope so.

Gene Fairfield

Fairfield

Lives dictated by the lure of the almighty buck

Is nothing more sacred today than the almighty dollar?

At present for some time, we have seen not one but two of the most sacred days in the history of our country succumb to the power of the almighty dollar and its influence on corporation and the business world.

In the very not so distant past, Thanksgiving was inviolate and invulnerable because we held it as a day to thank God by prayer and a feast for our life and good fortune with friends and family.

Now, slowly it has become a "jumping off" point for Christmas, a sacred religious holiday, which is gradually losing its religious significance for material gains, namely, gifts received and acquired by money.

However, most important of all, their spiritual wealth to our nation is being supplanted by the monetary value we shower upon each other.

Thanksgiving Day is almost here and the stores are already preparing for Christmas with advertisements for toys, gifts and holiday trees, thereby obliterating the importance, implication and religious influence and meaning of both holidays.

Consequently, we are not cognizant of their real truths, but being masked by things substituting for eternal joy and happiness guaranteed to us by Divine Promise.

Peter J. George

Bridgeport