My father is the only person I know who had read all 12 volumes of Arnold Toynbee’s “A Study of History,” which is an account about the rise and fall of civilizations.

The times in which we’re living remind me of discussions I had with my father about that topic. Did the Roman elite have any inkling about their fate prior to A.D. 410, when the Visigoths sacked Rome? Rome was rotten and ripe for the picking, and Western civilization was plunged into 800 years of the Dark Ages. A common system of laws, gone; a common system of finance, gone; a common system of communication and roads, gone; a common system of language (Latin for law and Greek for commerce), gone — along with a common system for security, the Roman army and navy, gone.

Are we in a final stage of a civilization decay? I hope not. But there are clear signs of rot, not the least of which is the transference of gigantic financial responsibilities between generations, where the baby-boomers are transferring enormous unsustainable debt obligations to succeeding generations. The federal government borrows 41 cents of every dollar it spends, according to former Sen. Alan Simpson, who co-chaired President Barack Obama’s National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, the recommendations of which the president has completely ignored.

The federal government owes nearly $20 trillion, a staggering amount of debt. With each passing year, the interest payments on that debt claim a larger part of the federal budget. We are living in a fantasy world, where those in power think we can continue to spend wildly beyond our means,with no adverse effects on our future.

Meanwhile, the world is becoming a more dangerous place for those who believe in liberty. Seventy-two years ago, during World War II, the Japanese introduced the Kamikaze suicide fliers into a war that eclipsed previous conflicts in barbarity. Today, reports of suicide bombings are as common as the weather report. Video of the decapitations of innocent people at first shocked and then numbed us. Yet the various governments in the West refuse to identify the culprits as Islamic terrorists. You can bet if Presbyterians were kidnapping people and making videos of decapitations, the media and government would acknowledge a connection between that denomination and the killings.

The president’s own deputy national security adviser, Ben Rhodes, an aspiring novelist, revealed in an interview with the New York Times that the Iran nuclear deal was sold to the American people based mostly on lies. Nahal Toosi wrote in Monday’s edition of Politico: “The piece implied that Rhodes and his colleagues had misled Americans about the nuclear deal by creating an ‘echo chamber’ of allies who promoted the administration’s talking points and emphasized a timeline that suggested negotiations began later than they really did.”

Evidently the aspiring novelist continues to peddle fiction.

Since the inking of the Iran agreement, has anyone noted any decline of the “death to America” chants coming from Tehran? Today we conceal the truth through political correctness, we are repeatedly lied to by our government (Jonathan Gruber on Obamacare, Ben Rhodes on the Iran deal, et al), we are tens of trillions of dollars in debt, our supposed friends no longer trust us, and our enemies hold us in contempt.

Civilizations are more likely to collapse from internal decay than from outside attack.

I hope for the future, but the signs are worrying.

http://myjournalcourier.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/web1_web-jamison052016.jpg

By Jay Jamison

Jacksonville resident Jay Jamison writes each Friday for this page.

Jacksonville resident Jay Jamison writes each Friday for this page.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus