By William Patrick | Florida Watchdog

TALLAHASSEE, Fla. – A regulatory provision in the massive Affordable Care Act law is setting up doctors and hospitals to take a financial hit, hydraulic fracturing, or “fracking,” could come to Florida and more Obamacare politics play out on Capitol Hill. Here’s more on those stories along with a few other top headlines from around the state.

Stiffing doctors and hospitals: Tucked inside nearly 11,000 pages of the Affordable Care Act is a little-known provision that doles out three months of free health care to individuals who choose to default on their premiums. Watchdog.org

Fracking in Florida?: A geoscientist with experience in hydraulic fracturing operations for the oil and gas industry said yesterday at the state Capitol that studies have shown groundwater contamination from “fracking” is “not physically plausible.” The Sunniland Formation in southwest Florida, where hydraulic fracturing is being considered, is about 12,000 feet below the surface while the deepest aquifer in the area are about 2,000 feet deep. Florida Current

VIDEO: Sen. Bill Nelson got his chance Wednesday to publicly confront Health and Human Services Sec. Kathleen Sebelius over the failed rollout of the Affordable Care Act online health exchange. But instead of holding Sebelius accountable, Nelson deferred blame and asked her to “burn” the fingers of healthcare.gov contractors. The same ones who had earlier testified to a House committee that they had informed the administration of the website’s problems. Watch Video

Legal pot: Miami Beach voters became the first in Florida to call for the decriminalization of marijuana for medical use in a Tuesday vote that gives a glimpse of statewide support for the issue. The 64-36 percent approval jibed with state and national polls that show medical-marijuana support approaching 60 percent or more. Miami Herald

Let the games begin: Charlie Crist‘s chief Democratic primary opponent for governor, Nan Rich, says told voters Wednesday that Crist has been on the wrong side of three critical issues for the Democrat Party: abortion, guns and education. Rich also made a point of her attempts to debate Crist to which he has yet to respond. ‘s chief Democratic primary opponent for governor, Nan Rich, says told voters Wednesday that Crist has been on the wrong side of three critical issues for the Democrat Party: abortion, guns and education. Rich also made a point of her attempts to debate Crist to which he has yet to respond. Palm Beach Post

Contact William Patrick at wpatrick@watchdog.org or follow Florida Watchdog on Twitter at @watchdogfla Like Watchdog.org? Click HERE to get breaking news alerts in YOUR state!