The Alumni Association of NJIT advances the interests of the university and generates support through the development and implementation of programs, activities, and events for its alumni members and friends.

Steven B. Saperstein of Bridgewater, receivesd an Alumni Achievement Award from the New Jersey Institute of Technology. (Photo: ~Photo courtesy of New Jersey Institute of Technology) Story Highlights Steven B. Saperstein of Bridgewater, receives alumni achievement award from NJIT

Saperstein is the chief operating office of Prudential Fixed Income

Saperstein an active alumnus since the 1990s

Saperstein a member of the NJIT Board of Overseers where he serves on the Foundation’s investment committee

Steven B. Saperstein, of Bridgewater, has been honored with an Alumni Achievement Award from New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) for his long-time and ongoing support of the Newark-based university.

Saperstein is the chief operating officer of Prudential Fixed Income, where he manages the divisions of Operations and Systems, Securities Lending, Finance and Business Management. Before assuming his current duties, he was controller of Prudential Individual Insurance and Prudential Real Estate Investors. He spent several years in corporate tax and other finance functions at Prudential Financial, which he joined in 1984 shortly after receiving a bachelor’s degree in industrial administration from NJIT. He also holds a master’s degree in business administration from Rutgers University.

In addition to his corporate accomplishments, Saperstein has been an active alumnus since the 1990s. He is a member of the NJIT Board of Overseers where he serves on the foundation’s investment committee and is a former president and vice president of the Alumni Association of NJIT, currently serving on the association’s board. In 2012, Saperstein received the Edward F. Weston Medal, which is presented to alumni in recognition of outstanding personal, professional and civic achievement and commitment to the development of the university.

He also is a member of NJIT’s College of Science and Liberal Arts Board of Visitors and also served on the Board of Visitors for the School of Management, the Editorial Board for NJIT Magazine, and on several search committees to help improve talent at NJIT. Saperstein received the award during a May 16 ceremony.

The Alumni Association of NJIT advances the interests of the university and generates support through the development and implementation of programs, activities, and events for its alumni members and friends. The association’s goal is to facilitate success – in fostering NJIT pride, building Highlander traditions, helping alumni develop opportunities for the university’s students, and acknowledging the accomplishments of NJIT graduates in our society.

For more information, visit http://www.njit.edu/alumni/index.php

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1IRz6SF