Many analysts viewed Boehner’s announcement of the lawsuit as a way to placate conservatives. What happened to that GOP lawsuit?

It takes about 10 minutes to walk from the Capitol to the federal courthouse just down the hill, but House Republicans haven’t managed to make that trip in the four months since they announced they’d be suing the president.

House Speaker John Boehner came out swinging hard last June when he announced that his chamber would take President Barack Obama to court. The suit, charging that the president grossly exceeded his constitutional authority by failing to implement portions of the Obamacare law, was billed as an election-season rallying point for aggrieved Republicans. But days before the midterms, the House’s legal guns seem to have fallen silent.

Story Continued Below

Lawyers close to the process said they originally expected the legal challenge to be filed in September, but now they don’t expect any action before the elections.

( Also on POLITICO: Obama moves key Senate races toward GOP)

Some attribute the delay to electoral politics — suggesting that Republicans were worried it could rile up the Democratic base — though the GOP is mum on why the suit has yet to be filed.

Whatever the reason, the delay means the core of the suit could effectively be moot before the Obama administration even has to respond to it in court. The case was expected to center on an employer mandate provision that Obama twice delayed but is now set to kick in for many employers on Jan. 1.

“I thought this was a constitutional crisis and the republic was in jeopardy because Obama overstepped his bounds. Now, they can’t even get around to filing it?” asked former House Counsel Stan Brand, a Democrat. “It, to me, emphasizes the not-serious nature of it.”

(Also on POLITICO: Obama library gets one donor in Q3)

A spokesman for Boehner said the date for filing the litigation remains up in the air. “No decisions on timing at this point,” spokesman Kevin Smith said Friday. He declined to comment on speculation about the reasons for the delay.

Some Democrats suspect the filing has been delayed because Boehner’s announcement of the suit over the summer backfired to some extent, spurring fundraising by Democratic committees. Raising the issue again so close to the election could agitate those in the president’s base who view such a lawsuit as disrespectful and part of an effort to delegitimize Obama.

And Democratic consultant David DiMartino said it could push an even wider swath of the country away from the GOP.

( POLITICO's 2014 race ratings)

“I think it goes beyond the Democratic base in terms of the Americans who thought this was beyond the pale,” he argued. Republican leaders “are really good at finding really efficient ways to alienate huge swaths of the American public, and this is one of those issues.”

Some conservatives, however, see the suit’s postponement until after the election as important to rebutting charges that it’s only about politics.

“After the election, it ought to garner more serious commentary, evaluation and judicial review,” said Todd Gaziano of the Pacific Legal Foundation. “It can have some very helpful consequences for a principle that I think liberals and conservatives should both be concerned about, and that is the president’s unilateral authority to rewrite a statute in dozens of ways.”

Authors: