Ellis, Spartans feeling better after going 4-1

BERTHOUD - In order to find out where you belong, sometimes you have to venture out. The road may lead you down the right path, or, in the case of Chad Ellis, show you that a U-turn is on order.

The Berthoud sophomore understood that staying at 160 pounds this season would make it a tall order to come home with a state title. It is where Broomfield's Phil Downing - a three-time state champion - resides atop the rankings. Ellis, ranked third, was still one of the elite in 4A, but last weekend at the Montrose Invitational he took a jump to 170 to check out the sights.

He took second there, losing to top-ranked Seager Oliver of Cortez. He also wrestled there Thursday, and those losses helped show him the best path for him was to head back home.

"(Downing) was part of it, and I've never beaten Keenan (Willits of Pueblo County, ranked second)," Ellis said. "I knew I'd see Oliver at Montrose, so I wanted to see how that goes. Sixties is definitely where I belong. You have to cut a little bit, but 70s, people are cutting down for 82 or 85 down to 174 now. I'm not cutting a ton of weight to get down to 60s, so I'm still fresh for big matches."

Back at 160 on Saturday at the Soeby Spartan Classic hosted by Berthoud, Ellis showed why he's more comfortable there, winning all five of his matches as the Spartans went 4-1, losing to Greeley Central in the final.

Loveland was also in the field, and after losing its first three duals of the day, walked away with wins in its final two bouts.

Advertisement

Berthoud coach Scott Pickert said Ellis will stay at 160 the remainder of the season, because that's where he's best suited physically. At that weight, he is as strong as anyone in the class, and it's not like the sophomore hasn't been close in matches with Willits.

That leads to another benefit, Ellis explained.

Confidence.

"It's always a confidence builder when you win," he said. "The motivation, you have somebody that you've always been close to beating and then somebody who's never been beaten at state. That's always driving you to be the best you can."

The loss to Windsor on Thursday wasn't good for anybody in the Berthoud program, as the team wrestled flat for the most part and didn't capitalize on building off the finish at Montrose. Saturday allowed the Spartans to gain a little of that back, but Pickert says the team can do more.

"We were better today," he said. "We still have some thing to work on, finishing our moves. Overall, it was a pretty good day. A long day, but going 4-1 and losing to a pretty good Greeley Central team. We've just got to keep working. We have three or four more weeks left, and we just have to put the hammer down."

Berthoud posted wins over Loveland (42-18), Longmont (42-36), La Junta (46-31) and Elizabeth (39-34) before losing to the Wildcats (44-30).

Berthoud's Nate Ryken, top, competes against Wes Boone of Elizabeth during the Soeby Spartan Classic on Saturday.

The Indians, in the same early pod, lost to Longmont (44-24) and La Junta (48-28) before rebounding with wins over Montbello (59-12) and Golden (50-30).

LHS coach Dave Dunkleman said the tournament was good for his team in providing chances to gain experience, though injuries to Charles Dunkleman and Mitchel Wheelock put a bit of a damper on the day.

Irvin Alvarado came away encouraged, picking up a couple of wins at 138 for himself and seeing teammates grab some victories that have been hard to come by. Seeing a guy like Cameron Bale get his first win was a boost for the team as a whole, he said.

"That helps the process," Alvarado said. "We've all been helping him in this process, and today he got his win. As a team, we all feel really proud of him. We're like a family. We all cheer for each other, we all help each other out as much as we can and we all work hard together."

But for him, the wins also provide a bit of a lift, especially the pin in his final match of the day, and he could tell things he'd been working on in practice were paying off.

"I really felt like my wrestling took another step," he said. "I became a little bit more offensive today, took a few more shots. I feel like today was a good day for me and I can definitely build from this."

That much was clear to his coach.

He said the approach is different, not just from last year to this season, but from a few months ago.

"He's a non-stop wrestler now," coach Dunkleman said. "Last year I watched him, he stopped. When that happens, the other guy moves. Now he's like a machine. He's doing great."

Mike Brohard can be reached at 635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and @mbrohard and @RHpreps.