WASHINGTON -- This week in the District, Amgen won approval for a new lipid-lowering drug, the PCSK9 inhibitor evolocumab (Repatha). Alirocumab (Praluent), its competitor, was approved last month.

The FDA announced a unique naming pattern for biologics and the Health Resources and Services Administration issued guidance on a controversial drug-discount program.

Also this week, the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) said it would extend a program aimed at improving health outcomes and eliminating inappropriate hospitalizations for nursing facility residents.

And CMS gave high marks to Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) for enhancing care quality, and in certain cases, reducing costs.

Amgen's PCSK9 Drug Wins FDA Approval

As expected, the FDA granted marketing approval on Thursday to evolocumab (Repatha), the second in a new class of lipid-lowering drugs -- PCSK9 inhibitors -- to become available in the U.S.

Drug-maker Amgen said evolocumab will be available in the U.S. next week.

As with alirocumab (Praluent), which was approved in July, evolocumab was approved for use in patients who fail to achieve LDL cholesterol lowering through diet and maximally-tolerated statin therapy in adults who require additional LDL cholesterol lowering, including patients with heterozygous or homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia.

CMS Extends Program to Enhance Care in Nursing Facilities, Eliminate Waste

Three years ago, CMS implemented a program aimed at curbing unnecessary hospitalizations among Medicaid-Medicare patients, known as "dual eligibles," while also improving care. This week the agency announced a new 4-year funding opportunity for program participants.

The cost of care for dual eligibles is estimated at $300 billion annually, according to the agency, but much of this spending is wasteful. Studies have found about 45% of dual eligible hospitalizations could have been managed in lower-intensity care setting, reported CMS.

The program known simply as the Initiative to Reduce Avoidable Hospitalizations among Nursing Facility Residents has paired seven organizations known as Enhanced Care and Coordination Providers (ECCPs) with nursing facilities. The ECCPs offer on-site care including evidence-based interventions to patients and also help train staff.

The new payment program includes Medicare payments to providers "at a level similar to payments they would receive for treating beneficiaries in a hospital," noted a press release. ECCP applicants who achieve their goals will extend the payment model to a "comparable number of newly recruited facilities."

An interim evaluation of the Initiative published last month, found that six of the seven partner organizations reduced "the likelihood of a potentially avoidable hospitalization" for beneficiaries in 2013. (However, the effect was only statistically significant for two ECCPs.)

The new payment model will begin October 2016 and run through October 2020.

FDA Announces Distinct Naming for Biosimilars

The FDA issued draft guidance to alert industry stakeholders that it will be using distinct naming for biologic products, deeming an exclusive naming practice the safest way to distinguish one treatment for another. Thus ends one round in a continuing debate over the interchangeability of biosimilars with their reference products.

The agency announced that it would stamp every biologic product with a nonproprietary name and a suffix made of four lowercase letters, and it requested feedback regarding whether such a suffix should be unique or shared with the innovator product.

HRSA Looks to Double Restrictions on Drug Discount Program

Federal regulators announced draft guidance that could shrink the number of beneficiaries qualifying for the 340B drug discount program, on Thursday, reported Modern Healthcare.

The 340B Drug Discount program was established to "stretch scarce Federal resources" by reducing the cost of certain drugs for providers caring for beneficiaries of government programs such as Medicare. Eligibility for such programs hinges on an individual's "established relationship" with qualifying providers, according to Health Affairs -- a definition that has incited considerable debate and may soon change.

In draft guidance, the Health Resources and Services Administration essentially doubled the number of eligibility characteristics, from three to six, narrowing the population of patients whose prescriptions would be covered by the program.

340B Health, an advocacy group serving providers who participate in the program, said in an emailed statement, "This is an important process and it is our hope that safety-net healthcare providers will not find themselves limited in their ability to meet their mission to treat the underserved."

CMS: 'Healthier People, Smarter Spending' With ACOs

Medicare Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs) continue to improve care quality and to lower costs, according to a new report from CMS.

"Many of these ACOs are demonstrating that they can deliver a higher level of coordinated care that leads to healthier people and smarter spending," said CMS Acting Administrator Andy Slavitt, MBA, in a press release that accompanied the detailed report on ACO performance in 2014.

Medicare ACOs comprise hospitals, physicians groups, and other clinicians working in collaboration to coordinate care for all patients. Since the Affordable Care Act was passed, 420 Medicare ACOs have been established, caring for around 7.8 million people in the U.S., according to CMS.

Next Week

Congress returns from its recess Sept. 8.