Investors pumped a record $6.5 billion into digital health ventures during 2014, an increase of 125 percent from the 2013 level, according to StartUp Health's annual report.

Big Data/analytics ($1.5 billion), population health ($1.1 billion) and healthcare system navigation ($975 million) companies nabbed the largest share of private funding in 2014. Rounding out the top 10 investment areas were diagnostics ($962 million), consumer health ($880 million), practice management ($783), payor/insurance ($699 million), workflows ($681 million), genomics ($632 million) and clinical research ($624 million).

Data and analytics beyond being the No. 1 category, also played a role in the other categories as well, according to StartUp Health.

The report noted trends including healthcare reform's role in boosting innovation, increased consumerism and growing backing for clinical decision support and personalized medicine.

Funding in each quarter was higher than 2010's total, the report stated, pointing out signs of a maturing market as investors place larger bets on fewer companies.

For entrepreneurs looking for less-traditional sources of funding, the venture arms of major corporations, such as Qualcomm, Google, and GE, are "an excellent go-to source, with most becoming more comfortable with early-stage investment," according to StartUp Health.

The report noted a trend toward consolidation as startups merge to provide stronger offerings and corporations look to entrepreneurs for innovation.

In contrast, consulting firm Mercom Capital Group reported a third-quarter slowdown in digital health funding from the second-quarter rate, with more deals at a lower funding rate.

Fueled by the medical-loss ratio rule in the Affordable Care Act mandating that insurers redeploy capital rather then distribute it to shareholders, insurers are becoming digital health backers, according to a Forbes article noting that corporate investors tend to treat these portfolio companies as competitors.

A greater focus on efficiency, especially on the administrative side, is erasing the barriers between healthcare and tech companies, two investors for venture capital firm Venrock recently explained at Harvard Business Review.

To learn more:

- find the report

Related Articles:

Why barriers between tech, healthcare are fading

Q3 sees drop in VC health IT funding, but rise in number of deals

Report: Health IT market moves to more powerful care delivery method

In twist on medical-loss ratio, insurers back health startups