The two insurers tapped to manage the most expensive and medically complex Illinois Medicaid recipients lost out on millions of dollars for failing to meet key quality benchmarks.



The Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services, which administers Medicaid, recently released a new scorecard that for the first time offers a glimpse into how well any of the state's new coordinated-care programs is meeting quality benchmarks, from screening for cervical cancer to following up with patients after an emergency room visit.

For the insurers — Hartford, Conn.-based Aetna Inc. and a unit of St. Louis-based Centene Corp., which manage a combined 36,000 elderly, blind and disabled Medicaid patients — Aetna delivered better results, but both still didn't best standards set by the state enough to capture the most financial rewards they could. In fact, in many areas, care actually declined.



“Are we satisfied? Yes and no,” said Jim Parker, a deputy administrator in the Department of Healthcare and Family Services and the state's point person on coordinated care. “Obviously we would have liked . . . to see dramatic improvement on everything, but we knew we wouldn't see it that first year.”



Preliminary data for 2013 shows improvement, he said.

A spokeswoman for Centene did not return messages. A spokeswoman for Aetna did not provide comment.



In 2010, Aetna and Centene-IlliniCare, a unit of Centene, beat out three other carriers that bid to manage the state's first integrated care program for the most costly subset of the Medicaid population. The idea was to better manage a patient's treatment across a variety of providers, from annual checkups to a visit with a specialist to a nursing home stay, to help keep patients healthy and save money.

Aetna and Centene-IlliniCare are both paid on a per-member, per-month basis, with fees ranging from $118 for an intermediate care facility that's treating a person with intellectual disabilities to $3,750 for a nursing facility, according to the insurers' contracts with the state.

ESTIMATED $200 MILLION SAVINGS



The program was projected to save the state an estimated $200 million over five years compared with costs incurred under the fee-for-service model, which rewards physicians and hospitals for quantity over quality of service.



Under a Medicaid overhaul backed by Mr. Quinn, half of the state's 2.9 million recipients must be transferred by 2015 to a form of coordinated care, in which health care providers are rewarded for keeping costs down and penalized for poor care.

The health care industry nationwide is being rewarded financially to improve quality while reducing costs, particularly as millions more newly insured patients are expected to seek care under the Affordable Care Act.



“We all know we need better care,” said Michael Millenson, Highland Park-based president of consultancy Health Quality Advisors LLC. “We all know we need to save money. If we can save money by improving care, that is the ethically, economically and politically smart thing to do.”



The scorecard details the first full year of the program, 2012, and separates quality measures into two categories: 22 measures in which the insurers could be financially rewarded for improving quality, and 28 measures that weren't tied to potential incentives.



Among key findings:

• Aetna provided care better than a state-established baseline in 20 of 22 measures tied to financial incentives but still only improved care so much that it led to rewards in just 12 measures, such as delivering beta blockers to patients with congestive heart failure.

• Centene-IlliniCare delivered care below state-established baselines in nine measures tied to financial incentives. The insurer saw its largest decline — 14.5 percent — from the state's baseline in following up within 30 days with patients hospitalized for mental illness.

• Nationally, both Aetna and Centene were in the top 90th percentile in such measures as dispensing medication to increase airflow to the lungs; Centene was in the bottom 10th percentile for emergency department visits per 1,000 member months, and Aetna was in the bottom 10th percentile for making sure patients had annual dental visits.



Mr. Parker could not say exactly how much in financial rewards each insurer lost out on, but he said it was “enough to get their attention” and likely totaled in the tens of millions of dollars.



He said the insurers are working with the state on ways to improve quality.



“We don't see this as punishment,” Mr. Parker said. “We see this as a partnership to continually improve the quality. We're looking for a . . . plan to fix the things that weren't working as well as we hoped they would.”