Media gathered near the scene of the shootings.(Photo by Brooke Workneh/VICE News)

Everything you need to know in the world this morning, curated by VICE.

US News

FBI Treating San Bernardino as Possible Terrorist Act

Federal investigators are treating the mass shooting which left 14 dead in San Bernardino as a potential act of terrorism. They are examining the two suspects' stockpile of ammunition, their recent Middle East travel and evidence one of them was in touch with other extremists. —The New York Times

Obamacare Under Threat

After five years of failed attempts, the Senate has passed a bill to repeal key parts of the Affordable Care Act. The symbolic bill is expected to pass at House of Representatives too, but President Obama has vowed to ultimately veto the measure. —CNN

Chicago to Release Another Shooting Video

Mayor Rahm Emanuel has said video showing another young man being fatally shot by a Chicago police officer will be released next week. Ronald Johnson, 25, was killed by an officer in October last year, and an attorney for his family says he was running away when he was shot. —USA Today

All Combat Roles Open to Women

All combat roles in the US military will now be open to women, Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter has announced. This means women will be eligible to join Navy Seals, Army Special Forces and the Green Berets for the first time. —VICE News

International News

Syrian Peace Talks to Begin in Saudi

Saudi Arabia will host talks for various Syrian opposition groups and rebel factions next week. The aim is to come up with a unified front ahead of peace talks with Syrian government representatives, set to start in January. —AP

Japan Launches Spy Unit

A new Japanese Foreign Ministry group will start collecting information on militant groups such as Islamic State, prompted by last month's attacks on Paris. The intelligence gatherers will work in Japanese embassies around the world. —Reuters

Germany Votes For Military Action

Germany's parliament has voted in favour of providing military support to the US-led coalition fighting Islamic State militants in Syria. Reconnaissance aircraft, a naval frigate and 1,200 soldiers will be sent to the region. —BBC News

Egyptian Restaurant Firebombed

Sixteen people have been killed in Cairo, after molotov cocktails were thrown into a restaurant. Egypt's interior ministry said it appeared to have followed a row between workers and others at the venue, which also housed a nightclub. —Al Jazeera





Scott Weiland. Photo via Wikimedia

Everything Else

Jon Stewart Lobbies For 9/11 Firefighters

Stewart took a group of 9/11 responders to the Capitol building, tracked down Senator Rob Portman, and persuaded him to back a bill making a health program for them permanent. —The Huffington Post

Singer Scott Weiland Found Dead

The former Stone Temple Pilots frontman has died at the age of 48. Weiland's manager said he "passed away in his sleep while on a tour stop". —Los Angeles Times

Mount Etna Erupts

The volcano on the Italian island of Sicily has erupted for the first time in two years, closing the nearest airport. The tallest volcano in Europe, it has been active for an estimated 2.5 million years. —The Guardian

People Who Share Inspirational Quotes are Dumb

Canadian researchers say there is a link between low intelligence and being impressed by bullshit, asinine, seemingly profound quotes on Facebook. - VICE