U.S. Education Secretary Arne Duncan slammed “white-suburban moms” for opposing Common Core while speaking to a group of school superintendents Friday.

Duncan said he found it “fascinating” that critics of Common Core curriculum standards include “white suburban moms who — all of a sudden — their child isn’t as brilliant as they thought they were, and their school isn’t quite as good as they thought they were,” according to The Washington Post.

The comment drew criticism of its own.

Common Core sets academic requirements based on standardized testing. Duncan has repeatedly reaffirmed that the standards, sanctioned in 45 states and now being implemented across the country, are more difficult than current standards followed by schools across the nation. Some states are reconsidering whether to use Common Core.

Even Common Core supporter Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, expressed concern, comparing the educational initiative’s implementation to another particularly troubled rollout, according to The Post.

“You think the Obamacare implementation is bad?” Weingarten told The Post. “The implementation of the Common Core is worse.”

Duncan has expressed frustrations before at the pushback Common Core is getting. At a National Press Club meeting on Sept. 30, he said opposition to the standards was “fueled by political silliness.” Then in June, he explained to a pack of newspaper editors that Common Core naysayers were “misinformed at best and laboring under paranoid delusions at worst. According to the Post, Duncan took a dislike to a New York Times op-ed that called the Common Core “a radical curriculum,” saying:

“It is neither radical nor a curriculum. When the critics can’t persuade you that the Common Core is a curriculum, they make even more outlandish claims. They say that the Common Core calls for federal collection of student data. For the record, it doesn’t, we’re not allowed to, and we won’t. And let’s not even get into the really wacky stuff: mind control, robots, and biometric brain mapping.”

Given the Obamacare lies, Americans are naturally suspicious of Common Core’s hidden components. Duncan’s comments about “white-suburban housewives” can best be described in the bureaucrat’s own words: “political silliness.” They’re also offensive.

The comments had Twitter abuzz. Here is a sampling of the reactions various Politico reporters on hand for the event tweeted:

.@arneduncan says foes of Common Core = white suburban moms who find their “child isn’t as brilliant as they thought” & “that’s pretty scary — Stephanie Simon (@StephanieSimon_) November 15, 2013

Duncan: Biggest threat to Common Core is “we lose the hearts and minds of those in the middle.” — Libby Nelson (@libbyanelson) November 15, 2013



Others were even less understanding, including writer Jose Vilson.

First They Came For Urban Black and Latino Moms (For Arne Duncan) http://t.co/Y4Zml7gBci — Jose Vilson (@TheJLV) November 17, 2013

@JammieWF @BeanfromPa Racism is racism, wherever you find it. Arne Duncan is a racist of the national socialist ilk. — I am Sparcatus (@SmillingHK) November 17, 2013

Best response I’ve seen yet to Arne Duncan’s asinine remarks. “Silly Moms and their Silly Opinions are Silly” http://t.co/7nZohZFeMt — Melissa Wiley (@melissawiley) November 17, 2013



[poll id=”138″]