They say he was a good kid with big dreams, who everyone loved. (Source: Reeves' Family).

There's no hiding from the devastating news one family got early Saturday morning. (Source: Reeves' Family).

Reeves' family says he was set to graduate from North Myrtle Beach High school this May. (Source: Reeves' Family).

Quentin Reeves' mother saw her son just hours before he was shot and killed Saturday. (Source: Reeves' Family)

LONGS, SC (WMBF) - No matter how much they want to, there's no hiding from the devastating news one family got early Saturday morning.

Quentin Reeves' mother saw her son just hours before he was shot and killed Saturday. She says he was just his usual, smiling self.

“He said, I love you ma, I love you ma. I love you so much, I love you too, and I told him to keep his head up, and don't be out there doing nothing,” Mary Richardson said.

Just a few hours later, a friend came to her door and asked her to come with him. He told her something had happened with her son at the Party Shop liquor store just down the road. “When I got to the scene, I saw a body laying there and I just fell out,” she said.

The county coroner says the 18-year-old was shot just once in the chest.

County police launched an investigation, arresting two people. Lindsey Walton and Bradley Gore are now behind bars charged with killing Reeves. Both also are charged with possession of a weapon during a violent crime.

On Monday, Walton and Gore appeared before a magistrate judge, who formally read their charges, and told them that bond for the murder charge would be set at a later date by a circuit court judge.

Reeves' mother says Bellamy was her son's cousin. "I'm a mother, and they have mothers, and they wouldn't want anyone to do them like that,” Richardson said.

Reeves' family says he was set to graduate from North Myrtle Beach High school this May. He then planned to move to Florida and pursue a music career.

They say he was a good kid with big dreams, who everyone loved. Now they feel they've been robbed of everything but their memories. "I'm supposed to have four boys and two girls, now I've got three boys and two girls, and it hurts,” Richardson said. “That's a hard pill to swallow," she added.

Click here for previous coverage.

Copyright 2015 WMBF News. All rights reserved.