WHEN: Thursday, July 17th, 2014 , at 9 a.m.

WHERE: Russell Senate Office Building – SR-385

WHAT: Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Consumer Protection, Product Safety and Insurance Hearing, "Examining Accountability and Corporate Culture in Wake of GM Recalls" (Hearing begins at 10 a.m. in Russell Senate Office Building Room 253 – Kenneth Feinberg , GM CEO Marry Barra , GM General Counsel Michael Millikin , Anton Valukas and Delphi CEO Rodney O'Neal to testify)

WHO: Emcee: Joan Claybrook , President Emeritus of Public Citizen, and former Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

U.S. Senator Richard Blumenthal

Clarence Ditlow , Executive Director of the Center for Auto Safety

Alexis Wilson ( Michigan ) drove a new 2008 Chevy Malibu which she lost control of while she was driving her best friend Tamia Williams home. The car struck a utility pole head on yet the Malibu's airbags did not deploy and the accident resulted in the death of Ms. Williams, who was pregnant at the time.

Carolyn Hawkins ( Alabama ) mother of Tamia Williams

Jay and Gerri Gass ( Tennessee</location>) are the parents of Lara Gass who died on March 18, 2014 , when the airbags of her 2006 Saturn Ion failed to deploy after she struck an 18-wheeler on a Virginia Highway . Lara was 28 at the time of her death.

Robert and Marie Buzard ( Pennsylvania ) Parents of Trenton Buzard who was paralyzed on April 2, 2009 when the 2005 Chevy Cobalt, driven by his great-grandmother Esther Matthews lost power seconds before another vehicle hit them head on, immobilizing the vehicle and preventing his great-grandmother from being able to avoid the accident.

Jeffery and Virginia Herrington ( Florida ) are the parents of Brandee Herrington who died on April 11, 2010 , when the airbags of her 2005 Chevy Cobalt failed to deploy after she hit a tree head-on. Brandee was 20 at the time of her death.

Michael and Le Ann Storck ( Minnesota ) are the parents of Donny Storck who died on April 22, 2010 , when he lost control of his vehicle and struck a nearby fence post. The airbags of his 2007 Chevy Cobalt failed to deploy resulting in Donny's death. Donny was 20 at the time of his death.

Michael Weston ( New York ) was severely injured in a motor vehicle accident on November 4, 2005 when his 2005 Saturn Ion turned off. His airbags did not deploy and Michael's face slammed into his steering wheel.