People Moves of the Week: Golub, Hall, Victory Park

Golub hires Joseph Wilson as managing director; Hall names audit director; Victory Park adds new business development head

Akerman LLP- The law firm added Andres Mendoza as a partner in the firm’s Miami, Florida office. He focuses on joint ventures, private placements, M&A and private equity. Before joining Akerman, Mendoza was with Bilzin Sumberg.

Baker & McKenzie- The advisory firm named Michael DeFranco as the global chair of its M&A practice. He replaces Tim Gee, who will continue to advise on M&A transactions for Baker. DeFranco is based in Chicago and has been a partner at Baker since 2007.

Comvest Partners- Colleen Gurda has joined Comvest’s direct lending group as a vice president. In her role, Gurda will be in charge of business development, including sourcing investment opportunities. Gurda was previously with middle-market lender Alcentra Capital Corp.

Duane Morris LLP- Carl Winkworth has joined the law firm’s corporate finance group as a partner. He will be based in London and comes over from Richards Kibbe & Orbe LLP. Winkworth focuses on credit structures and risks in the fixed-income markets.

Golub Capital- The middle-market lender added Joseph Wilson Jr. (pictured top) as a managing director. Wilson will be in charge of Golub’s relationships with buyers of leveraged loans and looking for secondary market opportunities, both within and outside of the firm’s current portfolio. Wilson was previously a managing director at Citigroup Inc. (NYSE: C) and also held roles at JPMorgan Chase & Co. (NYSE: JPM).

Hall & Co.- The Irvine, California-based accounting firm hired Wendell Daniel (pictured below) as director of audit services. Daniel’s accounting experience involves M&A, IPOs and debt raises. He was previously with Cherry Bekaert & Holland.

Morrison & Foerster- The law firm hired Vladimir Maly as a partner in its London office. Maly works with strategic buyers, private equity firms, sovereign wealth funds and high-net worth individuals on M&A and non-traditional finance structures. He comes over from Latham & Watkins.

Numet Manufacturing Techniques- Tim Ulles has been named CEO at the Kidd & Co.-baced metal parts manufacturer. He replaces Numet co-founder Mark Roscio, who will stay on as vice chairman. Ulles was most recently the general manager of Chromalloy Gas Turbine Corp.’s Georgia and Texas operations. Kidd acquired Numet in August 2011.

Perella Weinberg Partners- The investment bank hired Jameela Pedicini as a director in its agility outsourced chief investment officer business, which provides investment services for endowments, family offices and sovereign wealth funds. Pedicini was previously with Harvard Management Co. and before that, she was an investment officer at California Public Employees’ Retirement System.

PSA Healthcare- The home health care services provider, backed by J.H. Whitney Capital Partners, named Tony Strange CEO. He replaces Eric Minkove, who left the company to pursue other opportunities. Strange was most recently the CEO of Gentiva Health Services Inc. from 2009 up until its sale to Kindred Healthcare Inc. (NYSE: KND) in 2014. J.H. Whitney acquired PSA earlier in 2015.

Victory Park Capital- Ron Rolighed (pictured below) has joined the middle-market alternative asset management firm as a principal. Based in Chicago, Rolighed will lead the firm’s new business development, including investor relations, client services and developing new investment strategies. Before coming over to Victory Park, Rolighed co-founded Mira Capital Advisors LLC, where he advised emerging alternative investment firms on fundraising.

Vinson & Elkins LLP- Kai Liekefett has been hired to lead the law firm’s shareholder activism response team in New York. He will work with clients when it comes to shareholder activism, proxy contests and contested M&A transactions.

Weisermazars LLP- Barry Goodman recently joined the accounting firm’s New York office as a partner. Goodman will be working with broker dealers, hedge funds, private equity firms and closed-end mutual funds.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: