Kiz: Peyton Manning gives old guys like me hope. Since arriving in Denver as a broken-down quarterback rejected by Indianapolis, he has thrown an astounding 131 touchdown passes in 48 regular-season games. He set the league record with 55 touchdown passes in 2013. Now, at age 39, will Manning really be required to run the offense of new coach Gary Kubiak? Or will the Broncos go back to playing Manning’s way when the offense sputters or the team trails in the fourth quarter?

Renck: Manning spoiled fans with his aerial show the past three seasons. Could he still throw for 40 TDs at age 39? Sure. But that’s not a recipe for success. If the Broncos run the ball as well as expected Manning will post modest numbers. My prediction: 32 touchdown passes, eight interceptions, but as valuable as ever. Kubiak will adjust to Manning with more pistol formations and no-huddle concepts, but the Broncos are committed to running the ball.

Kiz: Manning is among the greatest QBs of all time. But he might be an even better politician. When Manning recently told Sports Illustrated legend Peter King that “I can’t feel anything in my fingertips,” it was sympathy-building at its best. Broncos executive John Elway replied with a smirk: “If I threw for 5,400 and something yards and 55 touchdown passes, I wish my fingers would have been numb too.” My loose interpretation: Elway now cares only about how many playoff games Manning wins, not how the quarterback does it.

Renck: Manning remains surprised the story took on a life of its own. He hasn’t had feeling in his fingers since he underwent four neck surgeries before coming to Denver. Nothing has changed. The biggest difference is Manning must wear a glove in cold weather. Elway wants Manning to play like Elway did in 1997 and 1998, his last two seasons. Audible into the right running plays, trust the ground game, and when necessary, throw it 45 times.

Kiz: Know what I find amusing? John Fox was bashed as being too conservative when he coached the Broncos, but it seems Kubiak was hired to make them even more grounded in old-time football. Manning must play Kubiak’s way, or this offense could become a mishmash mess. The lone time Manning won a Super Bowl, in the 2006 season, he threw a relatively modest 31 TD passes. That should be the goal for Denver this year. And that’s my prediction.

Renck: Less is more for Manning at this point. There’s no reason to worry about numbers at this point. He’s going to retire, after this year or next, holding every meaningful NFL quarterback record. Elway never won a Super Bowl without running back Terrell Davis. Manning won in Indianapolis only when his ground game sprang to life in the playoffs. Manning is attempting to become the first starting quarterback to win a Super Bowl with two teams. That would be remembered long after his final yardage and TD marks.