Hospice By The Bay — formerly Hospice of Marin — announced Monday it has signed a new affiliation agreement with the University of California, San Francisco.

In a prepared statement, the two organizations said they will collaborate to “expand home-based palliative and hospice care services, including new geographic areas.”

Officials at both organizations declined to disclose financial details, but Hospice CEO Kitty Whitaker said the Larkspur-based agency will continue to operate as an autonomous, nonprofit organization and will lay off none of its 308 employees as a result of the alliance. Three UCSF representatives will join Hospice By The Bay’s board of directors.

As recently as August, Hospice By The Bay faced speculation that it was on the brink of aligning itself with Sutter Health. Over the past several years, the organization has contended with cuts in federal funding for hospice care as well as increased competition from for-profit hospice operations.

In the 2013-14 fiscal year, Hospice By The Bay provided hospice services to more than 2,562 patients. The organization’s total revenue of about $39 million that year, including donations, exceeded expenses by about $5 million.

“We’re really looking to improve what we think is a fragmented system, to create more of a seamless continuum of care with UCSF,” Whitaker said.

Dr. Steven Pantilat, director of Palliative Care Services at UCSF Medical Center, said, “The challenge currently is that for seriously ill people, and people who are approaching the end of their life, there are lots of palliative care services in hospitals, and there is great palliative care through hospice; but there is very little in between. This affiliation provides an infrastructure for us to work closely with Hospice By The Bay to fill that gap.”

Palliative care refers to medical care focused on providing patients with relief from symptoms, pain and attendant stress. Pantilat said such care is often provided together with curative care. Currently, he said, most palliative care at UCSF and other hospitals is provided in a hospital or doctor’s office.

New models

Hospice By The Bay provides home-based palliative care to its patients; but under Medicare regulations patients must be diagnosed with six months or less to live to qualify for hospice care.

Advertisement

“Part of our partnership is reaching out to insurers throughout California to talk about what’s the right way to pay for these kind of services,” Pantilat said, “and try to create new models of payment that get away from a fee-for-service model.”

Dennis Gilardi, chairman of Hospice By The Bay’s board of directors, said that while Medicare won’t pay Hospice By The Bay to provide longer-term palliative care, that may change in the future due to the Affordable Care Act. One of the goals of health care reform was to replace fee-for-service medicine with a model that rewards health care providers for quality of service instead of quantity.

Gilardi said, “If you can take the patient out of the hospital and keep them at home, and the patient has a good quality of life, then it’s cost-effective and we’re all winners.”

Hospice By The Bay and UCSF had a close working relationship even before this agreement. Pantilat said UCSF’s palliative care team referred about 226 patients to hospice care in 2014, and in 2013, UCSF referred 232 patients to Hospice By The Bay.

Reaching the public

Gilardi said the affiliation should also help Hospice By The Bay to educate the public about the value of hospice care and attract new participants.

According to a Time magazine/CNN poll conducted in 2000, seven out of 10 Americans say they would prefer to die at home, but only 25 percent actually do. And while patients are qualified to receive hospice care if they have a life expectancy of six months or less, the median time that patients spend in hospice care is 18.5 days, according to a National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization study.

“San Francisco is underserved from a hospice standpoint,” Gilardi said. “There is probably a good 40 percent of people who are eligible for hospice care who are not receiving it.”

Gerald Peters, a Hospice By The Bay board member, said, “The affiliation should be a tremendous fit in terms of our existing patients, and our ability to spread our mission into further markets.”

Hospice By The Bay serves patients in Marin, San Francisco, San Mateo and Sonoma counties and the city of Napa. Peters would like to see the organization expand into adjacent communities.

“The dynamics of hospice right now are such that you really want to maximize your economies of scale so you can financially survive over the next five years,” Peters said. “It would be ideal if we could expand geographically.”