Hubbub resumes. Thanksgiving is already in the rearview mirror for many presidential hopefuls meandering back on the campaign trail following their respective family feasts. Things get particularly busy by Sunday, when the candidates will go scrambling, willy-nilly, for voter attention in battleground states. But that’s next week.

For now, Republican hopeful Donald Trump has the most high-profile event this weekend. He will be staging a jumbo rally at a big arena in Sarasota, Florida, followed by another on Monday at a Georgia coliseum, followed by yet another Tuesday at a New Hampshire athletic club, followed by still one more on Wednesday — this one staged at some fairgrounds in Virginia, not far from the nation’s capital.

Sen. Ted Cruz is also on a busy schedule. He tours Iowa this weekend with Rep. Louie Gohmert at 15 different events, including a stop in Tama to eat taco pizza and another at the Crooked Antler Lodge in Van Horne. Mr. Cruz will be in Virginia by Monday.

All three Democratic hopefuls will attend a major event in New Hampshire on Sunday. Front-runner Hillary Rodham Clinton, Sen. Bernard Sanders and Martin O’Malley star at the sold-out New Hampshire Democratic Party’s annual Jefferson-Jackson Dinner at the biggest hotel in Manchester. Yes, C-SPAN will be there, beginning at 9:30 p.m. EST. Mrs. Clinton will also visit with Boston Mayor Martin J. Walsh, poised to launch a new “Hard Hats for Hillary” voter initiative in the city.

THE CHANGING IMMIGRANTS

“Immigrants of today are unlike the immigrants of yesteryear. Although it is true that some still come for better education and free enterprise, most come out of necessity — they come because they don’t want to die in war,” writes Luma Simms, a contributor to The Federalist who was born in Iraq to Christian parents and currently lives in Arizona with her family.

“This type of refugee situation, which has been going on since the Iraqi diaspora after Saddam was toppled and recently flared up again with the Syrian refugee crisis, brings people who see America as better than death. Hence, they will take whatever America wants to give but will keep themselves isolated. They have no interest in assimilating,” she says.

“Some Muslims have even taken to building their own home schooling cooperatives rather than sending their children to American public schools. How much American history do you think they will learn, and with what bias? Being accustomed to socialist countries, modern immigrants (refugee or otherwise) carry with them a predisposition for government as caretaker,” Ms. Simms notes, adding that this prompts immigrants to typically vote Democratic, though most are social conservatives.

“Most Iraqis and Syrians I know say they would go back to their countries if there were a stable government. I suppose that’s good incentives for some Americans — there’s a way to unload some people. Self-deportation, anyone? I would venture to say that even Hispanic immigrants (legal and illegal) coming from Mexico and Latin America, to a certain extent, may feel the same way,” she concludes.

GIPPER GIFTS

From the Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation comes the “Trust But Verify” gift collection. Among items emblazoned with one of the 40th president’s most famous phrases, plus his signature: coffee mug, money clip, leather portfolio, pen, desk box. Check things out in the museum store at ReaganFoundation.org or through an old-fashioned phone call to 800/998-7641.

REGULATING THE CRAFT BREWERS

Sharp-eyed analysts have found yet another burden stemming from the Affordable Care Act.

“Amid Obamacare’s 3,000 pages lies a regulation that may squeeze craft beer brewers out of business. Regulators claim that American consumers are not healthy because they are blissfully unaware of the amount of calories in beer,” notes an new analysis from the National Taxpayers Union.

Next year all brewers must include a detailed calorie count on every type of beer they produce. Failure to comply means craft brewers can’t sell their beer in any restaurant chain with over 20 locations — a major blow to smaller operations. The Cato Institute also estimates the new labeling requirements will cost up to $77,000 to implement — doable for larger beer companies, a burden for local artisan brewers.

“The increasingly small size of craft breweries means they are faced with a tough decision in light of the impending regulations: cut costs and possibly lay off workers to pay for the calorie labels, or be shut out of one of the most profitable markets for their product. Either way, it is a lose-lose situation for craft beer brewers and drinkers, an industry that grew 27.8 percent from 2013 to 2014 when it was left alone,” says the taxpayer watchdog.

WEEKEND REAL ESTATE

For sale: Mammoth Spring Victorian, built in 1890 in historic Mammoth Spring, Alabama. Four bedrooms, one bath, 2,369 square feet; located “two minutes” from springs and trout stream. Twelve-foot ceilings, period lighting, original interior and exterior doors, woodworking and flooring; tiled fire place, bay windows. Twin verandahs, decorative railings, partial basement, central air conditioning and heat pump. Priced at $88,000 through WolfCreekReality.com; Press “find homes” under search function and enter MLS No. 1429.

POLL DU JOUR

• 65 percent of Americans make at least some of their holiday purchases with a credit card; 74 percent of Republicans, 68 percent of independents and 62 percent of Democrats agree.

• 62 percent overall pay off credit card debt right away or within a month; 72 percent of Republicans, 58 percent of independents and 60 percent of Democrats agree.

• 49 percent overall pay for their holiday purchases with cash or a debit card; 43 percent of Republicans, 47 percent of independents and 50 percent of Democrats agree.

• 23 percent overall pay off their holiday debt within three to six month; 28 percent of Republicans, 18 percent of independents and 32 percent of Democrats agree.

• 8 percent will pay off their debt sometime after six months; 6 percent of Republicans, 7 percent of independents and 11 percent of Democrats agree.

Source: A Harris Poll of 2.365 U.S. adults conducted Sept. 9-17 and released Wednesday.

• Kindly follow Jennifer Harper on Twitter @HarperBulletin