This was the scene last Sept. 30 at the Piggly Wiggly on Maybank Highway near Folly Road on James Island. Harris Teeter later closed the store. It plans to build a new supermarket on the site.

This past Saturday marked the one-year anniversary of Piggly Wiggly Carolina Co.'s announcement that it was selling most of its supermarkets in the Charleston area to larger rival grocers Bi-Lo and Harris Teeter.

The local chain that was established in downtown Charleston in 1947 essentially had erased its footprint in the Lowcountry by the time spring rolled around, making its tagline, "Local since forever," sound more like an epitaph.

The pig faces that beamed from 22 of Piggly Wiggly's storefronts were quickly replaced by Bi-Lo signs. Six more are now marked with Harris Teeter's logo, and another store at Folly Road and Maybank Highway will be razed and rebuilt by Harris Teeter in the next few months.

The staffs at many of the stores were kept the same, at least for most of the year. Bi-Lo told many of its employees in the Charleston area this summer that they would have to reapply for their jobs, with no guarantee they'd be hired back. While it was essentially a reshuffling of positions, the staffing changes meant some former Piggly Wiggly associates would have to leave stores they had worked in for decades.

Piggly Wiggly also closed its massive distribution center near Summerville and partnered with C&S Wholesale Grocers to supply its remaining 50 stores. In June, hundreds lined up outside the Jedburg warehouse to buy bulk items in a final closeout sale.

Many employees of the distribution center now work for Agro Merchants Group, a cold-storage business that leased the refrigerated portion of the facility. It held its grand opening last week.

David Schools, president of Piggly Wiggly Carolina, declined an interview request with The Post and Courier last week through spokeswoman Christy Boudolf. She said in an email the company is "focusing on smoothing out the supply chain transition and streamlining our operations to be profitable."

Changing it up

The longtime West Ashley restaurant that's been known as Med Bistro for the past decade once again has changed its name and ownership. But aside from a new sign and few different menu items, there's not much noticeably different.

Aris Newton, a principal owner of Lowcountry Eats Catering Co., and business partner Tommy Eiserhardt, bought the restaurant at 90 Folly Road earlier this year from Buzzy Newton, former president of Piggly Wiggly Carolina Co. Inc., who took over the Med Deli in 2006 and renamed it Med Bistro. The restaurant has changed hands and its name several times since it opened in South Windermere Shopping Center nearly 60 years ago.

The latest owners decided to change the name again as that's what so many patrons already called it, The Med, Eiserhardt said. The new sign was installed two weeks ago.