DARLINGTON, Wis. -- Interspersed among the brick storefronts of a pharmacy, appliance store and diner sit a Mexican grocery store, restaurant and auto repair shop.

A few blocks away, schoolchildren sing Ritchie Valens' "La Bamba" in front of a gazebo circled by Mexican, Honduran, Argentinian, Puerto Rican and Peruvian flags.

A soccer ball nearly careens into a gray-haired woman's lap as she enjoys a mango speared on a stick.

Behind her, Hector Larraga, of Mexican Cheese Producers, hands out plates of tortilla chips topped with refried beans, sour cream and cotija cheese produced at the plant he oversees less than two miles down the road.

Hundreds gathered May 10 at the town's festival grounds on Main Street for the community's eighth annual Fiesta Latina.

Darlington has seen its Latino population boom since 2005. A decade ago, it was home to 27 Hispanics, according to U.S. Census figures. Today, there are about 300 residents from Mexico and elsewhere living in the town of more than 2,400. An unknown number are in the U.S. illegally. Others have earned legal residency.

Drawn by well-paying, blue-collar jobs in the dairy, meatpacking, farming and manufacturing industries, cheap housing, safe neighborhoods and good schools, Latinos are settling in droves in rural towns that largely have not experienced immigration for the better part of a century, said Himar Hernandez, associate director of community and economic development at Iowa State University Extension and Outreach.

Their arrival has breathed new life into and brought new challenges to rural school districts and communities across the tri-state region, helping counteract once-shrinking tax bases, aging populations and dim prospects for economic growth.

It also has stoked tensions between longtime residents and Spanish-speaking newcomers and law enforcement.

While pressure mounts over immigration reform and ways to curb illegal immigration, Darlington and other tri-state communities are working to foster trust with a rapidly growing Hispanic population once hesitant to interact with local officials for fear of deportation.

"Immigrant workers are bringing new diversity to rural communities that hasn't existed for decades, and are contributing to the local economy," said Hernandez, whose work on the impact of Latinos in small rural communities has been featured on ABC's "Good Morning America" and NBC's "Today" show and in the Wall Street Journal.

"Poverty and violence drive them from their home countries and (it's) opportunities that bring them here," Hernandez said. "With that comes challenges but also possibilities. It means these rural communities stop declining and reach a sustainable level. They stop bleeding people. Local employers and ag producers do not struggle so much with finding a workforce. Schools don't have to close or consolidate because of increasing student population."

DRAWN BY DAIRY

In Wisconsin, the dairy industry has become reliant upon immigrant workers. Dairies employ about 5,300 immigrants in the state, making up an estimated 40 percent of the industry's workforce, up sharply from about 5 percent a decade earlier, according to a 2009 University of Wisconsin-Madison study.

And the trend is likely to continue as farmers expand herds and increase production, requiring even more workers.

Farm families are declining in size, spouses and farm children increasingly seek off-farm careers and the average age of dairy farmers continues to rise, furthering the need for hired labor, according to the study.

Farmers interviewed for the study reported difficulty finding reliable help willing to work long hours, night shifts and weekends.

"I have not been able to hire an American citizen since 1997," one Wisconsin farmer is quoted saying in the report. "... The way I see it, if we didn't have Hispanics to rely for a workforce, I don't believe I could continue farming."

Farmers stress the shift to immigrant labor is not an attempt to undercut local wages.

"(Y)ou hear from some people that these people (Hispanics) are taking jobs away," another farmer is quoted as saying. "But the fact of the matter is that there is nobody here who will work for those wages."

Rural communities across America in general face a labor shortage. Compounding the problem for dairies is the need for a dependable, trained workforce that values the demanding work, said Shelly Mayer, executive director of Professional Dairy Producers of Wisconsin.

"Rural America depends on these workers," Mayer said. "They show up on time, they like working outdoors and working with animals, and they value the job. ... Cows know when people care. It doesn't matter if you speak English or Spanish."

BRINGING NEW DIVERSITY

In Cascade, Iowa, the influx has been driven by the 2008 immigration raid and subsequent bankruptcy of a kosher meat-packing plant in Postville, with workers migrating south to work on farms and in manufacturing in Dyersville.

The number of Latinos in Iowa climbed 95 percent from 2000 to 2012, and they now represent 5 percent of the state's population, according to census figures.

Latinos -- primarily of Mexican descent -- now account for 3 percent to 4 percent of Cascade's population, according to Hernandez.

The rise has fueled a growth in Latino students in the Western Dubuque County Community School District, where 52 of about 2,600 students are Hispanic. In the 2005-06 school year, nearly all students were white.

That growth has helped stabilize enrollment at Cascade schools, whose student head count determines its amount of state funding, said Tesha Ruley, principal at Cascade and Bernard elementary schools.

But with that comes challenges helping Spanish-speaking students learn English quickly enough to understand the material being taught, said Ruley, who also coordinates the district's English-language program for non-native speakers.

Leydy Vega, 21, a 2011 Cascade High School graduate, remembers vividly her first year in Cascade as a Latino student who spoke limited English.

She was 13 years old. She had spent the previous six years in Burlington, Iowa, after moving to the U.S. with her parents and two sisters to escape Mexico's escalating drug war.

"When we got here, there was not a Hispanic community," Vega said. "We were like the first ones when we got here. A year later, people started coming, and they're still coming."

She could pick up on most English words but had difficulty understanding conversations. A few Spanish-speaking classroom teachers would help her when they could, but they were not ESL-certified.

"People were really helpful and welcoming when I entered the school," Vega said. "They were all kind, but there was still a large language barrier that made it really difficult to participate in class and classmate conversations. It was a little isolating."

Flash forward more than seven years -- Vega now works as an interpreter and paraprofessional at Cascade Junior-Senior High School, where she meets with two Latino students per period, assisting them with homework and translating assignments.

About one in 10 students at Cascade schools now come from a Spanish-speaking country.

In the past four years, the district has hired a translator and two ESL teachers to help Spanish-speaking students in its elementary, middle and high schools. It hopes to hire an additional translator and ESL teacher for next school year.

Ruley and Cascade Junior-Senior High School Principal Greg Vander Lugt said the students have become an asset to the schools. In addition to boosting funding, Latino students have enriched the lives of classmates who have not encountered other cultures.

"Yes, it's been a challenge getting beyond the language barrier to truly understand what these students know," Ruley said. "But, in the long term, it means continued growth in Cascade, and it means exposing students to a richer, more-diverse and -integrated school setting.

"Before, students had to leave for a big city to experience diversity," she said. "Now, that diversity is growing in their own backyard, presenting new opportunities to expand their understanding of different cultures and languages, broadening their ability to relate to different people."

FILLING EMPTY SHOPS

The growth also sparked a surge in entrepreneurship as immigrants have stepped onto Main Street, starting small businesses that helped fill once-shuttered storefronts.

Tomas Hernandez opened La Unica Mexican grocery in August in what used to be a beauty salon on First Avenue in Cascade. The salon had relocated a few blocks away, and the space sat empty for months.

Hernandez previously ran a clothing store in Postville for 12 years before the meatpacking plant closed, nearly killing his business.

"It almost killed the whole town because people had to move out to find work elsewhere," Hernandez said. "A lot of them moved here, and we followed them because they said it was a good place to do business. There was available, affordable commercial space, and (it) would be a good fit because it's a quiet, stable, welcoming community where we could do business. (Business) started slow but seems to be working out."

The Darlington Chamber of Commerce/Main Street program was quick to capitalize on the new wave of business, erecting welcome signs that read "Bienvenidos" and helping bank tellers, shopkeepers and employees learn Spanish.

"The impact to Main Street has truly been amazing," said chamber Director Suzi Osterday. "They're filling empty housing and empty storefronts. They shop, purchase gas and eat at our restaurants, which has been a boon to local business."

But not everyone was initially as excited by the change.

"When it first happened, someone asked me, 'How is little Havana doing? Every time I come to Darlington, I see a bunch of Hispanics walking the street,'" Osterday recalls. "I said, 'Really? I see people. And I'm glad you see people on our streets because that says we're healthy.' That's the way you have to look at it -- if you have people on your streets and you have shops that are full. For a small town, we are healthy."

POLICE AND IMMIGRANTS CLASH, COME TOGETHER

Hispanics across the tri-states still grapple with fear and mistrust of law enforcement, as well as discrimination.

In Galena, Ill., members of the local chapter of the Hispanic Council have alleged profiling by law enforcement and claim members of the city's Hispanic community are being unlawfully detained and harassed.

Carmela Cordero, president of the Galena chapter of the council, said many complaints stem from a county policy of notifying U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement offices whenever someone suspected of being in the country illegally is arrested, however minor the infraction.

Jo Daviess County Sheriff Kevin Turner said his department notifies immigration officials of minor offenses but does not hold suspects unless instructed to do so by ICE.

Turner and Jo Daviess County State's Attorney John Hay deny the claims, saying the department's policy is proper and common for local law enforcement.

Police and local residents in Darlington also recall fights a few years ago between residents and Spanish-speaking newcomers.

"Fifteen years ago, there was no Hispanic population in Darlington. It was nonexistent," said Darlington Police Chief Jason King. "We couldn't communicate with them, and they couldn't communicate with us."

For years, each side viewed the other with distrust. Misunderstandings -- such as the belief that immigrants do not pay sales, property or Social Security taxes -- obscured the positive contributions, and Latinos became scapegoats for social ills, leading to bitterness and hostility, according to local residents.

At the same time, a pervasive sense of surveillance and daily worry of apprehension among immigrants created a palpable sense of fear and need to keep a low profile in public.

Rumors ran rampant of workplace raids and other immigration enforcement.

The tensions quickly became a challenge for King.

"We tried hosting open houses for Hispanic residents to build ties, but nobody came," he said. "There was such a fear of deportation."

To improve relations between longtime locals and the new immigrants, King hired Sgt. Tony Ruesga Jr. in 2000 as a police liaison to build trust and explain laws to Hispanic residents.

"To do that, I knew it had to be more than just responding to calls or when things go wrong. It had to be about building community service," said Ruesga, who is Hispanic and speaks fluent Spanish. "At the beginning, they would call me for just about anything -- making appointments for an oil change, making doctor's appointments, setting up bank accounts or filling out government forms -- and my answer was always yes. It's breaking down those barriers, knowing they could come to me."

He also started an advisory committee that helps integrate the newcomers into the city.

Now, Latinos -- once fearful of the police -- help solve crimes, calling in tips to police.

A month ago, Ruesga received a call from the owner of Veracruz II Mexican Market. A Hispanic teen attempting to back out of a driveway had mistakenly placed the car in drive and damaged a garage. The teen, who is in the country illegally, went to the store to have the owner call Ruesga so he could fess up, knowing he would receive a citation.

"That's how far we've come," Ruesga said. "They want to rid the community of criminals as much as we do. They've taken ownership of the community and said, 'We're part of Darlington.'"

Immigrants sometimes end up on the wrong side of the law in Darlington but mostly for minor infractions, King said. He said about 5 percent of all cases involve Hispanic residents, the vast majority involving driving without a license.

Obtaining a Wisconsin driver's license became impossible for many undocumented immigrants since a 2005 state law passed to comply with the federal Real ID Act required applicants for a driver's license to submit proof of citizenship.

'TIME FOR A REALITY CHECK'

While Darlington has succeeded in building productive ties with its rapidly growing Hispanic community, King and Ruesga said they continue to walk a fine line between friendship and enforcement.

"That's the most difficult part of all of this -- not having undocumented workers confuse generosity, friendship and tolerance with law enforcement," Ruesga said. "They have to know when they break the law, I also have to enforce the law. And we make no ifs, ands or buts about that."

Both say immigration reform must not only serve employers' labor needs, but increase opportunities for legal migration that will bring immigrants out of the shadows to participate more fully in public life. Among those changes should be a driver's certification course so immigrants can be easily identified and are safe on the road, King said.

"There's no excuse for coming to our country illegally, and (we) have never suggested in any way, shape or form that illegal immigration is OK," he said of the department. "But our laws aren't preventing them from driving. We need to look at what we can do enhance public safety, and that's educate them on the rules of the road and make sure they're driving safely. That's just a logical solution, ... but that commonsense thinking is lost because of politics."

Before, King said, he wanted nothing to do with undocumented workers.

"That's just not realistic anymore," he said. "When 13 percent of your community are immigrants, that's not a realistic approach. We have to evolve in our thought process. We can either accept the fact they're here and a part of our community ... or we can ignore it. I'd rather bridge that gap and work together to continue to make our community a great, safe place to live."

Whether someone politically agrees or disagrees doesn't matter, King said.

"It's just the reality we're faced with. While lawmakers fight over partisan politics, communities like ours are being affected," he said. "It's time Washington did what we and many other communities across the country have done.

"It's time for a reality check."