INDIANAPOLIS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield announced its support for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) approval, and the efforts of Governor Pence to bring affordable health care to more Hoosiers through the new Healthy Indiana Plan (HIP) 2.0. Beginning February 1, Hoosiers adults between the ages of 19-64, with incomes up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level may be able to qualify for this expanded health care coverage. It is anticipated that coverage will be expanded to over 300,000 uninsured Hoosiers.

Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield has nearly 30,000 members enrolled in HIP today and has been a part of HIP since its inception in 2008. All HIP 2.0 plans include a Personal Wellness and Responsibility (POWER) account which functions like a Health Savings Account (HSA) to help pay for deductible expenses. The plans also include incentives for receiving preventive services.

With HIP 2.0, Anthem Medicaid members in Indiana will enroll into the HIP Plus or HIP Basic options, which offer different levels of benefits and personal responsibility.

HIP Plus: members and the state of Indiana jointly fund a $2,500 POWER account, which allows members to contribute based on a sliding income scale. This option offers enhanced services such as vision and dental services, comprehensive prescription drug coverage, and includes maternity services with no cost-sharing for the duration of pregnancy.

members and the state of Indiana jointly fund a $2,500 POWER account, which allows members to contribute based on a sliding income scale. This option offers enhanced services such as vision and dental services, comprehensive prescription drug coverage, and includes maternity services with no cost-sharing for the duration of pregnancy. HIP Basic: requires co-payments for all services, which may exceed the cost of monthly POWER account contributions required in Plus. This option uses an entirely state-funded POWER account to cover a $2,500 deductible and has more limited benefits with no Dental or Vision coverage. Maternity services are included with no cost-sharing for the duration of pregnancy.

“There is a high level of satisfaction from our members currently enrolled in HIP,” said Kristen Metzger, President of Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Indiana Medicaid. “Members appreciate having control of their health care decisions, and HIP 2.0 broadens this opportunity for Medicaid eligible Hoosier residents. We are excited to have been a partner with Indiana on HIP since the program’s inception and look forward to serving more Hoosiers under this new expanded program.”

Since 2008, HIP has successfully encouraged the use of preventive care and subsequently reduced the use of the emergency room for non-emergency conditions. HIP has empowered members to act as consumers in the health care market and to be proactive in making informed health care choices.

In preparation for the new members Anthem will serve under HIP, the health plan expects to hire more than 200 new associates to serve the anticipated demand. This includes associates who work within customer service, care management and enrollment and billing.

About Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield

Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield is the trade name of Anthem Insurance Companies, Inc., an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. ® ANTHEM is a registered trademark of Anthem Insurance Companies, Inc. The Blue Cross and Blue Shield names and symbols are registered marks of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association. Additional information about Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Indiana is available at www.anthem.com. Also, follow us on Twitter at www.twitter.com/healthjoinin, on Facebook at www.facebook.com/HealthJoinIn, or visit our YouTube channel at www.youtube.com/healthjoinin.