READ MORE More stories and a breakdown of the tiers of coverage at Special Section: Affordable Care Act More info: CoveredCA.com

Some area medical clinics say they have taken steps to ensure they will be able to care for current patients, as well as an anticipated slew of new ones, as the Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare, is implemented in the new year.

Signed into law in March 2010 by President Obama, ACA “makes preventative care more accessible and affordable for many Americans,” according to the Department of Health and Human Services web site.

“We’ve been preparing for this for three years,” said Celinda Vazquez, vice president of public affairs for Planned Parenthood Los Angeles, which oversees the 19 health centers in Los Angeles County. They include facilities in Whittier, El Monte, Alhambra, Lakewood and Glendora.

In fact, she said, the preparation has already improved service to patients.

“We have reduced patient wait time to about 15 minutes from about an hour or more,” Vazquez said.

Planned Parenthood, local call centers have had people seeking information about ACA, she said.

Serving 145,000 patients annually, Vazquez said, Planned Parenthood provides life-saving cancer screening, breast exams, STD treatments and family planning.

“Roughly 98 percent of patients are seeking preventative treatment,” she added.

Health center staffs have undergone training to help explain ACA to patients.

And while no additional staff have been hired, each of their workers have reconfigured their work flow to accommodate an increase in patient population,” Vazquez added.

For Dr. A. Shawn Adhami, who has clinics in Montebello and El Monte, Obamacare has meant hiring more staff, including clerical, physician assistants and nurses.

“Although there is no way to accurately tell how many new patients our offices will add, we are projecting an increase from 10 to 15 percent,” he said.

Currently the Montebello office, 1000 W. Whittier Blvd., sees 30 to 40 patients daily, and the El Monte office, 3030 Tyler Ave., sees about 40 to 55 patients daily.

The Montebello clinic, Vistasol Medical Group’s patients range from low-income to city officials, attorneys and fellow physicians.

Unlike a lot of his colleagues, Adhami, who is chief of staff at Monterey Park Hospital, welcomes the implementation of Obamacare.

It’s not a perfect plan, he acknowledged, “but overall, I’m happy about it because millions of people will be receiving basic healthcare and preventative medicine.”

Advertisement

The state-based Health Insurance Marketplace will provide millions, many who currently have no healthcare insurance, with affordable coverage choices.

In the past few years, Medicare and Medi-Cal recipients have had to choose a provider.

“Overall, it will reduce payments per patient to doctors,” said Dr. Adhami. “It’s definitely not a revenue-generator.”

“We have anticipated change,” said PIH Health Spokeswoman Monique Rodriguez. “We are expecting to see an increase in Medi-Cal patients to our hospital.”

Regarding preventative services, she added, PIH Health’s physician group has the capacity to care for any influx of patients.

“The community can rest assured knowing that (we are) committed to their well-being, and will continue to provide the high-quality care (they) have come to expect from us and deserve,” Rodriguez said.

In the past few years, the federal government has spent $11 billion to fund thousands of capital expansion projects across the nation. Of that, $200 million has come to California. The funding has allowed 45 new federally qualified health centers to open in California, said Carmela Castellano-Garcia, president and chief executive officer for the California Primary Care Association. The association represents 900 not-for-profit community clinics and health centers statewide.

Even small clinics in California will play a big role in the success or failure of the Affordable Care Act nationwide.

“We believe community clinics and health centers will be play seminal role in the success of the Affordable Care Act,” she said. “We expect community health centers to be one stop shop for both enrollment and health care services under health care reform.”

Of the nearly 5.3 million patients who visited health centers in California last year, about 43 percent are uninsured, state officials have said.

In Los Angeles, 51 community clinics serve more than 1 million patients each year, the majority of whom are currently uninsured,state officials have said.

The challenge of enrolling patients has been the vast amount of information and ongoing changes that have come with meeting the guidelines of ACA.

The federal health law requires most Americans to have health insurance starting January 2014, and many residents will qualify for free or subsidized coverage based on their income.

Those who qualify or those who want to change health plans can go to CoveredCA.com or call 888-975-1142 and compare plans under tiered policies that include Bronze, Silver, Gold and Platinum — each providing different levels of out-of-pocket costs, based on income.

Staff Writer Susan Abram contributed to this story.