An effort to depoliticize a turnaround plan for the city’s public hospital system has already become decidedly political.

Labor and elected leaders rallied last week to protest job cuts and facility closures that have not yet been—and may not be—recommended by consultants who are working on a blueprint to revive New York City Health + Hospitals. Mayor Bill de Blasio enlisted health-care consulting firm Manatt Health to address the safety-net system’s projected $669 million budget shortfall for the fiscal year ending June 30. Unions and community health advocates made clear at City Hall April 14 that Manatt better cross off its list a number of cost-cutting strategies if it wants to avoid a fight.

“We do not need an outside consulting firm to issue a report that cuts, closes, consolidates, regionalizes, outsources or privatizes services,” said Dr. Frank Proscia, president of Doctors Council SEIU, one of several public-sector unions that appeared alongside Public Advocate Letitia James and Manhattan Borough President Gale Brewer.

Manatt met with unions in late March to hear their concerns, but the firm was tight-lipped about the direction its report would take. “They might not present a disastrous plan, but we’re definitely not going to wait for that report to come out,” said Anthony Feliciano, director of the Commission on the Public’s Health System, an advocacy group.

NYC Health + Hospitals plans to generate more revenue by the end of the decade in part by growing membership in its MetroPlus health plan to 1 million members, which would help offset declining federal funding for treating the uninsured.

Correction: Anthony Feliciano, director of the Commission on the Public's Health System, is in the photo accompanying this article. The caption in an earlier version of this article published April 17, 2016 misidentified Feliciano.

Sign Up for Health Pulse Brought to you by Crain's New York Business, Health Pulse is a subscription-only website focused on the business of health care. The site is updated every day with breaking news, research and unique information. Subscribe today and receive access to the site and the daily emails. Plus, twice a week we release a special report called Extra, featuring data and statistics. Subscribe Today

Comments