BANGOR, Maine — Cheerleading teams spend countless hours developing and perfecting their routines for the opportunity to perform them only a few times in competition.

Often, it’s the exact same routine throughout the conference, regional and state championships.

Dexter High School added a little wrinkle to its repertoire prior to the Eastern Maine championships, and it may have been just what the Tigers needed. Dexter incorporated an express-up during a late pyramid, a move that helped propel the Tigers to their second regional title in three years on Saturday morning at the Cross Insurance Center in Bangor.

“It was a very big difference-maker,” said Dexter senior Sarah Ann Vigue. “It’s a higher-level stunt, and you switch from one foot to the other in the air while you’re throwing [the flyer] up.

“We were so afraid it wasn’t going to hit, and then once it hit, we were all so happy. We were cheering each other on the mat,” she added.

Coach Kacie Ladd’s team scored 114 points to edge runner-up Bucksport by four-tenths of a point (113.6). Defending Class C state champion and 2015 Penobscot Valley Conference winner Central of Corinth finished third with 106.3 points followed by Orono (102.9), Houlton (101.3) and Mattanawcook Academy of Lincoln.

All six teams advance to state championship competition Feb. 7 at the Augusta Civic Center.

Rounding out the field were: 7. Narraguagus of Harrington 94.6, 8. Sumner of East Sullivan 86.6, 9. Washington Academy of East Machias 86.4, 10. Calais 84.6

Dexter had tied for second place at the Penobscot Valley Conference meet a week earlier, signalling to Ladd that her team was ready to make a run at the title.

“We spent all week to clean up and just make things stronger,” said the sixth-year Dexter coach. “I definitely knew it was within reach, but it all depends on the day and how it goes.”

The Tigers, which utilized 13 competitors, made an impression early with a high basket throw that was facilitated in part by their three male team members, Martin Ward, Dillon Austin and Emmitt Ross.

“Our opening basket is something that gets a reaction every time,” Ladd said. “It gets pretty high, so we’re proud of that.”

Dexter appeared to execute its lifts with precision and demonstrated cohesiveness throughout. Even the Tigers’ cheer element was done while showing off three simultaneous lifts.

“We worked on all of our stunts, we came in confident, we came in ready, and we just decided we’d come in here and show everybody what we’re made of,” said Ward, who is a senior.

The express-up, which was added Thursday, wasn’t a major change for the Tigers, who had been nailing their stunts recently. And even though it came relatively late in Dexter’s routine, it provided the cheerleaders with a big boost.

“Getting the energy from hitting that stunt and going into that last dance, it just gives you so much adrenaline,” Vigue said.

Dexter’s other team members are: seniors Shayna Fogg, Cayla Wyman and Shawna Moulton; sophomores Grace Belanger, Olivia Day, Autumn Nickerson, Kirsten Swimm and Jasmine Woodard; and freshman Lily Cummings. The mascots are seniors Jacob Leighton and Matthew Stanhope.

Bucksport took home the Class C runner-up plaque, following up on its second-place finish (tie with Dexter) at PVCs.

Coach Sue Bennett said her team has concentrated on taking care of business on the mat.

“We have been trying not to worry about what everybody else was doing, just focus on our own routine and make it as clean and as solid as we possibly can,” she said. “A sharp, clean routine goes a long way.”

Golden Bucks team members said the key to their success was sticking together and supporting each other.

“We had encouraging, positive stuff in our routine, and we were working as a family,” said senior co-captain Olyviah Burns.

Bucksport showed off a couple of nice tumbling passes, was strong in its lifts and displayed good energy and cohesiveness throughout.

“We definitely felt like we had a really strong team this year and we had the potential, and we just had to work really hard,” added senior co-captain Sarra Bridges.

Bucksport’s other team members are seniors Sierra Cyr and Samantha Goode; junior Kim Davenport; sophomores Kylee Atwood, Isabella Cyr, Melanie Hall, Mariah Jerome, Lauren Stubbs and Arlena Tolmasoff; and freshmen Alyssa Bennett and Abby Morong.