Ping Enriquez was concerned this past fall when his home country of the Philippines was hit by a pair of natural disasters — a massive earthquake in October and a devastating typhoon in November.

Knowing the Philippine government wasn’t equipped to respond to a pair of disasters of that magnitude, Enriquez wanted to do something to help, and turned to residents of Topeka — where he has lived since the 1970s, when he enrolled at Washburn University.

Enriquez was nearly blown away by the response he received from people in the Topeka, Kansas City, Manhattan, Lawrence and Emporia areas, as more than $12,000 poured in to help victims of the disasters.

The monies were targeted for community sanitation stations that included restrooms and showers, which were badly needed after many people were forced out of their homes by the disasters.

Enriquez recently provided an update, showing photos of the first facility built in large measure by donations from those in the Topeka area.

The facility is located in the Central Philippines area of Maribujoc, Bohol, which was hit by last fall’s earthquake.

A contractor, Ray Lamdagan, with whom Enriquez’ Topeka-based roofing business works in the Philippines, was in charge of the sanitation station construction.

“Ray Lamdagan and his crew did an outstanding job building a much better facility than what we were able to afford,” Enriquez said. “These bathing and toilet stations were built to last a long while.”

While some repairs have been made in the Philippines since the typhoon and earthquake hit, “the pace of progress has really slowed down because of local and national politics,” Enriquez said.

“The international funds that were raised were way below the projected costs of rebuilding the central Philippines,” he said. “Setting priorities is really the biggest challenge for the government, and the victims were left to fend for themselves. Emergency loans are slow to get awarded, so the economy is at a standstill.”

Enriquez said the next typhoon season is right around the corner, which makes the residents “very nervous given the temporary shelters that they have.”

School started in June, he said, but many of them never opened.

“There have been other major emergencies around the world that have drawn the attention away from the Philippines,” Enriquez said. “Much like Haiti, the pain and suffering continue.”

The first disaster struck the island nation nearly nine months ago, on Oct. 15, when a 7.2-magnitude earthquake struck the Philippines and killed nearly 1,000 people.

While cleanup from that disaster was ongoing, Typhoon Haiyan struck the Philippines with heavy rainfall and sustained winds of around 200 mph on Nov. 6. By last count, the typhoon had resulted in more than 3,600 deaths.

Enriquez, 59, gets back to the Philippines on a fairly regular basis in his job representing the Topeka-based Ad Veritas construction company, which he owns.

Though he left the Philippines this past fall about two weeks before Typhoon Haiyan made landfall, Enriquez was in the country when the Oct. 15 earthquake struck, though he said he didn’t feel anything as its epicenter was about 350 miles south of Manila, where he was staying.

Back in the United States, and concerned for his home country, Enriquez got in touch with Lamdagan to be his “boots on the ground” in the Philippines and identify the most pressing needs in the wake of the disasters.

Lamdagan told Enriquez the “biggest needs” were for temporary restroom and shower facilities, as well as personal hygiene products such as soap, deodorant, towels and wash cloths.

Other relief agencies were bringing in food and water as roads open up, but little had been done in the way of sanitation, Enriquez said.

As a result, Enriquez said, a large number of people were at risk for contracting cholera.

Enriquez said this past fall that people couldn’t afford to wait on the Phillippine government to help remedy the situation as the Philippine government was “broke” and had “no money for emergency assistance. They don’t have anything like FEMA. So they’re depending on international support and private donations.”

Enriquez said his goal was to send local donations to the Philippines, where Lamdagan would use it to buy wood and other supplies for the temporary restroom and shower facilities.

Enriquez said 100 percent of local donations went to construction costs, with none of the funds going to administrative fees.

All labor on the projects was to be donated by Lamdagan’s company, Enriquez said.

“These sanitation stations will be maintained by the municipalities that accepted them as gifts from Kansas residents,” Enriquez said. “The first one was built on a school property. The project suffered from weather delays and delays due to other construction projects that took the personnel away from this job. I was back in Manila in March because Ray and I were working on a roofing project at the international airport. We had to pull his crew to work on that project.”

But now, the first sanitation station is up and running. Details are still being negotiated for the second station, which is being planned for an area where the typhoon hit, Enriquez said.

“This whole project ranks as one of the highest rewarding projects in my whole life,” Enriquez said. “What makes me prouder is that this project came to being because of my fellow Kansans. Friends and strangers came to help me with this simple idea of providing privacy to thousands of victims 10,000 miles away, knowing that there is no chance of a payback from the poorest of the poor.

“These donors gave us money freely without questions or doubts. This is what makes me proud to be a Kansan.”

Enriquez is well-known in Topeka for his work with various organizations and businesses, including the YMCA, Washburn University, WIBW-TV and KSNT-TV.

He started his Ad Veritas construction business, which does much of its work in the Philippines and other Asian Pacific nations, in 2002.

Donations are still being accepted for additional sanitation stations and can be sent to Philippines Relief Fund, Educational Credit Union, 2808 S.W. Arrowhead, Topeka, 66614.