home : news : news May 27, 2016 2/19/2016 3:37:00 AM

CAHC: IRS is taking it to small businesses

Proposed bipartisan legislation could change that



Brian Jopek

Reporter



It's February, tax time is well underway and at least one group is contending the Internal Revenue Service is "picking on the little guy."



Consumer advocate Joel White claims small businesses and companies are being fined large amounts of money for doing nothing more than giving their employees money to help pay for insurance.



"The feds claim the arrangement subverts the Affordable Care Act by allowing employers to avoid offering full-fledged insurance policies," White wrote in an opinion piece published last year. "But the fines are actually depriving small-business employees of thousands of dollars in compensation - and reducing the number of people with insurance."



Michelle Stevens, senior vice-president for the Council on Affordable Health Care Coverage, told The Lakeland Times "this is a case of no good deed goes unpunished for small businesses."



"Under the Affordable Care Act, businesses with less than 50 employees don't have to provide health insurance for their workers," she said. "Despite that, many small business owners want to do right by their employees and they want to help them with the cost of insurance and medical care."



Stevenson said historically, many small businesses have offered employees health care reimbursement arrangements, known as HRAs, to help with rising health care costs.



"These employers think HRAs help families better afford high deductibles we often see in Obamacare plans," she said. "What's happening is these small business owners are doing the right thing but the IRS is saying these HRAs are wrong."



The IRS declined to comment for this story but provided links to its website explaining its policies regarding HRAs.



Stevenson said she's thoroughly studied the material.



"In my view, the IRS is interpreting HRAs to be group health plans," she said. "Because of that, the HRAs are required to meet certain market rules and regulations so they have to cover preventative benefits at no cost."



They also can't impose limits on annual benefits, Stevenson said.



"Because HRAs are reimbursement arrangements, they don't meet these rules," she said. "If an employer decides to give an employee $1,300, that amount is capped at $1,300 for that year. Because HRAs don't meet set rules and the IRS is defining them as group health plans, employers can be fined an outrageous amount."



The fine is $100 per day per employee.



"That can accumulate pretty quickly," Stevenson said. "For many small businesses, that fine is really a financial unknown that's starting to add up. If you're currently a small business owner and you offer an HRA to your 10 employees, you're going to owe the IRS more than $366,000 by the end of the year."



Because of that, she said, small businesses that simply want to do the right thing can't afford the punishment.



"Unfortunately, they're going to have to stop offering assistance through HRAs," Stevenson said.



'Sooner rather than later'



Legislation has been introduced in both houses of Congress to address what Stevenson called "a backwards IRS ruling."



The bill is called The Small Business Relief Act.



"It's HR 2911 in the House and S1697 in the Senate," she said. "The bill would protect small businesses with fewer than 50 employees, folks who don't have the time or manpower to manage a group health plan. The legislation would protect them from outrageous fines for providing HRAs as an option to their employees."



Stevenson said both bills have been referred to committee.



"The House bill currently has 72 bi-partisan co-sponsors and the Senate bill has 12 bipartisan co-sponsors," she said. "My organization is actively engaged in trying to educate members of Congress and their staff members about the bills about what's happening with HRAs and the IRS interpretation, working to garner additional co-sponsors in support and we're obviously hoping to move this legislation sooner rather than later."



Brian Jopek may be reached via email at bjopek@lakelandtimes.com.











Article Comment Submission Form Please feel free to submit your comments.



Article comments are not posted immediately to the Web site. Each submission must be approved by the Web site editor, who may edit content for appropriateness. There may be a delay of 24-48 hours for any submission while the web site editor reviews and approves it.



Note: All information on this form is required. Your telephone number is for our use only, and will not be attached to your comment. Submit an Article Comment First Name:

Required Last Name:

Required Telephone:

Required Email:

Required Comment:

Required Passcode:

Required Click here to see a new mix of characters. This is an anti-SPAM device. It is not case sensitive.