Reprinted from THE AIS REPORT ON BLUE CROSS AND BLUE SHIELD PLANS , a hard-hitting independent monthly newsletter on new products, market share, management strategies, profitability, strategic alliances and executive compensation of BC/BS plans. (Not affiliated with the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association or its member companies.) Sign up for a $72 two-month trial subscription today .

CareFirst, Inc. is facing a proposed class-action lawsuit over the data breach it disclosed in May (The AIS Report 6/15, p. 11), with one current member and one former member leading the charge in the complaint filed Aug. 6 with the U.S. District Court of Maryland. While the Maryland-based Blues plan operator maintains that no Social Security numbers were compromised, one of the plaintiffs’ lawyers contends identities already have been stolen as a result of the cyberattack, and another industry observer says the number of medical identity theft cases he has seen in the past six months alone is “nuts.”

Named plaintiffs Pamela Chambliss and Scott Adamson charged the insurer with negligence, breach of implied contract and unjust enrichment, alleging CareFirst failed to maintain proper security practices after discovering weaknesses in its IT posture shortly before the breach occurred. William Federman, an attorney at Oklahoma City-based firm Federman & Sherwood and one lawyer representing the plaintiffs, says the legal team has been in contact with several dozen people who have experienced fallout from the breach that affected 1.1 million CareFirst members, and that they have evidence that shows the data have been used inappropriately.

Breaches Put Health Data at Risk

A CareFirst spokesperson declined to comment on the case, but according to the complaint, the insurer became aware of its shortcomings after its vendor, FireEye, Inc. subsidiary Mandiant Security Consulting, discovered an attempted data breach in June 2014.

Federman says he expects CareFirst to file a motion to dismiss sometime in September, but is confident that the strength of the plaintiffs’ evidence will kill that request. While Blues plans nationwide in July began offering credit monitoring services to all current members following breaches at Anthem, Inc., Premera Blue Cross and CareFirst, Federman says that doesn’t protect misuse of member health information and that the quality of the credit monitoring isn’t guaranteed.

“It’s only as good as the service they’re using,” he says, citing the Federal Trade Commission’s July actions against identity theft protection service Lifelock, Inc. for misleading customers about the extent of its identity theft capabilities. “A lot of these services are just inundated. They’re hiring left and right, and whenever you’re hiring massive new employees, you have problems in training.”

Medical Identity Protection Is New Frontier

The CareFirst complaint specifically mentions the possibility of medical identity theft, or the misuse of protected health information to submit fraudulent health insurance claims. According to the Ponemon Institute’s Fifth Annual Study on Medical Identity Theft, released in February, medical identity theft increased 21% in 2014 compared with 2013. Victims each ponied up an average of $13,500 over an average of 200 hours to resolve the problem, although only 10% said they had reached a satisfactory conclusion.

Rick Kam, president and cofounder of IDExperts, which offers MIDAS, the Medical Identity Alert System, says the number of medical identity theft cases he has seen in the past six months has skyrocketed, citing the Blues breaches along with recent exposures at UCLA Health System and the Office of Personnel Management.

“If you think about those particular incidents, all of them included health insurance information or some form of sensitive health information,” Kam tells The AIS Report. “So not only through MIDAS, but more specifically through the services we provide to our breach clients, we’ve seen a huge spike in medical identity theft, financial identity theft and tax return identity fraud just in the last six months. It’s just off the charts. It’s just nuts.”

MIDAS is an app that alerts customers when a medical claim is filed under their or a dependent’s name, and blocks the claim from being paid until the customer approves it. The software has to be set up with both the customer’s doctors and insurance company.

IDExperts launched MIDAS just last November, but Kam began working on the idea five years ago when he and the IDExperts team first noticed medical identity theft becoming a problem. After searching in vain for a product that would protect against fraudulent medical claims, they decided to build it themselves. MIDAS clients are mostly insurance companies, including Portland, Ore.-based Moda Health, the CEO of which was a victim of medical identity theft himself. Moda offered the pilot installation of MIDAS to its 170,000 insurance exchange customers for free last year, and Kam says Moda intends to roll out the service to its remaining 500,000 clients this year. The average cost of the service runs less than $1 on average per customer per month.

Many cases of medical identity theft don’t come from data breaches, but rather are perpetrated by the person’s friend or family member. Ann Patterson, senior vice president and program director at the Medical Identity Fraud Alliance — of which CareFirst is a founding member — says providers are better equipped to halt identity theft than insurers, because they can employ techniques including fingerprint scans and photo verification to ensure a person’s identity immediately upon arrival.

Insurance companies also are under pressure to pay claims quickly, which prevents their special investigations units from vetting each incoming bill. Additionally, insurers have to comply with the medical loss ratio (MLR) provision of the Affordable Care Act, which somewhat limits their ability to invest in new technology.

“Fraud reduction activities are in the restricted buckets,” Patterson says, referring to expenses such as administrative, marketing and salaries that are allowed only a 20% allocation of insurers’ premium revenues. An insurance exec might say, “‘Oh, there’s this cool software’ — they can buy and deploy that, but any money a health plan company spends to do those new technologies, that’s going to count against them in MLR.”

Several states are beginning discussions to tighten data breach laws to ensure more protection against medical identity theft, Patterson says. But any laws should take into account the organization’s size and capability, according to Linn Freedman, attorney and chair of data privacy and security at the law firm Robinson + Cole.

“HIPAA has always been a regulation that takes into consideration the size and complexity of the organization,” Freedman says. “Encryption at rest is definitely best practice, so entities with a lot of high-risk data may want to consider encryption, whereas a solo practitioner doctor shouldn’t necessarily be required to encrypt his data at rest.”

Consumers should check their Explanations of Benefits forms (EOBs) as soon as they come in, Patterson says, and can also obtain an annual statement of disclosure to see where their information has been sent over the past year. If customers notice a mistake, they can fill out a form from the Federal Trade Commission and file a report with the police to help recover any illegitimate costs.

But this information isn’t typically made available to consumers when insurers publish their notifications; insurers instead focus on credit protection services. Patterson says that’s partly because the health care industry is less accustomed to handling data breaches than the banking sector, where more straightforward practices, such as data sharing with competitors, are standard.

“The communication that flows from the breached company to the public, the nuance of that communication is somewhat different than what you might see coming out of retail or financial services,” she says. “That’s sort of been-there-done-that, and the communication is a little more frank.”

© 2015 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

For more practical news and strategies on data security and HIPAA compliance, check out AIS's Report on Patient Privacy at the AIS Marketplace.