After sorting through options for health coverage and selecting a plan, consumers using the health insurance exchange will confront another, perhaps more difficult, task: finding an available doctor.

Primary care physicians have long been a scarce commodity in New Jersey and across the country, and many expect that increased patient demand, with hundreds of thousands of additional people searching for a doctor, will stress the system further.

There are 22,400 licensed physicians actively practicing in New Jersey, but just 3,500 work as primary care providers in family, geriatric and internal medicine, according to a new report by the N.J. Council of Teaching Hospitals. That’s about one primary doctor for every 2,500 residents in the state, the report said.

New Jersey needs 1,000 primary care doctors by 2020 to meet the demands for service of the Affordable Care Act and offset the number of anticipated retirees who will need care, according to the report.

The physician shortage also is fueled by the fact that medical students and residents are choosing not to practice in New Jersey because of the state’s high cost of living, expensive malpractice insurance and insufficient reimbursement from private and governmental insurance plans, said Deborah Briggs, the council’s president and CEO.

Most doctors don’t see the Affordable Care Act as a gold rush. Quite the opposite, said Ruth Schulze, president of the Medical Society of New Jersey. Doctors fear the demand for more treatment will exacerbate the problem of inadequate reimbursements, she said.

“We want to stay in medicine, but we need fair compensation to do that and provide appropriate care,” said Schulze, an OB/GYN in Bergen and Passaic counties. “I don’t think the government fully understands that.”

One proposed solution to the physician shortfall is to give advanced practice nurses more autonomy. APNs, also known as nurse practitioners, are licensed specialists who can treat patients and write some prescriptions with limited oversight from a doctor.

However a bill pending in the state Legislature, which would give APNs even more autonomy and authority to write prescriptions, is expected to face stiff opposition from doctors when the proposal comes up for debate, according to the state medical society, as well as doctor and nursing associations.

Hospitals and federally-qualified health centers, which provide care for many low-income families, are “grabbing APNs left and right,” said Pat Barnett, CEO for the New Jersey State Nurses Association. “They see them as a great way of providing excellent care.”

The number of nurse practitioners in the state is on the rise, from 5,500 last year to 6,250 this year, a 13.6 percent increase, Barnett said. “I think APNs will go a long way to addressing some of the shortage issues and how we deliver health care in different settings.”

Briggs said she hopes the APN issue doesn’t turn into a turf war. “Instead of worrying about pitting advanced practice nurses against primary care physicians, it’s my contention that if you look at what our needs are, we still don’t have enough,” she said.

Briggs predicts that, in the absence of enough health care providers, some people will seek out a specialist because there are far more of them. Or, they will go to the emergency room, where New Jersey has seen a 27 percent rise in traffic from 2000 to 2010.

“You will hear that people in Massachusetts couldn’t find primary care doctors and they were waiting. They weren’t waiting. The emergency room activity skyrocketed. People don’t wait when they need care,” she said.