David Bruton was summoned to coach Gary Kubiak’s office Tuesday afternoon to get the news he expected but nonetheless hated to hear.

The Broncos were placing the veteran safety on injured reserve. His season — the finest of his seven-year career — was over, with two regular season games left, and possibly a postseason.

Less than 24 hours earlier, Bruton learned he had fractured the fibula in his right leg during Sunday’s 34-27 loss at Pittsburgh. The injury, which he initially thought was just a bruise, didn’t preclude him from playing the remaining three quarters.

“It shows his passion and his love for the team and his leadership,” said safety Darian Stewart. “Any guy that can play with that much pain throughout the game, he’s got my respect.”

After meeting with Kubiak on Tuesday, Bruton fulfilled a commitment he made before he was injured: He hobbled over to the Broncos’ fieldhouse, where he joined a handful of teammates to give bicycles to children of the Boys & Girls Clubs of Metro Denver.

Bruton’s on-field duties were done. But his work behind the scenes goes on.

Bruton, selected by the Broncos in the fourth round of the 2009 NFL draft out of Notre Dame, is the second-most tenured player on the roster. A team captain the past three seasons, he transformed himself into one of the Broncos’ most vital players this season — in the defensive backfield, as well as on special teams — recording a career-best 42 tackles.

But to many within the organization and out, it has been his influence off the field that has really stood out, so much so that his teammates voted him their 2015 Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year nominee and the NFL Players Association voted him the Broncos’ 2016 Byron “Whizzer” White Award winner, both acknowledgments of his humanitarian and community-service work.

“That’s David,” Kubiak said. “You don’t have to ask David to do anything. He does everything on his own. He’s a special player, a special person.”

Childhood literacy

Last April, in partnership with Mile High United Way, Bruton launched David Bruton Foundation and Bruton’s Books, designed to create childhood literacy programs and provide books to students in grades K-3 in low-income areas of Colorado.

In the months since, the program has provided more than 2,000 books to four elementary schools — Kenton and Crawford in Aurora, and Columbine and Greenlee in Denver. Thousands more books are expected to be donated in the new year.

“You see so many sports figures who forget about the community,” said Christine Benero, the president and CEO of Mile High United Way. “That’s not across the board, but oftentimes that happens. And here you meet a man who has taken his position and really recognized how he can give kids that opportunity. He’s a pretty extraordinary human being.”

Tuesdays are labeled “days off” for the Broncos, meaning there aren’t any scheduled team activities. However, they’re anything but for Bruton. On most Tuesdays, he’s either reading at a local elementary school, attending bike giveaways or other events for children of the Boys & Girls Clubs of Metro Denver, or serving as a spokesperson for the Western Dairy Association’s “Fuel Up to Play 60” program, which aims to educate children on nutrition and fitness.

This past year he has wedded his passions of reading and cycling, hosting a Family Fun Ride and raffling off a customized Broncos Trek bicycle autographed by his teammates to raise additional funds for childhood-literacy programs. In September, he donated $26,000 to the cause.

The results? Already evident.

“There was a bike giveaway recently, and they wanted me to come help give away the bikes at one of the Boys & Girls Clubs,” Bruton recalled. “I believe eight or nine of those kids were from Greenlee, a school that I adopted under the Bruton’s Books. They got rewarded these bikes because they had improved their reading scores. That alone, seeing that immediate impact, is definitely something that has stuck with me and continues to motivate me.”

The amount raised through Bruton’s work recently swelled as his foundation received a $10,000 donation from Nationwide for his Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year nomination. Also, he would receive a combined $170,000 should he win the leaguewide Payton award, its accompanying social-media challenge and the league’s Whizzer award.

The potential earnings will go back into the community — toward building “Scholastic Reading Oases,” which are designated areas within the elementary schools Bruton’s Books has adopted to provide additional reading resources.



The work is personal

For Bruton, the work — be it with Bruton’s Books, the Boys & Girls Clubs, “Fuel Up to Play 60” or beyond — is personal.

A bookworm with a political science degree, he served as a substitute teacher in his hometown of Miamisburg, Ohio, during the 2011 lockout. Since turning pro, he has made inroads toward getting an advanced degree to ensure he’s set up when football ends.

And, as the father of a 10-year-old boy, the message, he said, can’t simply be relayed. It has to be lived.

“David, his educational background, he understands what the power of reading and the power of books is,” Benero said. “He understands that it sets you on a lifetime path, so he lives that every single day. He talks about it, he thinks about it.”

By Wednesday, Bruton’s name had been erased, temporarily, from the active roster. An “X” marked the spot of injury on his right leg as he began his rehabilitation and walked with crutches around the Broncos’ practice facility.

A new face will take his spot in the defensive backfield Monday night, when the Broncos host Cincinnati in a game that will go a long way toward determining the team’s postseason fate.

But Bruton isn’t leaving.

Off the field, he still has work to do.

“It’s important because I’m extremely blessed and it’s been instilled in me since I was a kid,” he said. “I don’t do it for the accolades. I don’t do it for the awards. I do it because I like seeing a positive change and a big difference being made.”

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or @NickiJhabvala