By Richard Tormey

East Amwell

To the editor:

Bernie Sanders is a devout Socialist and Donald Trump a businessman/celebrity with no political experience are capturing the attention of the American voters.

The political pundits, who have been totally wrong about both of these candidates from the start, have espoused layers of reasons for what's happening.

Let's not over analyze the obvious, an ever growing number of Americans are dissatisfied with the direction our country is headed. President Obama has, for the most part, been a failure on every level.

Entrenched positioning by both parties in Congress has worsened during the Obama administration due to total lack of leadership and partisan decision making.

There are fewer people in the work force in America than in the 1970s, yet we have a population of 100 million more people today than in the 70s.

We have more people receiving entitlements than any time in history. We just experienced the worst drop in the Stock Market beginning a new year in history, and an economy on the brink of another recession. We have racial tensions at the highest since the 1960s.

The Middle East is in total chaos, millions of Middle Eastern refugees flooding into Europe causing chaos, crime and political unrest, to say the least.

Increasing global terrorist attacks including here in American. The number and threat of terrorists has increased dramatically in the last three or four years. Social Security and Medicare on the brink of collapse, yet Obama and Congress have done nothing.

Our national debt will be $20 trillion by the time Obama leaves office, more than double what it was when he was elected. Tens of thousands of criminals released early from our prisons, dozens of terrorists being released from Gitmo, sanctuary cities refusing to obey federal law and arrest and report illegal, often criminal, immigrants.

Releasing over $100 billion to Iran, the world's largest supporter of terrorism, and trusting them to discontinue progress toward becoming a nuclear power? If this agreement was so good, why are parts of the agreement seen only by a United Nations committee and not even our own Congress?

Before the money was released Iran tested two long range missiles, strictly forbidden by the agreement. Obama told Americans that if Iran violated the agreement, at any time, he would reinstate the sanctions. Another lie, he did nothing, except release over $100 billion while Iran laughed all the way to the bank.

The lies about Obamacare from beginning to now when the middle class found out, you can't keep your doctor, you can't keep your prior health plan, and you won't save an average of $2,500 per year. Huge deductibles, co-pays, and skyrocketing premiums all earned President Obama, lie of the year.

So, do you really need some political pundits to tell you why the American electorate is looking for change outside the norm? We need leadership in the White House and it's time for term limits for all of Congress.