RICHMOND — One preseason game, 10 plays. Not a bountiful bouquet to choose from, but Redskins quarterback Robert Griffin III was pleased nonetheless.

Looking back at Thursday’s 23-6 preseason win against the New England Patriots, Griffin was left to assess his teammates more than himself. The starting offense played just the opening drive, which ended with a 39-yard field goal from Kai Forbath. Not scoring a touchdown was Griffin’s only regret from the drive.

“We executed well,” Griffin said. “Played well in situational football. Third downs; in the red zone. Moved the ball up and down the field. I know the 1s only got 10 plays of that, but it trickled on down. Everyone did well.”

SEE ALSO: Redskins welcome Jason Hatcher to practice, cut CB Peyton Thompson

The Redskins were without wide receivers DeSean Jackson (ankle) and Pierre Garcon (hamstring) in that game. Jackson participated in light individual drills at the start of practice Saturday. Garcon took part in most of practice — then stopped to catch more balls from the Jugs machine after practice — giving Griffin his top target back.

“Gradually do more and more as the week goes on,” Garcon said. “Just making sure there are no setbacks.”

Jackson and Garcon were not the only players limited Saturday. Tight end Jordan Reed was out with what coach Jay Gruden called a “24-hour virus.” Fellow tight end Mike Caussin has a sore knee. Running back Chris Thompson sprained his ankle in the preseason game. Roy Helu Jr. has a mild knee sprain, and Gruden said Helu is day-to-day. None of them practiced.

PHOTOS: Redskins-Patriots preseason opener

Cornerback Tracy Porter (shoulder) didn’t play in the preseason opener and is unlikely to play in the second preseason game, as well, though Gruden said, “I think he’s ready to play.”

As the Redskins head toward the end of their time in Richmond — things wrap up here Tuesday — Griffin said having the New England Patriots in town last week was beneficial.

“Practicing against a different team was a new experience,” Griffin said. “I think it breaks up camp. I know the team really liked it. Come back out here again (Saturday) and got to go against our guys again. It kind of just keeps you on your toes, go through your playbook; know how to go against different defenses. The Pats play a totally different style than we do.”

Facing his teammates Saturday, Griffin at one point completed a deep touchdown pass to Aldrick Robinson, who beat DeAngelo Hall.

Bacarri Rambo and Brandon Meriweather were at safety because Ryan Clark (hamstring) remained out. Gruden said he wasn’t sure how much longer Clark will be out.

Gruden also went on to match Griffin’s upbeat analysis from the limited sample for the first-string offense Thursday. The Redskins were run-heavy in their play selections. They ran 44 times and passed just 26.

“I liked the way our backs were finishing runs,” Gruden said. ” I liked the way our receivers were blocking.”

Defensively, he was equally pleased. That’s not a surprise following an easy preseason win with camp just more than two weeks old. Optimism is free and readily available.

“I was impressed with the way we ran around (on defense),” Gruden said. “Flew around the football and we played some good situations.

“We’re trying to adopt a physical style of play, obviously. Offense and defense, protect the quarterback, dominant run blocking, and obviously stopping the run and getting after the passer are key elements.”