On a recent afternoon, Sebastien Lagree knelt down and plucked a spring rigged up to an elliptical machine. He climbed aboard the Frankenstein-ian creation, one of many scattered about the Burbank, California, headquarters of his company, Lagree Fitness, which occupies a warehouse that brings to mind a mad scientist’s lab.

“On these machines here, I’m experimenting having a mix of static and variable tension,” he said, pedaling slowly. “It’s like, out there, to drive cars, you have gas, diesel and electricity. Think about another way of powering a car that’s clean energy, that’s abundant, it’s the perfect kind of energy you want. That’s what I’m working on.”

This is how Lagree spends many of his days: toying with tension and figuring out how to better use it in a piece of exercise equipment he invented, the Megaformer, the basis of a core-burning workout that blends Pilates, cardio and strength training.

A wobbly carriage that can be pushed and pulled, lunged on and squatted down to, the machine challenges those atop it in ways that traditional Pilates may not.

“It brings to Pilates what Pilates was lacking,” said Amanda Freeman, founder of the New York-based Megaformer studio SLT, which stands for Strengthen Lengthen Tone. “I always wanted to do Pilates, but I felt like I needed to do another workout after. I didn’t sweat.”

Over the last 13 years, Lagree has built something of an empire. He has sold thousands of machines, which cost upward of $7,000 each, to the more than 250 fitness studios that license his method. With the promise of sculpturing lean, long muscles, his workout has attracted celebrity devotees, including Sofía Vergara and Kim Kardashian. Even Michelle Obama is a fan.

But Lagree exhibits none of the rah-rah enthusiasm of a typical fitness guru. He is a former aspiring actor who took up personal training to pay the bills (“I thought being a personal trainer was worse than being a car salesman”) and calls his success something of a fluke. He also hasn’t worked out in a year.

“You have to understand that I’m a lazy guy,” he said. “Nothing here happened because I masterminded it.”

When acting jobs didn’t materialize, he applied to be a personal trainer at Angel City Gym in West Hollywood, California, and was thrust into teaching Pilates, a form of exercise he had never heard of.

“I thought this was the biggest scam ever,” he said. “I come from a background that physical fitness needs to be exertive, you need to sweat, you need to be sore.”

So Lagree riffed on traditional Pilates moves and developed a workout that made him, in his words, “a sensation overnight.”