Today in Maryland, President Obama mocked and ripped Rep. Michele Bachmann for her claim that Obamacare will literally kill women, children, and seniors.

Video:

The president was mocking his favorite Republican lies and quotes about Obamcare, when he called out a gem from Michele Bachmann. Obama said, “I mean these are quotes. I am not making this stuff up. And here’s one more that I’ve heard. I like this one. We have to, and I am quoting here. We have to repeal this failure before it literally kills women, kills children, kills senior citizens. Now that I have to say that that one was from six months ago. I just want to point out that we still have women. We still have children, and we still have senior citizens.”

Here is the original video of Bachmann making her outrageous claim:

Six months ago, Rep. Bachmann said, “The American people, especially vulnerable women, vulnerable children, vulnerable senior citizens, now get to pay more and get less. That’s why we’re here because we’re saying let’s repeal this failure before it literally kills women, kills children, kills senior citizens. Let’s not do that! Let’s love people, let’s care about people. Let’s repeal it now while we can.”

President Obama closed his remarks with a prediction that after Obamacare becomes popular, Republicans will start referring to it as the Affordable Care Act, and claim that they voted for it. It might seem like Bachmann is low hanging fruit, but when it comes to the ACA, she represents the mentality of the House and some Senate Republicans. These people will do and say anything to deceive the American people about healthcare reform.

Rep. Bachmann’s claim was easily debunked. The Affordable Care Act has yet to kill a single woman, child, or senior citizen. The president did not name names as he quoted Republican Obamacare lies, but he didn’t have to. His point was that these people are intentionally lying in order to deny tens of millions of people access to healthcare. At one point during today’s speech, he directly called out Republicans for lying about the ACA.

President Obama is confronting the lies, and showing America that the Republicans are wrong on healthcare reform. Their predictions of death panels, higher insurance rates, and mass unemployment are all wrong. None of this is happening. The ACA debate has matured to the point where supporters now have data and facts on their side. The impact of healthcare reform isn’t a matter of subjective speculation anymore. The data is coming, and Republicans are being proven wrong.

Obama isn’t tolerating the lies any longer. He totally destroyed Michele Bachmann, and her preposterous Obamacare misinformation.