Ruth Furnace

NORFOLK, Va. (WAVY) — At the age of 54, the once vibrant Ruth Furnace, engaging, fun, full of life, now lives in the clutches of ALS.

As if the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, or ALS, wasn’t enough, Ruth’s medical conditions also include: Hypothyroidism and diabetes; she has a tracheostomy, is on a ventilator, is bowel/bladder incontinent, is bed bound, unable to speak, has had multiple emergency room visits in last year, and is on oxygen.

The ALS began three years ago in Ruth’s pinky finger.

Photos: Man faces uphill battle with wife’s care

Her only communication now is by blinking words using the Tobii eye gazer. It is a slow and tedious process, and only her eyes let you know she’s there, thinking, but trapped, and so is her husband Chris. “Basically, I’m a prisoner in my home. When I come home I cannot leave to go anywhere. I am trapped in the home unless there is someone who can relieve me.”

Chris is Ruth’s primary caregiver, and admits he’s not qualified to serve Ruth’s complex medical conditions and needs, nor is family friend Dayle Alligood, who watches Ruth while Chris is working. “I love my wife, and I will do this for her, as she would do the same for me.”

The desired outcome for the Furnace Family is to get full-time home care, but the rules or conditions set by the insurance company are denying that.

Chris says he has the coverage he needs to bring in full-time, skilled help to take care of Ruth. He has Home Health Care coverage through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois which includes Private Duty Nurse, and he has a Skilled Nursing Care clause. “I mean we all pay a lot for insurance, and we expect something for it. They should be able to tell me what they can do, but they have done nothing.”

After failing to navigate the insurance maze to get the benefits he thinks he deserves, Chris contacted 10 on Your Side.

When asked if she is frustrated by her current situation, Ruth nodded yes.

10 On Your Side started working the phones, reaching out to Chris’s insurance Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois, emailing, getting reviews of the Furnace case, looking at their policy, some of it head scratch confusing.

Mary Ann Schultz, who is a Sr. Manager for Media Relations Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois, replied to 10 On Your Side’s requests for an explanation, in an email. It simply stated:

“Mrs. Furnace does not meet the medical criteria for private duty nursing per her plan benefit.”

Not so says Scott Golden, an ALS advocate for the ALS Association DC/MD/VA. “A doctor could validate there is skilled coordinated care necessary, and go through their reasons and that is covered under their policy.”

In denying service, Blue Cross writes the reason is Ruth is “without any clinical likelihood of improvement of condition.”

Golden response to this was, “They are not giving you the benefit you deserve, and therefore you can’t get the other benefit which is the Medicaid benefit that you are entitled to. That is really a Catch 22.”

As bad luck would have it, Ruth Furnace was admitted to the intensive care unit at Sentara Norfolk General Hospital last Tuesday, with a urinary tract infection. Eight days later, she remains hospitalized.

Chris blames Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois, “It could have been avoided because the problem she has would have been seen by a skilled nurse.”

After 10 On Your Side started this investigation, Blue Cross Blue Shield had a change of heart and approved ten more Skilled Nursing Visits.

Golden said, “Upon further review I think the insurance company with some persuasion will actually cover what they are supposed to, but they won’t make it easy for anybody.”

However, Blue Cross Blue Shield goes further, and has promised to the Furnaces, “Skilled nursing visits are approved until there is approval of a Private Duty Nurse.”

Chris adds, “I want to thank you very much that you have gone to the extent to solve this problem.”

In the big picture of the ALS community Scott Golden thinks stories like these are important to connect the dots for people like the Furnaces. “Unfortunately, this is typical. I am glad you have taken the interest to give the ALS community a voice. Hopefully, someone will listen and there will be progress in this area.”

Additional Resources:

Information on insurance for individuals with ALS

The ALS Association

Under the Affordable Care Act, policies legally have to provide uniform coverage. Scott Golden provided these tips for families battling coverage for ALS:

Always get your outline of benefits. Make sure you have an advocate to help. Groups like the ALS Association, insurance brokers, HR specialists at your company and any passionate person who knows insurance and wants to help. Just because the insurance company says No at first, does not mean they will say No later. If a denial does not make sense it probably does not make sense. Don’t quit. The insurance companies expect you will. Patience is a virtue-things do not happen quickly in insurance, but things happen….Hang in there. Don’t be ignorant about your benefits; this is very important.

For ALS patients, review the benefits that will be most important and know what standards are to get things paid. Get your providers on board before seeking care so you are ready for the battle.