INDIANAPOLIS — Frigid air that snapped decades-old records will make venturing outside dangerous for a second straight day, this time spreading to southern and eastern parts of the U.S. and keeping many schools and businesses shuttered. Meanwhile, residents driven from their homes by power outages in the Midwest worried about burst pipes.

Monday’s subzero temperatures broke records in Chicago, which set a record for the date at minus 16, and Fort Wayne, Ind., where the mercury fell to 13 below. Records also fell in Oklahoma and Texas, and wind chills across the region were 40 below and colder. Officials in states like Indiana already struggling with high winds and more than a foot of snow urged residents to stay home if they could.

In New York, the cold broke an 1896 record when the mercury fell to 4 degrees by 8 a.m.

“The cold is the real killer here,” Indianapolis Mayor Greg Ballard said Monday as he asked schools and businesses to remain closed another day. “In 10 minutes you could be dead without the proper clothes.”

The polar air will next invade the East and South on Tuesday, bringing with it the prospect of more records falling. Highs in the single digits were expected in Georgia and Alabama, and wind chill warnings stretched as far south as Florida, with forecasts calling for minus 10 in Atlanta and minus 12 in Baltimore.

In downtown Louisville, Ky., where wind chills dropped to 22 below zero Monday, John Tyler gathered with friends at a McDonald’s. The self-described homeless man spent Sunday night sleeping on the street.

Dressed in a sweatshirt, two coats and a black woolen cap, Tyler said there’s no way to adequately prepare for this kind of cold.

Two women try to hail a taxi in NYC early Tuesday morning Photo: G.N. Miller The Chicago skyline is seen as the arctic sea smoke rises off Lake Michigan in Chicago. Photo: Reuters Daryl Daugherty clears the sidewalk in front of his home Monday in Carmel, Ind., as temperatures dropped to lower than -10. Photo: AP A Crestwood motorist tries to get his car moving along Watson Road in St. Louis as heavy snow falls on Sunday. Photo: AP/St. Louis Post-Dispatch Lee Tuttle, 66, takes a break from blowing snow off of his driveway in Flint, Mich. Sunday. Photo: AP/The Flint Journal A car is covered in snow Sunday in Zionsville, Ind. Photo: AP Cars drive on Interstate 44 in Fenton, Mo. Snow-covered roads and high winds created dangerous driving conditions from Missouri to Delaware on Sunday. Photo: AP/St. Louis Post-Dispatch The Chicago skyline and a frozen Lake Michigan as seen from the Museum Campus in Chicago on Sunday. Photo: AP A NOAA satellite image taken Monday, shows a storm cutting up the East Coast. Photo: AP/Weather Underground A car is left abandoned in St. Louis. The St. Louis area has been hit with 10.6 inches of snow in six hours and bitter cold of up to -40 degrees. Photo: UPI Pedestrians walk in the streets as heavy snow falls in St. Louis. Photo: UPI A snow sweeper clears the area of snow around the Rogers Hornsby statue in front of Busch Stadium in St. Louis. Photo: UPI A plane skidded off a runway after landing at Kennedy Airport. No injuries were reported. Photo: Reuters A blanket of fog covers Lake Michigan along the Chicago shoreline as temperatures dove below zero and wind chills were expected to reach 40 to 50 below zero. Photo: AP John Brower has snow in his eye lashes after running to work in the frigid -20 weather in Minneapolis. Photo: AP/The Star Tribune Ad Up Next Backpedal on ObamaCare's ' 7 million' :0 WASHINGTON — The White House on Monday downplayed its stated... 15 View Slideshow Back Continue Share this: Facebook

Twitter

Google

WhatsApp

Email

Copy

Advertisement 'In 10 minutes you could be dead': 'Polar vortex' freezes US

“How we’re dealing with it? You can’t deal with it,” Tyler said. “There’s no way you can deal with it.”

Forecasters said some 187 million people in all could feel the effects of the “polar vortex” by the time it spreads across the country. Tennessee utility officials braced for near-record power demand, while Ohio prepared for its coldest temperatures in decades.

PJM Interconnection, who operates the power grid supplying energy to more than 61 million people in parts of the Mid-Atlantic, Midwest and South, has asked users to conserve electricity Tuesday because of the cold, especially in the morning and late afternoon.

Recovery will be the focus in several Midwestern states Tuesday, since the subzero cold followed inches of snow and high winds that made traveling treacherous — especially on interstates in Indiana and Illinois — and was being blamed for numerous deaths in Michigan, Illinois, Indiana and Ohio.

Illinois Gov. Pat Quinn and Indiana Gov. Mike Pence issued disaster declarations, paving the way to request federal aid.

More than 30,000 customers in Indiana were without power late Monday night. Utility crews worked to restore electricity as temperatures plunged into the negative teens, but officials cautioned some people could be in the cold and dark for days.

“My kids are ready to go home, and I’m ready too,” said 41-year-old Timolyn Johnson-Fitzgerald, of Indianapolis, who faced a second night sleeping on cots at a Red Cross shelter with her three children, ages 11, 15, and 18.

More than 500 Amtrak passengers spent the night on three stopped trains headed for Chicago because of blowing and drifting snow in north-central Illinois. A spokesman said the trains — coming from Los Angeles, San Francisco and Quincy, Ill. — are operating on tracks owned by BNSF railroad and crews are working to reopen the tracks.

Bob Oravec, a meteorologist at the Weather Prediction Center in College Park, Md., said the blast of frigid air raised concerns that roads wet from melted snow would freeze over.

“In Maryland, we lost a lot of the snowpack and a lot of water is draining off, and the temperatures are dropping fast,” Oravec said.

But there are signs things are returning to normal.

JetBlue Airways, which stopped all scheduled flights to and from New York and Boston on Monday, planned to resume some flights Tuesday morning. Southwest Airlines operations in Chicago resumed Monday night, even if it was, as a spokesman for the Texas-based airline called it, “a trickle.”

The Minnesota Zoo announced it would reopen to the public Tuesday. State lawmakers in Indiana planned to kick off their 2014 legislative session after a day’s postponement.

And warmer temperatures — at least, near or above freezing — are in store for the Midwest. Indianapolis should reach 27 degrees on Wednesday, and other parts of the central U.S. could climb above freezing later in the week.

Even International Falls, Minn., had something to look forward to. Wind chills dropped as low as -55 Monday, but were expected to rebound to 25 below Tuesday. By Friday, the low was expected to be 5 to 10 above zero, Oravec said.

Until then, take advice for dealing with frostbite- and hypothermia-inducing cold from Anthony Bickham in St. Paul, Minn., who jumped around while waiting for the bus Monday.

“You gotta keep it moving,” Bickham said. “Stay warm at … all costs, you know.