FAIRBANKS, Alaska (AP) - Randall Aragon’s career in law enforcement has spanned 36 years and taken him all over the United States. After a childhood spent in New York City’s infamous Hell’s Kitchen neighborhood and a stint in the Army, Fairbanks’ new chief of police has seen it all. Still, there is one aspect of his new home Aragon finds truly surprising.

“People are helpful and kind and friendly. I’m not saying that in my last city they weren’t friendly, but this is really to the nth degree as far as people really being genuinely kind and considerate,” Aragon said. “I like what I’ve seen of Fairbanks. The Golden Heart City - it’s not myth. It’s realistic, and it’s there.”

Aragon took over the Fairbanks Police Department in late November, leaving his previous position as police chief in La Marque, Texas, a town of about 15,000 just 50 miles south of Houston. He said it was his experience growing up in New York that pushed him toward a career in law enforcement.

“New York City was rough back then, pre-Rudolph Giuliani. It was really a hard-core city with a lot of crime and neighborhood decay,” Aragon said. “I saw the other side of the coin. I said, ‘I can make a difference by doing the right things right.’”

Aragon spent 10 years in various sheriff’s departments before “making the leap” to small-town police chief, which he has done for the past 26 years. Before working in Texas, he served as a police chief in North Carolina, South Carolina and Arkansas.

Aragon said he has many ideas for the Fairbanks Police Department, but he’s not about to try to change the world in a day.

“I’m a slow mover on making changes - I’ve learned from experience. I always use this analogy: you can’t turn a battleship around on a dime. You got to go slow or else you’re going to lose people in the shuffle, and I want everybody to come along with me,” Aragon said.

Aragon subscribes to a management theory that embraces a four-phase system of getting to know his staff, assessing the needs of the department and presenting them to the mayor, implementing these changes and refining them.

“It’s reasonable; it’s methodical. You don’t want to fly by the seat of your pants in any way. You want to make sure that you’ve got a system,” Aragon said.

Aragon is almost done talking to all 53 of his staff members and finds many of them are “chomping at the bit to do things.” He’s “very impressed” with what he sees and is encouraged by the interest some of his officers have shown in the community-based policing program he plans to implement. This type of policing goes beyond the ways police departments have traditionally dealt with crime, Aragon said.

“A lot of departments, still to this day, are doing what we call ‘reactive policing.’ I call it ‘call the police, send a car, make an arrest, call the police, send a car, make an arrest.’ You’re not fixing the root cause. We need to go back to the thinking of preventing a crime from occurring in the first place,” Aragon said.

Aragon said he’s already identified the “movers and the shakers” in his department who will start this new outreach program.

“Community-based policing it’s not just serving food and having midnight basketball games. It’s ‘What are the problems?’ Lets get out of the car and work on them, and let’s get the community to know we’re actually there trying to solve them, and then telling them what we did,” Aragon said.

Though officers can’t walk a beat because the area is too large, Aragon plans to assign them to work defined areas and get to really know the community members. This will include officers visiting residents in their homes to discuss their needs and issues. He plans to start the program in South Fairbanks, an area he is “really concerned” about.

“I hadn’t been here three days and I realized where there is attention needed,” Aragon said. “You’ve gotta start somewhere.”

Aragon already has reached out to South Fairbanks community leaders and is encouraged by their response.

“The ones I’ve talked to in that area are really happy that we’re considering them,” Aragon said.

___

Information from: Fairbanks (Alaska) Daily News-Miner, http://www.newsminer.com