Despite some restless energy on the left and some emerging signs of strength from her Democratic competitors, Hillary Clinton remains the odds-on favorite to be the Democratic Party's presidential nominee in 2016.

So what will she do if she wins the White House?

On domestic policy, Clinton has struck a decidedly populist tone, emphasizing issues like college affordability, income inequality, and workplace policy reform to demonstrate her attention to Americans' basic economic concerns. She's stood behind the Affordable Care Act, arguing the Republicans would undo a law that's extended health insurance coverage to millions. And she's talking tough on Wall Street, accusing the GOP of having "mass amnesia" about the financial deregulation that preceded the last recession.

"Everyday Americans need a champion," she memorably said when she launched her campaign in April, "and I want to be that champion."

Her approach to economic issues like Wall Street reform and to social issues like gay rights and criminal justice reform is considerably more progressive than that pursued by her husband, former President Bill Clinton, during the 1990s - a fact that may have more to do with the passage of time than anything else.

On foreign policy, she's generally stood behind the record of President Obama, whom she served as secretary of state. She backs the nuclear deal with Iran and the U.S. rapprochement with Cuba, for example. But she's also outlined some differences with Mr. Obama, notably on the question of whether the U.S. should arm Syrian rebels fighting Islamic extremists and a repressive central government.

While her campaign risks getting sidetracked by the continued focus on her use of a private email server as secretary of state, which has generated an avalanche of GOP attacks on her character and judgment, it's obvious Clinton's team would rather focus on her policy proposals. In the months since she announced her bid, she's delivered substantive speeches on green energy, higher education reform, foreign policy, and criminal justice reform, to name just a few.

With that in mind, here's a look at what Hillary Clinton stands for.