Ursinus College Forum • Josh Shapiro, a Democrat and chairman of the Montgomery County Board of Commissioners and a former member of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives for the 153rd district • Ryan Costello, chairman of the Chester County Board of Commissioners, a former East Vincent Supervisor, Ursinus alum and a Republican running to replace James Gerlach in representing the 6th Congressional District • T.J. Rooney, a Democrat and former seven-term member of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives and former chair of the Democratic State Committee of Pennsylvania • Alan Novak, the longest serving chairman of the Pennsylvania Republican Party, an Ursinus alum and the chairman of the college’s board of trustees. • The moderator was Nell McCormack Abom, who in addition to a long career in communications directed media relations for two governors, one a Republican and one a Democrat.

COLLEGEVILLE — No American needs a degree in political science to know that politics in this country polarized at nearly every level.

But perhaps the more important question is — why?; and, more important than that, what do we do about it?

And here’s where a local college can be helpful (no degree required).

Because that’s where those were the questions put to four professional politicians brave enough to take the stage at a Wednesday forum at Ursinus College titled “Polarization in Politics: How can we build consensus and civility?”

Advertisement

There may be hope for American democracy after all, as there was plenty of civility to be found on stage Wednesday night and a fair amount of consensus as well — including about how you reach a consensus in politics.

Chester County Commissioners Chairman Ryan Costello and Montgomery County commissioners’ Chairman Josh Shapiro both said too many politicians conflate consensus with “centrism,” the idea that the only way to reach consensus is to have no positions too far to the left or the right, which Costello described as “let’s just meet in the middle and call it a day. They key to consensus is not centrism, but the tone with which you govern.”

“A lot of people think you need to be a moderate to reach consensus, but its possible to be a hard-core conservative or an ultra liberal and get something done,” Shapiro said.

He pointed with pride to the fact that Montgomery County was the first in Pennsylvania to recognize same-sex marriage, but he suspected there was a member of his board who did not agree with that position, so he supported that effort outside of the framework within which they had to work together.

“But I did not hold press conferences in the meeting room, I did not spend county money on promoting that cause that would force him to vote on it,” said Shapiro. “It’s a matter of having respect for the people you work with.”

In many ways, T.J. Rooney — a former member of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives — and Alan Novak — the longest serving chairman of the Republican Party — said consensus and civility are each key to the survival of the other — civility helps reach consensus and reaching consensus repeatedly encourages civility.

“Hey, elbows are sharp and campaigns are tough, but what’s changed is what happens after the election is over,” Rooney said.

He evoked the memory of former House Speaker Tip O’Neill and President Ronald Reagan: “They would fight like crazy, but at the end of the day, they went into a room, had a drink and worked out a deal.”

Novak said that increased partisanship decreases effectiveness. “You can pass things on a party-line vote, but it gets harder and harder,” he said, adding “frankly, I think that’s why the Affordable Care Act has been given such a rough ride because about half the country opposed it.”

But the public’s opinion is not always enough.

Shapiro recalled that during his time in Harrisburg, he was working to get a bill passed that would ban texting-while-driving, “which about 92 percent of all Pennsylvanians agreed with.”

But a Republican erected a procedural obstacle “not because he didn’t agree with the bill, but because of political reasons and it took another Republican, (state Rep.) Mike Vereb to stand up against his party’s wishes and speak out against that,” Shapiro recalled.

Vereb, himself now chairman of the Montgomery County Republican Committee, was in the audience and once again stood up, this time to ask the panelists to address the issue of money in politics.

Shapiro said he supported campaign finance reform in the past and even sponsored several bills, but now thinks that the reform measures have back-fired and taken the choice and responsibility for what gets said away from the politicians themselves.

Rooney and Novak agreed, saying that the Political Action Committees came from political reforms of the 1970s.

“Do you really think if you change the rules, a professional political operative is just going to say ‘O.K., you got me, I give up’?” asked Novak. “Their job is to win.”

Better, said Rooney, Novak and Shapiro, to have the politician be the ones who accept contributions, but use today’s technology to make it immediately transparent “and let people know right away who you’re taking money from. There might be a union that wants to contribute to a Democrat, but doing so would create some problems. Right now, there are one hundred ways to help without connecting the union’s name to the contribution,” Novak said.

Better to no longer allow anonymous donations, they said, and make the whole thing transparent.

“Sunshine is the best disinfectant,” said Rooney.

Steve Cickay, a Democrat running for the 10th district State Senate seat, asked the panelists their positions on term-limits and, after some sharp questioning from Abom, said he would pledge to serve only one term.

But Rooney and Novak both said that the more experienced legislators are the ones with the best potential to get things done and to be able to over-rule the staff in Harrisburg who, Rooney said, “are the ones who really run the show.”

“When I first got elected, I was a real bed-wetter and I worried about getting reelected even though I was in a pretty safe district and it wasn’t until I had been there for a while that I didn’t care if I lost, I just wanted to do the right thing,” Rooney said.

The phenomena of a “safe district” was also explored.

Politicians who are not worried about getting reelected feel less compunction to do things that might not appeal to a homogenous home district, said Novak.

Costello called the gerrymandering of new election districts “a cancer on Democracy.”

“If I get more Democrats in my district, then someone else is getting my Republicans and if someone else gets my Republicans, I don’t have to worry so much about acting on things that might please Republican voters,” said Rooney.

Politics is also becoming more partisan, the panelists said, because the country is becoming more partisan.

“Polarization comes from the intersection of culture, politics, government, social media and the 24-7 news cycle,” Costello said.

“Politics is always catching up to culture and right now people are on data overload,” said Novak. “There are so many places to get information that it’s exhausting to get the information you need for an informed perspective, so human beings fall back on what’s familiar.”

Forum moderator Neil McCormack Abom noted that some studies have shown that social media encourages people living in “silos,” where they only interact with people who share the same beliefs.”

That makes it even more incumbent upon the political parties to broaden their base, said Novak.

“The parties have to become more diverse, I think the demographics of this country are screaming that pretty loud and clear,” he said.

“The party that is going to become dominant,” said Costello, “is the one that can appeal to independents because right now, the fastest growing party is the party of ‘I don’t like either of them,’” he said.

One way to do that might be to allow independents to vote in primaries like in some other states, said Novak, who noted Pennsylvania’s closed primary system “disenfranchises 20 percent of the voters” and encourages candidates who appeal to each party’s extremes.

“If you’re going to run being the ‘I build consensus’ candidate, then you better be in a safe district because otherwise you will face a primary challenge from the left or the right,” he said.

But Shapiro disagreed and said primaries are for “a party to pick their candidate” and said it would be better to attract more independent-minded people into one of the two parties.

“The truth lies somewhere in the middle of all of us,” said Rooney. “Unless we hear from the middle, we just hear from the extremes.”