Guns

2000 “I generally oppose gun control, but I support the ban on assault weapons and I also support a slightly longer waiting period to purchase a gun.” — “The America We Deserve,” by Donald J. Trump

MARCH 3 Asked about the assault ban in a G.O.P. debate on Fox News: “I don’t support it anymore. I do not support the ban on assault —” [Audience boos.]

Syrian refugees

SEPT. 2015 On the U.S. taking them in: “I hate the concept of it, but on a humanitarian basis with what’s happening, you have to.” — on Fox News

NOV. 2015 “When the Syrian refugees are going to start pouring into this country, we don’t know if they’re ISIS, we don’t know if it’s a Trojan horse.” If he wins the presidency, the refugees are “going back, we can’t have them.” — on ABC News; campaign rally

Hillary Clinton

2012 “Hillary Clinton I think is a terrific woman. I am biased because I have known her for years. … I really like her and her husband both a lot. I think she really works hard.” — on Fox News

2015 “Hillary Clinton was the worst secretary of state in the history of the United States. … The world blew up around us. We lost everything, including all relationships. There wasn’t one good thing that came out of that administration or her being secretary of state.” — on MSNBC

Health care

2000 “I’m a conservative on most issues but a liberal on this one … We must have universal health care.” — from “The America We Deserve”

2016 “It is not enough to simply repeal this terrible legislation,” referring to Obamacare. “We will work with Congress to make sure we have a series of reforms ready for implementation that follow free market principles” on health care. — from campaign website

Abortion rights

1999 “Well, look, I’m very pro-choice. I hate the concept of abortion. I hate it. I hate everything it stands for. I cringe when I listen to people debating the subject. But you still — I just believe in choice.” — on “Meet the Press”

FEB. 22, 2016 “You know, many years ago, I’d be asked the question, and as a developer and a real estate person and as a business person, I was, like, never asked a question about pro-life. And they should leave that whole statement because I said, you know, I really don’t like it. They don’t show that. But I’m pro-life. [Inaudible] When I said this, I guess I said pro-choice.” — on Fox News

MARCH 30 Women who get abortions should be punished. — on MSNBC

MARCH 30 Only doctors should be punished; women are victims. — from campaign website

Taxing the rich

1999 “I would tax people of wealth, of great wealth, people over $10 million, by 14.25 percent.” — on MSNBC

2015 “This is actually a tax reduction, I — a big tax reduction, including for the upper income.” — on his tax plan at a news conference

MAY 5 Asked about his tax cuts for billionaires on CNBC: “I am not necessarily a huge fan of that,” adding that his tax plans would be negotiated later.

Torture

MARCH 4 “I will not order a military officer to disobey the law. It is clear that as president I will be bound by laws just like all Americans, and I will meet those responsibilities.”

MARCH 3 In G.O.P. debate: “We should go tougher than waterboarding.” Pressed about whether military officers would carry out orders like killing terrorists’ family members, a violation of the Geneva Conventions, Trump replied, “If I say ‘do it,’ they’re going to do it.”