An eight-hour YouTube video of an Irish waterfall helps people across the world sleep better — and reduce their stress.

While the term “Irish waterfall” may have different connotations on Urban Dictionary, it turns out to be an actual waterfall in Ireland that may help insomnia sufferers overcome their sleeping problems. Who knew that the soothing chirping of birds and the gentle cascade of natural water tucked away in the Irish countryside could help people focus better, sleep better, and feel better?

One YouTube video — containing eight hours of waterfall footage — makes all the difference. Posted by visual artist Johnnie Lawson, who is from County Leitrim in Ireland, the Irish waterfall helps fight insomnia all over the world; it’s also now part of a clinical trial at several London hospitals to determine whether it can help intensive care unit (ICU) patients in preventing post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), according to the BBC.

“This is one of a series of videos designed for various needs — as a calming sound to play in the background while studying or as a soothing sound to play while you sleep,” Lawson writes in the YouTube description. “These videos can be used for many relaxation requirements.”

Lawson was surprised when people from all over the world began sending him messages about how much it helped them relax, meditate, sleep, or study. “People who were finding it difficult to sleep began writing to me from all over the world — North Korea, the Central African Republic, Beijing and across the U.K.,” he told BBC. “They started leaving me messages, saying the recordings were helping to relieve their insomnia. I’ve even had people watching my videos from inside the Vatican.”

The researchers running the trial, at University College Hospital, University College London, and the Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre in London, hope that nature sounds can help bring people calm, stress relief, and sounder sleep.

Indeed, being outdoors — and immersed in nature — has been shown to reduce stress, depression, and fatigue levels. Nature also has a positive effect on people’s ability to focus, think creatively, and enjoy life. So next time you need a dose of nature, plug in to the Irish waterfall.

The inspiration behind the video? “I consider myself lucky to live in the unexplored and peaceful hills of County Leitrim,” Lawson told the BBC.