The cartoonist’s homepage, greenvilleonline.com/opinion/roger-harvell-cartoons (Photo: Roger Harvell , The Greenville News )

Caring employees

We travel a fair amount for leisure as well as for business so we have many experiences with Transportation Security Administration. However, the experience we had on our last trip from Southwest Florida International Airport is one I feel I compelled to share.

We travel to Sanibel quite frequently and on this day, we were flying home from RSW to Minneapolis. On this particular trip, we were bringing home a cat from a local shelter in Fort Myers that we adopted that day.

Not only is "Iris" high strung, we learned, we swear she is half wild. Needless to say, having her only a couple hours and now needing to travel with her had my anxiety level through the roof. I was in fear that if somehow she escaped through security, she didn't know me well enough to come to me.

When we arrived at security, I explained to one of the TSA agents my fear and how worried I was. I was led and helped through the line so that the time the cat was out of her carrier was an absolute minimum. I was so very impressed with the kindness, the empathy and the compassion that TSA staff had that I insisted on having their names; Jacklyn and Rehan.

Jacklyn and Rehan were absolutely wonderful and I cannot thank them enough for the level of professionalism and customer service they displayed. Not only are they terrific at what they do, they are just good people.

There are so many reasons we absolutely enjoy our time spent in Southwest Florida and now we can list the TSA staff as another reason!

Tanya Plonske Seneff, Rogers, Minn.

More education

Education is like a box of crayons, many colors that make a beautiful picture. Andy Marlette's editorial cartoon "With Liberty & Justice for All," Aug. 19, is a setback to education and a slap in the face to all that has been done for equal rights in the classroom.

Instead of reporting so much about crime in the schools, The News-Press would do well to report a little more about the positive side of the education of our children.

At one time, an entire page was devoted to what was happening in our schools. That was slowly changed to a small article here or there in amongst the crime reporting. A good example was the small amount of coverage of the first day of school (a couple of pictures). There are many good stories about our kids and their education that need to be told regardless of what race or creed the students involved are.

After 20 years of doing street ministry, I know that color does not rub off, just attitudes. Maybe The News-Press should get out of its building and walk the streets a little. Then they would know what life is all about. It would be a good education for them. If you read this, thank a teacher.

Fred Matthews, North Fort Myers

Half truths

Re: "Time to stop lying to people about our water woes, Ray," Matt Caldwell, Aug. 20. Rep. Matt Caldwell's rebuttal of Ray Judah's guest opinion ("Sugar supersedes people on Caldwell priority list," Aug. 16) criticizing his voting record as being influenced by Big Sugar is a deceptive litany of half truths.

Rep. Caldwell's sponsorship of the Everglades Bill with a rider that favored Big Sugar is the kind of quid pro quolegislation that is preventing significant progress with cleaning up Florida's polluted waters and Everglades.

Mr. Caldwell tries to disguise Big Sugar's influence by comparing coastal urban runoff on the same scale with agriculture. Agriculture contributes far more runoff and pollutant loads annually.

Mr. Caldwell says in his rebuttal that his legislative record has given Southwest Florida "a real seat at the table" and that he was responsible for bringing the "first ever water quality project to the Caloosahatchee." If he is referring to the Lake Hicpochee Restoration then it was part of a deal that enabled Big Sugar to sell a few hundred acres in Hendry County to the South Florida Water Management District in exchange for a 30 year no-bid lease for private sugar production on thousands of acres of state owned land in Palm Beach County.

Mr. Caldwell got his "real seat at the table" because of these kinds of deals.

Recent campaign ads by Mr. Caldwell claim he puts Lee County first yet he voted for HB 703 that was opposed locally by the city of Sanibel and if passed by the full legislature would have pre-empted Lee County from developing sustainable policies.

Haven't we had enough of special interests like Big Sugar turning our legislators into puppets?

John Cassani, Alva

Contradictory

Those who still vote Republican even after that party has become extreme, seem to do so largely because that's what they've always done before. The pull of consistency is so strong that reality and evidence are ignored when it comes time to vote.

Republican policies strongly favor the rich and large corporations. Surely, everyone can see that. But many working class and middle class people continue to vote Republican, even though it is against their own best interest. They look for reasons to justify their voting behavior (confirmation bias) and easily buy into the messages of fear and hate spewed out by numerous well-financed, right wing smear machines — which call on the Republican base to be "patriots," against all common sense.

The drive for consistency and powerful right wing propaganda are so strong that the Republican voter has become a patsy for the rich and corporate elites. Will they ever wake up and vote Democratic? Will they ever become true patriots and vote for the best interests of their country as well as for themselves? Don't count on it. Beliefs and behavior, no matter how bizarre, are very difficult to change.

Rob McKelvie, Fort Myers

Pursuing happiness

Re: "The medical community is not buying Amendment 2," Dr. Laura Yard, Aug. 11. Perhaps these doctors who are against marijuana have their heads in the sand and/or are unwilling to look into the research that's been done, or what the National Cancer Institute has said about marijuana and cancer. Maybe they are being influenced by the pharmaceutical companies.

The use of marijuana for medical purposes dates back at least 3,000 years. To say we need more studies proves we've been too dependent on chemically man-made pills that require disclaimers about how they might kill you or cause other health problems.

Marijuana was legal in the United States at one time. Then, in 1937, the U.S. Treasury began taxing marijuana under the Marijuana Tax Act even for medical use. The American Medical Association opposed this regulation of Cannabis and did not want studies of its potential medicinal benefits to be limited.

Dr. Yard mentions Colorado in her commentary, but in Colorado, marijuana is available to everyone. There is no need to see a doctor. In Pennsylvania, the state sent several lawmakers to Colorado to see firsthand what was happening. State Senator Daylan Leach on returning wrote, "We saw a system that is working." He then praised Colorado's regulations as well-crafted and enforceable, and listed the "astronomical" economic benefits to the state.

The pursuit of happiness is guaranteed in the U.S. Constitution, but there are always people in this country who don't believe in it, unless it benefits their own belief system. Although no one is guaranteed happiness, putting up roadblocks to one's reasonable pursuits of happiness is a crime.

Ron Smiley, Fort Myers

Failing law

Re: "Standing lacking," Stephen Filizzi, Aug. 10. Mr. Filizzi expressed puzzlement over the reason for the U.S. House of Representatives to sue the Obama administration. He sees this as counter-productive because the proposed litigation seeks to compel Obama to enforce the Affordable Care Act, something Republicans are opposed to.

Why would Republicans fight to compel the president to enforce a law they have attempted to repeal many times?

The president has issued delays and exemptions galore — so much so that the CBO can no longer predict the future economic impact of Obamacare. The dire predictions made by opponents of the legislation are actually coming true — higher costs, little reduction in the number of uninsured and general confusion and disarray throughout the healthcare industry.

Mid-term elections are coming this fall and Obama wants to shield voters from the disappointments they will encounter as they get fully immersed in Obamacare.

Democrats would be hurt greatly if the law's implementation went according the legislated schedule and Obamacare's implications became obvious.

The Republicans want voters to know what a debacle the new law is, and the sooner the better!

Voters won't be convinced of this Democrat folly unless the law is implemented as written and according to schedule.

Steve Bakke, Fort Myers

Obama doing his job

Several letters to the editor have recently been very critical of anyone who suggests racism has been involved in criticism of President Obama. It is expected that Republicans would disagree with his policies but if he were white, would a significant number of Republicans say that this president is Muslim and was born in Africa? Not very likely.

Do Republicans really believe that the recent onslaught of voter suppression policies targeting minorities in Republican-controlled states since the election of this president doesn't smack of racism? Many Republicans play fast and loose with other facts.

Border security, for instance, has been much stronger under this president and he has deported more illegal aliens than any previous administration. If Republicans really wanted more border security, they would have passed the bipartisan Senate immigration bill, which included significant additional funds for enhanced border security.

Republicans put forth incredible distortions and lies about the Affordable Care Act. They said it would have death panels, cost jobs, ruin the economy and significantly increase health care costs. None of this has happened yet, and Republicans have now moved away from this issue.

President Obama is also criticized for his handling of the Middle East, but there are many public officials who believe President George W. Bush's lies and distortions is what led us into Iraq and placed the area in turmoil and directly led to the situation today.

If President Obama was a Republican, had reversed a disastrous economy resulting from the opposition party's policy failures, significantly reduced the national debt, all without congressional support as he has, Republicans would be singing his praises

Graydon Sheperd, Fort Myers

No facts

Attorney General Eric Holder joined and sided with the Ferguson demonstrators. Instead of saying something like, "I am here to make sure all the facts come out and are used to determined what happened" or "We will get all the information out to you so that you can make an informed decision," he begins by telling stories of his stops on the New Jersey Turnpike for, allegedly, no reason.

These stories support the demonstrators that something wrong was done by the policeman. And, once again, the Obama administration makes statements, or inferences, about an incident before all the facts are out.

Slowly, information is coming out that the policeman may have acted properly and was injured. To delay these facts will make the decision by the grand jury unacceptable if they find no wrongdoing by the policeman. And there will be riots. We have seen this before.

Finally, why haven't we seen interviews of the dead boy's companion, who started all this with, "His hands were up in the air. He was executed." Did Sharpton ask him if that was true?

John Piccolo, Estero

Disingenuous

Re: "The party's over; now it's all about Amnesty Inc." Michelle Malkin, Aug. 7. Ms. Malkin states, "Steve Camarota and Karen Ziegler of the Center for Immigration Studies reported last month that since 2000, all of the net gain in the number of working-age (16-65) people holding a job has gone to immigrants (legal and illegal)."

First, the Center for Immigration Studies is an admittedly conservative anti-immigration think-tank. It is not in any way a government entity.

Second, the data was taken from the state of Tennessee only.

Third, there is nothing in the research to tie individuals, either citizens or immigrants, to specific jobs.

Finally, the groups involved in the study contrasted only native-born Americans with non-native born workers. Whether any of the 'immigrants" were U.S. citizens was not disclosed in the data.

To imply from the data given in either Malkin's commentary or the Center for Immigration Studies report that every new job since 2000 went to an immigrant "(legal or illegal)" is pure poppycock.

And to omit that the data was only from one state is disingenuous, at best. Xenophobia, anyone? Make hers a double.

Barry J. McCall, Bonita Springs

Water issues debate

In his recent guest opinion, Rep. Matt Caldwell stated that I have been lying about "our water woes." So at the outset, let me state unequivocally, that every word that I have written or said about the challenges and solutions to restoring and protecting the Lake Okeechobee watershed including the Caloosahatchee, St. Lucie, Indian River Lagoon, coastal estuaries and Everglades has always been subject to public scrutiny and found factual.

In fact, I would offer an opportunity for Rep. Caldwell to substantiate his allegations in a one on one debate anywhere, place or time.

Perhaps, we could have our debate at the King Ranch in Texas. Rep. Caldwell should feel very comfortable with the venue having already spent time at U.S. Sugar's hunting lodge on the property. With his open invitation for others to grab a seat next to him, Mitch Hutchcraft could be encouraged to attend. Mr. Hutchcraft is Vice President of Real Estate for King Ranch and Gov. Scott's appointment to the South Florida Water Management District.

Ray Judah, former Lee County Commissioner

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1txgnCj