Fitch report: Blue Cross Michigan leads earnings decline among nation's Blues plans

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan posted 5.2 percent higher revenue to $8.39 billion during the first nine months of 2015, but also posted losses of $230 million during those three quarters, a 158-percent decline from the same nine-month period in 2014, according to Chicago-based Fitch Ratings Inc.

Officials for Blue Cross told Crain's they plan to release full-year financials next Tuesday, March 1. They had no comment on the Fitch credit report, which concluded that the nation's 35 Blues fared more poorly than their for-profit competitors, including United Healthcare and Aetna Inc.

On whether health insurers might have rebounded in the last three months of the fiscal year, Fitch's Mark Rouck, senior director, said health insurers tend to post worse financials during the last quarter of the year because patient care expenses usually accumulate after deductibles are met earlier.

"It is somewhat hard to overcome three quarters with one quarter, especially the last one in the year because claims need to be paid," said Rouck.

Fitch said 23 of the 35 Blues plans reported a collective $1.9 billion decline in earnings for the first nine months of 2015, and 16 reported net losses.

The biggest contributor to the decline in earnings was Blue Cross of Michigan with a $622 million difference in profits to losses, followed by Chicago-based Health Care Service Corp. ($442 million) and Pittsburgh-based Highmark Group ($266 million). (View net income data from Fitch.)

"Earnings declines, lower enrollment and moderate revenue growth were challenges for the Blue Cross and Blue Shield companies," said Rouck said.

Rouck told Crain's that Blues' plans likely suffered declines relative to their publicly traded competitors because they are more heavily invested in federal and state health insurance exchanges and priced their products low to gain or protect market share.

Blues plans also were hit harder because use of services and medical expenses were higher than expected on the health exchanges.

"Some states had good experience with higher enrollment and profitability like California and Florida," said Rouck.

Michigan Blue Cross officials have told Crain's in the past that use of services was higher than expected both in the commercial and Medicaid market.

"Blue Cross plans have different profit motives than publicly traded companies," Rouck said. "They are more willing to participate in exchanges to protect their market share" and hold down premiums to gain members.

But "Fitch believes earnings are likely to improve in 2016 due to premium rate increases and benefit redesign aimed at improving underwriting results and regulatory changes," Rouck said.

Michigan Blues have requested higher rate hikes the past two years from the Michigan Department of Financial and Insurance Regulation.

Rouck said he expects most Blues plans will request rate hikes and develop different benefit designs that include offering more products with narrower provider networks to help reign in costs.

Through the first three quarters, the 35 Blues plans averaged a 5.7 percent increase in revenue to average $5.1 billion ($180 billion total), but a 52.1 percent drop in net income to $48.6 million ($1.7 billion total) for the same period of 2014, Fitch said.

Administrative costs at the Blues of Michigan increased to 16.5 percent in 2015 from 13.7 percent in 2014, a 2.8-point increase during that nine-month period. The Blues began a $100 million-per-year cost-reduction turnaround program last fall.

Nationally, Blues plans averaged only one-tenth of a percentage point increase to 10.6 percent from 10.5 percent, Fitch said.

Rouck did not have a comment as to why Michigan Blues are so much higher on administrative costs than other Blues' plans.

Last December, Crain's reported that the Michigan Blues have begun a "strategic business transformation" to cut out $300 million of costs over the next three years.

During the past several months, more than two dozen employees have either left or been laid off from Blue Cross of Michigan. Recently, Wheeler Coleman, Blue Cross's chief information officer, left the company for undisclosed reasons. At least two suppliers also have left, sources told Crain's.

On administrative costs, Rouck said all health insurers need to be careful with expenses.

"There are so many limits on insurers' ability to generate profits from an underwriting standpoint because of the Affordable Care Act," he said. "It is increasingly important to have expenses under control."

According to Fitch, Blue Cross companies have top market shares in 37 states and top-three shares in 49 states. Blues of Michigan are No. 1 in Michigan with 40 percent overall market share, Fitch said.

Last year's financial slide was especially acute when compared to positive numbers of the previous three years. During the three-year period from 2012 to 2014, Blue Cross of Michigan averaged revenue of $9.7 billion with a three-year profit average of $162 million, Fitch said.

But Rouck said many Blues plans nationally have suffered declining revenue and profitability during that period.

Rouck said Fitch did not directly compare Blues' plans with the publicly traded companies because they calculate expenses differently. For-profit plans use generally accepted accounting principles, he said, whole Blues plans generally use statutory accounting principles.

"Overall, we can tell Blues plans are not performing as well as publicly traded companies," he said.

For example, Rouck said Blue Cross companies' medical benefit ratios are often higher and their EBITDA-based margins are often lower than those of the public for-profit competitors. EBITDA is earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.

Related Links