The 2005 Chevrolet Cobalt is among models being recalled by GM. (Photo: GM via Wieck)

Last week, General Motors widened its recall of vehicles with ignition switch defects. Thirteen deaths have been linked to the problem. Letter to the editor:

The General Motors recall prompts me to write my first letter to the editor. The delayed and piecemeal recall of the Cobalt and other cars with defective ignition switches is not only a business ethics failure, but also an individual moral failing by those GM individuals responsible ("Foot-dragging by GM leaves a trail of tragedy: Our view").

Hopefully, there will be criminal proceedings instituted. And, don't forget, this was the company we taxpayers bailed out.

But I also wonder about the lack of public comment by new GM CEO Mary Barra. She and GM certainly got the publicity and praise when she was announced. Where's the publicity now?

David Hull; Claremont, Calif.

Comments from Facebook are edited for clarity and grammar:

This is why the government must regulate business. The free market has no morals. Businesses calculate the cost of lawsuits vs. doing the right thing and fixing a serious flaw. The government must interfere with the free market sometimes to keep businesses honest.

— Edward J Hale

Glad to see General Motors finally addressing an issue that apparently has been known about for some time. But it's just another reason I will never own a GM product.

— Robert Young

This senseless tragedy should be a wake-up call to the UAW, GM and people who trust government regulations can solve this. As a dad, I can't fathom the pain that those families who lost loved ones in these crashes must be going through.

Sadly, our government only enabled GM's past failings by bailing them out with taxpayer money.

Free enterprise isn't perfect, but it does put bad products out of their misery, particularly those that kill.

Let the bad companies go out of business.

— Bill Wertz

The recalls involve models before the bankruptcy filing. GM has been making some competitive vehicles lately.

Also, every car company has recalls; it's not as if GM is the only carmaker to have issues.

— Ali Safaoui

Condemning an entire auto manufacturer because some of its cars have defects is insane. Many other auto manufacturers have had recalls.

Do a Google search on Toyota if you need to refresh your memory.

— Richard Barberian Jr.

General Motors is making great-looking and competitive rides, especially Cadillac.

To me, the main issues are about reliability and how the company handles (or doesn't handle) major problems. For years, GM built substandard garbage, and as a reward they were given billions in a taxpayer bailout. We will see in a few years how the shiny new Impalas and Cruzes hold up.

— Benjamin Berlinsky

I would never have bought a Saturn Ion to begin with. I have a 1998 Honda Civic to this day that is still reliable and inexpensive to operate.

Shame on GM for not acting sooner to recall the cars that had a faulty ignition switch.

— Jeff S Alterman

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1bZ7Y5t