Voters are fed up with the "establishment of both parties," and are "going to seize their freedoms back in 2016" in an election that's "the most important … of our lifetimes," Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal tells Newsmax TV. In an exclusive interview with "Newsmax Prime" host J.D. Hayworth in early voting state Iowa, the conservative GOP presidential contender says Americans are responding to a message that embraces Republican principles."[W]e don't need a second liberal party, we don't need to be cheaper Democrats," he said.

Watch Newsmax TV on DirecTV Ch. 349, DISH Ch. 223 and Verizon FiOS Ch. 115. Get Newsmax TV on your cable system — Click Here Now

"We're going to secure the border. We're going to repeal Obamacare. We're going to invest in the military," Jindal continued. We're going to shrink the federal government, grow the private sector. We're going to stand with Israel. We're going to stop Iran from becoming a nuclear power… people are looking for a doer, not a talker.""[T]his is the most important election of our lifetimes and people get it," he added.Jindal touted his own record in Louisiana – saying he cut the budget 26 percent, helped create private sector jobs and make Louisiana "the most pro-life state six years in a row.""Folks are tired of the status quo," he said. "They're tired of the establishment in both parties. They were promised if Republicans took the majority last year things would change on amnesty, on Obamacare, on the budget. They didn't change and people are looking for a fighter that will go and represent them."And Jindal said his biggest takeaway from leading his state is to "trust the American people.""What they have shown is they have got more wisdom than their so-called leaders in D.C., the elites in D.C., on issue after issue," he said.The "Founding Fathers knew the genius of this country was a limited government that secured, that didn't create our God-given rights," he added. "The left has forgotten that. The American people are going to seize their freedoms back in 2016."