An agency responsible for choosing IT consultant Deloitte for a 10-year, half-billion dollar job said Wednesday that it has changed its mind.



The agency, Welfare Client Data Systems (WCDS), told KCRA 3 that it could not come to an agreement on the terms of a contract and will no longer negotiate with the company.



Watch report: Deloitte dropped from new state project

The decision represents what observers of the government said is a rare reversal in the middle of contract negotiations.



“I don't think it's very common,” said Jon Coupal, president of the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association. “And, it also suggests to us that they were feeling the heat from the taxpayers and the media, quite frankly, that their activities were being scrutinized."



Deloitte, which was widely blamed for a botched software upgrade that left hundreds of thousands of Californians without their unemployment benefits, was negotiating with WCDS to run the CalWin automation system, which sends out welfare benefits.



Those benefits -- including food stamps, Medicaid, and cash aid -- go to Californians in 18 counties. In Northern California, those counties include Sacramento, Placer, Yolo and Solano.



Deloitte’s subcontractor for the work was CGI, the company behind the troubled website where people have been unable to sign up for health coverage under the Affordable Care Act.



After KCRA 3 exclusively reported that the contract was awarded four months ago, some Californians said they were worried that the computer work could fail, leaving people without benefits.



A representative for WCDS did not give a reason for the agency’s decision to set aside Deloitte’s winning bid in the amount of $537 million. The agency’s executive director did not return a call or email requesting more information and previously said that she has been advised by WCDS’s attorney not to speak about the contract.

However, legal documents filed with the agency last fall reveal disturbing claims about Deloitte made by a competing vendor, Hewlett Packard (HP). In those documents, obtained by KCRA 3 through a Public Records Act request, HP claimed Deloitte did not offer numerous taxpayer protections required of all companies bidding for the job.



Among the problems HP wrote was Deloitte’s “refusal” to include a limit on the cost of the job, meaning taxpayers could have been on the hook for much more than $537 million.



WCDS has not said why it originally awarded the work to Deloitte. It announced Wednesday that it will now begin negotiating with HP, whose initial bid had been slightly lower, at about $532 million.

In a written statement Wednesday, Deloitte defended its work.



“In addition to significant taxpayer savings, we offered the consortium extensive taxpayer protections,” the company said. “We are committed to our clients, the community, and to continuing our long history of service to the people of California.”



State Sen. Jim Nielsen, R-Gerber, who has questioned Deloitte about late unemployment benefits following a software upgrade at EDD, said he believes WCDS did not welcome the scrutiny it was receiving for deciding last fall to work with Deloitte.



"I think they realized that a spotlight has been shined," said Nielsen. "I think that they didn't like the spotlight."



But both Nielsen and Coupal said WCDS needs to make other changes.



The agency, virtually unknown by the public, is one of three county consortia in California that distribute billions in welfare benefits every year. The agency’s work is overseen by several state agencies, but it doesn’t hold public meetings and doesn’t post meeting minutes or agendas, as required of public agencies by the Brown Act.



"Why are they closing the door to all kinds of scrutiny?” Coupal said. “I think this is one of the problems we have in California."



HP, which currently runs the CalWin automation system, released a prepared statement Wednesday.



“HP welcomes the opportunity to continue its relationship with WCDS to serve the consortium’s 18 counties,” the company said in the statement.