SYRACUSE, N.Y. - Directors of the Syracuse Community Health Center are re-evaluating their plans to construct a $14 million building on South Salina Street, saying the planned addition might be too large for the center's current patient volume.

Ben Moore, chairman of the center's board of directors, told the Syracuse city council today that the proposed 60,000-square-foot facility might be scaled down to reflect a 10 percent decline in patients at the center this year.



Thus far, SCHC officials are not sure why they are seeing fewer patients, Moore said. They want to understand the trend before designing and financing a new building, he said.

"If the building is over-programmed and we get financing for it, and we have to repay the financing, and it's not the (patient) volume it should be, that's going to be a really significant problem for the health center,'' Moore said. "It could be catastrophic to make that big of a mistake.''

Moore said he was confident that the project would move forward at some point. The health center first announced its plan in 2011 to build a new facility in the 900 block of South Salina Street, across the street from its headquarters at 819 S. Salina. The state has agreed to provide $3.1 million in grants for the project.

Health center officials have asked the city council to abandon the 100 block of West Taylor Street, adjacent to the building site, to make way for landscaping and to clear a safer path for pedestrians to cross South Salina Street. The council has delayed its decision, making it contingent on proof of financing for the new building.

Moore told the council today that health center officials will return with proof of financing after they reassess the size of the project. The review probably will take at least 90 days.

In the spring of 2014, health center officials started noticing a drop in patient volumes, Moore said. They are trying to determine whether the decline was caused by the Affordable Care Act, which might have enabled some patients to obtain private insurance and see private doctors, or some other cause, Moore said.

Syracuse Community Health Center is one of more than 1,300 community health centers nationwide created by federal legislation that provides some funding for the facilities. The centers are required by law to cater to medically underserved populations.

Since it opened in 1978, the center has grown dramatically. It started an East Side clinic in 1993, a West Side satellite clinic in 1995 and a South Side clinic in 1998. It took over operations of the Onondaga Nation health center in 2000 and the LaFayette health center in 2001. It also provides health services in Syracuse city schools.