Advertisement - story continues below

Senate Republicans rejected an amendment to an ObamaCare repeal bill on Thursday that would have given the attorney general the authority to bar the sale of firearms to known or suspected terrorists.

The amendment, offered by Sen. Diane Feinstein, D- Calif., went down in a 45-54 procedural vote. The California Democrat also offered the proposal as a separate stand-alone piece of legislation.

Feinstein told reporters before the vote that her amendment should be “the definition of a no-brainer,” according to The Hill.

Advertisement – story continues below

“If somebody is too dangerous to board an airplane (because they are on a terrorist watch list), they are too dangerous to buy a gun,” Feinstein said at a press conference with seven Democratic senators. “This shouldn’t be a partisan issue.”

Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, voiced concern about giving the attorney general the power to bar people from purchasing firearms without due process of law. “This is not the way we’re supposed to do things in this country,” he said before the vote on Feinstein’s amendment. “If you believe the federal government is omniscient and all competent, vote for the Feinstein amendment,” he added.

The Texas senator offered an alternative one that would grant the attorney general the authority to delay a terrorist suspect from getting a gun for up to 72 hours, while the government seeks a court order blocking the sale to the person in question.

Advertisement – story continues below

The Senate rejected Cornyn’s amendment as well in a 55-44 vote.

“House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., created a Republican task force on homeland security in the wake of the Nov. 13 attacks in Paris, and said Thursday the no-fly list gun ban may be an issue that task force ‘will look at.’ McCarthy said the task force is intended to consider ‘any gaps or any vulnerabilities’ in U.S. security, though he would not commit to any specific action,” USA Today reported.

As reported by Western Journalism, President Obama specifically advocated on Wednesday, following the San Bernadino shooting, for giving the federal government the authority to deny people who are on the “no-fly” list the ability to purchase a gun.

Advertisement – story continues below