Government does not have competition, but if it was focused on providing the best product for the cheapest cost through maximum efficiency, it would be transformative in terms of quality and cost to the taxpayer. One way to achieve those ends is through an informed electorate — one which, as with a corporate board of directors, makes decisions based on what is best for the institution.

That can’t happen unless voting is limited to at least those with skin in the game — taxpayers (those who actually pay taxes; not Americans who get refunds on taxes never paid). When you pay the bill, you have greater incentive to demand efficiency to keep your costs down.

To that end, in the early history of the country, most states allowed only property owners and taxpayers to vote. (The U.S. Constitution did not originally define who was eligible to vote.)

But there are those who don’t like the American system of government as envisioned by the founders, those who would prefer a socialist state where government is not limited, but rather controls everything from requiring you to buy a product (Obamacare) to even requiring you to vote, as President Obama proposed last week.

“If everybody voted, then it would completely change the political map in this country,” Obama said. It would “counteract money more than anything” — this from the champion of political fundraising.

Eighty-five percent of nations in the world lack compulsory voting. Those that do require it mostly include Third World or corrupt countries found mostly in South America and Africa.

Of course, hell will freeze over before the U.S. Constitution is rewritten to require citizens to vote or suffer some consequence. And even the thought of an American president suggesting such a departure from our basic freedoms would boggle the mind if it were not Obama.

The problem is not that Americans don’t vote. The problem is that too many cast an uninformed vote, including teens who lack the maturity to understand the American system of government and adults who have not a clue or who seek only to perpetuate or expand government free stuff.

That’s what needs fixing.