LANSING, MI -- National conservative advocacy group Americans for Prosperity unveiled a new television commercial at the Michigan Capitol on Tuesday, criticizing U.S. Rep. Gary Peters and sparking outrage from Democrats before the press event even began.

AFP was expected to screen the "issue ad" at noon inside the state Capitol, but those plans fell apart after House Minority Leader Tim Greimel (D-Auburn Hills) blasted Republican leadership for allowing the group to use the people's building to release an ad with political overtones.

Peters is in the midst of a closely watched U.S. Senate race. Former Secretary of State Terri Lynn Land, a Republican, is also running for the seat.

AFP had reserved a Capitol conference room through state Rep. Tom McMillin (R-Rochester Hills), but House Republican spokesman Ari Adler said leadership did not know what the organization had planned for the space.

"As soon as we found out it was being used to announce a politically-motivated ad, we asked them to leave and find another location," Adler explained.

AFP President Tim Phillips and Michigan Director Scott Hagerstrom eventually screened the ad for reporters on the steps outside the Capitol, referring to the commercial as a form of issue advocacy rather than a political attack.

The 30-second spot, set to air across the state this month, criticizes Peters for repeating President Barack Obama's claim that the Affordable Care Act would allow Americans to keep any health insurance policy they like.

In reality, plans held by roughly 225,000 Michiganders do not offer all 10 "essential health benefits" required by the law and will be cancelled. Michigan residents can keep non-qualifying plans through 2014 under a change announced by the president in November.

The AFP buy will total more than $1 million over the next three weeks and include ads on broadcast television, cable, radio and the Internet, Phillips said. Despite the timing, he denied suggestions that AFP is targeting Peters now because he is running for Senate.

"He's been a leader in this effort," Phillips said. "He's consistently and rather defiantly talked about how great this legislation and this law is. We want to hold him accountable for that."

Peters has defended his support for the Affordable Care Act and voted for several bills designed to improve the law, including a proposal that sponsoring Republican Rep. Fred Upton of St. Joseph dubbed the "If You Like It, Keep It" bill.

Campaign spokesperson Julie Petrick said the ad distorts Peters' record and includes edited footage of a floor speech in which Peters actually was discussing consumer protections in the Affordable Care Act.

"Gary has always fought to do the right thing for Michigan including fixing our health care system so it works for our middle class and small businesses, fighting to create jobs here in Michigan, and helping our Main Streets thrive," Petrick said in a release.

AFP, founded with help from billionaire businessman Charles and David Koch, has been consistently critical of the new health care law. The group also fought Republican Gov. Rick Snyder's successful attempt to expand Medicaid eligibility under the ACA and ran radio ads against some GOP lawmakers who voted for the "Healthy Michigan" plan.

Earlier Tuesday, Michigan Democratic Party Chairman Lon Johnson questioned whether the Land campaign was coordinating with Super PACs, which could be a violation of Federal Election Commission regulations.

Johnson pointed to an online video showing Land at a Leelanau County event discussing the growing influence of Super PACs before noting that "our campaign has talked to a lot of these folks. They are committed to Michigan."

"Land's campaign needs to answer the question today," Johnson said. "Did she receive a commitment in August from AFP? Ms. Land has yet to hold a single campaign event here in Michigan, yet she's talked with other Super PACs. It's time for her to come clean."

AFP is paying for the ads through its 501c4 "social welfare" non-profit -- not a Super PAC, according to Phillips, who said the group did not discuss the spot with Land or her campaign. "It is an issue effort that we're undertaking," he said, "and we haven't talked to anyone's campaign or any political party about this."

Land campaign spokesman John Yob did not directly respond to a question about coordination with independent groups but suggested Johnson's press call was "nothing more than a desperate attempt by dishonest Democrats to shift attention away from the fact that their candidates for statewide office are failing in the polls after being dishonest with voters and claiming Michiganders could keep their insurance if they liked it."

The Affordable Care Act is expected to be a hot-button election issue again in this year, and outside interest groups are likely to spend big in Michigan's Senate race if polling numbers continue to show a close race.

Watch the AFP ad in the player below.

Editor's note: This post was updated with a response from the Peters campaign

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Google+ or follow him on Twitter.