Editor's note: Talk of the County is a reader-generated column of opinions. If you see something you disagree with or think is incorrect, please tell us. Call us at 312-222-4554 or email talkofthecounty@tribpub.com. For a continuously updating blog of Talk of the County comments, visit newssunonline.com/talk.

All talk, no action

In regards to the article in the TOTC "Waukegan needs to be cleaned up." Yes, Waukegan has become a dump. We have a mayor and a new 2nd Ward alderman who are all talk and no action. Our city looks awful. People are speeding up and down the streets in our neighborhood and the police are nowhere to be seen. I'm ashamed of Waukegan and I can't wait to get out of here.

Kids these days

What would the prestigious Tuskegee Airmen of the WWII era think of the behavior of the youth of today. Embarrassed by their lack of responsibility would probably be their answer.

Smelly pond

In response to the retention pond located at 33rd Street and Elizabeth Avenue in Zion. How can the property owners be so callas as to disregard the city code and the people that live near that pond. The pond looks terrible and smells awful. Most of the people that live near the pond are in their mid 70s and 80s and we are having a hard time getting by with that smell.

Pride

I couldn't be more proud as a gay man right now. The Supreme Court truly showed the American colors of freedom with this decision. It was a joyous day when I recently taught my fourth grade class about what discrimination and inequality means to those who have suffered under it, and how it is truly the American ideal of freedom which eventually tramples these oppressive vestiges of a bygone era.

Drop off sites

Mothers are allowed to drop off unwanted or unneeded babies at the fire departments and police stations. We also need a place to drop off toilets and televisions instead of placing them on the side of the road.

Appealing Supreme Court ruling

I have a question regarding the decision to uphold the Obamacare healthcare law: When the Supreme Court isn't following the Constitution who can we call or write to? Somebody is always responsible for what they do and I would like some answers. Obamacare is strictly political and the people who will be receiving this healthcare are the ones that don't want the Constitution to be followed as written. This really concerns me.

Freedom of speech

If there is any reaction that goes against freedom of speech in this country it's the media and the spoken words from citizens speaking their opinions on any issue. While we're no longer a nation under God, we can still save our freedom of speech. Don't get too gay-friendly and don't criticize Donald Trump. I personally don't like Donald Trump but I know that he has been very successful. The true freedom of speech rings loud and clear. When we know something is wrong and the other people are getting away with it we still have the righteousness to fight for what is true justice and not a travesty of justice. Learn the difference.

Move obits to front

Just my opinion of course, but I wish you would consider that the obituary notices should deserve some level of respect and not be located at the end of the paper? Even after the classifieds? Even the comic pages? Please consider it?

Twitter @newssun

Editor's note: Talk of the County is a reader-generated column of opinions. If you see something you disagree with or think is incorrect, please tell us. Call us at 312-222-4554 or email talkofthecounty@tribpub.com. For a continuously updating blog of Talk of the County comments, visit newssunonline.com/talk.