The borough’s new anniversary logo (Photo: BEACH HAVEN FUTURE)

The borough has some celebrating to do this summer, in honor of its 125th anniversary, and some of it is coming up very soon.

Beach Haven was incorporated as a Borough by an Act of the New Jersey Legislature on Nov. 11, 1890, from portions of Eagleswood Township.

But the borogu, long known as s the "Queen City," was originally established in 1873. If you thought the nickname “Queen City: name came at the turn of the 20th century because the beachfront resort housed wealthy summer residents from Philadelphia in its grand hotels, and palatial summer cottages, think again.

According to historian Jeanette Lloyd, “When Atlantic City started to pick up steam in its popularity, an elected Beach Haven official sometime in the early 1900s decided to hop on the bandwagon and thought that naming it the Queen "City" might draw more tourists. And it stuck”

The borough’s emblem/seal bears that nickname and a crown, and though the name “Queen City’’ may have nothing to do with it, Beach Haven, with all its amenities has always been a mecca for summer vacationers.

Although the hotels and a beachfront boardwalk and other structures perished in storms in the 1940s, many of the beautiful old Victorian and Edwardian home remain. Most of them are in the Beach Haven Historic District which became listed in the New Jersey and the National Register of Historic Places in the early 1980s.

The first of the 125th anniversary celebrations is scheduled for May 9. There will be open houses at many of the public buildings, from 1 to 4 p.m.

At the New Jersey Maritime Museum between Dock Road and Centre Street at the bay, there will be a special guided tour from 1-3 p.m. by museum docents. Among other things, the museum showcases an extensive collection of artifacts and a database of shipwrecks in New Jersey. Light refreshments will be served.

Over at the Long Beach Island Historical Museum on Engleside Avenue, Visitors can see a special photo exhibit, from noon to 4 p.m. vintage photos of the especially relating to the 1890s Docents will be available to discuss the exhibits and allow the visitor’s imagination to guide them back to experience Beach Haven in that time. The Museum will be providing something warm to drink.

A few blocks north on Third Street, artifacts from the little museum in the historic Beach Haven Public Library, can be seen during the open house.

During the nation’s bicentennial, Beach Haven quilters made a commemorative quilt. All of those who quilted parts of it will be invited May 9 to tell their stories and share in the celebration, and the public will be able to see the quilt.

As part of the celebration, ReClamtheBay.org will be doing live shellfish demonstrations at their Beach Haven location at 420 Pelham Ave, (the Old Coast Guard Station).

ReClam the Bay currently has more than 10,000 juvenile shellfish growing in its upweller (tank) that will eventually be planted in Barnegat Bay. Members will be on hand from 12-4 for hands- on demonstrations and questions.

Anyone who grew up in Beach Haven can relive their childhood years by taking a guided tour of the historic Beach Haven School on May 9. The tours will run from 1-3 p.m. The Board of Education and the Beach Haven PTA will be guiding members of the public through the landmark to see what has changed through the years. Light refreshments will be available.

May 9 may be the start of the anniversary celebrations, but there will be more to come.

On May 24, there will be a “throwback” softball game to celebrate the 125th anniversary of Beach Haven. The game will take place at Walsh Field, near the borough tennis courts and will pit past and present borough employees versus local firemen. Refreshments will be provided by Beach Haven Future an organization that is helping to beautify the town.

The softball game also will feature an appearance by “Mayor Gator” from Fantasy Island Amusement Park, and the third inning stretch will include a Wing Eating Contest with wings supplied by The Chicken or the Egg. Announcements during the game will be made by Glenn Kalina from WJRZ radio.

The Beach Haven First Aid Squad on Engleside Avenue and the The Beach Haven Volunteer Fire Company #1 on Bay Avenue at Amber Street also will have open house celebrations on May 9, during which visitors can learn all about their life-saving programs and equipment (and maybe even volunteer!).

The fire company, the oldest one in Ocean County, was established on April 28, 1883. Along with its open house on May 9, a bigger event will be happening on Oct. 3. On that Saturday (of Chowderfest Weekened) there will be a triple housing at the firehouse for three pieces of equipment as well as a parade, and a rededication of rooms in the original section in the firehouse, which is 100 years old this year.

Other 125th anniversary events planned include, Bay Bash” pig roast at Walsh field on June 20 and a SUP Race/Bay Bash on Aug. 29, also at Walsh Field, The races on Aug. 29 will begin at 1 p.,m. and are sponsored by Beach Haven and South End Surf And Paddle. and hosted by the Little Egg Harbor Yacht Club.

More details on further anniversary celebrations will be published closer to the dates.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Gf2XkN