With only five more days until its crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter comes to an end, iCradle’s COBI continues to be a huge success on Kickstarter by raising nearly $322,000 thanks to over 1,500 backers.

As previously reported, COBI is considered a “world-first” in many ways. It’s the first integrated system for bikes, integrating the most popular smartphones, which turns every bike into a smart bike at an affordable price. The patented system integrates five typical bike accessories into one design: a light, a navigation system, a smartphone holder with charging function, a bell, and a bike computer.

COBI’s greatest strength lies in the in the seamless integration of more than 100 features that make biking more connected, smarter and safer: Navigation system, weather barometer, music player, smartphone-charger, thumb controller, brake light, Indicators, alarm system, online services, social media, mobile connectivity, fitness interface, styling kits and much more.

The connected biking system was designed to be future proof: The modular construction allows the device to be upgraded for the next generations of smartphones. It also offers a number of partner programs for bike manufacturers, retailers and service partners. An SDK for Software Developers will allow other companies to extend and integrate with the COBI system.

During a recent update, the COBI team shared, “At $300,000 the COBI Customizer will be officially unlocked so we thought it was time to give you some more detail on Stretch goal #3 – The Universal Mount Case. And as a holiday treat, we’ve also slashed the next target! Now, if we reach just $350,000, we will add the Universal Mount Case to the range of phone adapter options available to all COBI backers. First, here’s a recap: up to now, we’ve focussed on developing special cases for the 12 most popular smartphone models.”

The following is tailored mix of design and functionality that will be offered with COBI:

Smallest and lightest possible form-factors

Ergonomic materials

Easy to charge

Easy to charge Works on your phone all day long

Simple to attach and detach (to phone and bike)

Strong and stable connection with COBI

Operating temperatures -20 to +60°

Works on rough terrain and steep inclines e.g. MTB trails

Protects phone in falls from 1.2m

Supports Lightning and USB inputs

The team then added, “We’ve completed many rounds of prototype development and remain committed to the production of dedicated Mount Cases for the most popular smartphone devices.”

Those interested in contributing to the COBI crowdfunding campaign have until January 2nd.