Topics: Emanuel Cleaver, Ferguson, ferguson missouri, Governor Jay Nixon, Jay Nixon, Missouri, Media News, News, Politics News

After nearly two weeks of military fatigued gunmen, heavily armored tanks, clashes between political protesters and the state, smoke bombs, tear gas, sniper rifles, (alleged) Molotov cocktails, skirmishes and (reported) gunfire, Missouri congressman Emanuel Cleaver expressed his frustration about the events transpiring in Ferguson, Missouri. In an interview with MSNBC, the Kansas City-area Democrat likened the situation in Ferguson to Iraq: “Ferguson resembles Fallujah more than it does Ferguson,” Rep. Cleaver said.

The congressman’s words come a day after President Barack Obama announced that he was sending Attorney General Eric Holder to Ferguson to continue his Department of Justice investigation in-person into the death of Michael Brown, an African-American teenager and aspiring musician, who was killed by a white Ferguson police officer, Darren Wilson. Tensions in the community — between protesters, police and members of the press — have swelled.

Yesterday, Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon declared a state of emergency, calling in reinforcements to deescalate what has become a nine-day period of marching, protesting and unrest in the wake of Brown’s death.

Over the weekend, Rep. Cleaver visited St. Louis to survey the scene, concluding that the entire police department in Ferguson seemed “monumentally inept” at dealing with the situation. The congressman also condemned the militarized police force.

“Having military style weaponry moving down the main street of a middle-American town is as un-American as a coup d’état rather than an election,” said Mr. Cleaver. “I think that is obscene. And we’ve got to stop it because the police chief in Ferguson himself said we haven’t had training on this equipment, and yet, the world saw police officers with military helmets sitting in front of machine guns, pointing them at the crowd.”

Some have called for President Obama to travel to Ferguson to pacify some of the angst. But Mr. Cleaver cautioned against that.

“I don’t think the president needs to come to Ferguson,” Mr. Cleaver said. “It adds another distortion. We don’t need that now. We don’t need any more people coming into Ferguson to help the poor people out during this time of trouble. What we need is a sense of calm and anything other than that is going to be dangerous.”