Buy Photo Clay Schramski gets Papa John's pizza with his mother Sheena Schramski after the groundbreaking ceremony for the St. Vincent House at St. Vincent, Thursday, October 22, 2015. Papa John's founder and CEO John Schnatter, not pictured, donated $1 million to the hospitality house for extended stay families. The Schramski family shared their story, as they are a family that would be helped by the St. Vincent House. Clay was in the hospital NICU for two months. (Photo: Kelly Wilkinson/The Star)Buy Photo

Papa John's Pizza CEO and founder John Schnatter has donated $1 million to St. Vincent Health that will allow the hospital system to speed up plans to build a place for patients' families to stay.

To announce the Indiana native's donation, St. Vincent held a ceremonial groundbreaking Thursday on the St. Vincent House six months ahead of schedule. The edifice, to be built at the intersection of Dugan Drive and Naab Road, south of 86th Street on the Northside, will have private rooms for up to 20 families. Each room will sleep as many as five people, said Sue Anne Gilroy, executive director of the St. Vincent Foundation.

As many as 60 percent of St. Vincent patients do not live in the immediate Indianapolis area, said Dr. Joel Feldman, regional president. Patients come from across the state, neighboring states and even other countries.

Families like the Schramskis know what a difference a place to stay can make. The Schramskis' third child, Clay, was born in May of 2014 with a rare congenital condition that required him to have multiple surgeries in the first year of his life. His mother, Sheena, and father, Adam, tried to juggle being with their baby boy in the hospital while parenting his two older sisters, now 5 and 3, miles away in Mishawaka.

"There were many long hours on the road," said Sheena Schramski, on hand for the announcement of the Schnatter gift. "A place like the St. Vincent House will be such a blessing."

The hospitality house will serve families who live more than 25 miles from the hospital and have a family member in the hospital for an extended stay. This could include parents of an infant in the neonatal intensive care unit at St. Vincent Women's, a child at Peyton Manning Children's Hospital at St Vincent, or cancer or transplant patients at St Vincent Indianapolis, hospital officials say.

Babies in the neonatal intensive care unit, for instance, have an average stay of three months, Feldman said.

Scheduled to open in January 2017, the St. Vincent House also will feature laundry facilities, kitchens, a playground, chapel and common areas. Fees will be charged on a sliding scale, Gilroy said, with an eye toward making sure that all who need the service have access to it.

"We don't want this to be a burden on anybody," she said.

Buy Photo Papa John's founder and CEO John Schnatter, left of big check, donated $1 million during the groundbreaking ceremony for the St. Vincent House at St. Vincent, Thursday, October 22, 2015. (Photo: Kelly Wilkinson/The Star)

St. Vincent launched an $8 million campaign in May at its eighth annual Celebration of Caring Gala featuring quarterback Peyton Manning, formerly with the Indianapolis Colts and now with the Denver Broncos. Manning owns numerous Papa John's Pizza stores in the Denver area and is a pitchman for the company.

Papa John's Schnatter has deep ties to Indiana. Born in Jeffersonville, he is an alumnus of Ball State University. His pizza company, started more than 30 years ago, is the third largest pizza chain in the world.

Call Star reporter Shari Rudavsky at (317) 444-6354. Follow her on Twitter: @srudavsky.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1LOGBL7