WASHINGTON — The Rockies are not melting quietly away under the late-summer sun.

Carlos Gonzalez refuses to let them.

The Rockies’ right fielder flashed his multiple talents Sunday afternoon in a 6-4 victory over Washington at Nationals Park, hitting two home runs and making a Roberto Clemente-like throw to save a run.

“I take pride in both, but I like throwing guys out,” Gonzalez said. “I like making playing defensively.”

Game-winning-hit honors went to DJ LeMahieu. In the eighth, he drove in Ben Paulsen and Michael McKenry with a two-run, two-out single to left off Nationals reliever Drew Storen.

“I was just trying to slow things down,” LeMahieu said. “Those guys did a great job to get on base, and I was able to sneak it through the infield.”

The end did not come easily.

The Nationals jangled the Rockies’ nerves by almost putting together a winning rally in the ninth.

It began in almost inconceivable fashion when Yunel Escobar hit a routine grounder to two-time Gold Glove third baseman Nolan Arenado, who let the ball go right between his legs. Next, closer Tommy Kahnle walked Anthony Rendon.

Kahnle got the dangerous Bryce Harper to pop out to center but then walked Ryan Zimmerman to load the bases. But then Kahnle got tough, striking out Jayson Werth and getting Ian Desmond to ground out to short to close out the game and record the second save of his career.

The Rockies took two of three in the nation’s capital, putting a dent in the Nationals’ plans to close in on the New York Mets in the National League East.

“We had a lot of clutch performances today,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said. “It was a great team win. … We are fighting every day. The guys are really answering the bell. It’s been a tough year, with a lot of ups and downs. More downs than up, but our guys compete like this every (game).”

Gonzalez dares runners to test his left arm, so his eyes lit up in the seventh when the Nationals tried. Rendon was perched on second after hitting a double when Zimmerman — who had already hit two homers — singled to right. CarGo scooped up the ball and threw a perfect, one-hop strike to catcher McKenry, who tagged out Rendon. Washington asked for a review, saying McKenry blocked the plate and violated the non-collision rule at the plate. However, upon review, Rendon was ruled out.

“As soon as I caught the ball, I knew I was going to throw the guy out at home plate,” Gonzalez said. “I had a lot of time, and I didn’t rush it. I was in position to make a really strong throw, and it was money, right in the chest for McKenry.”

CarGo delivered his first home run with two outs in the first inning, driving ace Max Scherzer’s 1-0 pitch off the wall behind the Nationals’ bullpen beyond the right-field fence. Homer No. 2 was a leadoff rocket off Scherzer into the second deck in right-center, tying the game 3-3 in the sixth.

Gonzalez smashed three homers in the series and now has 25 this season. Since June 1, his 20 homers are the most in the National League.

Though Scherzer struck out 10 in his six innings, the Rockies roughed him up, scoring four runs on eight hits.

The day started out just fine for Rockies starter Yohan Flande. The left-hander used his sinker to get three quick groundball outs in the first. But then the Nationals flambéed Flande. Zimmerman smashed a solo homer to lead off the second, followed by a solo shot by Werth. It was the first time all season the Nationals hit back-to-back homers, and the first homer for Werth since May 13.

Zimmerman hit another home run off Flande in the third, this one a two-out shot to deep center to give the Nationals at 3-1 lead.

Back came the Rockies. They cut Washington’s lead to 3-2 in the fourth on a two-out solo homer by Daniel Descalso, who started the game for LeMahieu at second base.

In the sixth, after CarGo’s second homer tied the game, Colorado took a short-lived 4-3 lead on a double by Paulsen and a run-scoring single to left by Kyle Parker.

Washington tied the game in the bottom of the frame off reliever Rafael Betancourt. He issued a walk to Werth, who took third on Wilson Ramos’ single off the right-field wall. Werth scored on Michael Taylor’s grounder to Arenado, who tried to throw Werth out at the plate only to see his throw plunk Werth in the back. Arenado was charged with an error, his second of the game.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp