Photo

While Carly Fiorina’s positions on abortion rights and the future of Planned Parenthood are anathema to some readers concerned about women’s rights, others say she deserves credit for succeeding as a woman in the corporate world.

“She deserves our support for trailblazing a path which has helped every female executive, no matter her politics, who has successfully worked her way up the corporate ladder,” Feminist in Tampa wrote in response to a recent Room for Debate forum. “I may not vote for her, but she is a role model for every girl in this country who wants to succeed in the technology sector still mostly controlled by men.”

As C.E.O. of Hewlett-Packard, Mrs. Fiorina was the first woman to lead a Fortune 20 company. Hewlett-Packard’s poor performance during her tenure has been a point of criticism of her candidacy.

Some readers said a feminist is a woman who makes independent choices, regardless of her position on specific issues.

“I abhor Fiorina’s politics, but she’s correct that feminism is a woman leading the life she chooses, in spite of what men want on both the individual and social levels,” Jenifer Wolf in New York City wrote.

But just being a successful woman doesn’t make Mrs. Fiorina a feminist, some readers argued.

“Carly is not promoting policies that would help women in this country such as health care, child care, and equal pay,” Abelle in Portland, Ore., wrote of the candidate, who has promoted the repeal of the Affordable Care Act. “Just because she is a strong woman doesn’t mean she promotes women’s equality in public life.”

Others said it’s problematic for Mrs. Fiorina to trumpet her status as a leader.

“Her record at Hewlett-Packard — firing skilled Americans by the thousands and outsourcing their jobs to China and India, while almost running her company into the ground with an ill-advised merger — is hardly a sterling record for any sort of candidate, assuming we actually want a president of all the people rather than a modern Ebenezer Scrooge,” Grossness54 wrote from West Palm Beach, Fla. “This is a woman who would deny other women control over their own bodies, as well. If she’s a feminist then I’m a T. rex.”

In a recent column, David Brooks described Mrs. Fiorina as “stylistically indomitable” and called her a “marketing genius.” However, he wrote “for all her feisty outsider bravado, if you actually look at her views on substance and her behavior in the past, she is a completely conventional Republican.” And at Hewlett-Packard, he said, “she made the classic marketer’s error, letting her promises get far out in front of reality.”

Like Mr. Brooks, many readers expressed skepticism about Mrs. Fiorina’s leadership abilities.

“If she is such a marketing genius,” John W. Lusk wrote from Danbury, Conn., “why hasn’t another company hired her?”