Related Links

Who represents me?

Unfinished business: that’s the story as the Minnesota legislature ends it’s session without coming to an agreement on a variety of issues. Left on the table? A bonding bill with hundreds of millions of dollars, or over a billion dollars, depending on which side of the aisle you lean toward. That means many projects are going unfunded right here in the Red River Valley. But the end of this session isn’t all doom and gloom.

The good, the bad and the ugly is more than just a movie title. It’s how DFL Deputy Minority Leader Paul Marquart categorized the end of this legislative session. Left on the chopping block? A bonding bill with the DFL proposing $1.8 billion in funding. But that won’t go toward higher education or local school districts looking to upgrade their facilities. The biggest project that won’t happen is one as old as dirt: a grade separation project in Moorhead. The DFL was going to pony up almost $40 million.

“It was disappointing that we did not get a bonding bill done and the other major disappointment was we did not get a long term solution to transportation funding,” explained Rep. Marquart.

Another issue not fixed, making Minnesota compliant with the federal Read ID Act. The state is running out of time after the Department of Homeland Security rejected their latest request for an extension. But Rep. Marquart said there were some good things they accomplished, especially when it comes to our schools.

If you live in a rural Minnesota school district with an upcoming bond referendum vote, the state legislature is going to pay you 40%. That means if your taxes go up by 10 dollars an acre for a new school gym, the state is going to pay you $4. Its part of $800 million in tax cuts along with allocating some local government aid and extra money for rural school districts.

But this comes at the same time that the GOP-controlled Minnesota House of Representatives calls the end of the session a “train wreck”, pointing the finger at the DFL for the failing MNSure system and for raising taxes.

Here’s what the GOP’s full release:

The 2016 Minnesota legislative session came to a crashing end Sunday night as Senate Democrats broke their word with a last minute attempt to add a light rail transit provision to the borrowing bill. The amendment offered by Sen. Ron Latz (DFL-St. Louis Park) killed the entire bill which included $700 million in road and bridge funding as well as other public works constructions projects across the state. Sen. Latz and six other liberal DFL senators had previously sent a letter to legislative leaders threatening to take down any borrowing bill that did not include funding for light rail transit.

“There is only one reason we don’t have a transportation and borrowing bill this year – Democrats sacrificed hundreds of other worthy projects because they didn’t get funding for light rail transit,” said Senate Republican Leader David Hann (R-Eden Prairie). “Republicans will continue to make roads and bridges a state priority and perhaps it’s time for the public to break this stalemate.”

“After starting the session with a $900 million surplus, Senate Democrats failed to deliver on a transportation package, spent more money on state government than on tax relief and did nothing to address the rising costs of healthcare,” said Hann.

Since the legislature failed to pass a tax bill last year, the $190 million in tax relief per year represents 19% of the 2015 surplus of $2 billion. The Senate DFL and Gov. Mark Dayton spent the other 81%. And the Senate DFL once again failed to deliver a transportation plan because they insisted on raising the gas tax again in order to pay for costly new light rail transit.

Meanwhile, nothing was done this session to address the most pressing problem in state government – the rising cost of healthcare, specifically the failing MNsure program. Thousands of families are still struggling with problems ranging from poor customer service to actually dying while waiting for treatment.

“Every time we turn around, Minnesotans get more bad news about healthcare,” said Sen. Michelle Benson (R-Ham Lake). “Obamacare promised that if you liked your plan, you could keep your plan, and if you liked your doctor, you could keep your doctor. Instead, Minnesotans have lost their plans, lost their doctors, have fewer insurance options, and are paying more than ever before.”

The DFL party responded late Monday:

Last night at the eleventh hour – literally – House Republicans brought forward a new bonding bill and rushed through a floor vote before members or the public had much of any chance to read the bill.

Not surprisingly, today we are learning there were many mistakes in the bill that was jammed through. They include:

The total GO bond sale authorization was for $1.2 million instead of $1.2 billion.

There were several projects on the “spreadsheet,” but were left out of the language of the actual bill. Including:

$15 million for City of Duluth – Superior Street steam to hot water conversion project

$8 million for City of Hermantown Arrowhead Regional Health and Wellness Center

$3 million for Polk County – North Country Food Bank

-There was also a potential language problem related to funding Highway 14 funding that could have complicated land acquisition needed to move forward with the project.

Today, Speaker Daudt held a press conference in which he tried to blame Senate Democrats for the failure to pass the bonding bill. Even if they had passed the House bill without amendments the bill’s fate would have been in jeopardy due to these serious errors. Here is a statement from House DFL Leader Paul Thissen on the eleventh hour bonding bill that was rammed through:

“The errors in this bonding bill that was rammed through by House Republicans without any public input, without legislators having a chance to read the bill, is precisely why we need more transparency at the Minnesota Legislature.

Two years in a row, we have seen a complete lack of transparency. It is an embarrassing and unacceptable process and we should never let this happen again. If House Democrats win the majority this fall, I am committed to working with both Democrats and Republicans on needed legislative reforms.”

Remember 2016 is an election year for your local representatives. Click the link next to this story to find out who represents you in the Minnesota legislature.