Hispanic Christians were eager to hear from the leading presidential candidates as they gathered in California last weekend.

Hillary Clinton, in a video, talked first about how her faith has directed her life – but mentioned nothing of her well-known support for abortion rights and same-sex marriage. Donald Trump, reading from a piece of paper as he flew on his private plane, made no mention of religion at all in his footage, instead making broad promises to lower unemployment and cut taxes.

The crowd was silent after Trump's video finished, recalls the Rev. Samuel Rodriguez, founder of the National Hispanic Christian Leadership Conference, which hosted the summit. Then a group leader stood up and said, "Ladies and gentlemen, I do believe it's time to pray." The crowd chuckled, then prayed, recalls Rodriguez, who also serves on the board of the National Association of Evangelicals.

And "boy, do we ever need a prayer," Rodriguez adds.

If the emerging 2016 general election rhetoric continues as it has been going, Rodriguez is right. With self-described faith-driven candidates out of the race, there has been little talk on the trail of signature issues such as abortion, sexuality and gender identity, and religious liberty. And while the culture wars are evident in state legislatures and to some degree, in Congress, they are not being waged in the contest for president, perplexing some faith-motivated voters used to factoring candidates' social agendas into their decisions.

Clinton has spoken and written at length about her Methodist faith, and how it has spurred her to seek social justice. But on the campaign trail, she does not routinely discuss religion. She does mention two hot-button social issues – abortion rights and gun control – but those matters have taken a backseat in a campaign focused on experience, the economy and inclusion of America's many demographic groups.

And while Republican candidates routinely have played the God card in both primaries and general elections, Trump has been an anomaly. Thrice married, the casino-owning Trump has in the past talked openly about his extramarital affairs and dalliances with women. Soon after launching his presidential campaign, he described his practice of Communion to Iowa voters by saying, "When we go in church and I drink the little wine, which is about the only wine I drink, and I eat the little cracker – I guess that's a form of asking forgiveness."

"It's obviously a different moment, isn't it?" says Ronnie Floyd, president of the Southern Baptist Convention, musing about the 2016 campaign. "Neither one of the candidates has much of an affinity for speaking on those issues."

As for Clinton, Floyd notes, "I know what she obviously has believed and has been very verbal about, which is not privy to a conservative evangelical and their views about those kinds of matters. We already know where she is. She has a record." Meanwhile, "Mr. Trump is not a lifer in politics. We do not know where he is," says Floyd, who is among a group of evangelicals set to meet with Trump in New York next month.

In this campaign, it appears, social and religious liberty issues are not getting a lot of attention – largely, says Daniel Cox, director of research for the Public Religion Research Institute, a group that tracks Americans' views on values-based issues, because the GOP candidate unusually is not talking about them.

"If [Ted] Cruz were the nominee, you'd see a very different kind of campaign," says Cox, referring to the evangelical Christian senator from Texas.

At the state and local level, battles are raging over social issues. Oklahoma recently passed legislation making it a felony for a doctor to perform an abortion, though Gov. Mary Fallin vetoed it. Kansas recently acted to strip Planned Parenthood of Medicaid funding – a move the women's health care provider is challenging in court.

States and localities also are serving as battlefields over the rights of transgender people. North Carolina is defending its new law requiring people to use the bathroom reserved for their birth sex, instead of the gender with which they identify. And after the Obama administration issued a directive earlier this month telling all public schools to allow transgender children to use the bathroom of their choice, many officials blasted the move. Oklahoma GOP lawmakers even called on members of Congress from the state to seek President Barack Obama's impeachment over the issue.

"If you think about what's going on in the states, like on abortion and religious liberty, it's clear that there's a lot of interest in the social issues," says Mark Silk, director of the Center for the Study of Religion in Public Life at Trinity College in Connecticut. "On the other hand, there isn't much going on at the national level," including in the presidential campaign, Silk adds.

"Nobody's talking much about Obamacare, much less rolling back same-sex marriage or even abortion," he says. "My sense is that at the national set of issues, these things matter less than they used to."

Such matters are bubbling up to the national level somewhat: The House last week killed an amendment aimed at ensuring federal contractors do not discriminate against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people, with the process prompting cries of "Shame!" from Democratic lawmakers. And social conservatives are pushing for the Republican Party's platform at the national nominating convention this summer to explicitly endorse the "bathroom bill" language barring transgender people from using restrooms not associated with their sex at birth.

But for the most part, says Chad Griffin, president of LGBT rights group the Human Rights Campaign, "We are battling this issue city by city and state by state."

Notably, both of North Carolina's GOP senators, Thom Tillis and Richard Burr, parry when asked if the party platform should include language similar to the controversial Tar Heel State law. The platform, Tillis says, should focus on reversing Obamacare and other Democratic policies. Burr says the matter is one for the courts to handle.

Trump, meanwhile, has been all over the map on social issues. He called himself "very pro-choice" in 1999, then said in 2015 he is "very, very proud to be pro-life." He told MSNBC's Chris Matthews that women who have abortions, should they be illegal, would need to face some sort of punishment, then backtracked later by saying doctors performing the procedures should be punished, and that women who have abortions are victims.

On transgender rights, Trump said in April that people should be able to use whatever bathroom they want, but the following month said it is a matter best left to the states. The meandering views make it harder to cast the presumptive nominee as a reliable social conservative – and put less pressure on Clinton to discuss such things at all. That troubles people like Floyd, who notes that Baptists believe "gender is not fluid. It is a gift from God."

The choice for faith-minded people, then, may come down not to traditional social issues, but to the broader question of values, says Rodriguez, who has not endorsed a candidate and whose group is nonpartisan. Clinton's views on abortion, for example, are at odds with the position of Rodriguez's conference. But Trump's determination to build a wall with Mexico offends the members on both an ethnic and moral level, he says.

"Donald Trump has already built a wall through his rhetoric and demagoguery," Rodriguez says. "Donald Trump built a wall separating him from the Latino electorate. Now he needs to tear down that wall and build a bridge."