Complex's central plaza now nearly fully leased

Demand for office space in Boulder has resulted in Twenty Ninth Street finding a solution to a years-long quandary in the mall's central plaza.

Juwi Solar, a division of energy firm Juwi LLC, recently leased the 7,200-square-foot space last occupied by Ristorante L, formerly Laudisio, Twenty Ninth Street officials confirmed. The city of Boulder recently approved building permits for the conversion of a restaurant space to office.

Officials for Juwi, which operates its wind energy division in east Boulder, could not be reached for comment.

The gutting and build-out of the former Laudisio restaurant, which closed in June 2013, comes less than a year after Juwi Solar moved into the neighboring 12,000-square-foot space that had temporary tenants since Railyard Restaurant & Saloon vacated it in 2008.

Combine that with Genscape's leasing of the former Purple Martini bar on the second floor and Twenty Ninth Street's central plaza — the area that sits an escalator ride up from Century Theatres' movie complex — is nearly fully leased.

A few years ago, it was a different story.

In 2008, first level tenants Ruby's Diner and Railyard Restaurant & Saloon shuttered and the Purple Martini bar on the second floor went dark as well, leaving Laudisio as the sole restaurant to operate in the central plaza.

In 2011, bankrupt bookseller Borders Books & Music shuttered its stores, adding a two-story, 26,000-square-foot hole to the portion of the mall that still bore vacant spaces where the two restaurants and club once operated.

Twenty Ninth Street mall that year also marked its 5th anniversary, a key timeframe in a young mall's life as turnover likely would result from the expiration of 5-year leases.

In the following years, the mall's southwest neighborhood gained an anchor in Nordstrom Rack and turned into a court for a bevy of fast-casual food operators. In the central plaza, Sports Authority's S.A. Elite filled the first floor of Borders while local tech firm Lijit — now Sovrn — settled its offices in Borders' former second floor.

In other areas of the center, Twenty Ninth Street added high-profile tenants such as H&M and Trader Joe's.

The arrival of S.A. Elite, Sovrn, Juwi and Genscape leaves only the former diner space as a vacancy in the central plaza.

The former Ruby's and StarLite site currently is a raw space, said Kate Taggart Honea, Twenty Ninth Street's marketing manager. When mall officials converted half of the former diner space to serve as the center's new community room, the interior was demolished, she said.

"We're still exploring some different options," she said of the former diner space. "Nothing's been signed as of yet."

Juwi's expansion brings Twenty Ninth Street's total office space to 120,000 square feet, Honea said. Boulder-based Zayo Group is the center's largest office tenant, filling just under 30,000 square feet.

Honea declined to provide occupancy percentages for the center.

As of June 30, Twenty Ninth Street was 99.1 percent occupied, according to operator Macerich Corp.'s regulatory filing made July 23 with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.

In that second-quarter filing, Macerich listed Twenty Ninth Street as its 18th best-performing retail property with sales of $589 per square foot as of June 30. Sister property FlatIron Crossing placed 25th with sales of $533 per square foot, according to the filing.

In addition to Juwi's expansion, new arrivals at the center included Lucky Brand and Protein Bar. Expected additions include Bruxie, Orange Theory Fitness and Motomaki, the latter opening in mid-to-late-September, Honea said.

Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com