WASHINGTON, May 2, 2016 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- The Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA) today announced Lauren Levinson joined the organization as vice president of communications.

Levinson will help craft the association's communications strategy and public positioning and will manage a team responsible for executive visibility, rapid response, proactive media outreach and a number of high-profile public affairs campaigns. She will report to Robert Zirkelbach, senior vice president of communications.

"Lauren is a terrific addition to the PhRMA communications team," said Zirkelbach. "She has a proven track record and brings a wealth of experience managing issue advocacy and communications campaigns across a variety of high-profile issues. Her background, skills and experience will help make us a stronger, more effective advocate on behalf of biopharmaceutical researchers and scientists all across the country."

Levinson joins PhRMA after eight years as a senior leader of Ketchum's Washington, D.C., public and corporate affairs practice. During her time at Ketchum, Levinson managed global teams serving some of the agency's largest health care and sovereign clients. She provided strategic communications counsel on a variety of policy issues in the evolving health care landscape, including implementation of the Affordable Care Act, the creation of a regulatory pathway for biosimilars and efforts to repeal the medical device tax.

Prior to Ketchum, Levinson worked on political campaigns and for other Washington, D.C., public affairs firms, including Prism Public Affairs and Powell Tate/Weber Shandwick Public Affairs.

"Biopharmaceutical researchers are changing the world by discovering treatments barely imaginable a generation ago," said Levinson. "I am excited to join PhRMA's talented communications team and to help our member companies fulfill their promise of lifesaving innovation."

About PhRMA

The Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA) represents the country's leading innovative biopharmaceutical research companies, which are devoted to discovering and developing medicines that enable patients to live longer, healthier, and more productive lives. Since 2000, PhRMA member companies have invested more than $600 billion in the search for new treatments and cures, including an estimated $51.2 billion in 2014 alone.

Connect with PhRMA

For information on how innovative medicines save lives, please visit:

www.PhRMA.org

www.FromHopetoCures.org

www.Facebook.com/PhRMA

www.Twitter.com/PhRMA

Contact: Robert Zirkelbach

202-835-3460 or newsroom@phrma.org

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20091027/PHRMALOGO

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/lauren-levinson-named-phrma-vice-president-of-communications-300260343.html

SOURCE Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America

Related Links

http://www.PhRMA.org