A notable Accountable Care arrangement and collaboration was announced yesterday between North Shore-LIJ Health System and Empire BlueCross BlueShield that will provide over 33,000 commercial and Medicare Advantage members in New York with value-based healthcare.

As per the agreement, North Shore-LIJ will coordinate care via North Shore-LIJ Premium “by creating accessible, efficient, team-based, integrated care focused on the individual needs of eligible Empire’s members,” as the press release confirms.

The latter organization is, as the press release confirms, an integrated network of 5,500 primary care and specialty physicians and other New York metropolitan-based healthcare professionals.

“This new collaboration between North Shore-LIJ and Empire will further accelerate our efforts to manage population health and increase our value-based contracting,” says Howard Gold, North Shore-LIJ’s Executive Vice President of Managed Care and Business Development. “This framework allows us to focus on objective patient outcomes, better coordinate care and align quality with payment incentives,” he adds, confirming the collaboration will also engage physicians to manage high-risk patients receiving coverage under the program.

Adds Brian Griffin, Empire BlueCross BlueShield’s President and CEO, “We are very excited about this new collaboration with North Shore-LIJ and believe that by using data in a meaningful way and managing members more effectively we can achieve better health outcomes for thousands of our members.”

Griffin additionally confirms the backbone of all Empire Accountable Care arrangements lies within a greater focus on the fostering of transparency and a tri-fold focus on disease prevention, care management, and care coordination.

Recent ups and downs for North Shore-LIH / Empire Blue Cross

Regarding other related Xtelligent Media news connected to the aforementioned organizations, as HealthITAnalytics.com reported, North Shore-LIH Health System used a $2.5 million award last year to coordinate the care of patients with kidney disease via a variety of means, including patient education, depression screenings and health population management techniques to help reduce costs.

However, North Shore-LIH was in hot security water a few short months ago in relation to the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) and technical safeguard security issues, as HealthItSecurity.com reported. Unencrypted, password protected laptops were stolen, each containing the information of nearly 18,000 North Shore patients, including names, dates of birth, and insurance identification numbers.

Empire Blue Cross faced additional phishing attack woes from an alleged cyber attack possibly involving Chinese state-sponsored hackers earlier this year, as HealthITSecurity.com additionally reported.

On a slightly brighter note moving away from the topic of stolen data efforts, in other news, Empire Blue Cross has indeed been vocal about its efforts to shift to value-based payments, as EHRIntelligence.com reported. Empire Blue Cross announced efforts in 2013 with Beacon Health Partners to shift reimbursement towards value and outcomes to maintain positive health outcomes and increase care coordination.