Buy Photo Outside of the Okolona Branch Louisville Free Public Library which is planned to be closed after 82 years in the community. The new South Central Regional Library that is planned has some petitioning that Okolona should be kept in the name. Dec. 24, 2014 (Photo: Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

The space reserved for Louisville's second regional library sits across the street from the Okolona Post Office.

It's reached by the Okolona exit on Interstate 65, and the intersection it faces — Jefferson Boulevard and McCawley Road — is immediately recognizable by Okolona residents.

But the proposed branch's name doesn't reflect the community it will be built in, a group of residents say.

They live in Okolona — not the South Central region.

"My concern is that if you don't use a place's name, it disappears," resident Louis Ray said. "... We're losing our identity."

The South Central Regional Library is part of Louisville Free Public Library's master plan to operate four large branches — three regional libraries and the Main Library — that combined serve about 90 percent of the city's population.

The library system opened the Southwest Regional Library in Valley Station in October and has plans for a third regional branch in northeast Louisville.

The South Central branch is still years away from opening, but its construction is on the fast track after the city received a $6 million state grant for the project last month. The Louisville Metro Council has also promised $6 million for the branch, and an additional $2.5 million will be raised by public donors.

The second regional branch will be similar to the first, with about 400,000 square feet that will include meeting rooms, classrooms, computers and a large children section. It will be located less than 1 1/2 miles away from the current Okolona branch on Preston Highway, which will close when the new one opens.

Buy Photo Louis Rey, Pres. of the Okolona Historical Society, stands inside the Okolona Branch Louisville Free Public Library which is planned to be closed after 82 years in the community. Rey is behind the petition that would like the new South Central Regional Library, planned to replace the Okolona Branch, to use Okolona somewhere in the new library's name. Dec. 24, 2014 (Photo: Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal)

Ray and other residents say they're excited for the development, but they're disappointed by the decision to change the branch's name — especially when the community has a history of rallying behind the library.

The first Okolona Library opened in the 1920s as a few shelves of books in the Okolona State Bank, Ray said. It later changed hands between community organizations — including the Okolona Womens Club and Southern High School — before settling in its current location on Preston Highway as part of the library system.

"It has always been the Okolona Library," Ray said. "It eventually became the Okolona branch of the public library, but it was always ran and started in association with local civic groups."

Ray and other residents say they understand the reasoning behind the new branch's name — that it will serve a region, not just one community. But they hope library officials will consider naming it the Okolona Regional Library, instead of South Central.

They are now asking people to sign a petition concerning the name change at www.change.org.

"Why should the Okolona Library change simply because the mission has changed?" Jim Reed said.

LFPL interim director Lisa Sizemore said she is aware of the residents' concerns, and the organization plans to incorporate Okolona's history into the new location.

"We want to make sure the Okolona community feels like this is their library," Sizemore said. "We want to make sure where they came from is still there somehow. We'll figure out a way to do that."

If you go:

What: Public Meeting about the South Central Regional Library

Where: Okolona Fire Station #1, 8501 Preston Highway

When: 6:30 p.m. Tuesday, Jan. 27

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1B9fQJk