Federal grant could help reduce suicides, jail overcrowding

National Suicide Prevention Lifeline 24-hour number: 1-800-273-8255

Recognizing signs of depression -Sad or irritable mood -Loss of interest in activities once enjoyed -Large changes in appetite or weight -Difficulty sleeping or oversleeping -Slow or agitated movement -Loss of energy -Feelings of worthlessness or guilt -Difficulty concentrating -Frequent thoughts of death or suicide For more information: hopecoalitionboulder.org/ Source: HOPE Coalition of Boulder County

Boulder County suicides, by year 2000: 47 2001: 39 2002: 44 2003: 38f 2004: 45 2005: 54 2006: 50 2007: 45 2008: 49 2009: 59 2010: 50 2011: 53 2012: 59 2013: 57 2014, through Aug. 12: 29 Source: Boulder County Coroner's Office

On a daily basis, Boulder County law enforcement officials are first on scene when calls come in about a person who has threatened suicide, disappeared or made troubling statements to a loved one or friend.

When many people imagine police or sheriff's deputies, they picture a gun, a badge, lights and sirens and a job "catching bad guys," said Boulder County Sheriff Joe Pelle.

But in reality, the job is much more complex.

Though statistics for calls involving suicidal parties aren't readily available, Pelle said the number of county-wide 72-hour mental health holds have increased in recent years. Overall suicide rates have been rising in the county, too, according to the coroner's office.

Though the public — and many prospective police officers and sheriff's deputies — don't realize it, responding to calls about suicidal parties or people in crisis due to mental illness have become a substantial part of officers' everyday duties.

As awareness around mental health issues grows, law enforcement agencies are working to improve training and resources for officers, whose actions often determine the outcome of a dramatic situation.

"We investigate a lot of suicides," said Longmont police spokesman Cmdr. Jeff Satur. "It's far too many. We investigate far too many suicides every year."

Training

In Boulder County and nationally, rising suicide rates have emphasized the need for more mental health resources, and for law enforcement officials to be well-trained in crisis intervention.

Though the number fluctuates each year, the number of suicides in Boulder County has been trending upward in the last 15 years. In 2001 there were 39 suicides in Boulder County, compared with 59 in 2012, according to the Boulder County Coroner's Office.

The number of 72-hour mental health holds in Boulder County has gone from about 800 in 2007 to more than 900 in 2012 — not a huge increase, Pelle said, but still a change.

Colorado law empowers law enforcement officials to take people who they deem to be a harm to themselves or others into custody, so this statistic reflects a sample of the calls officers go on involving mental health issues, Pelle said.

Most law enforcement officials — including Longmont police, Boulder police, University of Colorado police and the Boulder County Sheriff's Office — undergo a 40-hour training in crisis intervention that helps prepare them to talk to someone who is considering suicide, among other things.

The course uses professional actors so officers can practice verbal de-escalation tactics, and teaches them to make on-the-spot assessments about a person's mental health, Pelle said.

Many officers also go through one-day mental health first-aid classes as a refresher to the crisis intervention training, he said.

"'Let's stop and talk about this. What's your first name? Tell me what's going on in your life,'" said Boulder police Cmdr. Tom Trujillo demonstrating the types of questions an officer might ask a person in crisis. "We get a conversation going with them. Officers are very good at that."

Pelle said most law enforcement officials understand that because they're the first on scene, the way they respond to a suicidal party or a person in crisis can make a big difference in the final outcome of the situation.

"We tend to be very reactionary, fairly defensive, that kind of thing," Pelle said. "(The training) teaches a lot of negotiation skills. Officers are used to arriving and telling people what to do and having them comply. They learn to use verbal skills to help the person calm down, to bring them back to a place where they can actually transport them or have help come to them."

Longmont police officer Tash Petsas said the renewed emphasis on mental health in policing reminds officers to consider the whole picture, which is often more nuanced than it seems on the surface, when responding to calls.

When officers, after training in crisis intervention, respond to a call with the appropriate level of sensitivity, that also helps to build trust between law enforcement and community members, Petsas added.

"We as an industry, we as law enforcement, are learning more about mental health and being more attune to it, recognizing that, 'Hey, maybe this is a mental illness issue, not just a man or woman that's angry about something,'" he said.

"In terms of building relationships with people, it definitely helps and they can see that the officer recognizes there's a little more going on than whatever the original call was."

'State of the world'

Mental Health Partners, the nonprofit organization serving Boulder and Broomfield counties, saw a 75 percent increase in demand for mental health crisis services in the last five years. There has also been a 10 percent increase across all of the organization's services, said Beth Lonergan, chief clinical officer for Mental Health Partners.

"We are seeing record numbers of people," she said.

One reason for the increase could be that people are more willing to seek help for mental illness as it becomes less stigmatized, said Kathy Valentine, chairwoman of the HOPE Coalition of Boulder County, a group of organizations working to prevent suicide.

"There is growing knowledge that it's OK to talk about depression," Valentine said. "It's OK to talk about mental health. For many years, there was such a stigma for your family if a loved one died by suicide. It's beginning to be a little bit more acceptable."

Nationally, suicide rates declined for all Americans from 1991 to 2000, but gradually rose from 2000 to 2009, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In 2009, suicide was the 10th leading cause of death in the U.S., according to the CDC.

Lonergan said it's hard to pinpoint one reason for the increasing rates.

"We talk about the state of the world," she said. "Every generation probably thinks this, but certainly from my perspective it feels like there are huge financial pressures for people, things like unemployment, the stresses of trying to raise a family. All those things are just harder and harder.

"I also think you turn on the radio and listen to the news, we're just sort of bombarded with the latest tragedies and bad news, whether it be ebola or the war in Iraq. I don't know. It's hard to say. It's hard to say."

Jail overcrowding

Boulder County agencies also are working to reduce overcrowding in the county jail, where as many as 40 percent of inmates have mental health issues. They hope to do that by getting people with mental illness treatment earlier, before they become incarcerated.

In Boulder County, people with behavioral health conditions are three times more likely to interact with law enforcement officials, according Mental Health Partners.

Once they're incarcerated, mentally ill inmates tend to have longer stays because they struggle to make bond and have a harder time advocating for themselves.

"It's a much more complicated picture," Lonergan said.

There are many resources for when people get out of jail, Lonergan said, but not many working on the front end — until now.

The city of Boulder and Boulder County have been awarded a three-year, $966,666 grant from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, a federal organization working to reduce the impact of substance abuse and mental illness.

With funding from the grant, the Boulder and Longmont police departments are staffing mental health professionals to help get people in crisis the resources they need more quickly so they don't end up in jail.

The Longmont police department started staffing mental health professionals, called EDGE (Early Diversion Get Engaged) workers, in March of this year. In Boulder, six EDGE workers started working at the police department in early August.

In Longmont and Boulder, the grant has funded both crisis clinicians, or people with a background in psychology and social work, and peer support specialists, who have personal experience with mental illness, Lonergan said.

A police officer who is dispatched to a call can request an EDGE worker if they'd like additional mental health support, she said. From there, the EDGE worker may help de-escalate a situation and will help the person connect with resources and treatment options in the community.

They'll also follow-up to ensure that the person is getting help, Lonergan said.

"We're trying to help build (the officers') capabilities," Lonergan said. "They didn't go into law enforcement because they wanted to be psychologists."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Sarah Kuta at 303-473-1106 or kutas@dailycamera.com