John Olsen (Photo: Special to the Register)

John Olsen says he’s working less and making less because of the requirements of the Affordable Care Act.

Last year, the Ankeny Community School District capped at 29 the number of hours he could work each week as a substitute teacher. The reason was the law’s mandate that larger employers provide health care coverage for those who work an average of at least 30 hours a week.

“My guess is that this requirement cost me personally around $1,500 last year,” Olsen wrote the Reader’s Watchdog. “It also hurt the Ankeny School District in that there were many days last year that they were severely short of substitutes.”

Olsen’s personal experience would seem to solidify what many critics feared.

Republican presidential candidates have been pledging to repeal or replace Obamacare, saying it is a job killer and hinders the country’s economic recovery.

Union officials have predicted more workers will be phased from full-time to part-time to get around the mandate.

But among Democratic presidential candidates, support for the Affordable Care Act has been universal.

And most research released thus far has concluded the act has dramatically increased the number of insured Americans with a nominal effect on the labor market or the economy.

This year, employers with 100 or more full-time employees have to insure at least 70 percent of their full-time workers under the 2010 act. In 2016, businesses with 50 or more full-time workers have to do the same for at least 95 percent of full-time workers, or pay a penalty.

Full-time is defined as an average of 30 hours or more.

Olsen, 46, wonders how many other school districts have cut substitute teacher hours since the requirements went into effect.

He says he’s heard at least one Iowa district was having teachers sign a health care waiver, so subs could work more than 30 hours a week without being provided health care benefits.

And he questions who regulates whether employers are really keeping workers to less than 30 hours a week when they want to bypass the health care requirements.

“This is a national law. This is just one school district. What about all sorts of other employers? If school districts can get away with it, how is this part of the … law being enforced?”

Some subs sign off on no health care

Most districts in the metro, including Johnston, Waukee and Des Moines schools, do not limit the hours of substitute teachers.

Waukee schools officials admit they looked at the option but determined it “would degrade our ability to put substitutes in the classroom each and every day,” according to Terry Welker, director of human resources.

“A normal substitute works a seven-hour day. If they work five days a week and we had those controls in place (the 30-hour limitation), they wouldn’t be eligible to work on Fridays, which in turn, would negatively impact our teachers and students,” Welker said.

But the Ankeny district admits it is making a big push to reduce the need for substitutes.

Samantha Kampman, communications coordinator for the district, also confirmed the hours of substitutes were capped.

“In light of our strategic plan and budget, we will not have substitutes work greater than 30 hours per week in this district. We also have decided not to utilize insurance waivers as advised by our legal counsel,” Kampman wrote in a statement.

Contrary to what Olsen heard, the Ames Community School District doesn’t require subs who work over 30 hours to sign voluntary waivers saying they don’t need health insurance, a school official said.

But any employee of the district can opt out of coverage if they don’t need it by signing a waiver, according to spokesperson Kathy Hanson.

The eight to 12 long-term substitutes the district uses every year do receive health care coverage, along with other full-time employees, she said.

How is it all regulated?

Larger employers have to send their workers and the IRS notices about whether each worker was eligible for insurance, was offered it and received it.

Violations of wage and hours rules, including Obamacare requirements, would be regulated by the U.S. Department of Labor.

Early numbers suggest act's success

Iowa Workforce Development officials tell me they have not tracked what has happened to worker hours in the state since the Affordable Care Act's requirements went into effect this year.

Some researchers, like Maxim Pinkovskiy, an economist with the Federal Reserve Bank, have concluded that the act does not appear to have "substantially slowed the recovery or hurt it in its first year of implementation."

But “its long-run impact on the U.S. economy remains to be seen," Pinkovskiy said in research released this month.

In some specific sectors nationally — franchises like Subway, grocery chains, colleges and universities, school districts — employers have reported reducing hours of workers because of Obamacare.

And there is some early evidence from the Bureau of Labor Statistics suggesting slightly more part-timers are being capped at 30 hours in the last two years.

For workers like Olsen, that stings. The whole purpose of the act, as he points out, was for more workers to have access to insurance.

“Do I wish every company sucked it up and did what’s right by their employees? Absolutely,” he said. “But the fact is hours are getting cut to save on the bottom line. Whether we think that’s good or justifiable, it’s a reality.”

But according to research released in September by the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, a health care policy research organization, there’s been no widespread shift.

In fact, fewer than one-half of 1 percent of U.S. employees work 30 to 34 hours a week and are uninsured.

Nationally, worker hours have been trending upward and the unemployment rate has dropped from around 9 percent to 5.5. percent since 2010.

Some part-time workers have also found that being insured through an exchange is cheaper than taking employer insurance.

Economist Gary Burtless at the Brookings Institution and Gary Claxton, a vice president at the Kaiser Foundation, have said the changing national economy has affected the labor market as much or more than Obamacare.

“I don’t know if you’ll ever be able to go back and say what happened," Claxton said. "It's a big workforce,and a big country. It may not show up in statistics.”

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1LAyCRY