In an interview on Mornings with Maria on the FOX Business Network, GOP hopeful Carly Fiorina discussed how she plans to challenge the status quo for working women in America.

Continue Reading Below

“Leaders are made, not born,” she said. “I think leaders, through all of their life’s experiences about which I have been completely transparent-- whether it was getting fired at Hewlett Packard… I’ve been absolutely upfront about that from the day it happened. Sometimes when you challenge the status quo you make enemies -- it's why so few people lead.” she said.

Fiorina said she plans to challenge the status quo through “the power of technology."

“We need a leader in the White House who understands that their highest priority is to unlock the potential of this nation now. I am convinced that the citizens of this nation actually know what we need to do. The reason they are so frustrated and sick of politics and politicians is because some of these answers are so obvious and people give big speeches and yet nothing really seems to change,” she said.

She commented on Hillary Clinton’s e-mail scandal.

More On This... Carly Fiorina: U.S. is back in leadership business

“It now appears that this server has been with some IT company in New Jersey since 2013-- I’m pretty sure they scrubbed it thoroughly but it reminds me of the old adage, the cover up is always worse than the crime. The more we learn here, the more it appears that Hillary Clinton very purposefully and deliberately used a home-brewed system and made sure nobody knew what was on that home-brewed system,” she said.

Continue Reading Below ADVERTISEMENT

She said, if elected president, she would repeal Obamacare.

“We have never tried the free market. Health insurance has always been a cozy little arrangement between regulators and health insurance companies. We used to do it on the 50 state level-- now all we have done is nationalize that. Let’s actually have health insurance companies have to compete for everybody’s business across state lines like we do homeowners insurance or car insurance or a whole set of other products,” she said.

Fiorina also explained how she would approach relations with Russia and Vladimir Putin.

“I won’t talk to him. I’ve met him and we’ve talked way too much to him, but, Vladimir Putin will not stop until he faces, senses, strength and resolve on the other side. It is why we must immediately begin rebuilding the sixth fleet. It is why we must immediately begin building the missile defense program in Poland. I would conduct regular, aggressive military exercises in the Baltic States and I would be moving troops in and out of Germany. Vladimir Putin will get the message, but we ought to quit talking to him,” she said.