When Donna Allie, president and founder of Team Clean, Inc. launched her business in 1983, she was down on her luck and unable to find employment.

Allie started out cleaning homes on the Main Line and has grown the company into one of the region’s largest minority-owned janitorial services in the region, with more than 700 employees.

Team Clean offers cleaning solutions to commercial offices, education, government, sports and entertainment venues. It’s located at the Philadelphia Navy Yard complex.

Allie was one of four local successful business leaders who shared viewpoints during a panel discussion titled CEO Evolution. She was joined by Nancy Glass, CEO of Nancy Glass Productions; Garry Maddox, former championship player for the Philadelphia Phillies and CEO of A. Pomerantz & Company and Tom Scannapieco, president of Scannapieco Development Corporation.

Garry Maddox, a key member of the Philadelphia Phillies 1980 World Series championship team, talked about how he went from center field to the C-suite. After retiring from baseball in 1986, he founded World Wide Concessions, a national products company specializing in branded gifts and packaging. In 1995, he became majority owner and CEO of A. Pomerantz & Company.

Under Maddox, A. Pomerantz & Co. evolved from an office furniture distributor to offering office solutions for clients in commercial, healthcare, education and government sectors.

“I think the best decision that I made in my life was to retire here in Philadelphia,” Maddox said. “By retiring here the business community reached out to me. The Phillies continued to work with me, so I had that foundation. I had mentors and people who wanted me to do well.

“I’ve learned to always have people around me that are smarter than me and to always give back to the community, so those are the things that I focus on in almost everything that I do. I learned a lot of lessons the hard way, but I love what I do.”

The panel discussion focused on what it takes to build and maintain a successful company. It was hosted by the Philadelphia office of accounting and consulting firm Citrin Cooperman, Temple University’s Fox School of Business and Region’s Business, and moderated by Mark Carrow, managing partner, Philadelphia office, Citrin Cooperman.

“One thing that our firm recognizes is that when we are engaging and dealing with CEOs is that they are very unique,” Carrow said. “If you look at our four panelists, each of them has a different background. Each of them found a different way to become very successful. To be a successful CEO you have to do a lot of things. You have to be a leader. You have been a communicator. You have to have the ability to gather knowledge.”

The business leaders shared some of the knowledge they have garnered over time and how they have overcome various challenges.

“When I first started this company, it was really about supporting myself and my family and then it (transformed) into helping other people,” Allie said.

She recalled an incident that occurred in the ’80s, when she learned that an employee who cleaned Veterans Stadium after the games, would take the fans leftover snacks home to his family and neighbors who lived in the projects.

“That sort of touched my heart,” Allie recalled. “That was a motivation for me to continue on, to run this business, to provide jobs (and) to do the best that I could possible do.”

One of the biggest obstacles that Allie faced during her time in business was her employees becoming unionized.

The advent of the Affordable Care Act has also had an impact on Team Clean’s bottom line.

When it was time for Allie to renew her employee’s health care plans, their premiums doubled. In order to remain competitive, Allie did not want to pass the increase in costs on to her customers. Due to the increase, Team Clean employees are now paying about nine percent of their salaries for health insurance.

“These are the kinds of things that we have to do to stay competitive because the end users in my industry are buying (based) on price,” Allie added.

Nancy Glass, a former local television personality, addressed how her company has remained competitive in a challenging environment. Her firm has produced more than 2,000 hours of programming for major networks including A&E, Animal Planet, HGTV, Travel and TLC. Despite her success, Glass has to overcome to hurdle of being headquartered in Bala Cynwyd, whereas most production firms are located in Los Angeles and New York.

To remain competitive, she said her company focuses on constantly looking for new ideas.

“In order to be competitive we have found that you have to run faster and jump higher,” she said. “My business is consisted of — you come up with your own ideas and you go out and you pitch them. Our pitch process is different from other people’s pitch process. We would do anything to be fastest, have a sexier look (and) be more interesting. In our business, because thousands of people do what we do, people rely on our brand. Your brand comes from the ideas that you are able to be successful with.”

Glass said Pennsylvania’s film production tax credit program has been instrumental to her business because the money is used to help train employees and purchase cutting-edge equipment.

During the panel discussion, Tom Scannapieco of Scannapieco Development Corporation (SDC), addressed how he carved out a niche in Philadelphia’s ultra-luxury real estate market.

Scannapieco started out in real estate industry by flipping homes in the Philadelphia’s Art Museum neighborhood 30 years ago. He founded SDC which has been a driving force in the real estate industry for more than 25 years. SDC recently developed 1706 Rittenhouse, a 31-story tower featuring 4,200 square foot, full floor residences with prices ranging from $4 million to $12 million. The project set new records for the most expensive residence to sell in Center City. Now SDC is gearing up to break ground next spring on 500 Walnut St., a 26-story tower that will feature 37 residences.

Scannapieco said their business concept works because there is a specific buyer in mind. He noted that most luxury building in Philadelphia offer studios, one to three bedroom units and a penthouse.

“They are selling the location and they are selling luxury, but they don’t have a very specific buyer in mind. We are selling a full floor of a building and we have one buyer in mind,” said Scannapieco.

“Everything we do in that building is focused on that ultra-lux buyer, so we are able to tweak every decision in the building to make the right product.”