3954768

Air Force Col. Rob Maness is making waves in the Louisiana Senate race.

When Maness, a political rookie, first threw his hat into the ring to challenge Louisiana Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu, he did not make much of a splash. Republicans already had one candidate in the race, Louisiana Republican Rep. Bill Cassidy, and the $4 million he had raised made Maness’s low six-figures look paltry.

But last week, Maness got the endorsement of the Senate Conservatives Fund.

“That changes the picture dramatically,” Maness said of the endorsement. The truth in Maness’ statement is evidenced in his fundraising: Maness raised just over $100,000 over the past two quarters. After the endorsement, he told The Daily Caller, “we’ve raised more than half of that in the last five days.”

That gives Maness the potential to shake up the race. Louisiana has a jungle primary, so instead of each party having its own party and then sending one nominee to a general election, everybody goes straight into the general election. If no candidate gets a majority of the vote, the top two candidates go to a run off. If Republicans divide their support between Maness and Cassidy, that could give Landrieu an edge. But Maness dismissed that logic, calling it “a concern for the establishment GOP,” a group he makes it quite clear he does not think highly of. “They’re coalescing behind a candidate that doesn’t have the right message, doesn’t have the right voting history in congress and his time in the state legislature … and has supported and defended Mary Landrieu and her approach and the Democratic Party’s approach to things for many, many years, and even criticized President [Ronald] Reagan a time or two in public letters to the editor,” he told TheDC.

All of that is a dig at Cassidy, who once wrote a letter to the editor criticizing Reagan and encouraging people to vote for Dukakis, gave money to Landrieu in 2002, and as a state legislator, proposed healthcare bills that had components similar to Obamacare.

Maness makes a point, however, of not going after Cassidy by name, in what is perhaps a nod to Reagan’s 11th Commandment. Asked why Cassidy is the wrong candidate, Maness replied: “The question really is, is what’s the right candidate and the right set of principles to defeat Mary Landrieu… And that’s the question I’ll answer.”

Maness spoke about the political landscape in terms of ‘us’ and ‘them.’