Richard Rothschild is correct about one thing; we "frustrated Republicans" are sick and tired of the establishment. Unfortunately, that's where the veracity ends and the paranoid communist fantasies begin. Despite his often colorful raving about secret Marxists, "thousand years of darkness" and our poor trampled Constitution, Rothschild has failed again to explain why as a local official, he is concerned with such things or why they are his priority.

It's actually the same reason Republicans are sick of the Tea Party and unwilling to elect a religious zealot to the office of president. We don't think the Constitution is under siege, we don't see a "crisis of epic biblical proportions," we learned that Obamacare wasn't a job killer after all and that the national debt isn't collapsing the economy. Reasonably, we also don't believe that Obama isn't an American citizen or a closet Muslim, nor that our individual freedoms are in the cross hairs from government thugs intent on taking away our Second Amendment rights. In fact, the majority of Republicans are pretty sane and able to discern fact from political spin.

Whether we like him or not, Donald Trump remains the odds-on favorite to secure the Republican nomination for president, ironically, because of the splintered factions within the Republican party. The longer the other candidates stay in the race, the more likely Trump will be nominated with just a plurality. While Trump has won primaries by double-digit margins, he still has yet to earn even 50 percent of the Republican vote. I realize the math may be less appealing than Rothschild's conjecture, but personally, I'm more concerned about having a president who embarrasses America than I am concerned about their courage.

I must continue to take umbrage, however, with Rothschild's ignorance of his elected office to expound his political viewpoints, which have no bearing on his job as a Carroll County commissioner. He's been in office for over five years and has virtually nothing to show for it but political blather. Has anyone had the misfortune to drive on Route 27 from Mount Airy to Taylorsville during rush hour? Rothschild's abject failure to support any improvements to this section of state road has completely log-jammed his constituents and businesses in this important county corridor. Rothschild should resign or start doing the job for which he was elected. Leave the political commentary to the journalists.

Ross Dangel

Eldersburg