TRENTON — On Sunday, a new state law takes effect that bars many companies from asking job applicants if they have criminal histories until they've been granted a job interview.

But the rules to implement the law have yet to be adopted, and the law's advocates are fuming.

Gov. Chris Christie signed the "Opportunity to Compete Act" in August, but the New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development only this month submitted a copy of draft rules to the Office of Administrative Law on how to implement it - the first step in a lengthy process.

At the very least, it's going to be at least several months before the rules are formally adopted.

"It's hard to infer anything other than that the department does not consider this to be anything close to a high priority," said Craig Levine, legal director for the New Jersey Institute for Social Justice, which took the lead advocating for the law.

Brian Murray, a spokesman for the labor department, said there's nothing unusual about taking six months to submit draft rules.

"It certainly is not uncommon in New Jersey for the careful and complex process of drafting rules and adopting rules under newly passed legislation to go well beyond the effective date of the legislation. Any fair research of New Jersey's legislative process will bear that out," Murray said.

On Wednesday, the labor department posted a draft copy of the rules on its website — a few days after NJ Advance Media began inquiring about them. Murray insisted the inquiry had nothing to do with the decision to post them.

The campaign for the law was dubbed "ban the box" — referring to a box on applications asking about criminal histories. The law does ban that box, and requires companies give interviews to candidates before asking about criminal histories. It applies to companies with 15 or more employees, and there are some exceptions, such as law enforcement and any jobs that laws already require criminal background checks.

Christie signed the law on Aug. 11 as part of a larger package of laws to overhaul the criminal justice system.

"This is going to make a huge difference for folks who have paid their debts to society, who want to start their lives over again and are going to have an opportunity to do just that in our state." Christie said at the time. "That's what people want and it's what they expect and it's what they deserved from those of us they entrust with public office."

Companies that violate the law are to face fines of $1,000 for the first violation, $5,000 for the second and $10,000 for each violation after that.

"Regardless of whether the rules are in place, a law that is adopted by the Legislature and signed by the governor goes into effect on the date specified in the legislation, and the Opportunity to Compete Act is no different," Murray, the Department of Labor spokesman, said. "The department will begin to enforce the law on its effective date of March 1 with the same diligence and procedures the department has always employed in the enforcement of all other labor related laws in New Jersey."

That wasn't the case on at least two high profile laws under the authority of other state departments. The state's medical marijuana law was signed by former Gov. Jon Corzine as he was leaving office in 2010, but the rules were not adopted by the Department of Health under the Christie administration until 2011 and the first dispensary didn't open until the end of 2012.

Also in 2010, Corzine signed a law requiring chain restaurants to post calorie counts on their menus. The Department of Health under Christie delayed the law's implementation because the federal Affordable Care Act, passed not long after, had the same provision. The federal Food and Drug Administration signed off on rules only this past November, and they'll take effect later this year all over the country.

On the other hand, Christie's highly-touted overhaul to the state's teacher tenure law, which was signed in August 2012 which took effect for the 2012-2013 school year, didn't have rules in place at the start of the school year. But by February of 2013, the first round had been fully adopted, according to the New Jersey Principles and Supervisors Association.

Levine said the state needs to set rules so companies know exactly what their responsibilities are, and job seekers know what their rights are. He questioned how the Opportunity to Compete Act will be enforced without any rules in place, even if employers by law are obligated to follow it.

"Is there a reasonable chance that violations of that obligation will be enforced?" Levine said. "The answer appears to be sadly, no."

Levine also doubted that job seekers would know how to file complaints with the department. Murray responded that as of Wednesday, the department's website made that clear.

Murray said the department is consulting with business advocacy groups on the rules, and that a public hearing on them is scheduled for April 7. That's followed by a 60-day comment period, followed by any revisions that need to be made before it goes back to the governor's office for a final 30-day review before adoption.

Michael Egenton, a lobbyist for the New Jersey Chamber of Commerce, said his organization is working to inform its members of the upcoming law and to consult their attorneys on compliance.

Egenton defended the Department of Labor and Workforce Development's efforts, and its commissioner, Hal Wirths.

"Just like anything in state government, he's limited with what his staff can do. He's strapped for resources," Egenton said.

Jerome Harris, the interim president of the Institute, said that he and Levine met with department officials in August to talk about the law's implementation. But since then, he said they've been ignored.

"We've made attempts to follow up," Harris sais. "We've requested meetings. And as of today, we don't have any better sense of what their game plan is than when we met with them in late summer/early fall."

Murray responded that his department's staff "listened intently to their ideas and suggestions, and the department remains thankful for the time they spent with us." He added that they'll have a chance to comment on the rule proposals over the next couple months.

State Sen. Sandra Cunningham (D-Hudson), the law's lead sponsor and a personal friend of Christie's, said she's going to make sure that advocates' concerns are heard by the department.

"I will be meeting with them, and I won't be blown off," she said in a phone interview. "I'm sure that we'll get it up and running."

Brent Johnson may be reached at bjohnson@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @johnsb01. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.