Gov. Doug Ducey, celebrating 100 days in office. (Photo: Yvonne Wingett Sanchez)

While Gov. Doug Ducey hops aboard his "Opportunity Express" bus today to celebrate 100 days in office, close to 200,000 Arizonans might be wondering about their opportunity to get decent health care soon.

Ducey on Friday quietly signed House Bill 2643, barring the state from spending any public money to run a health insurance exchange under the Affordable Care Act.

Arizona is one of 34 states that declined to set up a state-run exchange, forcing the feds to step in.

PREVIOUSLY: Budget packs wallop for universities, hospitals

But the U.S. Supreme Court could soon bar federal exchanges from offering subsidized coverage.

Opponents of the ACA sued, contending that the law doesn't allow subsidies for insurance purchased through the federally run exchanges – only insurance purchased through state-run exchanges. The ACA says subsidies can be offered "through an exchange established by a state" but says nothing about federally run exchanges.

The court is expected to decide the matter in June.

And if the high court rules that only state-run exchanges may offered subsidized policies?

Well then, it appears that close to 200,000 Arizonans may be out of luck – or, in the alternative, the state would presumably have to pick up the tab without the feds' help. (I'm quite sure the Arizona Legislature will be happy to help...)

Then again, I'm sure the hospitals will be quite happy to resume picking up the crushing tab for uncompensated care.

Won't they?

Ducey told reporters on Tuesday that he won't budge on Arizona running an exchange if the Supreme Court bars subsidies via a federally-run exchange.

"I'm not in favor of a state exchange. I've been outspoken on this issue and what my opinion is of Obamacare and that I'm no fan of it," he told reporters on Tuesday. "But let's see how the court rules. And then we will have a plan of action."

Sure. Like that plan of action for the $24 million Arizona Public School Achievement District – the one aimed at funneling money to charter schools?

Thus far, there isn't one, yet lawmakers funded the district anyway.

Not to worry, Ducey says. If the court tosses out the federally run exchanges, "I think we'll be prepared with some good ideas."

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1FU89KF