I am one of the seven remaining people in the world who still reads a hard copy of the newspaper. To be honest, I get it mostly for the sports section as it’s something to read while I’m working out. But I do glance at the other sections, even if to just read headlines.

A couple of years ago I noticed how the columnist, Charles Krauthammer, seemed to be the only opinion writer who stuck 100% to his/her political agenda. There are democratic and republican leaning writers of all sorts, but I can tell you at least one time they’ve said something nice about the “other side.” But Krauthammer is the exception. We killed Bin Laden – no credit to the President. The stock market is doing amazing – no credit to the President. Wall St. Reform?? It’s all bad to Chuck. Basically there hasn’t been one instance that he’s said something nice about President Obama. I don’t even recall him giving a backhanded compliment.

It’s become a lame sort of game I play to see how long he can keep his streak going. I get that it’s his job to take as hard of an angle as he can and he doesn’t have to be objective. He also doesn’t have to be credible, but I don’t think he cares about that. You can be against Obamacare in the real world, but still recognize that it has some good points. But that’s not Chuck’s world. His most recent column was to pick out every bad thing former defense secretary William Gates said in his memoir and not offer one positive point of view of the President.

Of course this type of “professionalism” happens on Fox News, MSNBC and many other places, but you’d think that newspapers would have some higher standard, even when it comes to syndicated columnists. Instead, the behavior of the Tribune and others is to get a few from the right, a few from the left and call it a day.

I’m bringing this up in a law blog because it reminds me of a lot of miserable lawyers that I know. They went down a particular career path that makes them good money, but they are miserable in what they do every day. That said, they don’t have the ability to do anything else without a huge pay cut. So they keep at it even though their job makes them miserable people. I love what I do legally, but I can’t say that if I started to hate it I’d have the guts to cut my income dramatically. Sounds easy to say, but when you have a wife, kids, mortgage, desire to travel, etc., changing careers takes guts.

I’m both disgusted and fascinated by Krauthammer. I do wonder how authentic he is as compared to playing a character that supports his gravy train. But I’ll bet a nickel that he didn’t get in to journalism with the thought that he could just write hacky pieces every week to make a living, no more than someone who went to law school with thoughts of changing the world envisioned themselves defending insurance companies all day.

On another note, here are some great bad job photos I came across.

Advertisement: