By Rex L. Troute, The Hawk Eye, Burlington, Iowa McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

March 09 --For most men, their business ends when they decide to retire. In Jim Walker's instance, his life work and passions, accounting and investment advising, will be carried on by two reputable firms.

"I knew it was going to happen nine or 10 months ago," Walker said of his retirement plans and his search for the right companies to take over his businesses.

Menke & Co. , a 30-employee firm based in West Point , has taken over Walker's accounting clients as of Jan. 1 . Buckingham Asset Management , based in St. Louis , has purchased Walker's investment advisory firm, Great River Asset Management, as of April 1 .

Walker started his accounting practice in his hometown of Burlington in 1973. He was joined by Jim Egerton in 1976 as the firm was known as Walker & Egerton P.C. and eventually grew to become CPA Associates P.C. In 2007, Walker became a one-man accounting firm again as Walker Tax Service LLC .

"I agreed to stay on for two years," Walker said of the deal worked out with Menke & Co. "I've been doing this for 40 years. When I deal with people, its one on one. I wanted somebody that was a clone of me 40 years ago. I wanted somebody with a strong tax background."

Walker found what he wanted in Menke & Co. and Jay Henrich , who will manage the Burlington office.

Henrich's work experience includes three years with Ernst & Young in Des Moines and four years with a large local firm in Des Moines . With a wife from Houghton , Henrich's move to southeast Iowa was eventual where he worked for CPA Associates in Burlington , and started with Menke & Co. in September.

"Jim's got a good practice with many good clients," Henrich said. "He's full of knowledge. You can't beat having him around for two years."

Eventually, Menke & Co. will move the accounting practice from the fifth floor of the Burlington Building at 320 N. Third St. , to the second floor.

Walker admits he was picky and may have taken less money for Walker Tax Service in choosing the right company to take over his clients.

Years into his accounting practice, Walker discovered many of his clients could use good investment advice. So in 1999, Walker formed Great River Asset Management, and as of Dec. 31 , the company was managing $131 million for its clients.

Choosing a firm to take over his investment advisory business became a search for the right fit.

"It is the same investment philosophy I've been using," Walker said of Buckingham Asset Management .

Walker's belief was the "markets work," and he didn't jump onto any short-term trends.

Buckingham Asset Management has 140 employees in the following locations: St. Louis ; Dallas ; Cupertino , Irvine and Santa Rosa, Calif. , and now Burlington . The company manages or administers $6.2 billion in client assets.

"I cut the deal with them last June," Walker said. "It is an incredible opportunity. Buckingham has a national presence. They have horsepower on their team."

And as far as his replacement in the Burlington office, Walker told them, "I think I've got the guy for you."

Once a year, Walker would have lunch with Kent Schmidgall , who worked for Northwestern Mutual in Burlington .

"It was tremendous respect for Jim, whether he knew it or not," Schmidgall said of their annual luncheons. "We shared the same investment philosophies."

When Walker approached Schmidgall about being the one to man the Burlington office for Buckingham Asset Management , "It pulled the rug from under my feet" in a good way, Schmidgall said.

Schmidgall's work experience began as an IT manager for Hawkeye Concrete in Mediapolis in 2004. He became the head of the accounting department in 2006, and in 2009 decided to explore other opportunities at Northwestern Mutual.

"I cut my teeth on selling insurance. I started shifting toward asset management and comprehensive financial planning," Schmidgall said. "I built my practice with Northwestern Mutual."

Schmidgall eventually will manage the Burlington office, but Walker has agreed to stay on for two years to make for a smooth transition. Schmidgall began training and working with Buckingham Asset Management in October.

Another part of Buckingham is BAM Advisor Services, which manages or administers $15.7 billion in assets.

"They provide me with intellectual capital," Walker said.

Having been the boss since '73, Walker said he will have to grow accustomed to working for somebody else for the next two years. But he is glad both his accounting and investing clients will have time to get used to Henrich and Schmidgall, respectively.

"I wanted an easy arrangement," Walker said.

One thing is for sure, Walker created two successful businesses, and his hard work will be carried on by companies approved by him.

___

(c)2014 The Hawk Eye (Burlington, Iowa)

Visit The Hawk Eye (Burlington, Iowa) at www.thehawkeye.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 807

[jetpack-related-posts]