With the ink just dry on a series of economic measures, including opening the country’s state-run oil and gas industry to private investment, Mexico’s government is taking on a bigger role in efforts to channel the country’s economic resources into a more productive whole.

Twice in two days, the ministers of economy and finance got together with leaders of the country’s main business groups to showcase cooperation they hope will contribute to solving subpar economic growth.

On Wednesday, producers, retailers and government officials made an early start unveiling preparations for this year’s Buen Fin—the Mexican version of Black Friday—in hopes that sales over the four-day weekend in November will reach 200 billion pesos ($14.9 billion), up from last year’s 173 billion pesos.

A shopping mall in Mexico City. Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

On Thursday, some of those same business leaders attended a press conference in which Finance Minister Luis Videgaray and Economy Minister Ildefonso Guajardo outlined a proposed law to raise productivity and competitiveness, an initiative that calls for longer-term planning and greater cooperation between the private and public sectors.

The proposal by no means implies a return to the policies of the 1960s and 1970s, where the state controlled means of production or substituted the private sector through economic activism, Mr. Videgaray said.

It seeks a “modern economic development policy” where the private sector provides jobs, generates capital and creates value. “But the private sector can do that better when it teams up with the public sector, particularly the government,” he said.

It does, however, mark a departure from the idea that the best industrial policy is to have no industrial policy, he added.

Loss of productivity in recent decades has been one of the main reasons for Mexico’s meager economic growth, which has averaged just 2.4% a year since 1980, and the cause lies partly in the country’s large informal economy.

The proposed law, officials said, aims among other things to bring a host of small- and medium-sized businesses into large productive chains, creating incentives for growth and for joining the “formal economy,” bolstering the domestic market. The economy grew just 1.1% in 2013, and the government is projecting 2.7% growth this year.

Cooperation on the Buen Fin sales event, now in its fourth year, is a good example of how the government can contribute to enhancing economic activity, says Deutsche Bank’s chief Mexico economist Alexis Milo. “Big retailers always had their special offers, but it was necessary to concentrate those efforts into one weekend and expand it.”

The number of participating companies will rise to 60,000 this year from 40,000 in 2013, officials said, and the Finance Ministry is doubling the amount of money-back prizes it will offer to people who buy with credit or debit cards to 500 million pesos from 250 million.