The non-denominational West Plains Christian Clinic at the Ozarks Medical Center Doctors Pavilion on Alaska Avenue provides free medical care for people who fall below 125 percent of the federal poverty level and have no Medicare, Medicaid or veterans’ health benefits. The clinic’s only financial support comes from community donations and much more is needed. There are no residency requirements for patients.

Executive Director Len Campo writes: “The clinic also works with the patients to make life-changes, like cessation of smoking, losing weight, getting more exercise, tracking their diabetes readings on a consistent basis. We also offer, if asked, Christian counseling and referrals for behavioral health. All of this is done without regard to race, religion or creed. Our volunteers, whether medical or lay, offer compassionate and non-judgmental support. Sometimes, just a listening ear is good medication for them.’’

Examples of some cases include:

– Doctor recognized severe heart problems and immediately sent patient to emergency room. Surgery was performed that evening;

– Patient had extremely high blood pressure and when sent to ER it was treated and brought under control;

– Patient who had a stroke came in for medications and doctors noticed patient had a broken arm. He had not realized that due to the stroke;

– Woman who hadn’t seen a doctor in five years complained of heavy bleeding. It was found she had cancer and was referred to OMC for surgery with follow-up. She is now living a healthy productive life.

Cost to serve a patient at a visit is $20, excluding all services provided by Ozarks Medical Center. All medical staff are volunteers.

All that should catch the eye of the public but many don’t know the clinic exists. It started in July 2010 and at this point a crew of volunteers has put brochures in businesses throughout a nine-county area to try to get the word out. Campo, West Plains, spends a great deal of time raising money. There are plans for a fundraising bike ride in the spring of 2016, with hopes of continuing it as a yearly event. For more information or to help support the non-profit clinic through monetary donations call 417-256-9722 or come to the clinic on Alaska Avenue 9 a.m. to noon Tuesdays and Thursdays.

Startup costs for the clinic were largely funded by OMC, which donated medical equipment and the use of four exam rooms.

Since 2010 a total of 3,024 patients have been seen, with 585 of those in 2015.

Clinic nights when doctors, pharmacists and nurses deal with patient care are the second and fourth Thursdays of each month, beginning at 6 p.m. Doctors will see 15 to 35 patients in a very fast paced atmosphere. The clinic is also open 9 a.m. to noon Tuesdays and Thursdays to interview patients, help in scheduling tests and processing paperwork.

Volunteers include 27 doctors and family nurse practitioners; 45 nurses of various services, triage, doctor assistance, blood samples and more. Twelve ministers provide spiritual and emotional counseling. There are 12 pharmacists and four pharmacy technicians. Lay volunteers have provided a total of 20,280 hours of support service.

Services provided include family practice and internal medicine visits, basic gynecological exams, dispensing of medications ordered by medical practitioners, $4 scripts given to patients for medications not available at the clinic’s pharmacy, as well as filling out and filing Patient Assistance paperwork for free medications from pharmaceutical companies. There also are referrals for specialists such as physical therapy, behavioral health, MRI’s and CAT scans, ear/nose/throat, urology, cancer, surgeries, etc.

Medications come from pharmaceutical companies through the patient assistance programs and from nursing homes. Campo stresses the medications must be unopened and in date.

And, with the advent of the federal Affordable Care Act, the clinic is now purchasing larger quantities of medications, he said. In 2013 the usable medications donated to the clinic were worth $141,236.

The clinic does not issue narcotic pain medications.