Surf City lifeguards place the Portuguese man-of-wars in Ziploc plastic bags and dispose of them in regular trash, which state authorities said is appropriate. (Photo: Courtesy Surf City Councilman Peter Hartney)

It's an invasion!

Well, that would seem to be the appropriate hyperbole after a number of venomous Portuguese man-of-wars began washing up on the beachfront of this Long Beach Island town on Saturday.

Surf City Councilman Peter Hartney reports that more than two dozen such creatures have been washing up on the shore of his 0.9-square-mile borough since about 10:30 a.m.

Lifeguards have been actively collecting each marine cnidarian as it washes ashore, placing the creatures in Ziploc plastic sandwich bags and disposing of them in the regular trash, Hartney said.

"There must be a pretty good colony offshore," Hartney said. "I would say they're about the size of a small rubber ball."

Last weekend, a Portuguese man-of-war washed up on the Harvey Cedars beachfront, just north of Surf City, prompting some alarm. For humans, a man-of-war sting is excruciatingly painful, but rarely deadly, Hartney pointed out.

"But beware — even dead man-of-wars washed up on shore can deliver a sting," the councilman warned. "Beachgoers are advised if they find a man-of-war washed up in the beach to advise a lifeguard of the location of and not to touch it as the tentacles can still sting."

A Portuguese man-of-war looks like jellyfish, but they are not. Moreover, a man-of-war is what is called a siphonophore, meaning it is not a single animal but a colony of organisms working together.

The man-of-war comprises four separate polyps. It gets its name from the uppermost polyp, a gas-filled bladder, or pneumatophore, which sits above the water and somewhat resembles an old warship at full sail. Man-of-wars are also known as bluebottles for the purple-blue color of their pneumatophores.

Colonies of the creatures are found most often in warm, tropical and subtropical waters of the world's oceans and have most likely floated north on the warm waters of the Gulf Stream in this season's particularly strong east/northeast wind and ocean current, Hartney said.

The tentacles of a man-of-war can extend 165 feet (50 meters) in length below the surface, although 30 feet (10 meters) is more of the average, Hartney said.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1NnPwRN