Spring break in Panama City Beach may be winding down, but it's still making headlines. A video showing a girl getting gang raped on the beach was released and the crime has left many in the community outraged.

Ever since the shooting that injured seven people, the Panama City Beach community has called for the city to crack down on spring break.

"I thought last year was bad, this one was worse," said Panama City Beach resident, Debbie Cromwell.

Now a gang rape that happened on our beach has reignited the controversy.

"That's terrible it should have never happened," said Ashley Shaven, a Panama City Beach resident.

"They can destroy their own homes when they get back. They dont need to come down here and destroy ours," said local Erik Kimball.

Earlier this week authorities released cell phone video showing an unconscious girl getting gang raped by three men on the beach behind Spinnaker Lounge.

Locals say they're sickened to learn that things like this are happening on their beaches.

They say we need to take control.

"It's pretty disgusting that that would happen in broad daylight and no one would come forward and none of the people viewing what was happening would do anything about it," said local Mike Howe.

Police arrested former Troy University students Delonte' Martistee and Ryan Calhoun for the crime, but authorities are still searching for the third suspect.

"Everybody who watched that and the people that filmed it oughta be charged just like the people who committed it," said Bay County Commissioner Mike Thomas.

Bay County Commissioner Mike Thomas says the only way to stop things like this from happening is to find a way to drive off some of our undesirable visitors.

"We're getting a lot of bad publicity because we have a beautiful place that attracts some sorry human beings and that's a shame and we need to do whatever we can do to make sure they don't wanna come here anymore," said Thomas.

In recent weeks the city and the county have passed several spring break ordinances. One is particular has caused a rift among the community, banning drinking on the beach during spring break.

"We like to sit there and have our beers and I think its penalizing us as locals just for a small group," said Howe.

"Get over it. Go home. Go to a bar. Bring some sand and put it in your front yard," said Kimball.

But Thomas isn't sure that a beach alcohol ban would have prevented the crime.

He said, "I don't know whether ordinances help when you have slugs like this. The problem we've got is we're trying to pass ordinances to police people that are unpoliceable. They need to go away and stay away and leave us the hell alone."

The city and the county have been working together to come up with some more spring break ordinances that Thomas hopes will drive away some visitors who are here to cause trouble. Those ordinances are expected to come before the city and the county in mid-May.