Jim Renacci, R-Wadsworth, is seeking a third term in the U.S. House in November and faces a challenge from former state Rep. Pete Crossland, D-Copley Township, in Summit County.

Renacci, 55, first was elected to the 16th District House seat in 2010 after serving a term as mayor of Wadsworth.

The district, which was redrawn in 2012 following the 2000 Census, covers eastern Medina County — including the cities of Brunswick, Medina and Wadsworth — western and southern suburbs of Cleveland, western Summit County, portions of western Portage and Stark counties and Wayne County.

Renacci has made reining in spending and repealing the Affordable Care Act top priorities during his time in office and the centerpiece of his re-election campaign.

Crossland, 76, said Renacci’s voting record is the reason he entered the race.

“I was shocked when I saw how my congressman voted,” Crossland said. “He’s a tea party extremist.”

Renacci acknowledged he receives backing from a range of supporters, including some tea party members. But he said his voting record was not extreme. He pointed to endorsements from five building-trade unions this year as proof he has appeal outside traditional Republican circles.

“My opponent likes to use Democratic talking points to stay away from the issues,” Renacci said. “I have a bipartisan working group that gets things done.”

The bipartisan group Renacci refers to is one he formed with U.S. Rep. John Carney, D-Delaware.

Renacci said the group has about 20 members and has made an impact on legislation. The group introduced bipartisan legislation aimed at exempting Americans who reside in other countries, including some businessmen and members of the armed forces.

Those groups typically have different health care coverage more suited to their needs. Some aspects of the bill have been included in reforms approved by the Senate and signed into law.

He said the bipartisan committee also has introduced other reforms to the ACA that he hopes can be approved when Congress returns from recess. The group Renacci meets with grew to include nearly 60 members of Congress during the government shutdown, and though it’s returned to lower levels, he hopes they can continue to find common ground.

“We get together three times a month and we try to find things we can work together on,” he said.

But Crossland said Renacci’s voting record is anything but bipartisan.

“Renacci votes 97 percent of the time with Republicans,” Crossland said.

Crossland argued that real bipartisanship means collaborating with leaders on both sides of the aisle on major political reforms — reforming immigration laws, passing energy reform and other major legislation.

“I was in the Ohio Legislature for a little over 10 years and I understand the climate of a legislative body,” Crossland said.

Crossland said Renacci is most known for voting against the ACA numerous times.

“About 16,000 people in this district now have health care thanks to the Affordable Care Act,” Crossland said. “Obamacare is clearly a mixed bag, but they have nothing to replace it with.”

Renacci said that wasn’t true.

“When people say we’ve voted to repeal it, we’ve also voted to replace it in some way,” Renacci said. “The bills aren’t even taken up in the Senate.”

Crossland also criticized Renacci for not working to develop reforms for immigration and energy policies.

“His whole idea is to get the government out of the way and let the free market solve the problems,” Crossland said. “But we need some government to protect the environment and to govern.”

Renacci said he’s opposed to some proposals on energy reform because of the impact stronger emissions limits would have on Ohio coal production.

“We should not be bankrupting coal,” he said. “If you go to our coal plants in Ohio, you can see they’re already complying with our emissions standards.”

Renacci said he supports new legislation that would require the Environmental Protection Agency to get approval from Congress when making changes that would have a major impact on industries.

“We said if it affects the economy by more than $100 million, you need to come to Congress and talk about it,” he said. “We’re the elected body. They need to come and tell us why these (regulations) need to be done.”

Crossland has taken aim at Renacci for more than just his policy stances. On Sept. 10, Crossland filed an ethics complaint with the House Ethics Committee against Renacci. Crossland took issue with the lobbying Renacci’s office did for Akron businessman Ben Suarez in 2011.

Renacci’s campaign accepted $90,000 from Suarez and his employees in 2011. His congressional office also wrote a letter to Gov. John Kasich on Suarez’s behalf, asking him to intervene in a legal case in California where Suarez faced charges against his corporation.

Suarez was found not guilty of campaign fraud but was found guilty of witness tampering in June.

Renacci returned the money his campaign received.

Crossland said Renacci made a mistake by accepting the donation in the first place.

“It’s wrong to take that much money from one person,” Crossland said. “And one person doesn’t give you that much money unless they want something.”

Renacci said the courts have never charged him or his office and he doesn’t think he should be tied to Suarez now that the case has been settled.

“This whole thing has been debated in the press for three years now, and it was debated during the last election,” he said. “Our office was never a part of this issue and the courts have made their decision and I leave it at that.”

Crossland also filed an ethics complaint against Renacci about his use of federal mailings to send a flyer in June to seniors describing a “60-plus” program.

“The mailing was indistinguishable from an election campaign brochure,” Crossland claimed in his ethics complaint.

But Renacci said the mailing met standards set by the House Commission on Congressional Mailing Standards Regulations.

“We have spent some of the least amount of dollars,” for the mailing, Renacci said. He said a recent report found his office has only spent $1,600 compared to $40,000 spent in other districts. The $1,600 amount was calculated in June before his most recent mailing was sent.

Crossland and Renacci agreed that in January Congress must work with President Barack Obama to address the terror threat faced by the Islamic State group in Iraq and Syria, also called ISIS.

Renacci said he authorized the president to mobilize air strikes and some forces in Syria but said he expects an update on Dec. 12. He did take issue with Obama’s warning that the United States would not put troops on the ground.

“You cannot tell the enemy what you won’t do,” he said. “We cannot have a strategy where we say we won’t do this or we won’t do that.”

Crossland said he agrees that special operations should be mobilized and gathering intelligence in the region, but said he doesn’t believe in a full-scale war operation.

“I think the president is handling it well,” Crossland said. “It’s ridiculous to criticize the president for saying we won’t put boots on the ground. I know the American people don’t want to get involved in a land war, and he’s made it clear that’s not what we’re doing.”

Contact reporter Loren Genson at (330) 721-4063 or lgenson@medina-gazette.com. Follow her on Twitter @lorengenson.