Garrett Grayson was fond of New Orleans before the Saints made him the third quarterback selected in the NFL draft Friday.

The former Colorado State star — the highest Saints-drafted quarterback since Archie Manning in 1971 and possible successor to Drew Brees — participated in the Manning Passing Academy last summer at Nicholls State University in Thibodaux, Louisiana.

“I was one of the guys that was helping out. I got to coach up some kids, learn from them, and hang around the Manning family,” Grayson said in a conference call, after being selected in the third round at No. 75. “I stayed in New Orleans for a couple of days after the game, and I loved the people down there. The southern hospitality is a true thing, and that’s something that I’m definitely excited to be a part of. I love being around people and I’m very social; I just love being in that type of environment. It’s definitely something I’m excited to be a part of.”

Because of Brees, 36, and coach Sean Payton, “the Saints have been one of my dream teams throughout this entire process,” Grayson said. “Seeing how they go about their process and how routine-oriented those guys are, as well as talking to them about what their week is like, I think they mesh together extremely well.”

Grayson and Rams teammate Ty Sambrailo were the only Front Range players selected in the draft. Sambrailo went to the Broncos in the second round.

Linebacker Darius Allen (6-foot-3, 229 pounds) of 2014 NCAA Division II national champion CSU-Pueblo signed a free agent contract with the Baltimore Ravens and ThunderWolves cornerback/returner C.J. Roberts (5-10, 183) agreed to terms with the Arizona Cardinals. Allen graduated from Pueblo East High.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers

The following local players, listed alphabetically, were not drafted but might sign free-agent contracts:

Bernard Blake, CB, Colorado State, 6-0, 185

Chris Bonner, QB, CSU-Pueblo, 6-7, 225

Aaron Davis, OLB, Colorado State, 6-0, 225

Dee Hart, RB, Colorado State, 5-7, 199

Greg Henderson, CB, Colorado, 5-11, 185

Jared Roberts, K, Colorado State, 6-0, 210

Mike Chambers, The Denvere Post