Ted Cruz: ‘Young people can do without condescension and patronizing from Washington’

While the White House continues to pander to Millennials in an effort to convince them to sign up for Obamacare, Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) believes the Obama administration’s attempts are nothing but condescending and patronizing to young people.

Speaking with radio host Ben Shapiro, Cruz criticized the White House for its repeated tries to encourage young people to sign up for health insurance under Obamacare.

“You know, I think young people can do without the condescension and patronizing from Washington,” Cruz told Shapiro, referencing an ad featuring First Lady Michelle Obama in which she said, “We nag you because we love you.”

With the open-enrollment period coming to a close on March 31, the White House has tapped A-list celebrities — and their mothers — athletes and pop culture icons to help reach Millennials.

President Barack Obama appeared on the web show “Between Two Ferns,” and Michelle Obama was featured in a video starring celebrities’ mothers in an effort to convince young people to sign up for Obamacare. Additionally, the White House took advantage of March Madness and created “The Sweetest 16 Reasons to Get Covered,” a play on the Sweet 16.

The Obama administration, though, remains mum on exactly how many 18- to 34-year-olds have actually signed up for Obamacare in the weeks leading up to March 31.

According to the latest figures from the Department of Health and Human Services, more than 5 million people have signed up for health insurance under Obamacare. Only 25 percent, though, are Millennials. The White House previously set a target goal of 38 percent.

While Obama continues to preach about the benefits of the Affordable Care Act — he’s making an appearance on “Ellen” tomorrow — Cruz said the president is ignoring the more than 6 million Americans who lost their insurance because of the law.

“The president is doing a lot of pop culture. He’s sitting between a couple of ferns, he’s hanging out with basketball stars,” the Tea Party darling said. “He’s trying to say everything is hip and hunky-dory without taking responsibility to the over 6 million people who’ve had their health insurance policies canceled because of Obamacare.”

Listen to Cruz and Shapiro’s interview below.

h/t Washington Examiner