Mothers day message on felt hearts (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto )

Next week, my mother will turn 80, a very active 80. She babysat my twins just last week while I took my son on a college tour. She went shopping with me a few weeks ago and I was getting tired, so she offered to carry my bags. She watches CNN like an addict and I sometimes have to call her just to see what’s going on in the world. She’s like my very own newscaster.

While quietly flipping through an old photo album, I asked her about her oldest memories. She said she didn’t know that the 1930s were desperate times because she was too little. My aunt once said she remembers they didn’t have much of anything, but it didn’t matter because nobody else did either. They were lucky to get a tea set, mittens and a peppermint candy for Christmas. That was pretty much it and they felt extremely lucky just to have that.

Her memories begin in the 1940s with radio programs like “The Hermit’s Cave,” “Let’s Pretend,” “Lux Presents Hollywood” and “Fibber McGee and Molly.” She remembers victory gardens, the death of President Franklin Roosevelt and that she could go to the movies for free if she brought in a bag full of tin cans, an old tire or whatever they might be collecting for the war effort. They also shared ration coupons, had air-raid drills with blackouts and she remembers early morning visits by the milkman.

At the end of the war, on VE Day, they drove their big old Buick to downtown Lansing and a huge bonfire celebration where people were laughing, crying, dancing and hugging each other.

In 1950, their family got its first television set. They lined up chairs in front of it and watched Kate Smith, Milton Berle, Dinah Shore and “I Love Lucy.” She said that these were quiet times — the times she misses the most.

She said the difference between now and then is mostly the noise. The world now seems so loud. Houses only had one car, there were no motor lawnmowers or leaf blowers, and the music was soothing with crooners like Bing Crosby and Perry Como, or women like Rosemary Clooney and Patti Page.

It was a peaceful time. You sat on your front porch all the time to relax and talk. Maybe you took a walk around the block. There wasn’t much violence, at least not like today.

She sighs a deep sigh and says she does miss those times, but she misses the people who were in it the most. Her parents, grandparents, aunts, uncles, neighbors, siblings — all gone now. My mother is the lone survivor in her family.

She didn’t have much to say about the 1960s because, as she put it, “It was all a blur.” She had four small children and used to look forward to taking the garbage out so she could get two quick breaths of fresh air before she had to go back into the house.

She said she had no idea what was going on in the world, but remembers she was washing a baby when President John F. Kennedy was assassinated, feeding one when Martin Luther King was, and rocking one when Sen. Robert Kennedy was.

The 1970s are when my memories just begin — of her, my grandparents and life in a small town. The ’80’s and ’90s flew by with a blink of an eye, and now she finds herself thinking of the old times often. She shows me pictures of when she was little and the progress through the years.

I know it’s hard on her because it hurts the heart if you look back for too long. She said she won’t be around forever, but I can’t imagine life without her.

When asked what wisdom she has to pass on, she said, “Just that you have to cherish the people around you when you have them. Hug them. Say you love them. Because someday, either they won’t be here anymore or you won’t.”

She says strong faith is what pulled her through her darkest hours.

Take a moment at the end of this article, close your eyes and remember all the people you loved and lost, and then open them and remember that life does indeed go on.

Happy Birthday, Mom, and I say to everyone turning 80, shoot for the Smuckers jar.

— Amy Dehn is an Appleton resident. She can be reached at pcletters@postcrescent.com

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1qxhwXy