'It's still difficult to get dog blood'

If you go What: Dog blood type clinic When: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Saturday Where: Aspen Meadows Veterinary Specialists, 104 S Main St, Longmont Cost: Free More info: Email CanineBloodHeroes@gmail.com or call 208-346-3533

Randy, a 6-week-old puppy, was not going to make it.

Gayle Lacy of Lafayette adopted Randy from the Boulder Valley Humane Society in 2013 and was devastated that her new vomiting, diarrhea-stricken puppy developed deadly parvovirus infection symptoms within a week.

After about a week of ineffective treatments, Jennifer Bolser, the chief clinic veterinarian at the Boulder Valley Humane Society, decided to try a last-ditch and ultimate successful effort to save Randy — get him a plasma transfusion.

Bolser had to obtain the plasma from a dog blood bank in Wheat Ridge, but Adam Peterson wants to bring the service to Longmont.

Peterson is a veterinarian from Idaho Falls and founded Canine Blood Heroes in 2009. He has founded five banks around the country and now has his sights set on starting one that will operate out of the Aspen Meadows Veterinary Clinic.

Advertisement

Veterinarians need canine blood when someone brings in a dog that requires extensive surgery or is afflicted with certain diseases. One immune disease, immune mediated hemolitic anemia, makes up 50 to 60 percent of dog blood transfusions, Peterson said.

"It's still difficult to get dog blood. The need every year continues to be increased, and I'm intent on fixing this problem in as many places as we can," Peterson said. "Most dog owners I run into, I get the same response. People go 'Oh, yeah, I never thought of that.' But when it's your dog, when it's needed, it's needed."

One reason the need for blood is going up is because people are increasingly willing to spend the time and money to save their dog's life.

"We as vets are able to provide more and better care, and owners are more willing to go those lengths, because of the family member status of their pets," Peterson said. "They're more and more willing to spend hundreds if not thousands of dollars to save their pets. So the need goes on up and up, but the supply side really has not."

Lacy said she was happy to hear of a blood bank coming to Longmont. She said that two years after they were fairly certain Randy would die, the dog is doing fine thanks in large part to the transfusion.

Bolser said she also welcomed Peterson's bank to the area.

The Boulder Valley Humane Society needs blood or plasma only three to four times a year, she said, but it's still good to have a bank close by.

"The products are helpful and most of the time blood or plasma transfusions are needed in emergency or critical care situations — dogs that have a traumatic event like being hit by a car," Bolser said.

Peterson will need some dog owners in the area to volunteer their pets to be donors. There's a universal blood type for dogs and labradors and retrievers don't usually possess the right type, Peterson said. Boxers, dobermans, pitbulls, Irish wolf hounds and greyhounds are more likely to have the ideal blood type. Especially greyhounds.

"Greyhounds are God's gift to blood donation," Peterson said. "They have the perfect temperament — more blood can be drawn more often — easily accessed veins."

Bolser said dog blood banks tend to insure they're screening and signing up dogs that will tolerate the 15 to 30-minute donation process.

"The dog is basically being fed treats and being petted for the whole time," Bolser said.

Peterson is holding a free clinic where people can bring in their dogs and find out their pet's blood type. To donate, a dog should be 1 to 7 years old, up-to-date on vaccines and weigh more than 50 pounds.

Blood "is not needed that often, but when it is, having it is literally the difference between life and death," Peterson said. "That's why we do this and that's what should get people excited."

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci

Alex Burness: burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness