Respect and courtesy can go a long way when citizens interact with law enforcement, manners that should be shown from both sides, a panel of police and local officials said.

The Boys &Girls Club of Maury County Teen Center, 210 W. 8th St. in Columbia, hosted an event aimed at increasing dialog between police and citizens.

Attorney Antwan Booker, Columbia Police Department Officer Jeremy Humphrey, CPD Sgt. Jeff Duncan, retired CPD Lt. Andre Martin, Tyler Harrison, who is in the CPD Explorers program, and Maury County Sheriff’s Department Deputy Tony Greene participated in the discussion.

Annie Hardison, a social worker and community activist, moderated the meeting and asked the panel questions about ways to improve police and citizen relationships.

“The first thing, and the main thing, is just be courteous, and that’s not just for police — that is for anybody you might be communicating with,” Duncan said.

Columbia’s crime rate has dropped 23.7 percent in the last five years, which Duncan attributed to police work but also relationships officers have built in the community.

Booker, who grew up in the south side of Columbia, encouraged police to introduce themselves into the areas where they will be patrolling, especially in black communities where talking to police officers is sometimes viewed negatively.

“We, as young people, didn’t know how to engage with the police, because there is always that hostility in that relationship,” Booker said. “I think that is the most important thing that can come out of today, is being courteous to our officers, and officers have to be courteous to us as well.”

Greene, who is also a school resource officer, said youth who are not taught respect at home will have no respect for law enforcement.

As a young person, Greene said he grew up with a negative outlook about police because two officers drove by him and yelled racial slurs as he was walking at Fairview Park. He told his mother about the situation, and she offered some advice.

“She stated to me ‘When you get older, you make sure you be a police officer and don’t act like those,’” Greene said.

He listened. Green climbed the ranks at the MCSD and was recently appointed to fill Christa Martin’s seat on the Columbia City Council.

Harrison, a former Boys &Girls Club member, said police have a tough time building community relationships because there is a lack of respect and trust among youth. Some people’s only interactions with police are negative, he said.

“Youth cannot be afraid to go to these officers to ask for help. They are sworn in to protect and serve and also make an oath to uphold the law,” Harrison said.

An audience member asked about police involvement in the recent shooting of unarmed black teenager Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo.

Greene said he was not aware of all the facts surrounding the case but said Brown was told to stop and did not respond to officer Darren Wilson’s commands.

“We’ve got to let our young folks know, when they encounter police officers and they tell you to stop — stop,” Greene said. “When you start jerking your hands and moving, you are resisting arrest. Once (the youth) know, then we can prevent that — to a certain extent.”

Martin, who served with CPD for more than 20 years, said a situation like what happened in Ferguson could have happened here when he first became an officer.

Police-community relations were nonexistent at the time, Martin said.

“I made sure that when I rode through, I made sure that I stopped and talked to people and started establishing those kind of relationships where people could start trusting me,” he said. “I took a whole lot of heat, from not only people in the community, but also officers in the department.”

Those early efforts translated into creating a local Drug Abuse Resistance Education (D.A.R.E.) program, which furthered opportunities to build relationships with young people, Martin said.

“The only way that we can clean this stuff up is we’ve got to do it together,” he added.

Humphrey closed the discussion by encouraging youth to also view police as people. Law enforcement are there to help young people work through problems together, he said.

“Don’t be afraid to talk to me. I am human like everyone else … I am just like you. I don’t like to be labeled a bad guy because of what someone else did,” Humphrey said.

Ketron Hatton, a 16-year-old Central High School student, said he felt the meeting was positive for him and his other Boys &Girls club members.

“I feel like the youth went away with more trust and felt as if the policemen of Columbia do care about how we live, how we are treated and what we make of ourselves,” Hatton said.