A memorial for Chance Walsh, the missing 10-week-old baby from North Port, has been set up outside the home where his grandparents say they last saw him.

His parents, Joseph Walsh and Kristen Bury, sit in a South Carolina jail and are charged with child neglect. NBC2 confirmed through the Jasper County Jail that the pair will be extradited, but the date has not been determined.

Chance's grandmother, Sally Susino, didn't have any comment when reached by NBC2, but she left a very visible comment at the memorial.

Scrawled on the photo of the baby: "We love you, Chance. I will find you. Signed - SS."

Susino said during a press conference Thursday "we just want to bring him home where he is loved.

"Please, if you know anything, anything that can help, please share it."

Outside the home on Orduna Avenue, neighbors say the makeshift memorial appeared overnight.

"Just seeing it brings goosebumps to you," Jeffrey Campbell said.

Cody Faz said he remembers Chance - and his parents.

"I would watch them take their baby out on the stroller and what not, and just go up and down the street," he said.

Walsh and Bury were charged with child neglect after the baby's disappearance. Chance was last seen Sept. 9.

Bury had another child, a boy named Duane Jacob Walsh, who died in April 2014. The medical examiner determined he died from an acute kidney infection.

Investigators say Chance's parents checked into a hotel in Georgia less than two weeks ago. They were spotted without the baby and told conflicting stories about his whereabouts. The family contacted police.

"It's just tragic. No one should be doing that to their child. They didn't anything wrong," Jeffrey Campbell said.

But what did the parents do to Chance? NBC2 was told they had been involved in drugs. Investigators found blood inside the North Port home, and an alligator in a nearby canal was euthanized, its stomach searched as part of the investigation.

The medical examiner did not respond to requests for information on the alligator.

RELATED STORIES

- Details about Kristen Bury and Joseph Walsh's history surface

- Alligator examined as part of investigation