Topics: From the Wires, News

GULF SHORES, Ala. (AP) — With boarded-up windows, peeling paint and a rooftop tarp that flaps in the ocean breeze, the beachfront retreat at the end of Gulf Way Drive is a $1 million eyesore in paradise.

Odd as it may seem, this pricey dump is Alabama’s coastal governor’s mansion. And it has been falling apart for nearly two decades because of government inaction.

The state has been unwilling to repair the house since it was damaged by a hurricane 18 years ago. Officials also have refused to return the land to the developer who donated the property for a gubernatorial retreat in 1962.

So there sits the mansion, vacant and deteriorating a little more each day. Neighbor Ralph Gilges says he has asked the state to at least paint the house and repair the rusting fence, but nothing has happened yet.

“It is nuts,” Gilges said. “We would really like to see something done with it.”

Property caretaker Bill Ross, a retired Mobile shop supervisor, comes by three days a week to guard against vandalism, cut grass and make sure plywood covers the broken windows.

But Ross is 88, and the demands of caring for a nearly 7,500-square-foot, two-story beachfront house far outstrip his abilities.

“It’s just a shame that it’s in this condition,” Ross said.

Governors used the six-bedroom, four-bath house off and on until it Hurricane Danny damaged it in 1997. Since then, successors have been unwilling to take on the political risky task of renovating a mansion that most Alabamians couldn’t afford.

Property records show Republican Gov. Robert Bentley owns two homes within a couple miles of the mansion, so he has no personal need to fix the house. Plus, spending state money on mansion repairs as he supports tax increases to plug budget gaps could be tough politically.

Bentley has stopped by several times recently to look at the mansion, and he told The Associated Press that an architect is assessing what could be done with the property. No final decisions have been made, but Bentley said possibilities include using it for entertainment as an economic development tool.