Large fans sat at the edges of Tillman Hangar for Saturday’s Republican rally, their hum making it difficult to hear for someone standing too close.

Several attendees held their own fans, thin cardboard with a wooden handle they’d gotten from a nearby booth. They waved them at their faces and kept to the shadow of the large hangar as they waited for a stream of speakers including Gov. Nathan Deal and U.S. Rep. Tom Graves to approach the lectern.

The Rev. Harvey Palmer sat at one of several tables set up under the shade of the hangar. A black minister who previously served Metropolitan United Methodist Church in Rome, Palmer said it was expected when he grew up that blacks would become Democrats.

Palmer quickly noted, however, that he felt some of the best decisions over the years have come from Republicans.

“That’s how we became interested in party politics,” Palmer said. “It’s not about who’s right, it’s about what’s right.”

Less government, less regulation — that’s what Beth Martin wanted to hear from candidates. Martin came to the rally with her husband, Colin Martin, who failed to unseat Columbus Mayor Teresa Tomlinson in her re-election bid earlier this year.

A physician, Beth Martin pointed to Obamacare as a problem she wants fixed.

“They’ve got no idea what they’re doing and it just doesn’t work,” she said. “They tried to create something that’s one size fits all and it just doesn’t work.”

The buzz of the crowd softened as speakers took their turns at the lectern. U.S. Rep. Tom Graves likened the two main political parties to teams, telling the crowd they knew which team was the right choice.

Lt. Gov. Casey Cagle said people should remember the party’s principles and why they’re fighting. He said some want an entitlement society.

“I will promise you, the Democrats are coming,” Cagle told the crowd of more than 200 people. “They will try to make Georgia a purple state. We do not need that to happen.”

Cagle will face Democrat Connie Stokes in November.

Republican state Sen. Josh McKoon came from Columbus for the rally. A former Karen Handel and Jack Kingston supporter, McKoon said Republicans must unite for the general election.

“We’ve just got to bring everyone together and work really hard and not take anything for granted,” McKoon said. “We can’t become complacent.”

Some took the opportunity on Saturday to have their own voices heard in a presidential straw poll. Forty-five people paid $1 each to pick their top three choices for the next occupant of the White House.

Texas Gov. Rick Perry won first place with 16.9 percent of the vote. U.S. Sen. Rand Paul and former U.S. Rep. Allen West tied for second with 12.1 percent.

Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush took third place with 10.5 percent of the vote.

Click to visit the Floyd County Republican Party website.