Texas employment continued to climb so strongly and steadily in July that economists expect wages to start increasing at a faster pace.

Employers added 46,600 jobs across the state last month, according to data released Friday by the Texas Workforce Commission.

Moreover, the state agency revised June’s 19,100 new jobs to 30,300. So far this year, Texas has added an average of 40,343 jobs each month, compared with a monthly average of 27,520 jobs for the first seven months of last year.

“Those are some really good-looking numbers,” said Robert A. Dye, chief economist for Dallas-based Comerica Bank. “We’re seeing strong acceleration in job growth from last year.”

Texas has added 396,200 jobs over the last 12 months, putting the state on pace for a record number of new jobs this year. That’s in line with the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas’ forecast of a 3.5 percent job growth rate for 2014, which equates to 400,000 jobs.

Dallas Fed senior economist Keith R. Phillips said this is the strongest year of job growth since 1998, when the Texas economy was booming.

Other recent statistics also point to a strengthening economy in Texas.

The Federal Reserve’s Beige Book showed moderate economic growth for the six weeks through early July, thanks largely to manufacturing, retail and energy. Other reports show increased growth in Texas manufacturing, service sector activity and business optimism in July.

July’s job growth was across all industries, reflecting a general pickup in the economy.

Professional and business services led July’s growth with 10,600 jobs, but seven of Texas’ 11 major industry groups each added at least 4,000 jobs. The six others were health services; leisure and hospitality; trade, transportation and utility; construction; services; and government.

Energy is still the largest driver of Texas’ long-term job growth, with 7.8 percent growth in the last 12 months. Overall, eight of Texas’ 11 major industry groups have seen employment growth of at least 3 percent in that period.

The seasonally adjusted unemployment rate in Texas remained at 5.1 percent in July, well below the U.S. jobless rate of 6.2 percent. Ten of Texas’ 25 metropolitan statistical areas had jobless rates below 5 percent last month.

Dallas-Fort Worth’s unemployment rate was 5.5 percent. The Midland area had the lowest rate in the state at 2.9 percent. McAllen-Edinburg-Mission had the highest rate at 9.9 percent. Local rates are not adjusted for seasonal variations.

Dye is worried about potentially “very tight” unemployment rates in Texas in 2015 and 2016. He sees two possible scenarios: Stronger in-migration to Texas from other states to keep the labor force growing, or “record low unemployment rates” if in-migration doesn’t pick up.

Housing markets are starting to loosen in other parts of the country, allowing people to move, which could help boost population growth in Texas, Dye said.

Employment growth typically leads to higher wages and increased inflation.

Overall inflation is being kept in check, with the inflation rate averaging about 1.5 percent in the first seven months of this year.

Wages and salaries for Dallas-Fort Worth employees rose 4.4 percent over the 12 months ending June 30, more than double the national growth rate, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Economists expect wages to grow in Texas in the coming months.

“Contacts have told us they’re having troubling finding workers, and typically when you see that, you see higher wages so companies can attract more workers,” the Dallas Fed’s Phillips said. “In the short run, it creates some profit squeeze for employers unless they can get more productivity from workers, but companies have seen increased productivity in the last few years. Employees have had little negotiating power on wages for a long time.”

The BLS will release employment and unemployment data for other states Monday.

Follow Sheryl Jean on Twitter at @SJeanDallas.