The Agenda How small-business issues are shaping politics and policy.

Today, we return to our series attempting to answer questions about how the Affordable Care Act will affect small businesses. In our last installment, we addressed how to determine whether a business is subject to the law’s employer mandate. The next question is obvious: If a business is subject to the mandate, to which employees must it offer insurance in order to avoid the penalty?

On the surface, the rule seems straightforward: Every full-time employee — that is, anyone who puts in 30 hours of service a week, or 130 hours a month — is entitled to an offer of coverage from the company for that month (the monthly figure is 130 hours rather than 120 hours because most months are a few days longer than four weeks).

For companies where work schedules are consistent or those that offer health insurance broadly, the method for determining employee status is also pretty straightforward: The employer counts up the hours for each calendar month and makes sure each full-time employee has an offer of coverage that month (or the business prepares to pay a penalty). The Internal Revenue Service calls this the “monthly measurement method.”

But things become complicated when employee hours vary week to week or month to month: How can an employer know whether a worker with fluctuating hours will be entitled to insurance in advance of a given month? And, really, what company is going to offer health insurance on a month-to-month basis?

The answers to these thorny questions are found in what the I.R.S. calls the “look-back measurement method.” Essentially, the rules give companies the option to determine whether “variable-hour” employees are full time in the current year by calculating their average hours of service in the previous year. Hours of service, by the way, can include time for which employees are paid even when they are not performing work, such as for vacations, sick leave or jury duty.

It works like this: A company establishes a “measurement period” of three months to a year. Immediately after the measurement period is a “stability period.” Employees whose actual hours of service average out to full time in the measurement period are deemed full time in the stability period; they must be offered insurance or the company could face a penalty.

The stability period must be at least six months long and cannot be shorter than the measurement period. In between the measurement and stability periods, a company may also establish an administrative period of up to 90 days, to allow it to make offers of coverage and send out enrollment information.

In practice, lawyers say, most companies will operate with a one-year measurement period from Oct. 15 through Oct. 14 of the following year, followed by an administrative period through Dec. 31, and then a stability period running from Jan. 1 through Dec. 31.

A company calculates the hours of service during the measurement period for an hourly employee by checking its records. It can do likewise for salaried workers, or it can simply credit an employee with eight hours for every day worked. But the rule makes special provisions for certain circumstances — the company, for example, has to count certain unpaid leave, for military service, say, or provided under the Family and Medical Leave Act.

Disability is particularly thorny, said Leigh C. Riley, a benefits lawyer in Milwaukee. The regulations require “every hour that you’re paid by your employer” to be counted, she said. But, she added, long-term disability is typically covered by the company’s insurance: “What do you do if your disability is paid by an insurance carrier?” Ms. Riley said she believed that time spent on long-term disability did not count toward full-time status, but other lawyers disagree.

New hires — that is, employees who have not worked through an entire measurement period — are treated differently. The company has to categorize a new hire at the outset. If it “reasonably expects” — the I.R.S.’s term — that the employee will work full time, it has to offer health insurance by the start of the employee’s fourth month to avoid a potential penalty. Eventually, once new employees have worked through an entire measurement period, their status will be conditioned on the average number of hours they worked through that period.

If the company reasonably expects a new hire to be a variable hour, seasonal or part-time worker, it uses a special measurement and stability cycle at the beginning. It takes about two years for a new employee to sync up with the standard measurement and stability cycle that continuing employees use, said Linda Mendel, a benefits lawyer in Columbus, Ohio, but the company will have to offer the employee insurance before that.

Under the rules, Ms. Mendel said, a company is shielded from the mandate penalties until the first day of the new hire’s 14th month. “But then you have to offer insurance on the first day of the 14th month,” she said. The look-back method does give businesses with seasonal employees a break, because the yearlong measurement period will mean that the employees do not average out to full-time status. But deliberately misclassifying a new full-time hire as a variable-hour or seasonal employee could expose the company to additional penalties, lawyers said, depending on how vigorously the I.R.S. enforces the rules.

Generally speaking, an employer has to apply the same methods for determining full-time status across its work force. But the rules give the company some discretion to distinguish across broad categories of employees — between all salaried and hourly employees, between employees in different states, between union and nonunion workers, or among union workers. Based on these categories, the company may use either the monthly or look-back method, or use different measurement and stability periods.

But Ms. Mendel said that despite all its complications, the look-back method is only marginally more difficult to follow than the monthly measurement method, even for companies with stable work forces. “Nobody’s using the monthly method,” she said.