This was the week of Democratic Party reorganizations. Except for Hoboken, there was little by way of change and drama but we'll try to make it sound exciting.

Let's start with Jersey City where the party committee people re-elected Shawn "Sully" Thomas-Sullivan as their chairman. Sully says he want to continue to build relationships. I hear this from other political party leaders but I don't know what they mean. Build relationships with whom, exactly? One thing about these stories, quotes are so mundane, you don't have to record or jot anything down. Any cliché is as good as another.

If anything, the JCDO leaders need to learn how to work, work and work. On Monday, the day of the reorg meeting, committee people say that they had yet to hear from party officers who were apparently certain they would return.

It wasn't until it was obvious that there would be opposition -- Gilbert Moore and Riaz Wahid, to name a couple -- pushing for the election of Vice Chair Esmeralda Trinidad that Jersey City Democratic Organization committee people and ward leaders started to get panicky calls from Sully and company. And really, it you plan a coup, don't tell everyone or publicly announce it, unless it's all for show.

Once everyone knew what was expected of them and what they would do at the meeting, Thomas-Sullivan was assured of nailing down another term. Not having taken the How to Reorganize 101 course, at least the powers in charge managed to get a "What to do" GED.

The action, intrigue and conniptions were in highbrow Hoboken where Dem City Chairman Jaime Cryan wanted to return but it was obvious that he did not have a majority of votes. There were some other possible candidates for the top spot, including council members Beth Mason and Michael Russo, as well as Freeholder Anthony Romano.

Sources say Jersey City Mayor Fulop, the new de facto county Democratic Party boss, and his some of his mayor whisperers did not want Mason to get the nod. Had something to do with her and Senate President Steve Sweeney being too cozy, some say. Union City Mayor Brian Stack was not crazy about Romano and no one was back flipping for Russo.

Romano wound up chairman and credited his selection as a compromise with Hoboken Mayor Dawn Zimmer and her Small Council member Rick Cohen. I think he's being too modest.

Here's what some of what several sources reported. Cryan showed up determined to work the room for votes at warp speed while essentially have officers put to a vote – but by putting up the sergeant at arms first for a vote and working backward to keep opposition off balance are buy himself some time. I don't get it because I would have tried to work this out before the meeting.

Former Assemblyman Carmelo Garcia threw himself into the fray by engineering a vote for a chairman pro temper – which he won – to control the meeting. It helped that Garcia and Councilman Russo are chummy with future mayoral candidate Ruben Ramos. Life was made easier for Garcia by the double-digit committee people he controlled.

In the end, Garcia had his forces backed Romano – as part of that vaunted compromise.

How intense was this meeting? It was hot enough for people to claim that at one point Russo and Cryan were involved in a hot, face to face shouting match and because Cryan was elevated, it was Russo who caught the larger share of the spittle, say observers. I'm sure Cryan got his share of a face wash. First, let me say that deep down all Hoboken politicians are gentlemen and ladies and would never let their emotions get so out of hand that they'd act like they're from -- Jersey City. Right.

Hoboken is so confusing. You have a cabal that leans toward Ramos but supported Romano, who says he too wants to be mayor. If Zimmer is so powerful, why didn't she take control? Can any opposition put a leash on Frank Raia, because you know the first thing he'll try to do is split The anti's, to his benefit. Lastly, is Fulop running or at least exerting his influence on Hoboken?

The next day they held the Hudson County Democratic Organization reorganization at a public school they own on Laidlaw Avenue in Jersey City. The event was very quick and Assembly Speaker Vincent Prieto was returned to the chairmanship.

What I enjoyed most were the honorary "vice chairs" and honorary sergeant at arms, as well as the appointment of parliamentarian and HCDeadO counsel. It was all prepared on, for a better term, a script.

It starts verbatim with what the chairperson pro tempore, Weehawken Mayor Richard Turner, says to turn the meeting over to Chairman Prieto. At this point Prieto says, "Thank you. I would like to take the moment to recognize the elected officials with us tonight, (acknowledge individuals)."

It must be difficult to scan the room to find them because some slump in their chairs, others came late or stand behind others against the wall. Somehow, Prieto manages.

Then the script notes: "Mr. Chairman, I, Jamie Cryan (oops, scratch that name) – Robert Knapp, would like to nominate the following:" It's a long list of names and it could get boring. Here are just a few of them:

Paul Bellan-Boyer, Elmer Andale (oops scratch his name ) – Joseph Lopez, Jonathan DeFillipo, Muhammed Akil -- and I'll let that sink in a little -- , Rev. Reginald McRae, Hector Velasquez (scratch him) – Stacey Flanagan, Rev. Gwendolyn Rivers, Yolanda Miranda, Eugene McKnight (pause), Alisha Powers, Fred (I'm still here) Bado, Silvio Acosta, Susan Contey, Michael T. Dolaghan , Donna Florio, Angelica Jimenez, Susan McCurrie, Thelma Garcia... -- sorry but it has to end here.

The sergeants at arms named were Douglas Carlucci, John Metro, Robert Wondlowski, Francis J. Pizzuta (son of Charles), Frank Schillari (son of -- nevermind) and Thomas Curtis. The parliamentarian is David J. Yanotchko and former state Sen. Bernard Kenny of Hoboken gets to be legal counsel.

Along the way, Prieto asks for a second to the nominations then votes in favor, "say aye."

Then it's all those opposed, "say nay" and there is stage direction on the script – "wait ... (for crickets)."

After the meeting, Prieto demands to know what he has to do for me to end the party description, HCDeadO. "I bend forward, backwards, what else can I do?" he asks. I can't write my response because I consider this family ready but it has to do with a popular movie starring John Travolta and Uma Thurman.

INSIDER NOTES

-- Yesterday they teed off at the new Hudson County golf course, Skyway. It was like a ribbon cutting. On Monday, the course is open for county duffers.

This is DeGise's legacy, his baby. He has been preparing for years. Now that it was arriving, he was practicing his drives weeks in advance. On the day, he was practicing off to the side ripping off some swings, even as the crowd gathered at the first tee. His would be the first ball hit down the virgin fairway. The crowd came closer, all eyes were on him wearing shorts and a golf shirt, eager.

He pulled his driver back – and popped the white dimpled ball straight up and then watched it dribble about 10 feet from the tee. The crowd sang a solid "ooooohhhhh!"

On his second try he managed to tag it.

I did not attend but there were so many calls from those who were there, describing the action in unanimous detail. I had to share. I asked one source if U.S. Sen. Robert Menendez was there, and the pol said yes, "he was wearing striped shorts." No he wasn't. Menendez wore khaki pants, polo shirt, and answered no questions.

-- Paul Swibinski held a party Thursday evening at the Waterfront in North Bergen celebrating the 30th anniversary of his Secaucus-based Vision Media consulting and marketing firm . A number of his clients attended, including many HCDeadO folks. The only person missing was Tony Amabile.

-- So Matthew Kopko, the Bayonne Republican running for a 31st Legislative District Assembly seat has dome two things this week.

First, he wants to debate the Democratic Party candidates for the same seats. Nice idea, if you can get the favorites to agree.

Second he responds to the New Jersey high court's ruling on Christie reluctance to provide funding this year for the pension system.

He says:

"We need to stop the cycle of senseless bickering that is only tearing the state apart. When Democrats and Republicans use the pension system as a way to attack each other, I'll tell you one thing that doesn't happen: we don't get a dime closer to solving this crisis.

"So at this point, I am encouraging everyone to read the following report:

http://www.state.nj.us/treasury/pdf/FinalFebruaryCommissionReport.pdf

"While not perfect, it lays out a roadmap to begin the dialog on how to reach consensus on what to do about the pension problem. Coupled with a bit of openmindedness, a truly bi-partisan follow-up report and a serious consideration of Speaker Prieto's private retirement proposal, which has severe shortcomings of its own, we must come together and agree to SOMETHING ... "

Remember the "1776" song , "Is Anybody There?" I think Kopko can sing it but can he do it with conviction?

EDITOR'S NOTE: Agustin C. Torres' columns appear in The Jersey Journal every Saturday and online at nj.com/hudson/voices.