When it comes to multistate tax policies, states hold sway.

Compliance with such regulations is among the top issues facing payroll professionals, according to members of Bloomberg BNA's Payroll Library Advisory Board.

The board members, who held their annual meeting Aug. 6 at Bloomberg BNA headquarters in Arlington, Va., also discussed other critical issues for payroll departments, including international payroll, the Affordable Care Act and local minimum wage and hour requirements.

States Rule

Multistate sourcing, especially when related to deferred compensation, is a big issue for audit purposes, said Patrick McKenna, CPA, tax director for Prudential Financial Inc. Payroll departments need to know the years to which the services relate, along with salary and other compensation, he said.

The overall allocation is important, especially for employees who travel, said Fred A. Basehore Jr., CPP, senior manager for KPMG's international executive services and employment tax practice. If employees spend too much time in one place, their tax home shifts.

“A lot of states have de minimis rules,” Basehore said. “Some states have no de minimis rules—it's just instant."

Charlotte Hodges, CPP, payroll manager for Towers Watson & Co., succinctly summed up the situation: "You have to look to the state to see what the rules are."

Merging Payrolls

Companies have been busy with mergers and acquisitions this year as the economy continues to gain strength after the last recession. Most employers do not have to deal with mergers and acquisitions, but those cases raise the question of overlapping workweeks, said Martin Armstrong, CPP, vice president of payroll shared services for Time Warner Cable Inc.

Having a successful transition to a new workweek requires using the correct dates, Armstrong said. "It's a one-time event, and you can't believe how many people can't get that right," he said.

International Payroll

At the international level, knowing what is taxable from one country to the next can be complicated, said Barbara Youngman, CPP, president of the American Payroll Association and a consultant on payroll issues.

"Go into a country, you have to know what's taxable," she said. "If you bring in lunch, it's taxable to those employees. So try to understand what those fringe benefits are: What is taxable in those countries?"

Basehore said: "There are some countries where even a 39-cent pen, if that's given as a gift, that's taxable. And it's no questions asked. You've got to do it."

Compliance Conundrum

The Affordable Care Act, with key provisions for employers taking effect in 2015, is a major focus for payroll departments, said Lois Fried, CPP, a senior learning specialist for Automatic Data Processing LLC. For employers, information on ACA tax policies is critical for payroll processing, she said.

Compliance is a critical aspect of the payroll process, with questions centering on what is correct or incorrect, Hodges said. "Metrics and analytics help us stay in compliance," especially in a rapidly changing policy environment, she said.

Although changes to federal and state payroll requirements generally occur on a predictable schedule, such as annually, local jurisdictions often make changes with little warning, Hodges said, adding that payroll departments do not want to miss important policy changes.

States and localities also have been changing their minimum wages and requiring leave and other benefits with greater frequency, said Brent R. Gow, CPP, director of global payroll consulting and compliance for Starbucks Coffee Co. Some of those changes can have a big effect on garnishments, he said. Large organizations with operations in these localities are struggling to keep up with these changes and stay compliant.

Fried agreed that compliance was a key element of payroll.

"That's one thing about payroll professionals and practitioners, and human resource and benefits—everybody looks at ways to be in compliance," Fried said. "We want to do things right."

With a free trial to Bloomberg BNA’s Payroll Library for reliable, up-to-date guidance and analysis in every area of payroll administration and compliance. In addition, Bloomberg BNA and Ernst & Young, LLP’s joint survey on multistate taxation remains available until Aug. 21.