Sioux Falls, SD

A Yankton attorney who has top-secret military clearance wants to be South Dakota's next U.S. Senator.

Jason Ravnsborg announced Monday that he will run for the Republican nomination this spring.



Ravnsborg says he's a 'common sense' conservative with leadership skills which were developed commanding units in Iraq and Afghanistan.

"You will always know where I stand," Ravnsborg said.

Ravnsborg, whose name is Danish, says he is opposed to the Affordable Care Act. He adds he would vote against the two-year budget that was passed by the House of Representatives last week. While he likes the stability of the two-year deal, he says it doesn't do enough to cut the federal deficit.

"We're running $2 billion a day in the hole so this grand bargain that they're hoping to pass will save us over the next ten years what we're going to spend in the next ten days," Ravnsborg said.

Ravnsborg was awarded a Bronze Star for his service in Iraq. In Afghanistan, he served as a voting member for the United States on several NATO committees.

"I went into committee meetings thinking I had a 5-0 win and the next thing you know all those people had rotated and you had to start over and negotiate and help get things passed. We built a city while I was there. We went from 15,000 to 40,000 people," Ravnsborg said.

So why run in a primary that already has four Republicans including popular former Governor Mike Rounds? Ravnsborg says he's taking on the challenge because many have encouraged him to run.

"I'm getting in because people asked me to; a call to service. I've always done what my country and state have asked me to do. I've had people approach me from all over. I believe I can offer some positives to the race," Ravnsborg said.

Ravnsborg is currently working as a lawyer in Yankton and is a Major in the Army Reserves serving on an intelligence committee in the Twin Cities with top secret clearance.

Candidates can start circulating petitions to get their names on the June primary ballot on January 1, 2014.