Buy Photo Debbie Wasserman Schultz, chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee and U.S. Representative from Florida, speaks at the Des Moines Register Political Soapbox on Saturday, Aug. 16, 2014, at the Iowa State Fair in Des Moines, Iowa. (Photo: Charlie Litchfield/The Register)Buy Photo

NAME: Debbie Wasserman Schultz

OFFICE HELD: Chair, Democratic National Committee.

NOTABLE: Wasserman Schultz, who is serving her fifth term in the U.S. House from Florida, was President Obama's choice in 2011 to chair the Democratic National Committee. She pulled no punches in attacking Republicans in a State Fair soapbox speech Saturday, particularly targeting Republican U.S. Senate candidate Joni Ernst, She described Ernst as "an onion of crazy; every time you peel back a layer you find something more disturbing about her views." She said Ernst has suggested impeaching Obama, and that there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, as well as other views she considers extreme. "When you have a woman like Joni Ernst who has been endorsed by Sarah Palin, that should say it all," Wasserman Schultz said.

Wasserman Schultz praised U.S. Rep. Bruce Braley, the Democratic candidate for Iowa's U.S. Senate seat, calling him a voice of reason and moderation.

Ernst's campaign spokeswoman Gretchen Hamel said in response to Wasserman Schultz's comments, "Liberals are continually trying to distract from Bruce Braley's elitist big government record of raising taxes, overspending and overreaching."

CROWD:. More than 100 people, spilling beyond the soapbox area, including many who held Iowa Democratic Party signs and who wore Braley for Senate t-shirts..

OTHER ISSUES: Wasserman Schultz said Republicans are out of touch with the reality of most Americans, saying no one is suggesting "that we haven't investigated Benghazi enough" and that no one is asking for her for "56th time" to repeal the Affordable Care Act. People don't talk like that when she is at home in south Florida, she added, saying, "What they do tell is me is that they want us to work together."

QUOTE:. "Stop Obama. That is all they (Republicans) have been about since Day One. They have no desire to work together and find common ground."

REACTION: Wasserman Schultz received enthusiastic applause and loud cheers from the friendly, Democratic-dominated audience. She shook hands and posed for photos with crowd members afterward, and she made a special point of shaking hands and thanking two uniformed troopers from the Iowa State Patrol who stood watch during and after her speech. She was the last in a series of Iowa and national politicians who have spoken at the Des Moines Register's soapbox this year at the Iowa State Fair.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1oELsEp