EMMAUS — The East Penn School District has hired a new business administrator.

The school board voted unanimously to hire Robert E. Saul, who worked for 14 years as the business manager of Montoursville Area School District in Lycoming County, at a base salary of $135,000 a year. He starts May 2.

Saul replaces Deborah Surdoval, who retired in January after 35 years working for the district. Like Surdoval, Saul will serve as treasurer of the school board.

"This has been a long and exhausting search, but we are very confident we've found the right person for the job," said Michael Schilder, district superintendent. "Creativity, work ethic, integrity and expertise were all words that came up in every single conversation (about Saul)."

Saul serves on the Pennsylvania Association of School Business Officials board of directors and recently earned an MBA from West Chester University.

Consultant Denis McCall has served as interim business manager since Feb. 1. School board members and Schilder also complimented James Frank, assistant business manager, for taking on more responsibilities during the transition.

The school board approved one-time "market adjustments" to salaries for four assistant principals, bumping three up to $85,500 and one up to $85,0000 from about $80,000. It also approved the required Act 93 administrative compensation plan that, among other things, sets competitive salary ranges for each position.

Under the latest plan, all administrators will move to the same medical insurance plan effective July 1. Next year, they will move to another plan designed to avoid triggering the Affordable Care Act's federal excise tax, or Cadillac tax.

In other business, the school board voted unanimously to refund and restructure a 2011 bond series with a $6.5 million general obligation note purchased by First Niagara Bank.

By doing so, the district will shift about $3.6 million in cash flow relief from the 2016-17 and 2017-18 school years to the next three years, when its total debt service will be lower. Given the deal First Niagara offered, the district will only spend a total of $24,700 over the next five years by restructuring its debt.

Scott Shearer, managing director of Public Financial Management, had previously estimated the district would spend about $193,000 more by restructuring.

"This transaction doesn't remove the need to tighten the purse strings, but it makes what tax increase we need this year much smaller than it would have been," school board vice president Ken Bacher said.

Alan Earnshaw, school board president, said another alternative was burdening the taxpayer with the $3.6 million over the next two years and then later reversing the property tax rate when its debt service dropped.

"But I think it's unfair to the taxpayers to stick them with a $3.6 million bill if we can avoid it," he said. "For the cost to be under $25,000 in expenditures over five years to do so,… I don't think I could in good conscience vote against this. It's the only thing that's fair to the taxpayers."

awagaman@mcall.com

Twitter @andrewwagaman

610-820-6764