What will it take to get the state legislature to revise a law that is suffocating the construction of condominiums in metro Denver and thus the dreams of cities that seek mixed development along their transit corridors?

Lawmakers had a chance last spring to address the lack of condo construction with bills sponsored by Sen. Jessie Ulibarri, D-Commerce City. But the legislation died and another year is going by with condo construction stuck in the deep freeze.

But maybe the city of Lakewood can prod the General Assembly out of indifference.

As John Aguilar reported in The Denver Post, the Lakewood City Council has taken up a proposed ordinance addressing structural defects in construction that will “give builders more opportunity to fix problems before litigation begins.”

No one is suggesting that developers escape liability for construction defects or that homeowners be denied the right to sue. But under the state’s current construction defects law, the scales have tilted too far in favor of litigation as the default tool for resolving disputes. And this appears to be the biggest reason for the collapse in the number of new multi-family dwellings in recent years.

At the time Ulibarri introduced his bills, condos represented just 2 percent of new residences being built. That improved slightly to 4.6 percent of the inventory in the second quarter, but the percentage is still way below what existed before the current construction defects law went into effect.

For example, condos were 26 percent of new housing units in 2008.

Mayors and city planners have been pushing to amend the law, and now Lakewood is going to try flying solo — although its powers to do so as a home-rule city may well be challenged.

Whether the city succeeds or not, there is no doubt its purpose is laudable. “If there are defects, we want to get them fixed rather than dragging this through the courts for years,” says Lakewood Mayor Bob Murphy.

If only state lawmakers would heed the message.