SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Akshai Bhatnagar, a field organizer for the Alison Grimes Senate campaign in Kentucky, wrote an article for the Johns Hopkins Politik Magazine in April of this year titled “Why Barack Obama’s New New Deal Depends on This Year’s Kentucky Senate Race.”

In the article, Bhatnagar, a 2014 graduate of Johns Hopkins who previously worked as an intern at the House Majority PAC and the Democratic National Committee, wrote, “Since the 2010 midterms, Republicans in Congress have managed to block even routine legislative action. Major policy initiatives, like immigration reform, cap-and-trade legislation, or gun-control, are frustratingly out of reach.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“Despite President Obama’s surprisingly comfortable re-election margin,” Bhatnagar wrote, “it seems the New New Deal Coalition is not strong enough to pass its own legislative agenda. That means Democrats must expand the political map beyond the current Obama comfort zone. This election cycle, there is no more promising opportunity to do so than the Kentucky Senate race between Republican Minority Leader Mitch McConnell and Democratic challenger Alison Lundergan Grimes.”

Bhatnagar expressed a fairly negative view of Kentucky in his article.

“[P]erhaps no state benefitted [sic] more from the original New Deal than Kentucky,” he wrote, “and as, one of the poorest, unhealthiest, and shortest-lived states in the country, it also stands to benefit from the liberalism of the New New Deal.”

Bhatnagar sang the praises of the benefits Kentuckians are experiencing from Obamacare.

“Obamacare alone has helped almost half a million Kentuckians sign up for health insurance,” he wrote, adding that “polling shows Kentuckians prefer Democratic positions on economic issues like the minimum wage and pay equity. Kentucky is a state both willing to listen to Democratic ideas and in need of more liberal policies.”

Federal Election Commission reports indicate that Bhatnagar has been on the payroll of the Kentucky State Democratic Central Executive Committee since July.

Breitbart News asked Grimes campaign spokesperson Charly Norton if Bhatnagar was hired to work in Kentucky based on the views he expressed in this article but has not yet received a response.

Bhatnagar’s LinkedIn profile, which contained his work history, was deleted on Wednesday.