Christmas lunch at the Topeka Rescue Mission was the same as it always is.

A delicious meal — this year featured tenderloin in natural gravy and a smorgasbord of pies — prepared by dedicated staff and volunteers. More than 500 people dined Wednesday.

Santa Claus was on hand, posing for pictures and sharing a jolly laugh with attendees.

More toys than imaginable cover the walls of a side room, enough for each child to take two, and the very last children to have a selection.

But take away Santa, take away the toys, and Wednesday was a regular day at the mission.

“We do this every day, not once a year,” said executive director Barry Feaker.

The Topeka Rescue Mission served 541 people Wednesday — that actually is lower than other days during a regular week, Feaker said. Although the mission has been averaging about 300 people a night recently, he said, between 400 and 700 people eat a meal at the mission every day.

Another constant, he said, is the overwhelming appreciation shown by those who eat. The Christmas meal, like all meals at the mission, was open to the entire community. That means about 200 diners aren’t staying at the mission.

“Christmas can be real joyous for some people, but for others, without family or a place to go, it can be really heartbreaking,” Feaker said. “We try to make this day a little lighter and brighter for those families.”

Suzanne Ortega has been living at the Hope Center with her two children, Skyler, 4, and Ariella, seven months, for about one month. She was genuinely touched that mission would bring Santa and toys for the children.

“We’re appreciative,” she said, fighting back tears. “If not for the mission, I don’t know where we’d be.”

The more than 70 volunteers Wednesday were told to be kind and to smile, Feaker said. The mission, and, more importantly, the mission’s residents, appreciate their time, he said.

Lori Ellis certainly followed that admonition as she helped people through the line, wishing each one Merry Christmas with a friendly smile. But when asked about why she was there and what it meant to her, she was brushing away tears.

“It’s really emotional for me,” she said. “Everyone is just so thankful. These are amazing people that just need a little bit of help.”