News Release — KSE Partners

June 27, 2014

Contact:

Nick Sherman

[email protected]

802.318.8151

BARRE, VT — Central Vermont Community Action Council announced today it is changing its name to Capstone Community Action. Capstone Executive Director Hal Cohen explained: “The new name better reflects the breadth and diversity of the services we provide and our mission to end poverty and strengthen communities statewide.”

The announcement was made at a community block party at the new Capstone campus in downtown Barre celebrating the organization’s new name and successful completion of a multi-year capital campaign. Cohen was joined by US Senator Patrick Leahy, Secretary of Administration Jeb Spaulding, Lt. Governor Phil Scott, Barre Mayor Thom Lauzon, State Senators Bill Doyle and Anthony Pollina and Representative Francis “Topper” McFaun.

“We have been part of the Vermont landscape for half a century fighting the ‘War on Poverty’ and our new name, new logo and new building will help us reach out and connect with Vermonters and the people we serve,” Cohen explained. “Capstone serves more than just Central Vermont and like other community action agencies, we support communities throughout the state through our various partnerships and programs.”

Capstone serves a total of 47 towns in Lamoille, Orange and Washington Counties and an additional nine towns in adjacent counties. The agency also operates statewide and multi-regional initiatives that extend beyond Central Vermont.

“The Central Vermont Community Action Council has long been committed to offering program participants a solid foundation for family and career success, and to alleviating poverty. I know that Capstone Community Action will continue this dedicated service to Vermonters in need,” said US Senator Patrick Leahy.

Capstone serves more than 18,000 Vermonters per year through its weatherization, comprehensive child and family services, education, home heating fuel, housing, financial literacy, nutrition, transportation and emergency food programs.

“Building on a strong foundation, Capstone Community Action and its partners will provide Vermonters with important resources, training and support, whether it be through affordable housing, workforce training or home heating in the winter,” said Secretary of Administration Jeb Spaulding. “Their work and partnership will be key to achieving economic prosperity for all Vermonters.”

Every individual and family Capstone interacts with comes from a unique situation. The goal of every one of Capstone’s 184 staff members is to work together with clients to develop a plan to empower and connect them with the resources they need to prosper.

“I’m continually impressed by Capstone’s willingness to think outside the box and find creative ways to better the lives of Vermonters,” said Lt. Governor Phil Scott. “They are a long-time partner in ‘Wheels for Warmth,’ our annual tire recycle and resale event that benefits heating assistance, and I look forward to working with them as they develop new ways to help our neighbors.”

The block party culminated in the dedication of the “donor wall” which is located in the new Capstone building. The donor wall commemorates the many people both in and outside of Vermont who have made it their priority to fight poverty through supporting the programs Capstone provides throughout the state.

###

About Capstone Community Action

Founded in 1965 under the name Central Vermont Community Action Council, Capstone Community Action is part of a nationwide network of community action agencies (CAA) established by the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964 in order to fight America’s War on Poverty. Today, there are nearly 1,000 CAAs across the United States located in 98% of our cities and counties. CAAs are a primary source of support for the more than 40 million Americans who are living in poverty in both rural and urban areas. Over the years, Capstone has earned a reputation for leadership in education on poverty issues, advocacy on behalf of low-income families, and developing innovating strategies and programs to reduce poverty. As a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization and Community Development Corporation, we provide a diversity of programs and services for low to moderate income Vermonters aimed at reducing poverty and creating prosperity. We focus our work on the basic tenets of outreach, empowerment, advocacy and organizing.

Learn more at http://www.capstonevt.org/.