Saturday night’s Rockies game against the Los Angeles Dodgers has been postponed because of inclement weather. The game will be played at a later date, but no decision has been made on when it will be made up.

It is the fourth time this season wet weather has wiped out a game, and the third time on the current homestand.

Despite a wintery forecast, the Dodgers and Rockies are still scheduled to play a single game on Sunday afternoon, with the first pitch scheduled for 2:10 p.m.

The National Weather Service has issued a winter storm warning starting Saturday evening and going through Sunday morning, saying that between 5 inches to 10 inches of snow could fall along the Interstate 25 corridor. Rain is expected to turn to snow in Denver about 9 p.m.

“We’re getting a little bit of everything. Heavy rain, flash flooding, snow. A lot of moisture and a little heating can go a long way on the Eastern Plains, producing a lot of hail and the potential for tornadic activity,” said Kari Bowen, meteorologist for the National Weather Service in Boulder.

A winter storm watch was upgraded to a winter storm warning a little after 1 p.m. Saturday. Meanwhile, a flood warning remains in effect until 8:15 p.m. Saturday for the same Front Range cities.

The Dodgers and Rockies are both expected to keep their rotations intact for Sunday’s game, meaning that Dodgers left-hander Clayton Kershaw, the two-time National League Cy Young Award winner, would face Colorado lefty Jorge De La Rosa.

Tickets from Saturday’s game will be valid for the rescheduled game or exchanges can be made for any game throughout the remainder of the 2015 season — value for value, best available seating, as long as the exchange is made prior to the rescheduled game.

Complimentary tickets have a value of zero dollars and therefore may not be exchanged.

Discounted tickets may be exchanged only for the amount paid to the Rockies and are subject to any constraints applicable to the original sale.

There will be no cash refunds. Ticket exchanges will be accepted at the Coors Field ticket office and all Rockies Dugout stores.

Tickets purchased via StubHub for Saturday’s game will be valid for the rescheduled game.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp