On the heels of Newport News-based Riverside health system's nearly $300 million renovation plan, Sentara Norfolk General Hospital has announced it will spend $199 million to renovate its facilities.

Sentara's five-year project will expand and modernize the hospital's emergency department and level I trauma center and 18 operating rooms, according to a news release. It will also replace a 48-bed ward-style special care nursery with state-of-the art private and semi-private rooms and consolidate 54 ICU beds on two floors.

The project aims to bring the 525-bed hospital up to modern standards and enhance its reputation as a mid-Atlantic referral center, officials said.

"We are proud to provide world-class care, but our patients and clinicians deserve more modern facilities," Kurt Hofelich, the hospital's president, said in the release. "We are investing in the future to improve the patient experience, prepare for new technologies and bolster our position as a mid-Atlantic referral center."

Patients from 28 states, Puerto Rico, Canada, Germany and other countries have traveled to the hospital in recent years for cardiac, cancer, neurology and urology care, officials said.

Construction is scheduled to start in March, and officials anticipate the work will be complete in 2020. Space is limited on the campus, so the expansion will be built up rather than out, adding a total of six new floors on top of two existing wings.

In addition to the projects at the Norfolk hospital, the health system plans to double its number of psychiatric beds at Sentara Obici Hospital in Suffolk. The Virginia Department of Health approved Sentara's proposal last month. The addition will be made through the conversion of 10 private rooms to 10 semi-private rooms, resulting in 20 acute inpatient psychiatric beds. The estimated cost of the project is $61,000, according to the proposal.

Sentara's plans follow an announcement by the Newport News-based Riverside health system over the summer to spend about $296 million on its facilities in Newport News and James City and Gloucester counties over the next five years. Those projects are part of an ongoing expansion of Riverside throughout the region.

Daily Press archives were used in this report. Ketchum can be reached by phone at 757-247-7478.