Veteran coach leaving top-seeded Eagles after playoff run

After 20 seasons, five state titles, and more than 450 wins, Mike Croell is leaving the Broomfield girls basketball program. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

Before the win total zipped past the 400-mark, and long before the glut of championships that brought a wealth of hardware to Broomfield High, Mike Croell always exuded his signature enthusiasm.

Among the handful of stops Croell made before beginning his historic run as the Eagles' girls basketball coach was a stint as an assistant for the boys team at Fairview under coach Mike Leahy.

Leahy recalls a midcourt team meeting in the days leading up to a state tournament game when a young Croell wandered to the far end of the floor and started adjusting the height on a portable basket. Moments later Croell had forced the Knights to jump jubilantly to their feet as he threw down a monstrous dunk.

"You never knew what he was going to do next," recalled Leahy, now an assistant under his son Tim Leahy at Erie. "I think it was obvious then he had that passion."

The passion that fueled so many memorable girls basketball teams at Broomfield no longer will be prowling the Eagles' sideline. Whether the top-seeded Eagles cap their first season at the Class 5A level with Croell's sixth state title or succumb to playoff heartbreak, Croell's 20th season at the helm will mark his last with the girls basketball program.

With his son Chad having just completed his junior season with the Broomfield boys program and his younger son set to join Broomfield next year, Croell is keen on devoting more time to simply being a basketball dad.

"Actually, if I would've thought about it more I would have done it last year," Croell said. "But with the program moving into 5A, and I knew the team we had coming back would be so good and could make another run, I thought I'd give it one more year.

"Then you look around and you see what you might have next year and you wonder...but I've come to the conclusion that no time is good. My son will be a senior on the boys team and I've been watching all his games on DVDs the parents give me. It's just time. It's time to go."

After cutting his teeth coaching a little bit of everything at tiny Hi-Plains High School in Seibert, Croell, a Broomfield native, jumped at the chance to return to the area with a series of assistant coach jobs that included stints at Fairview and Centennial Middle School.

Croell took over the Broomfield girls program before the 1995-96 season and promptly led the Eagles to the Elite 8, a plateau the Eagles would reach in each of the next 18 seasons and counting under Croell.

Known for the peerless intensity of their full-court press, Croell's Eagles quickly developed into a Class 4A powerhouse, making 13 appearances in the Final Four and eight in the title game. Broomfield emerged with victories in five of those, all in a row from 2007 through 2011. That run included a 44-game winning streak.

"The intensity level his kids always played with has always been very impressive," said longtime Niwot girls basketball coach Terri Ward. "Whether it's the first minute of the game or the last, it doesn't matter. The intensity is there. The full-court press they've used forever has kicked a few of us in the behind quite a lot. No one will miss playing his teams, that's for sure. But Mike will be missed in the high school coaching world."

Inevitably, suitors came calling, with several colleges attempting to lure Croell from the high school ranks. Given his deep-rooted ties to the community, Croell never budged. That longevity and loyalty has helped Croell compile a record 453-69 heading into Broomfield's Sweet 16 match Tuesday.

It's a mark that someday should merit consideration for the Colorado High School Activities Association Hall of Fame as well as the Colorado Sports Hall of Fame.

"The thing I'm most proud of is that when we took over, it has been a number of years since Broomfield had been in the Final 8," Croell said. "Those girls were so ecstatic to get to the Final 8. Now in this program if you don't win it all it's considered a disappointment, for better or worse.

"The good always far outweighed the bad. I have nothing but good things to say over the years about the players, the administration, the parents. I know I'm leaving the program in a really good state."

While Broomfield is set to honor Croell after Tuesday's Sweet 16 game against Pine Creek, the veteran coach isn't planning to disappear. He will remain a teacher at the school and will continue coaching the freshman football team. A return as a head basketball coach is hardly unlikely, and perhaps inevitable, once his sons are through high school.

Yet for now, the only job Croell wants to focus on is that of basketball dad.

"The nice part is leaving with so many great memories," Croell said. "Maybe the book isn't closed, but if not I'm content to be a fan for a while. The benefits of watching my two kids far outweigh the benefits of coaching right now."

Follow Pat on Twitter: twitter.com/prooney07