CULLMAN - Across from Sacred Heart School, there is a little boutique that is helping women find the best style for them. We have many great boutiques in town to choose from, but at Younique Boutique, you are guaranteed to find amazing customer service and sizes for all women and ages.

“My sister-in-law, Tammie Hudson, and myself started real small selling jewelry and clothing in what we call trunk shows,” said co-owner Gidgett Overton. “Then last April my sister was getting married and we came here to try on dresses, and Ashley who owned Just For Looks, told me she was going out of business.”

At first, Overton was unsure that she and her partner were ready to open their own store, but after some deliberation they decided to go for it.

“One morning I just decided to call and ask some questions,” she said. “So I called Mr. Kraft [the building’s owner], and he was wonderful. I told him what we were wanting to do and it all sort of fell into place. So we started here in June.”

Overton and Hudson quadrupled their inventory over the past few months and continue to fill the store with even more. You can purchase your favorite mineral way makeup at their store. They are also carrying inventory of wedding gowns and prom dresses from Just For Looks, which are marked down to unthinkably low prices.

“Ashley has made all of the wedding dresses $100, $200 or $500,” said Overton. “There’s not a dress over there priced over $500. All of her prom and pageant dresses are half priced also. We’re just trying to help her get this inventory out.”

The store is one of the cutest shops you will see. Its large windows are lavishly decorated with fun and colorful décor and display some of their beautiful clothes. The clothes in the store are all boutique style clothing ranging in price from approximately $25 and up. Beautiful dresses, shirts, pants and accessories cover the store. Another great thing about the lines of clothing they choose is that the clothes are made for women with curves as well.

“The clothing that we are trying to stay with is missy sizing for women,” Overton said. “The sizing goes all the way from small to 3x. We are trying to stay with vendors that carry those sizes, and I think that makes us a little different. We are hoping to stay unique.”

Overall business has been steady for the two owners, and they are more than happy with their location.

“The great thing about here is that it’s visual,” she said. “We have great windows, the space, and the parking is great. There is a steady stream of traffic. It’s a great spot. We have been doing well and hope to generate more buzz from word of mouth.”

Younique Boutique has something for everyone with their large inventory and even offer layaway to make shopping more affordable for everyone. If you are looking for sincere and warm customer service, you need look no further.

“I really love helping people feel good about themselves,” Overton said. “When I help someone find the perfect outfit or piece of jewelry that helps them feel good and makes them smile, that is what I love. It’s not just about the sale. I want them to leave feeling great about what they bought. For me, that is what is rewarding.”

Younique Boutique is located at 105 2nd Ave SE, Cullman AL, 35055. They may be reached at 256-735-4074.