Gov. Sean Parnell’s decision Nov. 15 to not expand Medicaid in Alaska, as allowed under the federal Affordable Care Act, ranks as the top health care story of 2013.

Had it been allowed, the expansion would have brought health coverage to an estimated 40,000 lower-income Alaskans who do not now have health insurance or do not have coverage as good as Medicaid.

Parnell cited cost concerns as the primary reason for his denial of the expansion, and acknowledged that he could still allow it in the future but he said he does not trust the federal government’s ability in the future to finance the expansion.

The law states the federal government will cover 100 percent of the cost of expanding eligibility for the first three years, with the state responsible for 10 percent of the expansion thereafter.

If more of the liability were to fall back on the state, even partly, it could become very burdensome at a time when state revenues are diminished.

Parnell said Medicaid already covers about 140,000 low-income Alaskan families and disabled who are below the federal poverty level for Alaska. The cost of this is now $1.5 billion per year, the governor said. Under the current Medicaid program the state pays about 50 percent, or $750 million yearly.

If the program costs continue to escalate, expenses are projected to grow to about $2.5 billion a year by 2020, of which $1.25 billion would be state funds.

There was sharp criticism of the governor for his decision, including from groups like the American Association of Retired Persons, or AARP.

“We are disappointed that the Governor chose to ignore the pro-expansion arguments of organizations as diverse as the Alaska State Chamber of Commerce, the Alaska Federation of Natives and AARP, Alaska’s largest membership organization representing over 90,000 Alaskans,” said AARP’s Alaska director, Ken Osterkamp, said in a statement.

“In doing so he is giving away the federal tax dollars already paid by Alaskans to the dozens of other states that have chosen, and continue to choose, to expand Medicaid to help those most in need.”

2. New facilities

New and expanded healthcare facilities opened around the state this year.

The Alaska Native Tribal Health Consortium, or ANTHC, constructed a new clinic in Kaltag, in western Alaska, that opened March 2. The 2,100-square-foot, $2.1 million facility includes a pharmacy, laboratory and medical and dental exam rooms.

In Fairbanks, the Tanana Chiefs Conference Chief Andrew Isaac Health Center also opened in March.

ANTHC also built a new clinic in Chalkyitsik, east of Fort Yukon, which opened in May, and the SouthEast Alaska Regional Health Consortium opened a new “micro” clinic in Kassan in June. The micro clinic is a new style facility meant to serve communities with fewer than 100 residents.

Hospitals are also expanding.

The 109,000-square-foot Samuel Simmonds Memorial Hospital in Barrow had its official opening in August, replacing the old hospital, which was built in 1963. The hospital added additional outpatient rooms and emergency room beds, as well as more specialty services, such as audiology and endoscopy, than were available previously.

Arctic Slope Native Association operates the facility, while funding came largely from the Title V construction program through the Indian Health Service.

Nome’s Norton Sound Regional Hospital, a tribal facility, held its grand opening in 2012, and by spring of 2013, all departments had transitioned to the new 150,000-square-foot facility and were seeing patients there.

In October 2012, Providence opened the first phase of its expanded Maternity Center, the Mother-Baby Unit. Additional work is ongoing, with the Labor and Delivery Unit expected to open in 2014.

The Alaska Native Medical Center also opened its expanded Neonatal Intensive Care Unit in the spring, marking the completion of one of six planned expansions to its Maternal Child Health department.

Eventually, patients at the ANMC will also have access to housing in the future under action taken by the state legislature last spring.

ANTHC is building a 170-bed residential facility at ANMC to house patients traveling from outside of the Anchorage area to receive healthcare. The project came about as a way to both improve health care and reduce state spending on Medicaid.

Planning and construction also began at other sites throughout the state.

In November, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services announced $3.98 million in funding for six clinic projects.

Glenallen, Kodiak, Nome, Seward, Anchorage and Fairbanks will all receive funding from the Affordable Care Act program, which is meant to expand local access to primary care services through community health centers. According to the announcement, the facilities will serve 15,926 patients.

The Kenaitze Tribe also continued work on its new clinic in Kenai, which is set to open in June 2014.

The Central Peninsula Hospital, in Soldotna, also received approval this year from the Kenai Peninsula Borough to proceed with a 89,000-square-foot expansion. The borough assembly approved up to $43 million in revenue bonds to fund the project, which will add a spine-center, foot procedure room, and five clinics.

Telehealth expansions this year also changed the healthcare landscape in the state.

Kodiak Area Native Association expanded its telehealth services in March through a partnership with Alaska Communications. According to KANA, the expansion will enable the rural clinics to access specialists such as mental health, cardiology and critical care experts.

— Molly Dischner

3. Troubled rollout for health insurance exchange

Alaska’s health exchange, managed by the federal government, had a troubled rollout Oct. 1 like exchanges elsewhere in the nation. A few people were successfully enrolled in the first weeks after the exchange went “live” due to technical glitches.

The glitches are being gradually worked out and the pace of enrollments was picking up in late November and December. The deadline for individuals having proof of insurance, or face a penalty, is Jan. 1 under the federal Affordable Care Act.

Meanwhile, concerns over private health insurance policies in Alaska being cancelled because they were not in compliance with the federal law were eased when insurers, such as Premera Blue Cross Blue Shield, announced they would extend the policies.

In a statement, Premera said it will extend its policies at current rates until the end of 2014. Those extensions will be automatic unless policyholders contact Blue Cross, spokeswoman Melanie Cook said.

— Tim Bradner