Miley Cyrus isn’t very happy that someone leaked the highly-anticipated “Adore You” music video ahead of its official release.

The singer got the ball rolling when she dropped a handful of teasers on Instagram before Christmas. Although Cyrus and her record label hoped to unveil the full-length video today (December 26), someone decided to release the video ahead of schedule.

However, you shouldn’t point the finger of blame directly at Miley Cyrus. The singer swears she’s not responsible for the leak. In fact, the former Hannah Montana star is downright angry that a sneaky individual beat her to the musical punch.

“We all know Smilers would break another record if it wasn’t for the f*** face who leaked my video. All good! Keep smiling,” Cyrus recently tweeted.

For those who don’t feel the need to watch the clip, the “Adore You” video finds Miley Cyrus writhing around under sheets while filming herself with a handheld camera. The singer also pretends to masturbate, something that will surely send countless viewers to VEVO when it officially arrives later today.

Putting together extremely provocative clips for her songs is precisely how the singer generates so many views these days. “Wrecking Ball,” which finds Cyrus swinging from the titular object while completely naked, is easily this year’s most popular music video. As of this writing, the clip has over 437 million views.

“Adore You” is the third single from the singer’s latest album Bangerz. Considering there’s a significant amount of buzz brewing for the tune at the moment, chances are the official music video will generate millions of hits by the time years comes to a close.

Given the clip’s sexual nature, a fair amount of controversy is sure to follow its release. Both “We Can’t Stop” and “Wrecking Ball” raised eyebrows and caused pearl-clutchers to shake their heads in disapproval. “Adore You” will no doubt follow in their footsteps.

Curious to see what all the fuss is about? Check out the leaked video below. Since the clip is definitely a little raunchy, viewer discretion is strongly advised.

This isn’t the only reason Miley Cyrus has made headlines in recent days. The singer recently came under fire from quite a few folks after wearing a fur coat during her appearance at the Jingle Ball in Miami. The questionable attire also made an appearance during a show in Washington D.C.

What do you think about the video for Miley Cyrus’ “Adore You”?