Incumbent Lt. Gov. Tate Reeves is running for re-election in November. Reeves cites a balanced budget, efforts to cut taxes and increased school funding as his major accomplishments. (Photo: Submitted photo)

Mississippi voters will choose between incumbent Republican Lt. Gov. Tate Reeves and his recent Democratic-convert opponent Tim Johnson on Tuesday.

While Reeves maintains his record over the past four years qualifies him for another term, Johnson, a former Republican state senator and county supervisor, said his own priorities as lieutenant governor are what Mississippi needs.

Reeves described campaigning as a different experience from his first go-round in 2011.

“I’ve had the opportunity to talk to voters about what we have done — about my record as lieutenant governor, about the fact that we’ve truly balanced the budget for the first time in many, many years,” Reeves explained.

Reeves highlighted a full rainy-day fund, increased education spending and his support of education reform efforts such as the Literacy-Based Promotion Act and the Mississippi Public Charter Schools Act of 2013, which led to Mississippi’s first charter schools opening in Jackson this school year.

Reeves said if re-elected, he hopes to further improve the charter school law to allow students to attend charter schools outside their own school district.

“There shouldn’t be arbitrary lines separating the good schools and kids having access to them,” Reeves said.

Reeves, who pushed for the elimination of the inventory tax on small businesses in the state, said he hopes to continue those efforts. The accomplishment he’s most proud of, however, is the literacy law, also known as the third-grade reading gate.

The law requires third-graders to pass a reading test before being promoted to fourth grade.

“I was in Noxubee County a couple weeks ago, where the state funded a reading coach and a data coach for that school district, for those elementary kids. Their reading scores improved nearly 25 percent year over year — that’s three times better than the state average,” Reeves said. “We had positive results statewide, reading results improved 7 to 8 percent … Those kids have a chance now for long-term success.”

Asked where he stood on public school funding should Initiative 42 not pass, Reeves said he hopes to continue increasing spending for schools over the next four years.

“In the most recently completed legislative session, we spent 57 percent of all new revenue on K-12 public schools,” he recalled. “And so if Initiative 42 does not pass — and I pray that it does not for the sake of our kids — if 42 does not pass, we hope to continue to significantly improve funding for public education but to do it in a responsible way that does not raise taxes, does not take money away from the good schools and that focuses on what’s best for kids.”

Reeves, who has drastically outraised his opponent, currently has $3.5 million campaign cash on hand, according to the most recent campaign filings. He’s raised $1.6 million this year. In comparison, Johnson has raised about $207,300 this year.

Tim Johnson, Democratic candidate for Lieutenant Governor, says his priorities to expand Medicaid, fully fund schools and improve infrastructure are what Mississippi needs. (Photo: Special to The Clarion-Ledger)

Johnson said his focus, if elected, will be on three priorities: expanding Medicaid, improving infrastructure and fully funding the Mississippi Adequate Education Program.

Johnson switched from the Republican Party to Democratic Party earlier this year. He said his decision came after his 90-year-old mother had a stroke in Kosciusko. At the time, there were talks of shutting down Montfort Jones Memorial Hospital, the only hospital in Attala County.

Although his mother was able to get care and recover, Johnson said it made him ask, “What would’ve happened if that hospital had been closed?”

He began looking at how Medicaid expansion was handled by state officials. The Affordable Care Act would have allowed Mississippi to expand coverage to 333,000 people, but Mississippi did not do so.

“ … The fact they would not allow those dollars to flow into Mississippi that could help our rural hospitals, protect our professional health-care providers and help our sick and elderly — it just didn’t make any sense to me,” Johnson said at an editorial board meeting of The Clarion-Ledger earlier this month.

Reeves has criticized Johnson’s position on Medicaid as evidence of his alignment with the president, calling him “out of tune with Mississippians.”

Johnson pointed to his experience as an alderman, county supervisor and state senator, which he says he would bring with him to the lieutenant governor’s office. He said as a supervisor in Madison County, his main focus was infrastructure.

“We were able to build $69 million worth of new roads in Madison County,” he said. “I want to make sure roads and bridges are safe in this state. I want to make sure more money flows into cities and counties. We need to invest in the future by building new roads.”

Asked about his party switch, he says he doesn’t think of himself or his values in Republican/Democrat or conservative/liberal terms.

“I have Mississippi values. … I believe the Democratic Party offers people like me with a heart for public service the opportunity to serve, and that’s what I want to do — serve,” he explained.

Contact Kate Royals at (601) 360-4619 or kroyals@gannett.com. Follow @KRRoyals on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://on.thec-l.com/1MldKKy