Executive order expected to affect thousands in northeast Colorado

People sit Thursday at a table in El Jacal Mexican Grill as Barack Obama delivers a speech on his executive order. ( Zachary Laux / Fort Morgan Times )

Undocumented immigrants living in Fort Morgan watched in excitement Thursday night as President Barack Obama delivered a speech of his executive order on immigration law.

The most important thing Obama addressed in his speech was the deferred action for parents, said Fort Morgan immigration attorney Lisa Pray.

"The thing that's going to benefit the people in [northeast Colorado] is the new deferred action for parents," she said.

The deferred action makes it easier for undocumented parents of United States citizens to stay in the country, keeping families together.

"The importance is really to stop separation" of families, Pray said.

Pray was watching Obama's speech Thursday night at the Fort Morgan restaurant El Jacal Mexican Grill with several members of the Amanecer Group, a branch of the Colorado Immigrant Rights Coalition.

"I was very happy," said Leticia Zavala, a member of the group. "I am a citizen born and raised in Fort Morgan but I have many friends where that is not the case."

Not only has immigration law affected her friends, but it also affected Zavala and her family, she said.

Zavala's husband, Guillermo Morales, was living in the United States illegally. As a condition to become a legal citizen of the United States, Morales had to partake in "voluntary departure" which meant he had to return to Mexico. Morales was on voluntary departure from December 2013 to August of this year, putting strain on Zavala and her two children, Isahias, 9, and Yaslne, 6.

"From what I understood, they won't have to stay over as long, which is amazing because it was very rough for me and my two kids," she said.

Obama's executive order should make the legalization process easier and protect undocumented parents, if their children are United States citizens.

Obama's executive order is expected to affect 5 million people living in the United States. Pray said the order could potentially affect thousands living in northeast Colorado.

Zachary Laux: 970-867-5651, zlaux@fmtimes.com