James Comer, left, looks on as Hal Heiner addresses the audience at the Americans for Prosperity Kentucky Republican gubernatorial debate. Kentucky race turns on abuse claim, but which way? Ex-girlfriend’s charge may motivate backers of GOP gubernatorial candidate James Comer.

LEXINGTON, Ky. — It would be an ironic end to a bitter campaign: The allegations of domestic abuse that threatened James Comer’s bid to be the next governor of Kentucky may instead propel him to victory in Tuesday’s primary election.

Veteran political hands in the Bluegrass State say the charges from an ex-girlfriend he dated in college, which Comer fiercely denies, have stoked indignation among his supporters and may energize them just enough to pull ahead in the closely fought contest.

Story Continued Below

It’s a function of what election forecasters expect to be abysmally low turnout and a razor-close finish. The candidates have spent the final few days scouring for votes and any slight edge that might put them over the top. Comer, the state agriculture commissioner, is virtually tied with businessmen Matt Bevin and Hal Heiner, according to recent polls. Former state Supreme Court justice Will T. Scott is polling a distant fourth.

The abuse allegations, which emerged earlier this month, have shaken up the race in unpredictable ways — and each camp hopes they work in its favor.

“I’m more motivated to see Comer win now than I was before,” said Rep. Thomas Massie (R-Ky.), who predicted an eight-point Comer victory.

Comer has worked assiduously to paint the abuse allegations as a smear driven by Heiner, long considered his leading rival for the nomination after spending $4.2 million of his own money on the race.

“Hate’s a fantastic emotion in politics, and there’s plenty of hatred … right now from Jamie Comer’s supporters against Hal Heiner,” said Ted Jackson, a Kentucky Republican strategist.

Heiner has disavowed any role in the allegations coming out, but Comer’s allies have returned to the assertion repeatedly to paint Heiner as a dirty campaigner. And Heiner’s running mate has been connected to a controversial blogger who has been pushing the abuse story on Comer for months.

“Hal’s complete fabrication about his involvement in this story is just — it really is creating a backlash,” said former Rep. Anne Northup, a Comer supporter. “It’s just beyond belief.”

Heiner has countered that Comer is taking advantage of the sordid allegations to gin up his supporters. In an ad released Friday, he accused Comer and Bevin of trying to make political hay out of domestic violence. Comer rejects the suggestion but acknowledges that the dispute could work in his favor. “The people that know me are really fired up — the people that know me well,” he said. “We’re just trying to close this race out.”

Bevin, meanwhile, who was left for dead after a failed challenge to Sen. Mitch McConnell in last year’s GOP Senate primary, has proven to be an adroit campaigner with a flair for retail politics that has helped resurrect his fortunes. Though McConnell was long expected to stand in Bevin’s way, there’s been little evidence — beyond vocal opposition from McConnell allies — that the Senate majority leader has done anything to prevent Bevin’s comeback.

While Comer and Heiner have attacked each other, Bevin has sought to portray himself as the most serious candidate in the race. He’s spent the final few days emphasizing his humble upbringing, military service and experience in the pension business as his qualifications to lead Kentucky. Many Republicans who spoke with POLITICO Campaign Pro said Comer and Heiner ignored Bevin for too long, presuming his candidacy wouldn’t gain traction.

Establishment Republicans worry that he’d fare worst against the near-certain Democratic nominee, Attorney General Jack Conway. Bevin still has baggage from last year’s Senate race, including a perception as a strident tea party ally with little appeal to mainstream Republicans.

“I have two words to say to any Republican who supports Matt in this primary,” said Bill Stone, a former chairman of the Jefferson County Republican Party and Heiner supporter. “Those two words are: Gov. Conway.”

Republicans are hoping to take over the governorship after eight years of Democratic control under the popular, term-limited incumbent Steve Beshear. A victory in Kentucky would give the GOP control of 32 of the nation’s statehouses.

But despite Kentucky’s solid-red status in federal elections, Democrats have more than held their own at the state level. They’ve won seven of the past eight gubernatorial elections, and they still control the state House.

“Kentucky still ranks at the bottom or near the bottom in every category. We haven’t really had a governor who’s been able to move the needle much for Kentucky for quite some time,” said Terry Stephens, a Republican donor who supports Comer.

“That’s why this election is so damned important,” added Stone.

On the ground, the Republican candidates will be competing for distinct pockets of votes. Bevin and Heiner hail from vote-rich eastern Kentucky, which includes Democratic-leaning population centers of Louisville, Lexington and their surrounding suburbs. Comer, meanwhile, is the only candidate from rural western Kentucky and is likely to fair better among voters who view even Republicans from the cities with skepticism.

Another wildcard is the vote from southeastern Kentucky, dominated by loyalists to Rep. Hal Rogers, who’s butted heads with Comer on hemp legalization efforts. If Heiner can eat into Comer’s support in this territory, he could prevail. But Bevin’s strength in the Cincinnati suburbs could erode Heiner’s base. Bevin won the endorsement of the Cincinnati Enquirer and came an eyelash away from beating McConnell in populous Boone County in last year’s Senate race.

Even Scott, who captures about 8 percent in polls, could be a difference-maker. Asked about the viciousness of the primary, Scott called it symptoms of a growing Kentucky Republican Party.

“What you’re seeing in this race is nothing more than growing pains,” he said, adding that any of his rivals would make good governors. “They’re all great people, and if they get lucky enough to beat me, I don’t care if they make me mad. I’m going to support them.”

That cold calculus has been dominant in a race that’s featured little obvious division on policy. The candidates talk predictably about jobs and education, touting their diverse backgrounds as proof that they — not their opponents — are uniquely qualified to juice the Kentucky economy.

“My background has been job attraction. I’ve had the opportunity to work with hundreds of companies,” Heiner said in an interview. “I don’t have to read about it or learn about it. I’ve lived it my entire life.”

All of the candidates say they would like to do away with the state’s Obamacare exchange, KyNect — though only Bevin and Scott advocate completely dismantling it, while Heiner and Comer have advocated keeping certain pieces. Bevin has swiped at Heiner on guns, arguing that Heiner’s lone vote on gun policy came as a Louisville city councilor when he rejected a concealed carry measure.

Heiner ripped Bevin for the criticism.

“It’s absolute mischaracterization. Matt will say anything to get elected,” he said.

Heiner said he’d maintain the state’s Medicaid expansion under Obamacare, but he’d model it after other Republican-led states that have approved versions that rely primarily on private sector insurance coverage.

Though Republicans are sharply divided, there’s general agreement than any of the three potential victors would be better than Conway, which has some in the GOP worried that the bitter race could damage their ultimate nominee.

Stone compared it to a string of nationwide Republican losses in campaigns they were favored to win. “We had Harry Reid in our sights. It was our year to beat Claire McCaskill,” he said. “We did their work for them.”

Adding to the intensity of the negative campaign is the fact that super PACs for Comer and Heiner have been hurling haymakers at their opponents, a development not lost on Bevin.

“You notice who doesn’t have a super PAC blowing up their opposition?” he asked reporters at a campaign stop in Lexington. “Why? Because I’m running on issues. I don’t need to attack other people or bring them down or smear them. … I’m not going to get there by demeaning other people. If that’s what it takes, I have no interest in being the governor.”