FARGO, N.D. -

For this weekend, Fargo is the center of the Republican Presidential race.

There are two sets of races happening, national and statewide.

There was a contested race for the nomination for governor, and Senator Ted Cruz headlining, trying to recruit delegates.



"We will prohibit the federal government from regulating fracking and we will build the Keystone Pipeline," says Senator Ted Cruz.



Aiming straight for the state's heart, Senator Cruz came to the Scheels Arena stage to woo delegates.

Something he says could decide the entire Republican primary.

He vows to abolish the IRS and repeal Obamacare.



Cruz promises, "Mark my words: in January 2017...it will end."



Cruz kept his speech clean and with only few jabs here and there at rival Donald Trump.

"Nominating Donald Trump would be a train wreck," says Cruz. "Donald has been supporting liberal Democratic politicians for 40 years. I have no experience doing that."

Trump does not plan to attend the convention, giving Cruz a chance to lock in delegates.

"I am here asking you to stand with us to elect delegates who are supporting me to stand with us together because if Republicans unite, we win," says Cruz.



For some, this was a reassurance that Cruz belongs in the White House.



"I thought today, he confirmed that he is the solution to America's problems," says District 23 delegate Judy Estenson.



And for others, he's just not the whole package.



"I wish we had the heart of Trump and the constitutional knowledge of Cruz," says District 29 delegate Mike Peterson.



As for the governor's race, three candidates went head to head for the party's nomination.

Attorney General Wayne Stenehjem, businessman Doug Burgum and Bismarck State Representative Rick Becker could not snatch a majority vote the first round.

In round two, Stenehjem came on top, scoring 50% of the delegates.

Becker fell behind, racking 37.8% and Burgum 9.6%.



"Together we will win and keep North Dakota a great place to live, to raise a family and to do business," says Stenehjem.



Even without the party's nomination, Burgum plans to run against Stenehjem in the primary election.

After hearing from Cruz, Dr. Ben Carson is scheduled to speak on Trump's behalf Sunday morning.