Last year’s Open Carry Guitar Rally along the Continental Avenue Bridge wasn’t a one-off jam session after all.

Barry Kooda, the capo di tutti capi of the Dallas event that spread from Austin to Ohio to Oregon, says the guitar open-carriers will return to the Continental bridge May 3, from 4-9 p.m. And this year’s rally will be much bigger than the July 4, 2014, kick-off. For starters there will be actual bands on a real stage, as opposed to, say, random AC/DC riffs wafting over the Trinity River. And, there will be Port-a-Johns.

In other words, it’s now a thing — a giant, glorious, “family friendly, all inclusive, fun and free to attend” thing, in the words of this morning’s heads-up.

And, like the open-carrying gun-toters who inspired this event, the guitarristas aren’t going anywhere. Kooda’s actually assembled a five-man board-turned-”team spirit squad” — himself, Majestic Theatre general manager Mike Schwedler, KNON deejay and marketing consultant Reid Robinson, rally co-founder Kyle Reynolds and musician-turned-artist-turned-Don’t Shred On Me Logo-creator Pat Ramseur — to cement its longevity.

But the once-and-future Nervebreaker wants to make one thing clear a year after the Open Carry Guitar Rally’s well-received inception: It might have begun as a response to the long-gun-lovers who wear their weapons to Chipotles and Targets, but it’s “never been the main thing.”

Says Kooda, “With a group like this, there are always going to be people who are totally anti-gun and those who aren’t but believe the right to bear arms shouldn’t supersede the greater right for all Americans to feel safe, secure and at ease when they are in public. The proper response to seeing weapons displayed openly is alarm. You should be concerned. To desensitize people to that sight is dangerous, foolish and would certainly lead to very bad things happening. With guitars, the worst that may happen is a bad rendition of ‘Smoke On The Water.’”

But a bigger event in 2015 means a bigger budget, though anything would be bigger than last year’s let’s-put-on-show march that took on a life of its own. With a stage, bands, food trucks and porta-potties come permits, security, sanitation and equipment rental, and those things don’t come cheap. Hence the just-launched GoFundMe page, which is hoping to raise $15,000 to cover costs. Says Kooda, leftover money — if there is any — will go to the Carter Albrecht Music Foundation and others to be determined.

“With your help, we can host this Dallas event again, make it better, involve more people, make a sensible statement, and raise some money for some good Dallas charities,” says the OCGR statement sent this morning. “As before, this is an event that belongs to all of us, and we wholeheartedly encourage everyone to open their minds and let those ideas flow.”

Just not this one.