Topics: Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Religious Right, Ted Cruz, Texas, The South, Business News, News, Politics News

“Not a dime’s worth of difference,” was how Alabama Governor George Wallace described the Democratic and Republican Parties of the late 1960s, when he led the short-lived American Party.

The same can be said of Ted Cruz and Donald Trump as they compete for the voters Richard Nixon saw as key to a Southern Strategy and a permanent Republican majority in the South.

The difference between the two Republican candidates is stylistic. Trump is the narcissistic vulgarian incapable of restraint while in front of an audience; Cruz the cerebral and abrasive ideologue who abandons restraint when it suits his purposes (Obama is “treasonous” and a “clueless socialist”). Their principles and policy goals, absent harsh restrictions on immigrants, have already been written into House Speaker Paul Ryan’s budget, the party’s blueprint for a low-tax, small-government utopia.

Going into the Iowa caucuses, Cruz was cautiously deferential toward Trump. Like a NASCAR driver cheating the wind and riding a leader’s slipstream, he hung behind Trump without challenging him, waiting to make his move.

His moment arrives now, when the race for the Republican nomination turns south: Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia in March.

George Corley Wallace, Jr. was a genuine son of the Confederacy. Rafael Edward Cruz, a genuine heir to Wallace’s politics of white working-class resentment, is not. The jeans, boots and western-cut shirts are part of a sartorial makeover intended to turn an Ivy League law school graduate into the leader of pitchfork-bearing blue-collar insurgents. Born in Canada, of an American mother and a Cuban immigrant father, his parents’ careers took him to a Houston suburb where he attended a non-denominational Christian elementary school and a Baptist high school. Cruz left Texas after high school and didn’t return until Rick Perry appointed him solicitor general in 2003, when he was working for a small politically connected law firm in Washington. His only other employment in the state was as a partner at a Houston law firm, where he earned $1 million and $1.57 million in the two years prior to his Senate campaign. In 2001, he married Heidi Nelson, who had worked for the George W. Bush campaign in 2000; she later became a Goldman Sachs executive.

Unlike Bush, who built an oil business in Midland then bought into the Texas Rangers, or John Cornyn, who held two statewide elected offices before running for the U.S. Senate, Cruz has no political roots in the state he represents.

As a solicitor general, Cruz had a big job but no name recognition. To voters, he was an unknown, polling from 1 to 3 percent when he filed for the open Senate seat in 2012. The favorite was incumbent Lieutenant Governor David Dewhurst, a telegenic, bilingual, former Air Force officer and CIA agent, who had built a company worth $400 million, and roped calves at rodeos on weekends.

But Dewhurst was damaged goods. As lieutenant governor, presiding over the Senate, he had cut a few deals with Democrats. $16 billion in tax cuts and shrinking state agencies wasn’t enough to satisfy a Republican electorate primed by a Tea Party movement and an animus toward Barack Obama that was inflamed by the rhetoric of elected leaders like former governor Rick Perry and current governor Greg Abbott.

Dewhurst was unaware of his vulnerability. Cruz wasn’t.