The healthcare.gov website (Photo: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services)

A Minnesota-based health-insurer plans to join two other carriers on Iowa's version of the Affordable Care Act insurance marketplace.

Thursday morning's announcement from Medica means that moderate-income Iowans who qualify for federal subsidies under Obamacare will have at least three carriers to choose from for 2016. Such subsidies are only available to help pay premiums for policies purchased on the Affordable Care Act marketplace, known as healthcare.gov.

The nation's largest health insurer, UnitedHealthcare, announced Monday that it intends to sell 2016 policies to Iowans on healthcare.gov. Coventry Health Care, which this year is most Iowans' only choice on the marketplace, said it plans to continue participating in the system.

Iowa's dominant health-insurance company, Wellmark Blue Cross & Blue Shield, has declined to join the marketplace, also known as the public exchange.

Medica said in a press release that it is a non-profit company that insures about 1.5 million people in Minnesota, Wisconsin and the Dakotas.

"Medica has demonstrated stability and service - serving the Midwest for 40 years," Vice President Dannette Coleman said in the release. "We are committed to offering health insurance products in the individual market to the people of Iowa for years to come."

The company also will sell individual policies to Iowans who want to purchase them through traditional routes, such as via insurance agents. But to qualify for subsidies, policies must be purchased on the exchange.

Most Iowans who make less than 400 percent of the poverty level – or about $47,000 for a single person – can qualify for Affordable Care Act subsidies to help pay for premiums. The subsidies are a centerpiece of the Affordable Care Act. But only about 38,000 Iowans received them this year.

The Kaiser Family Foundation, a national group that studies health-care issues, has said Iowa has the lowest participation rate in the country. The group estimated that just 20 percent of Iowans who could have qualified for subsidies obtained them last year, and one of its experts said this week that the lack of participation by the state's main insurer probably contributed to the paltry response.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1HjgXxa