A settlement has been reached in a federal lawsuit over a Smethport woman’s right to pump breast milk while at work at Saint-Gobain Containers in Port Allegany.

On Friday, an attorney for Bobbi Bockoras told The Era, “The matter has been fully resolved to the parties’ mutual satisfaction.”

No details of the settlement were released.

The federal court docket for the U.S. District Court of the Western District of Pennsylvania indicates the case was terminated as of June 12.

Attorneys for Saint-Gobain did not immediately reply to messages seeking comment.

Bockoras filed a federal lawsuit in November, alleging her rights were violated when she encountered workplace harassment while pumping breast milk, and saying she was forced to pump milk in unsanitary conditions at the factory.

According to the original complaint, Bockoras gave birth to a daughter in April 2012. About a week later, she contacted her supervisor about her desire to use a breast pump at work. She was told she could do so in the bathroom. Bockoras told him federal law calls for a place other than a bathroom for a woman to pump breast milk, and the area should be shielded from view and free from intrusion by co-workers or members of the public. She allegedly received no response.

She provided a copy of the Nursing Mothers Provision of the Affordable Care Act to the human resources department at the factory, and was told she would be permitted to use the “first aid room” and would be placed on a day shift. However, when she used the room, people would bang on the door and try to enter. When she complained to a supervisor and recommended the company secure a place for nursing mothers in the future, her supervisor said, “This situation will never happen again in this facility,” the suit read.

Company officials had given her three alternate locations to use, the least offensive of which was a dirty locker room with dead bugs on the floor, according to her complaint.

A few days after she asked for the room to be cleaned, the lone stool in the room was removed and she had to sit on the floor to pump, the complaint read.

She was later changed to a rotating shift despite presenting doctors’ notes saying it was medically best for her to work the first shift. She filed a union grievance. The next day, someone put grease with metal shards in it on the doorknob to the room she used. She complained to company officials about harassment, but no investigation was done, the complaint read.

In a response to the lawsuit, company officials said accommodations had been made for Bockoras, including renovations to the room she used for pumping.