Related Links

T-Rex Planet Official Website

Have you ever wanted to travel back in time and hang with the dinosaurs or see them in their natural habitat? Well a unique exhibit has arrived in Meridian for the weekend. It's an exhibit that has children roaring with excitement.

Coelophysis, Mamenchisaurus, and Stegosaurus, Oh My! The Frank Cochran Center is like taking a step back in time to the Jurassic, Triassic, and Cretaceous periods, thanks to a traveling exhibit called T-Rex Planet.

"We travel from city to city and state to state, where kids can learn about dinosaurs," CEO of T-Rex Planet Dave Eldika said. "Kids hear about them and never actually get to see them, so we figured out that we can actually bring out an exhibit for kids and they can enjoy about learning and having fun at the same time."

The real-life animatronics bring excitement to the faces of little children who embark on an adventure to the land before time.

"I think it's an awesome place, it's really cool and like being back in time," Visitor Baron Rose said.

Visitors even got to meet a walking dinosaur named Tracy, it was a chance to pet and even take a picture with her if you dared.

"I really like the dinosaurs, I love dinosaurs," said visitor Joey Shurylo.

And if the dinosaurs weren't enough for you, there was a play exhibit set up outside and even the chance to dig for your dinosaurs.

"A lot of families like it because it's more that their kids get to learn about dinosaurs," said Eldika. "In school they hear about them and never get to actually see them, so it's more like a dream come true for a lot of kids."

And no dinosaur exhibit is complete without seeing a Tyrannosaurus Rex or being able to take home your favorite stuffed dinosaur.

"This one is called an Ankylosaurus," said Shurylo. "Its back is full of spikes and a hard shell. The only way to kill it is to knock it over on its back side where it is soft. You don't want to get hit with the tail end, it's hard, hard bone, it can break bone."

Just watch out where you walk because you may get a visit from the past.

The exhibit goes until 9 PM Saturday and then reopens on Sunday, September 13 at 10 AM until 7 PM. It's being held at The Frank Cochran Center.

Tickets can be purchased at the door or online. You can click on the link at the top of this article for more information.