Longmont Theatre Company marks building's 75th with campaign to restore facade

Steve Carver, president of the Longmont Theatre Company, shows examples of strips of flexible LED lights at the Longmont Performing Arts Center in downtown Longmont last week. The company is raising money to replace the original red, white and blue neon lights on the theater's marquee with LED strips of the same colors. ( Quentin Young / Longmont Times-Call )

Editor's note: This article stated, based on the best information available at publication, that the building was the city's first movie theater when it opened in 1939 as The Fox Theatre. Subsequent reporting has indicated that two movie theaters in Longmont — the Odeon Theater and Isis Theater, both on Main Street — predate the Fox.

One of the greatest moments for downtown Longmont came on Dec. 5, 1939.

On that day the city got its first movie theater, The Fox Theatre. The facade of the Art Deco building, at 513 Main St., was book-ended by columns of vertical glass blocks and the marquee was topped with a cascade design, a popular feature for theaters at the time. The marquee that night announced a comedy from that season, "The Housekeeper's Daughter," starring Joan Bennett and Adolphe Menjou.

A detail of the building that visitors couldn't miss were the bright neon lights that striped the cascade at of the top of the marquee and trimmed its letterboard.

Today the theater is called the Longmont Performing Arts Center, and it's where Longmont Theatre Company, the facility's owner since 1990, produces its plays. The original façade is largely intact. But the neon stripes, which once helped highlight the building as the center of the downtown solar system, haven't worked in a long time.

"It's hasn't been lit up in probably 15 years," Steve Carver, LTC's president said.

Advertisement

The company is marking the building's 75th anniversary with a campaign to restore the marquee lights. It has partnered with Longmont Downtown Development Authority and the Longmont Community Foundation to launch a capital campaign to raise $18,000. The money would be used to replace the original neon lights with energy efficient, flexible LED strips. The state-of-the-art strips cost more than neon up front but are expected to pay for themselves in energy savings. The theater plans to use the original colors - "liquid fire" red, white and blue.

The campaign has raised about 30 percent of the full amount so far, and Carver expects to have the total raised and the lights installed sometime next year -- at least by the start of the 2015-2016 season, he said.

Paul Gentile, LTC's treasurer, said the project will affect the whole community by enhancing the look of Main Street.

"I think it's the crown jewel of downtown," he said.

Carver added: "And that's what it was meant to be."

The campaign, in fact, grew out of a conversation started by leaders at the LDDA, which "has been a very strong supporter" of it, Carver said.

He sees the project as a contribution to a larger program of elevating downtown Longmont as an arts hub, an effort that includes the recent designation of the area as an arts district, the creation of new artist studios, and recent collaborations among local galleries and arts organizations.

"It's an investment in the building, and it's an investment in downtown," Carver said.

Gentile added that the project is also tied to the LTC's effort to raise its profile and better use its facility. The company recently bought a digital projector, for example, and might want to host a film series at the theater, he said.

In 1960 Richard Klein bought the theater and covered the Art Deco façade with a modern one. His daughter, Connie Lehman, wife of former Times-Call publisher Ed Lehman, managed the Trojan Theatre, as it was then called, until it closed in 1986. The LTC bought it in 1990 and stripped away the aluminum Trojan front.

"Luckily for us they put it over the original design," Carver said.

The Trojan emblem and a marquee letter board from that era still adorn the theater on its alley side.

Donations for the LED lights may be sent to LTC, P.O. Box 573, Longmont, CO 80502; or made through the theater's website, longmonttheatre.org; or given at a show, such as "Toonful Christmas," the theater's current production, which runs through Dec. 20.

Quentin Young: 303-473-1109, quentin@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/qpyoungnews