$50K study on homeless services due in June

Every day in the winter, 10 people from Longmont obtain a free regional bus pass from the OUR Center and take a bus to Boulder so they can hunker down for the night at the shelter there.

On especially cold nights, Agape Family Services operates an overnight warming center in one of four Longmont churches. There are also emergency sheltering options available for families and for those affected by domestic violence, but for the most part, people with no home in Longmont spend the winter nights in the Boulder shelter, an Agape warming center, a car, a tent or outside.

While the city funds a myriad of services designed to help people in danger of becoming homeless, people who are suddenly homeless and the chronically homeless, some sectors of the community think a homeless shelter in Longmont makes the most sense. Others believe that limited resources could be better put to other uses.

The question of whether Longmont needs a homeless shelter of its own will come under scrutiny in 2016, with a $50,000 study on Longmont's services for the homeless due out in June.

Labor's in Longmont, shelter's in Boulder

Advertisement

The city of Longmont pays $50,000 annually to the Boulder Shelter for the Homeless, and in exchange, the shelter reserves 10 beds for people who come from Longmont. But to be one of those 10 on any given night, a person must first check in with the OUR Center, which serves as the initial point of contact between the city's network of nonprofits and someone with no place to sleep.

The 10 spots are available on a first-come-first-serve basis. OUR Center Executive Director Edwina Salazar said that on colder days, the spots are usually gone by mid-morning. For warmer nights, the spots are usually gone by 4 p.m.

Securing a spot means the OUR Center staff takes the person's name and refers it over to the shelter so they know who to look for. Each of the 10 people also get a regional bus pass that they can use to get from Longmont to Boulder and back again in the morning.

Boulder Shelter for the Homeless Executive Director Greg Harms said that if the 10 beds are not filled shortly before 7 p.m. each winter night, the shelter staff will fill them with people in Boulder who need a bed.

But Agape Executive Director Paula Saxon said that homeless people who are have temporary work in Longmont during the day may find obtaining a warm bed at the shelter difficult.

"We really appreciate the services that the Boulder shelter offers and they do an excellent job ... however, we have Longmont residents who live and work here and it's not feasible for them to try to get to Boulder," Saxon said.

Lisa Searchinger, the executive director for HOPE, agreed.

"There a lot of people working day labor," Searchinger said, adding that it makes it tough for people to nab one of the 10 spots early enough at the OUR Center. "The day labor's in Longmont and the shelter's in Boulder and that's just a problem."

'Considerable resistance' to adding more shelter beds

But the Boulder County 10 Year Plan to End Homelessness calls for using the limited dollars for homelessness on permanent supportive housing, not emergency sheltering.

Harms, who runs the Boulder Shelter, said the decision between the two is a tough one but it has largely already been made as homeless service providers move more and more away from providing temporary emergency shelter.

"There's a significant resistance to adding more shelter beds anywhere," Harms said. The U.S Department of Housing and Urban Development "is not funding those types of programs and 10-year plans across the country are not stressing those, so it has been a focus on getting away from the Band-Aid approach."

Harms said the current facility with its 160 beds was built in 2003 and since then, the shelter has focused on expanding services "that are more transformative in nature and not just emergency-style services" like a transitional program that aims to help people become more stable.

Salazar, of the OUR Center, agreed wih the Boulder County 10-year plan's push for permanent supportive housing over temporary sheltering.

"I think we should put our public will toward providing homes to people who are homeless," Salazar said. "It will always come down to 'OK what is the next step.' A shelter is not the final step."

Searchinger, of HOPE, contends there's still a responsibility to get people off the streets for the night. Most of the people HOPE serves with its nightly street outreach and other programs are working, but can't afford a place to live, Searchinger said.

"Until we raise the minimum wage so that people can afford the rent that is here, we should provide a safe place to sleep," Searchinger said.

Both Searchinger and Saxon said that there doesn't necessarily need to be a brand new homeless shelter built in Longmont, but rather an expansion of the Agape warming center program.

Saxon said Agape is looking for an existing building to purchase to house a more permanent warming center, but the right building at the right price is hard to find.

"Right now we just operate on an emergency basis in order to keep people alive and we're doing the best we can with the money that's available," Saxon said.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci