Julian Bond, an iconic civil rights leader and lawmaker, passed away last week at his home in Walton County. He was 75.

On Saturday, friends and family of the N.A.A.C.P. leader gathered near him home on the gulf to spread his ashes and honor his memory, and N.A.A.C.P. chapters across the country were invited to do the same.

Several members of Bay County’s N.A.A.C.P. joined in. At 2 o’clock in the afternoon they tossed flowers into the water near Watson Bayou in Panama City to remember Bond’s legacy.

“It’s all connected and shows unity.” Matthew Shack, a member of Bay County’s N.A.A.C.P. said. “So he was a man about everything and he was everywhere.”

A handful of Bay County’s N.A.A.C.P. members gathered at the water’s edge of Watson Bayou and tossed flowers into the water as they mediated on Bond’s legacy.

“When I was in college at Florida A&M, this was back during the 60s and you had the civil rights marches and Julian Bond came on campus and that was a big thing because we had seen him on TV and heard a lot of about him,” Shack said. “When he came on campus, he kind of related to us and we could talk the same language and he was just a dynamic person."

The Moorhouse College graduate was best known for his work as a Georgia lawmaker, N.A.A.C.P. leader and the first president of the Southern Poverty Law Center. He also helped to found the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.

"He had a unique way of connecting with young people,” Dr. Rufus Wood, President of Bay County’s N.A.A.C.P. said. “Even a lot of the young civil rights activists, he taught them a lot of things and encouraged them, he inspired them and I think that's a great model. Again and that's why I think I’m so inspired when I look at his life and the things he was able to do."

Bond’s family said he had a great love for the water and wished his memory and legacy to be carried out with the tide.

"This was a way of connecting, especially in this area, all along from Panama City all the way to Pensacola all that water and inner waterways connect,” Shack said. "So even in his death, he's going to be everywhere."

Bond’s family said in a statement that while they wanted to lay him to rest privately, they do have plans for a larger celebration of his life very soon.