Wide-eyed 9-year-old Mikele Medlock stood quietly as he watched marching bands, floats and vehicles pass by him Saturday morning along Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard in his South Dallas neighborhood.

“I like the motorcycles,” he said.

With his parents behind him, Mikele was mesmerized by the sights and music that filled the streets as the annual Martin Luther King Jr. Parade traveled to Fair Park from Dallas City Hall.

“I know he had a dream to help us,” Mikele said.

The parade was part of a weekend celebration of King’s life and achievements and was hosted by the city of Dallas and the MLK Jr. Community Center. It is a highlight and tradition for many in the South Dallas community.

Born and raised in the area, Joseph Howard, 63, said he attends the parade every year despite no longer living there.

“It’s a blessing to be able to be out here,” he said. “This is home.”

Mikele’s mother, Danisia Medlock, said the parade has become a community event at which folks are likely to see old friends and relatives.

“You see people you haven’t seen in years. You may even see a family member,” she said. “It grows every year, too. It’s bigger today.”

About 50 volunteers helped with Saturday’s parade, said Clara Brown-Trimble, vice chair of the MLK celebration committee.

“I’m thankful our community is out here to celebrate with us,” she said.

The march included about 130 organizations and groups, Brown-Trimble said. Fraternal organizations, dance groups, school bands, and representatives from other local events like the Chinese Lantern Festival all took part.

“We had many young people in the march,” said Patrick Jackson, manager of the MLK Jr. Community Center. “Dr. King’s vision is just as important today. People believe, and they’re willing to work together.”

Dozens of elected officials and candidates were among thousands who attended. Among them was state Sen. Wendy Davis of Fort Worth, a Democratic candidate for governor.

Davis said King’s message embodies her campaign and her goals as a public servant.

“He taught us all to dream of the opportunity that we could take advantage of,” Davis said. “Where you start shouldn’t define where you’re headed.”

After the parade, a health fair at the community center gave residents the chance to learn about the Affordable Care Act and to sign up for health coverage.

The health fair was added this year because health care was an important issue to King, said Joyce Campbell, the fair’s coordinator.

“This was a strategic move by the center,” Campbell said. “When health care reform was passed in 2010, that’s part of undoing injustice. We felt it was appropriate and fitting.”

Campbell said that next month, the community center hopes to provide on-site help for people wanting to learn more about the health care law.

Longtime parade attendee Claudette Small of Cedar Hill, who was with her nieces Saturday morning, said she wants to instill in them a sense of understanding of King’s historical importance.

“I want them to take away that his dream is still alive,” she said. “They know the importance of our black history.”

Michelle White, who carried her 3-year-old daughter, Mackenzie, agreed.

“This is my daughter’s first time here,” she said. “This is our history. He made a difference.”