President Barack Obama speaks about the Affordable Care Act at the United Community Center in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, on March 3, 2016. | Getty Obama revels in redemption on Walker's turf The president hails Obamacare's success in Milwaukee, as he thumbs his nose at Walker and his fellow Republicans.

President Barack Obama visited Milwaukee on Thursday because it won an Obamacare enrollment contest, but for the White House, the Wisconsin city’s victory is especially sweet.

Wisconsin represents Democrats’ political redemption since Obama’s post-health law slump in 2010. Russ Feingold, who lost his Senate seat to Ron Johnson during a Republican wave that year, has a healthy lead in the polls ahead of a in a rematch in November. The president’s approval rating is the highest it’s ever been in the state, while Republican Gov. Scott Walker’s numbers are underwater and haven’t recovered since his presidential campaign flamed out late last year.

Story Continued Below

And despite attempts by Walker — once seen as a giant-slayer after overcoming a union-backed recall effort in 2012 — to undermine Obamacare in the state, it's posting robust enrollment numbers. Milwaukee beat out 19 other cities in a White House contest meant to spur coverage for the uninsured, and that objective measure was the official reason for Obama’s visit. But a White House official admitted that debates over the health law are inherently political, and Walker has been a top antagonist.

Obama was all too happy to rub the law's success in Walker's face.

“By the way, Milwaukee, while you worked your tails off to cover enough folks to fill Lambeau field, your governor still refuses to expand Medicaid in this state,” Obama said. “He’s denying Wisconsinites their ticket to health insurance, and it’s political.”

He went after Johnson, too: "Your senior senator won’t tell you that if he gets his way and repeals Obamacare, millions of working families would see their premiums spike."

Democrats in the state say Obama’s visit would boost their efforts to draw a sharp contrast with Walker, Johnson and the Republican frontrunner Donald Trump.

The “division and the fear that is being injected into society, it may be exciting for sound bites,” said Democratic state Rep. Melissa Sargent in an interview. Sargent wrote a column published Monday arguing that Walker’s rhetoric, including his refusal to say whether Obama is a Christian, helped create Trump, even though he dropped out in hopes that conservatives would unite against the loudmouthed billionaire.

Walker’s administration has worked to block Obama’s agenda, whether by refusing to take federal dollars to expand Medicaid or suing to stop the president’s new power plant regulations.

Republicans are perfectly happy to exploit that record, and they’re still confident that running on the health law is a loser’s move in the state, six years after it passed.

Johnson’s campaign, which still refers to Feingold as the “deciding vote” for the health law, cast Obama’s visit as “a stark reminder of Senator Feingold’s partisan record on Obamacare,” and Republican state Senator Leah Vukmir, seen as a rising star in the party, hit the talk radio airwaves ahead of the president’s visit on Thursday morning to trash his “Obamacare love fest.” That was on top of an email from Freedom Partners blasting the law for causing “surging deductibles” in Wisconsin and 40 other states.

Back before anyone took Trump’s candidacy seriously — back when Walker was No. 1 in the Iowa polls — the union-busting, budget-cutting brawler seemed like the ultimate anathema to Obama’s presidency; in fact he remains one of the only Republicans to have put out a plan to not just repeal but also replace Obamacare. (Trump released his own plan Wednesday night.)

Obama hasn't been subtle about taking Walker on. In July, he traveled to Wisconsin to unveil a labor-pleasing overtime rule, while mocking the state for having more unemployment than its blue neighbor, Minnesota. The White House also took the rare step of releasing a critical statement when Walker signed a right-to-work law in March and called Walker’s criticism of the Iran negotiations “foolish.”

Now Obama’s back again, while Walker’s poll numbers are in the dumps. According to a Marquette Law School poll last month, 52 percent of Wisconsinites approve of Obama’s performance, with a record margin. That same poll showed Walker with 39 percent approval, with 55 percent disapproving of his performance. That’s actually a slight improvement over previous months; his approval rating hasn’t cracked 40 percent since he dropped out of the race in September.

It’s a mistake to rule out Walker in the Badger State, local Republicans say, pointing to his political history, and they’re confident that his popularity will come back as he ramps up efforts to reconnect. Johnson has shown zero reluctance to campaign with the governor, and on Monday, they held a joint press conference where Walker praised Johnson for “taking on the oversize problems that we’ve seen with Obamacare.”

“Unlike Pres. Obama, @ScottWalker & @RonJohnsonWI understand that ObamaCare is wrong for Wisconsin. RT if you agree!” the State GOP tweeted on Thursday.

Feingold, meanwhile, is trying to thread the needle in how he positions himself in relation to Obama. On Thursday, he campaigned on the other side of the state from Milwaukee, near Minneapolis, and his theme this week emphasizes one of his biggest differences with Obama: Feingold opposes the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

Feingold, who has long worked to cultivate a maverick image, would welcome Obama on the stump in Wisconsin in the fall, a campaign official said.

But now, as the Obama administration finishes crunching the numbers on his final insurance enrollment season, the president’s Milwaukee speech — one of his last major reflections on the health law — shows his fresh confidence that Democrats can feel good about it.

Obama announced that 20 million people are now covered under Obamacare, raising the stakes for repeal efforts.

“The reality is that real people are actually getting insurance,” Obama said.

For those who don’t have Obamacare plans, “Your insurance is better than it was," he said, “Even if you didn’t know it. Even if you didn’t vote for me,” he said.

“Thanks, Obama," he deadpanned, smirking as the crowd cheered. "It's ok."

The majority aren't saying thanks yet, according to surveys. Only four in 10 Americans hold a favorable view of the law, according to February’s Kaiser Health Tracking poll. But the law’s backers say Milwaukee is evidence that people are voting by enrolling. Democratic Mayor Tom Barrett — who lost the governors race to Walker in 2010 and the 2012 recall — led an effort that signed up 75 new customers for every 100 eligible uninsured people in the city.

And Democrats working on Senate races both at the national level and in Wisconsin say candidates increasingly feel comfortable celebrating Obamacare’s successes. If anything, Feingold has run on going even further.

“In fact, [Sen. Bernie Sanders] and I were holding out for an even stronger bill on the Affordable Care Act. We wanted a single-payer,” Feingold said in January. “We wanted an option, an option to opt in, a public option.”

Walker’s office didn’t respond to a request for comment, but he spoke for himself on Thursday — on Obama’s turf. Citing his record of defunding Planned Parenthood, enacting a voter ID requirement, and passing a concealed carry law, Walker urged on conservatives at the CPAC conference just outside Washington.

“Conservative, positive reforms actually work. How do we do it?” Walker said. “We did it like other states did it. We got government out of the way.”