Helped lead team to State run

After winning the State title in class 3A at heavyweight, Brush senior Joe Carwin was named All-Conference by the coaches in the Patriot League this season. (Brandon Boles / Fort Morgan Times)

BRUSH — February capped off a remarkable season for the Brush Beetdiggers wrestling team. Not only were they considered one of the top teams in class 3A all season long, but they sent nine athletes to the Pepsi Center in Denver to compete in the CHSAA State Tournament, two of whom became State champions, and came just five points away from taking first place as a team in class 3A at the tournament.

Their success in the State tournament could be stemmed from their strong season in the Patriot League, where the team stood out all season long. As a result of their success against other conference schools during the year and their run at State, four Beetdiggers were named All-Conference by the coaches in the Patriot League this season. All four named were seniors on the team, who were strong in competition on the mat while also providing the leadership for the program in their final year.

Alec Petterson had a very strong season at 160 pounds for the Beetdiggers, going 39-8 and qualifying for the State tournament. At State, he won his first two matches to get to the semi-finals, and bounced back from a loss to win his final two matches of his career by pin to take third place in the tournament.

Kyle Rosenbrock was named All-Conference after his season competing at 182 pounds. In his final season wrestling for the Beetdiggers, he went 24-4 on the season to reach the State tournament. Despite having an ankle problem coming into the tournament, he won his first match at State and would go 2-2 in Denver to close out his career with the program.

Advertisement

The other two wrestlers named All-Conference for the Brush wrestling program were their two seniors who would go on to become State champions in February. The first was Conrad Cole, who shined in his final season at 126 pounds for the Beetdiggers. He finished a strong regular season going 41-2 and became the top seed in the State tournament in his weight bracket. There, he won all four of his matches by decision to wrap up his career as a two-time State champion.

Brush senior Conrad Cole (right) was named All-Conference in the Patriot League during his senior season, which included becoming a two-time State champion (Brandon Boles / Fort Morgan Times)

As for Joe Carwin, he also proved to be the man to beat in all of class 3A at heavyweight this season. In his senior season, he went 37-4 and also grabbed the top seed in the weight bracket at the State tournament. Two pins and two decision wins later, Carwin wound up taking the State title to close out his fine career with the program.

Head coach Troy Lussenhop inherited a strong class when he officially took over the Beetdiggers wrestling program, and seeing that class become seniors and lead the team to the success they had this season was a site to see. Going forward, Brush will look to replace a handful of those athletes due to graduation, but the history and accomplishments from 2014-15 are hoped to carry over next season.

Brandon Boles: 970-867-5651, sports@fmtimes.com & Twitter @FMT_Sports