Health-care inflation has hit a low point and is poised to start rising again, but it’s unclear whether annual medical cost hikes are heading back to the double-digit increases of years past.

That’s the conclusion of a study released Tuesday by consultant PricewaterhouseCoopers’ Health Research Institute, which says medical costs will rise 6.5% this year and 6.8% in 2015. Actual medical spending growth, however, could be 4.8% when benefit plan changes are taken into account, but that figure still will be up from 2014, the report says.

iStock

The expected increase in inflation is the first the medical community will see since the downturn hit all sectors of the economy in 2009.

A number of changes in health care — including the advent of Obamacare, doctors and hospitals consolidating operations, and a push toward higher-deductible health plans that force patients to act more as consumers — have brought down medical inflation from the annual double-digit hikes of the 1990s and 2000s.

What has analysts puzzled, though, is whether the measures taken will prevent a return to what many viewed as out-of-control inflation rates. While cost increases are down, health-care inflation remains double to triple that of the rest of the economy.

“There’s still a lot to do,” said Rick Judy, principal for PricewaterhouseCoopers’ health-care advisory practice. Judy says a move toward higher-deductible plans will keep patients more engaged as health-care consumers than before, thus keeping better controls on costs.

“I think we’re very optimistic,” he said.

The study shows that roughly 26% of those in employer-sponsored plans will be in high-deductible programs this year, up from 8% in 2009. By contrast, those in preferred-provider organizations or health-maintenance organizations have seen their numbers drop by 10 and 4 percentage points, respectively.

Judy says nearly half of all employers, 44%, are considering making a high-deductible plan their only option for employees.

Further, some of the 2015 increase may be due to a rise in spending on specialty drugs, such as Gilead Sciences Inc.’s /quotes/zigman/72849/delayed /quotes/nls/gild GILD Sovaldi, for treatment for hepatitis C.

Specialty-drug spending more than doubles every four years, and should reach more than $192 billion in 2016, up from $87 billion in 2012. By 2020, that figure could reach more than $401 billion, the study says.

Follow @russbrittmktw

Follow @MWHealthBlog



More must-read health coverage from MarketWatch:

Abbott to buy Russian drug maker, but says it’s not a tax inversion deal

Shire says its sales should double by 2020

Allergan, Valeant trade more salvos in takeover war