SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

HOUSTON, Texas – Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker (R) will cap off a star-studded evening with a keynote address at the Harris County GOP Lincoln-Reagan Dinner on March 28. The event is expected to be the largest in the history of the Harris County GOP and will be attended by many statewide elected officials, Harris County officials, and grassroots activists.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

For the third year in a row, the keynote address will be delivered by a 2016 Republican presidential hopeful. Governor Walker will deliver this year’s keynote address to what is expected to be a crowd of at least eight hundred people, according to one of the event organizers. The 2014 keynote speaker was Kentucky Senator Rand Paul. He was preceded in 2013 by Texas Senator Ted Cruz.

Walker was first inaugurated as Governor on January 3, 2011, and immediately set our state on a path toward government reform and fiscal order, according to his official state biography. When he took office, Wisconsin faced a projected $3.6 billion deficit, more than $800 million in unpaid bills, and the loss of nearly 134,000 jobs over the previous four years. Governor Walker made tough, but prudent, decisions to ensure our children and grandchildren were not buried under a mountain of economically crippling debt; he paid the bills, balanced the budget, cut taxes, and put in place reforms that are growing jobs in Wisconsin.

Governor Walker began his second term as Wisconsin’s governor on January 5th. He shares a common interest with Texans in his efforts to fight Common Core in his state’s education system.

The evening’s festivities are being dedicated to former United States President George H.W. Bush who served as Harris County Republican Party Chairman in 1964 and the growth of the county party over the past fifty years.

“Fifty years ago, long before he was president, George H. W. Bush served as chairman of the Harris County Republican Party,” said Harris County Judge Ed Emmett. “None of us would be in office today if it had not been for the dedicated service of Republican volunteer leaders such as President Bush. That is why it is so appropriate that this year’s dinner will pay tribute to President George H. W. Bush.”

Texas Governor Greg Abbott will be in attendance along with Lieutenant Governor Dan Patrick and General Land Office Commissioner George P. Bush. One other statewide elected official is scheduled to attend but his name has yet to be publicly released. Other special guests may also be in attendance for the evening.

As with all GOP Lincoln-Reagan dinners, this dinner will serve as one of the largest fundraising events of the year for the Harris County GOP. Currently the party has raised in excess of $360,000 for the event. There will also be additional fundraising opportunities throughout the night.

“In 2014, Harris County once again became a Republican stronghold under the leadership of Paul Simpson, the precinct chairs and lots of volunteers,” Judge Emmett said. “For that success to continue, though, we must raise money to prepare for the 2016 elections. All we have to do is look back to 2008 to understand the dangers facing our party in a year where there is an open presidential race.”

Emmett invited Republicans to join him in honoring “the great leaders of the Republican Party.”

Bob Price is a senior political news contributor for Breitbart Texas and a member of the original Breitbart Texas team. Follow him on Twitter @BobPriceBBTX and on Facebook.