The Marin City Health and Wellness Center received a $1 million grant from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services that could allow it to move into new quarters and more than double its office space — but the project appears to be in limbo.

The funding may be in jeopardy because of concerns voiced by community elders over their recreational programs being moved out of the Marguerita C. Johnson Senior Center to make room for the expanded Health and Wellness Center.

The plan to move the health center into the senior center was part of the grant proposal.

But at a meeting Thursday, the Marin City Community Services District board voted to keep the senior services at the Marguerita C. Johnson Senior Center, reported board member Royce McLemore.

Because the health center grant was tied to moving into the senior center, JayVon Muhammad, the center’s chief executive, said money may have to be returned to the federal government.

“We might have to give that money back,” Muhammad said Thursday night.

The senior services would have been moved to another nearby location as part of a larger $24 million re-do of the Marin City services campus, which would include a new community center. Fundraising is underway for that project.

But elders at the meeting complained they were never made aware of the plan and said it was important to them to keep the Marguerita C. Johnson Senior Center as is.

“I don’t understand why that when things need to change senior citizens are the first ones they put the foot to,” said Kenneth Davis. “Why do the seniors have to be moved?”

Opened in 1988, the senior center was named for a longtime Marin City community leader who died in March 1990 at 76. For over two decades in the community, the retired teacher and librarian served as chairwoman on the Marin Commission on Aging, was elected to the Marin City Community Services District board and served on the Sausalito Marin City School Board, among other posts.

Earlier in the week, Muhammad noted the lack of space at the health center.

“When I started this job almost three years ago, we had 11 staff members, and now we have over 40 and the same space,” she said. “We have only two dental rooms and two medical rooms, and we do over 10,000 visits a year.”

The center, a federally qualified health center, occupies about 2,200 square feet at 630 Drake Ave. in Marin City.

At the new location, the health center was to have six medical examination rooms, five dental treatment rooms and three behavioral health rooms; it currently has two behavioral health rooms.

Advertisement

The grant was part of more than $36 million in funding announced this week that will be shared by 40 health centers in California for facility renovation, expansion or construction. The money comes from the Affordable Care Act’s Community Health Center Fund. Health centers will use the money to increase their patient capacity and to provide additional comprehensive primary and preventive health services to medically underserved populations in California.