UAlbany lacrosse set to open season against Syracuse UAlbany tries for second victory over Syracuse when teams meet at Carrier Dome









Photo: John Carl D'Annibale Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Image 1 of 3 Buy photo UAlbany's #11 Harry Erickson,left, and #5 Connor Fields, during lacrosse practice Wednesday Feb. 17, 2016 in Albany, NY. (John Carl D'Annibale / Times Union) UAlbany's #11 Harry Erickson,left, and #5 Connor Fields, during lacrosse practice Wednesday Feb. 17, 2016 in Albany, NY. (John Carl D'Annibale / Times Union) Photo: John Carl D'Annibale Buy this photo Image 2 of 3 Buy photo UAlbany Head Coach Scott Marr speaks with player Adam Osika, left, during lacrosse practice Wednesday Feb. 17, 2016 in Albany, NY. (John Carl D'Annibale / Times Union) UAlbany Head Coach Scott Marr speaks with player Adam Osika, left, during lacrosse practice Wednesday Feb. 17, 2016 in Albany, NY. (John Carl D'Annibale / Times Union) Photo: John Carl D'Annibale Buy this photo Image 3 of 3 Buy photo UAlbany Head Coach Scott Marr with players during lacrosse practice Wednesday Feb. 17, 2016 in Albany, NY. (John Carl D'Annibale / Times Union) UAlbany Head Coach Scott Marr with players during lacrosse practice Wednesday Feb. 17, 2016 in Albany, NY. (John Carl D'Annibale / Times Union) Photo: John Carl D'Annibale Buy this photo UAlbany lacrosse set to open season against Syracuse 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

University at Albany men's lacrosse alumnus Lyle Thompson has one piece of advice for his former team in its season opener against rival Syracuse: "Effort and attitude is all that matters."

Thompson, currently playing professionally for the Florida Launch with his brother, Miles, scored four goals in last year's 17-12 setback against the Orange.

He'll be back on the sidelines at the Carrier Dome on Sunday — "watching this time, though" — when the Great Danes renew their rivalry with the traditional lacrosse power.

The two teams have met every year since 2004, with Syracuse leading 12-1.

UAlbany's lone victory came in 2013, when behind the Thompsons, who are from the Syracuse-area Onondaga Nation Reservation, the Great Danes won 16-15 in double overtime.

Senior defenseman Josh Babcock remembers that game vividly.

"I remember coming in as a freshman opening against Syracuse and then beating them," Babcock said.

Now, three years later, he's hoping to go out the same way he and the senior class came in.

"They are returning a lot of guys on defense, but we're returning a lot of guys too," Babcock said. "We know what it feels like to play 'Cuse, so we're ready to go."

More Information UAlbany at Syracuse What: Season opener When: 4 p.m. Sunday Where: Carrier Dome, Syracuse

Though Babcock and the rest of the upperclassmen have seen Syracuse each of the past three years, Sunday's game will be unique for the freshmen.

They're facing an Atlantic Coast Conference program that's won 10 NCAA championships, most recently in 2009. The No. 7-ranked Orange opened the season last weekend with an 18-5 victory over Siena.

Freshman Chaunce Hill, a recipient of the Tewaaraton Native American Scholarship, said playing in the Carrier Dome against Syracuse has always been a dream of his.

"I've been working my whole life for this opportunity," Hill said.

UAlbany graduate assistant Tim Cox offered this advice to the freshmen: "These guys are all the same age as you are, and they are out there playing. Don't ever think of yourself as a freshman or an underclassman. Don't get nervous."

Cox, who played for UAlbany last year, said it's important not to be intimidated by playing in the Carrier Dome.

Added Thompson: "That place has a way of making you nervous, no matter how many times you play there."

Hill said he's looking for "a win, a win for my team, a win for my boys, and a win for my family."

Celia Balf is a frequent contributor to the Times Union.