MARINERS 8, ROCKIES 5

At Salt River Fields

Scottsdale, Ariz. — For most of the Rockies regulars, Saturday’s Cactus League finale against the Mariners was a throw-away game. The plan: make a cameo appearance, get in a couple of at-bats and then get out with out getting hurt.

Not so for right-hander Jordan Lyles, who has been tabbed to start the regular-season home opener against the Padres on Friday at Coors Field.

Lyles struggled throughout spring training, entering Saturday’s game with a 7.88 ERA and a team-high four homers surrendered in 16 innings. So he needed a solid outing.

What he got was an uneven performance. He allowed one run, three hits and two strikeouts over three innings. That sounds pretty good, but he also walked three, and half of his 30 pitches were outside the strike zone.

“We didn’t give up as many runs, but I did give up three walks, which is not ideal,” said Lyles, who finished the spring with a 7.11 ERA. “I’m going into this season healthy, and that’s exciting. I’m just looking for a healthy season and hoping to contribute to the team.”

His best pitch of the game was a 3-2 sinker he threw to Mariners slugger Robinson Cano to start an inning-ending double play in the first.

HITS

** Nolan Arenado finished his splendid spring by going 1-for-2 with a single. Arenado finished the Cactus League season hitting .542 with six homers and 17 RBIs.

** Ben Paulsen had an RBI double in the second inning and finished the spring hitting .298.

MISSES

** Lefty Chris Rusin, a possible fifth starter once he’s built up his arm, had a bad day. The Mariners lit him up for four runs on three hits and drew two walks in one inning.

** Right-handed reliever Justin Miller, who appears to be a lock to make the team, also struggled. He gave up three runs on two hits and three walks in his inning of work.

UP NEXT

The Rockies finished the Cactus League with a (15-13-4) record. They open the regular season on Monday night against the Arizona Diamondbacks at Chase Field. (7:40 p.m MDT, Root TV, 850-AM radio).

Left-hander Jorge De La Rosa starts for Colorado vs. Diamondbacks right-hander Zack Greinke.