"While leading the Club For Growth, Chris Chocola went against the Republican establishment by backing Marco Rubio for Senate in 2009," Conant said. "Chris saw firsthand how Marco stood up to the Washington establishment then, has been impressed with how he's done it in the Senate, and knows Marco will continue to do so as president."

The Club for Growth, a conservative non-profit with a focus on economic issues like taxes, trade, and government spending, has long allied itself with Rubio. In 2010 the Club's political action committee endorsed him in his Senate race in Florida, back when Chocola was president of the non-profit organization. And current Club president David McIntosh has praised Rubio, along with Texas senator Ted Cruz, for being "gold standard" presidential candidates . The Club's PAC has bundled for Rubio, Cruz, Rand Paul, Jeb Bush, and Scott Walker in the GOP primary.

"Marco is committed to expanding jobs and opportunity for all Americans, and he has successfully chipped away at Obamacare and consistently fought back against burdensome regulations that are crippling businesses from hiring more workers and increasing wages," said Chocola. "Under Marco's leadership, all American families will know that their best days lie ahead."

The Weekly Standard http://assets.weeklystandard.com.s3.amazonaws.com/tws15/images/logo-large.png

The Weekly Standard

2016

Washington, DC

Politics

http://www.weeklystandard.com/former-club-for-growth-prez-endorses-rubio/article/2000425

2016-01-05T16:01

2016-01-05T16:01

Former Club for Growth Prez Endorses Rubio

The former president of an influential conservative organization is endorsing Marco Rubio for president, THE WEEKLY STANDARD has learned. Chris Chocola, the former Indiana congressman who was president of the Club for Growth from 2009 to 2014, tells TWS the Florida senator is a strong fiscal conservative and living testament to the American Dream. Marco is committed to expanding jobs and opportunity for all Americans, and he has successfully chipped away at Obamacare and consistently fought back against burdensome regulations that are crippling businesses from hiring more workers and increasing wages, said Chocola. Under Marco's leadership, all American families will know that their best days lie ahead. The Club for Growth, a conservative non-profit with a focus on economic issues like taxes, trade, and government spending, has long allied itself with Rubio. In 2010 the Club's political action committee endorsed him in his Senate race in Florida, back when Chocola was president of the non-profit organization. And current Club president David McIntosh has praised Rubio, along with Texas senator Ted Cruz, for being gold standard presidential candidates. The Club's PAC has bundled for Rubio, Cruz, Rand Paul, Jeb Bush, and Scott Walker in the GOP primary.

Michael Warren

http://cdn.weeklystandard.biz/cache/280x280-5717657e4ca283056550078afd28dbff.jpg