Topics: Books, Income inequality, The American Dream, Politics News

America has frequently been referred to as the land of opportunity. Horace Greeley’s famous advice, “Go West, young man” and seek your fortune, illustrates the dream of nearly unlimited opportunity. The availability of opportunities has been viewed historically as a key building block upon which individuals and families have been able to achieve the American Dream. The notion of streets paved with gold, with its obvious exaggerated implications, reflects this overall idea as does the image of climbing the ladder of opportunity.

In recent years there has been much discussion about how such opportunities may have changed over time. The early 1970s appear to have been a turning point with respect to the nature of jobs and the workplace. Evidence indicates that there has been an increase in lower paying jobs with less stability, often part-time, and providing few benefits. At the same time, some sectors of the economy have added well-paying jobs demanding high skills and education. Consequently, there is the notion that the labor market has become more polarized over the past few decades. One of the consequences of this is that for a growing number of Americans, there is an imbalance between those in need of a decent job that can support a family and the number of such jobs that exist.

The Game of Musical Chairs

In previous writings I have relied on the analogy of musical chairs to illustrate the mismatch between opportunities and the pool of individuals in search of such opportunities. The analogy plays out in the following way. Let us imagine a game of musical chairs in which there are ten players but only eight chairs. The players circle around the chairs until the music stops. Who is most likely to find a chair? If we focus simply on the characteristics of the individual winners and losers, those more likely to find a chair will be in a better position when the music stops, perhaps possessing more agility, greater quickness, and so on. All of these attributes help to explain who in particular is able to find a chair.

However, given that there are only eight chairs for ten people, these characteristics only explain who in particular wins or loses in the individual game, not why there are losers in the first place. That question can only be answered by understanding that the structure of the game ensures that two people will not be able to locate a chair. Even if everyone were to double their quickness and agility, two people would still lose out.

Similarly, while greater or lesser levels of skills and education help to determine who in particular may be more likely to find better opportunities, they cannot explain why there may be a shortage of such opportunities in the first place. In order to answer that question, we must look to the structure of the game.

In thinking about the overall availability of opportunities, they vary over time and place. In periods of robust economic growth, when plenty of good-quality jobs are being produced, the mismatch may be that there are nine chairs for every ten players competing in the game. On the other hand, during periods of economic downturn, such as the recent Great Recession, it may be that there are only six or seven chairs for every ten individuals looking for a decent opportunity.

Likewise, the size of one’s birth cohort can play a role in this mismatch. A larger birth cohort entering the labor market will be at a greater disadvantage than a smaller birth cohort. There can also be a spatial mismatch between opportunities and individuals. For those living in impoverished inner city or remote rural areas, there is clearly a mismatch between available job opportunities versus the pool of labor in need of such opportunities. The game itself is therefore fluid over time and place. But the bottom line is that in order for Americans to get ahead and achieve the American Dream, there must be enough good opportunities for all who are in need of them.

In his study of long-term unemployment, Thomas Cottle talked with one man who had worked for 25 years at the same company, only to be downsized. After two and a half years of searching, he eventually found a job at a much lower salary, but he felt fortunate to have such a job, nonetheless. He referred to his job search using the musical chairs analogy:

The musical chairs of work still have me in the game. The music plays, we run around, the music stops and I dive for a chair. Took me two and half years to find this last one, I don’t want the music to stop again. I’m only 52, but pretty soon they’ll take all the chairs away. Then what? That’s the part I don’t want to think about.

Or as one of our interviewees put it, there are a number of Americans who are thinking, “the music’s going to stop and they’re not going to have a chair. And they’re just probably living on the brink. One paycheck away, one car accident away, one unfortunate illness away” from joining those in poverty.

We argue that this analogy applies to what has been happening to the US economy. There has been a declining number of jobs that we might consider of good quality (livable wages, benefits, stability, good working conditions). Yet the pool of labor in search of such jobs is much larger than the number of available jobs, creating a significant mismatch.

A straightforward way of seeing this is simply to look at data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2013). In an average month in 2012, the unemployment rate was 8.1 percent, which represented approximately 12.5 million Americans. An additional 8.1 million Americans were working part-time, but wanted full-time work. Another approximately 1 million Americans were categorized as discouraged workers, in that they desired to be working, but felt there were no jobs available and had stopped searching for work. Consequently, in a typical month in 2012, over 20 million Americans could not find a full-time job. And as we have seen in our life course research, if we were to look over longer periods of time, these numbers would be much higher in terms of Americans experiencing problems finding full-time work.

One woman from our focus group sessions commented,

We were talking about the American Dream and whether it’s alive and well, and most people said it wasn’t. But the kids that I work with really believe that if they buckle down and work hard, they’re going to get somewhere. And that’s what’s so heartbreaking to me, ‘cause it’s not true. It’s a lie and the reason that it’s a lie is because there simply aren’t enough good jobs for them to have. We can’t all do that. There’s gotta be people working at 7:15 at McDonald’s and Walmart.

Approximately one-third of all jobs in the United States are considered low paying, often lacking in benefits.

On the other hand, a few of the remaining chairs may have become more comfortable and spacious. That is, some of the jobs being created in the new economy pay very good wages with solid benefits. Many of these jobs can be found in the financial and technology sectors, as well as in several of the professional fields.

The Changing Economic Landscape

One of the economic trends over the past 40 years has been the declining percentage of good jobs that can adequately support a family. When we speak of good jobs, one is generally referring to jobs that pay a livable wage, have benefits, are relatively stable, and possess good working conditions. They are the backbone of the American Dream of economic security. Yet such jobs have been harder to come by in more recent times.

Volumes of research have been written about this and why it has occurred. A number of factors have been suggested to account for the loss of such jobs, including globalization and outsourcing, increased international competition, technological change that benefits highly educated workers, corporate restructuring, the decline of unions and worker power, expansion of the service sector, and the weakening of government intervention in the labor market.

The result has been a proliferation of lower quality jobs during the past few decades. This can be measured in several ways. First, it is estimated that approximately one-third of all jobs today are low paying. Indicative of this has been the fact that male median full-time wages between

1973 and 2012 have actually declined in real dollars. In 1973 the median wage was $51,670, and by 2012 it was $49,398. In other words, the typical male worker in the United States has actually lost ground over the past four decades in terms of his wages. Low-wage jobs are also frequently lacking in benefits. In particular, decent and affordable health care, pensions, sick leave, vacation time, and other benefits are increasingly absent from low wage work.

Second, there has been a tendency toward the creation of a greater number of part-time jobs, rather than full-time. Again, many of these part-time jobs offer no benefits whatsoever. In an average month in 2012, there were over 8 million Americans working part-time, either because their hours had been cut back, or because they were unable to find full-time work.

Third, the numbers of unemployed and the length of time that individuals remain unemployed have been rising over the past four decades. In the 1960s the notion of “full employment” was considered an unemployment rate of 3 to 4 percent, whereas today, 5 to 6 percent is considered the norm. In addition, the percentage of workers out of a job for a prolonged period of time has been rising steadily over the past 40 years. Over the last few years, approximately 40 percent of the unemployed have been out of work for 27 weeks or more, which is an all-time high.

Fourth, work in general has become much more unstable and precarious. Individuals are at a greater risk today of being laid off or released from their job than in the past. This includes both low- and high-quality jobs.

Fifth, there have been limited sectors of the economy that have seen the creation of good-quality jobs over the last few decades. In particular, the financial and technology sectors of the labor market have produced a number of jobs with good wages and benefits.

Finally, as a result of these trends, there appears to be an increasing level of polarization in the labor market. A number of the new jobs that have been created are of low quality, while a smaller number of jobs are of fairly high quality. The gap between the haves and have nots has widened, while the middle ground has been hollowing out. Taken together, these changes in the labor market and economy suggest that the landscape of opportunity has become more tilted over time.

In illustrating these changes in working conditions, we could point to any number of our interviewees as examples. However, for purposes of space, we focus on three individuals. One is employed at a big box retail store. The second is a skilled professional, but finds himself in a declining industry. And the third is an entrepreneur who has used his creative and technical skills to his advantage in the new economy.