Palin's smarts

Monroe Township, N.J.: To Voicer Robert LaRosa: Maybe you should investigate the facts first — or do you just need an excuse to diminish Sarah Palin.

The truth is that it was brainless Tina Fey who came up with the “I can see Russia from my house” statement — while mocking Palin. Then all the other idiots just ran with it, thinking Palin really said it.

As for attacking John McCain for picking Palin as his vice presidential running mate, and the fact that she would have been second-in-command, do you really think the joker who is in second-in-command now is a better choice?

He had a Senate seat for all those years and accomplished practically nothing. And he makes more gaffes than anyone I can remember — for example, telling a man in a wheelchair to stand up. Between Joe Biden and President Obama — who, by the way, thought there were 57 states — they couldn’t hold a candle to Palin. Lorraine Shaw

Fare is fair

Manhattan: It is commendable that the bodega and supermarket associations have contributed funds for the funeral and burial of the murdered Angel Rojas, and that Catholic Charities is receiving donations for the family (“Group aids bus shoot vic’s family,” March 24). But what happens after this money runs out? The late Mr. Rojas was shot to death on a city bus. The MTA must undertake to ensure that the Rojas family continues to have the funds to pay for its apartment, food bills, medical care and the future education of his children. If no law exists to compel them to do this, one should be passed immediately. Aviva Cantor

Race to the top

Brooklyn: To Voicer Henry Ramos: You are 100% correct. The FDNY deputy commissioners and chiefs are appointed by current acting Commissioner Sal Cassano. They are overwhelming white Italian or Irish males. Hopefully, when Mayor de Blasio announces our new FDNY commissioner, qualified females and people of other races will finally get selected. Sandra Klein

Commissioner corrections

Belle Harbor: Just to let misinformed Voicer Henry Ramos know, there is a test to become a battalion and deputy chief of the New York City Fire Department. These tests are quite difficult, taking years of reading and studying to pass. The fire commissioner is appointed by the mayor. There are also deputy commissioners, and I believe — if Ramos does his homework — he will find that quite a few minorities hold or have held those positions. If you are going to add your two cents, at least have your facts straight. Palmer Doyle

Cold at heart

North Syracuse, N.Y.: Republicans in Congress are obsessed with repealing Obamacare. They can’t wait to take away the health coverage of millions of Americans. They are supported by the billionaire Koch brothers who never have to worry about their own health care. The worst part is that Republicans have no plan to replace Obamacare. They figure that if you can’t afford to have health insurance, you should just suffer and die. I guess this is what they call compassionate conservatism. Linda Wyatt

Road responsibility

Brooklyn: To Voicer Jason C.M. Atkins: As both a pedestrian and a driver, I think cyclists should be held to the same standards as drivers, including observing the rules of the road. Both myself and my sister have been hit by cyclists running red lights and had to pay all the medical bills, since cyclists aren’t required to carry insurance. If you’re riding in traffic, follow the rules of the road. Judith Bent

Jumping the gun

East Meadow, L.I.: Did the Daily News’ front page on March 24 label someone who has not been accused of a crime a mass murderer just because he won a gun? And then derisively call him a gun nut without knowing anything about this man? While I understand The News has no respect for gun-owning, law-abiding citizens who have never committed crimes, this kind of hype used to be beneath you. Obviously, not anymore. Cathy Mervyn

Proud alumnus

Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.: I thoroughly enjoyed Ian Powers’ detailed and informative piece on George Kaftan, Bob Cousy and the 1947 NCAA champions, the Holy Cross Crusaders (“Garden crusade,” March 25). I graduated from the college in 1962, and my wife and I have been to more than 800 games over the last 50-plus years. Powers touched on the scholar-athlete emphasis at the Cross, noting that Kaftan became a dentist. Holy Cross, a difficult academic institution, graduates 100% of its players. You not only have to be a good player but a good student as well. Larry Lombardi

What are the odds?

Patchogue, L.I.: Something smells at the New York State Lottery. On March 20, there were 29 top-five winners in the Take 5 drawing. There are usually zero, one or two. The numbers (03-04-31-33-35) don’t appear to have significant meaning. Do you think it was fortune cookies? Joan Tallman

Step aside

Howard Beach: Let me be the first to applaud Mayor de Blasio for his mission to have “a government that looks like New York City.” If he believes what he says, he should take it one step further and resign, so that Public Advocate Letitia James, the next in line, can succeed him. After all, the city has never had a female mayor and only one black one. That does not look like NYC to me. Come on, Bill, turn your words into action. Robert McGuire

No suit for you

Shaftsbury, Vt.: Justin Green sounds a lot like another lawyer trying to get rich quick (“Fire might have KO’d pilots,” March 25). His opinion that Malaysian Airlines Flight 370’s disappearance was due to a “mechanical issue” is exactly what lawyers want. They can then sue the airline for negligence and collect millions. This is when everybody else is saying that human intervention was responsible for shutting down the transponders and flying the plane off course. Either way, there’s no real proof — families of passengers will have to settle for the $5,000 being offered. Sorry, lawyers are out of the money on this one! Tom King

A national shame

Woodstock, Ga.: Why don’t your reporters go out on the streets of NYC, interview homeless American veterans where they sleep and find out why they are there — that is, if your reporters are not afraid. Is it because the VA takes one-to-two years to process a disability claim? Is it because they have PTSD and can’t get help? Is it because in the service they got hooked on drugs and drinking? Or is it because nobody cares about them? What happened to standing up for those who stood up for us? Bob Eldridge

U.S.A.F., retired

False solution

Manhattan: Re “Build a better future” (editorial, March 24): According to a recent study by the Real Estate Board of New York, less than 4% of New York City is under any sort of municipal landmark regulation. Those seriously concerned about affordable housing should be looking at what is blocking the construction of affordable housing in the other 96% of the city. Clearly, when it come to the lack of affordable housing, the preservation of New York’s historic neighborhoods is not the culprit. Anthony C. Wood

The content of our character

East Islip, L.I.: To Voicer Anthony Johnson Sr.: You’re a good person who doesn’t use the bad things that happen to all of us in life as excuses. God bless your mother for being an exemplary model for all mothers. I don’t know you personally, but the respect you show for your mother says it all. The fact that you state strongly that you are not a victim and take charge of your own destiny speaks volumes for all of us, no matter what our race or circumstances we saw as children, or what we must endure as adults. Daniel A. Hesse

Job well done

Howard Beach: Thank you, Voicer Anthony Johnson Sr., for one of the most intelligent letters I have read. Your mother should be very proud. Patricia Guglielmo

Debt paid in full

North Brunswick, N.J.: What Michael Vick did was a truly terrible thing. He served his time, he spoke to groups about the right way to treat animals and his behavior has been exemplary since that time. That is what the law is all about. To those who moan about him being a Jet, you are phonies. You don’t mind players who have long rap sheets, carry illegal weapons and actually kill people. Vick did his time. Vincent Brindisi