Last night's Republican presidential debate was hosted in Houston, Texas, and moderated by CNN's Wolf Blitzer who was joined by CNN's chief political correspondent Dana Bash, Telemundo News anchor Maria Celeste Arras, and Salem talk radio host Hugh Hewitt — and the gloves came off between the five remaining candidates.

If any of them wishes to unseat Donald Trump from his frontrunner status and stay in the race much longer, last night was the time to throw the former reality star off his game ahead of next week's Super Tuesday. This mega election hosts 12 states’ primaries and caucuses, and while it may sound like a lame spirit day where everyone is supposed to dress up like a superhero, it’s actually a key date during the primaries. Twelve states in one day with 595 delegates at stake equals a lot of votes that Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio, John Kasich, and Ben Carson can’t afford to lose. And as Trump is leading in the polls, and has already won big in New Hampshire, South Carolina, and Nevada, the stakes couldn't be higher.

This explains why Marco Rubio, the junior U.S. senator from Florida, and Ted Cruz, the junior U.S. senator from Texas, ganged up on Trump in a bid to show constituents and party leaders why they should be the party's eventual nominee. From his taxes to whether or not he's a true conservative, Trump fended off attacks on multiple levels. Missed the action? Don't worry, below you'll find the most compelling exchanges about the issues that matter most to you.

Healthcare

It’s no secret that the Republicans want to repeal the Affordable Care Act. Kasich, the governor of Ohio, wants to take federal resources and combine it with freed-up Medicaid programs in order to cover the working poor currently without health insurance. Carson, a former neurosurgeon, said, “Well, first of all, healthcare is not a right. But I do believe it is a responsibility for a responsible society, and we are that. We spend almost twice as much per capita on healthcare as many other nations who have actually much better access than we do.” When Trump didn’t have a clear outline for his plan, Rubio took on the role of debate moderator and grilled him. “What’s your plan?” Rubio asked, multiple times. Finally, Trump replied, “You get rid of the lines, it brings in competition. So, instead of having one insurance company taking care of New York, or Texas, you'll have many. They'll compete, and it'll be a beautiful thing.”

Immigration

Marco Rubio was called out by Arrass, one of the moderators, for flip-flopping on immigration and recently pledging to end DACA — which provides protection to immigrants who came to America as children — on day one in office. "What changed?" Arrass asked. "The problem with the executive order is it is unconstitutional. The president doesn't have the power to do that," Rubio responded. "No matter how sympathetic we may be to a cause, we cannot violate the Constitution of the United States the way this president now does on a regular basis." Trump then tried to call out Rubio's change of heart, and said, "I have to say, he lied this time." Cruz, who would also void DACA, said, "I think we need a president who knows what he believes in."

Arrass then asked Cruz about criticism that he and Rubio have received about not using their positions as Hispanic candidates to expand the Republican party base instead of pandering to traditional Republican voters by being tough on deportation. Cruz replied, "I do think it's amazing that on this stage tonight there are two descendants of Cuban origin and an African American. We are the party of diversity, not the Democratic party. And the second point I would make is that we have to move past this idea that somehow the hispanic community only cares about immigration.”

And as always, any discussion about immigration with Trump involves his plan to build a wall across our southern border with Mexico.

Planned Parenthood

By now, we all know that all of the Republican candidates want to defund Planned Parenthood. Some of them already have. But Trump’s stance on the women's healthcare organization has left us feeling more confused than when we found out — spoiler alert — that #CeCeisA. “As far as Planned Parenthood is concerned, I'm pro-life. I'm totally against abortion, having to do with Planned Parenthood. But millions and millions of women — cervical cancer, breast cancer — are helped by Planned Parenthood,” Trump said. For a moment, it seemed like Trump was going to defend funding Planned Parenthood, but then he said, "So you can say whatever you want, but they have millions of women going through Planned Parenthood that are helped greatly. And I wouldn't fund it.” He later explained that the only reason he would defund Planned Parenthood is because 3% of their health services are abortion services.

And on our bodies, Trump also said that he would apply a litmus test to Supreme Court nominees in regards to their views on religious liberty, after a moderator referenced Hobby Lobby, a case about whether employers with religious objections could deny women contraceptives.

Foreign Affairs

The Cruz-Rubio-Trump smackdown continued when Cruz called out Rubio and Trump for supporting Secretary of State John Kerry. Rubio voted to confirm Kerry, “and Donald Trump supported John Kerry against George W. Bush in 2004, gave him a check,” Cruz said. “And John Kerry has been the most anti-Israel secretary of State this country has ever seen. His diplomacy has been a disaster. And if we nominate someone who agreed with John Kerry, Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton on foreign policy, we're not in a strong position to win the general election.”

Well, whatever love Trump might have once had for Kerry is gone now. He said, "As far as John Kerry is concerned, there has been no tougher critic of this man, I think he negotiated one of the worst deals in the history of our country, the Iran deal... I'm no fan of John Kerry."

Your iPhone

Ever since whistle blower Edward Snowden exposed the activities of the NSA to the American people, we’ve had the national security versus personal privacy debate on our minds. After the San Bernardino shooting, that debate continues as the F.B.I. and Apple fight over whether the company should help the government hack an iPhone used by one of the shooters. Apple believes assisting the F.B.I. will threaten the security of its customers. The Republican candidates all seem to agree that Apple should work with the F.B.I., however. Rubio said, “Well, let me tell you, their brand [Apple] is not superior to the national security of the United States of America.”

Winner?

We don’t think anyone got out of this debate unscathed — not even viewers. But if anyone came out on top, it’s Rubio. From the moment the debate began, we could tell that he was here to take votes away from Trump, and to whittle down Cruz's relevance. On the former, we're not sure if he was successful given Trump's seemingly teflon shield, but on the latter, maybe. We’ll see if his efforts pay off in the next few days when people head out to their polling places on Super Tuesday.

Related: A Shocking Amount of Donald Trump Supporters Think Ending Slavery Was a Bad Idea