Good morning and welcome to Wake-Up Call, your guidebook to and roundup of the latest in city, state, and national political news...

Mayor de Blasio is riding the wave of his Italian jaunt while still taking care of some business stateside. Meanwhile, Gov. Cuomo is ready to sign a bill fighting petnappers, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie is blowing off Cuomo's GOP rival, outrage continues over the death of Eric Garner, Mike Bloomberg takes to the skies with El Al, and Chelsea Clinton may be wearing the pants in THAT family...

Now it’s a vacation. After spending his first two days in Italy meeting with officials in Rome, Mayor de Blasio on Tuesday finally had some play time. He enjoyed some fun under the sun on this shimmering island, including a father-son boat trip. De Blasio climbed into a yellow inflatable motorboat with his son Dante, 16, and headed out to open waters at a leisurely pace. Dante was shirtless and behind the wheel; his dad wore a blue T-shirt and sat in the back.

De Blasio on Tuesday nominated two people to serve on the Landmarks Preservation Commission, but he withdrew another nominee because of potential conflicts of interest. Marcie Kesner’s nomination was yanked after de Blasio’s office determined that she would have to recuse herself from too many cases because of her job at the land-use firm Kramer Levin. De Blasio instead named Adi Shamir Baron and John Gustafsson to the panel board.

The City Council is slated to pass Avonte’s Law on Thursday, requiring the Education Department and NYPD to determine which schools need door alarms. The bill, named for autistic teen Avonte Oquendo — whose remains washed up on a Queens beach in January after he disappeared from his school last October — gives the agencies until May to submit a list of schools where alarms may be warranted.

Locked in a high-stakes legal tussle with several New York officials, the popular apartment sharing website Airbnb has hired a political consultant with close ties to de Blasio. Airbnb confirmed Tuesday that Bill Hyers, de Blasio’s campaign manager last year, has joined its New York team, but the company declined to detail his exact role.

celeste katz

EXCLUSIVE: A new law is adding some bite to penalties against dognappers in New York. Gov. Cuomo is set to sign legislation Wednesday that boosts the fines for mistreating or stealing “companion animals” from $200 to $1,000, the Daily News has learned. “For many New Yorkers, a pet can be an extension of their family — which is why pet theft is a particularly heartless offense,” Cuomo said. “Increasing the penalties for stealing or harming dogs, cats and other animals is an important way that we can crack down on this crime.” The legislation marks the first time in 40 years lawmakers have increased the penalty for stealing pets.

Upset that Gov. Chris Christie dismissed his campaign to unseat Gov. Cuomo as a lost cause, Republican Rob Astorino suggested Tuesday that Christie should quit as chair of the Republican Governors Association. “If Gov. Christie is unable to help a Republican candidate for governor, then maybe he should consider stepping down as chairman of the RGA,” Astorino said at a press conference in Manhattan.

WNYC: "Christie says he's considering cutting benefits for the state's younger public workers, but he does not intend to cut pensions for retirees or those close to retirement."

NYT: "While [Cuomo] now maintains he had every right to monitor and direct the work of [an anti-corruption] commission he had created, many commissioners and investigators saw the demands as politically motivated interference that hamstrung an undertaking that the governor had publicly vowed would be independent."

ap Eric Garner and his family.

New York's top cop on Tuesday ordered his 35,000 officers retrained in the use of force as an incensed lawmaker called the death of a dad placed in a banned chokehold “murder.” As cries for justice resounded on the steps of City Hall over Eric Garner’s demise in police custody, an autopsy on the asthmatic father of six proved inconclusive, and a spokeswoman for the medical examiner said further tests would be needed.

State Sen. Ruben Diaz said he will introduce a bill to ban the use of chokeholds in New York. The bill would create a felony crime of "strangulation in the first degree, disregard of banned employment procedures" if a person violates an anti-chokehold employment policy and causes serious physical injury or death.

Diaz announced the bill days after Eric Garner died on Staten Island after NYPD seemingly put him in a chokehold.

City and state pols blasted police in the death of Garner and demanded criminal charges against the officers involved. “This was a murder,” said state Sen. Bill Perkins (D-Manhattan) at Tuesday's rally outside City Hall. “Without even being arrested, he was choked to death. Called for pity so that he could breathe. It’s outrageous. It’s unacceptable.”

Longtime Brooklyn Assemblyman Dov Hikind utilizes his campaign warchest as a charitable foundation, new disclosure records reveal. The beleaguered Borough Park lawmaker used more than $18,150 of his well-stocked campaign kitty for donations to yeshivas and powerful Jewish groups, including $2,400 for a scholarship at a day camp connected to a rabbi under criminal investigation.

Four people vying to become the newest Board of Elections commissioner will line up to be grilled by the City Council in a series of private interviews Wednesday, the Daily News has learned. A slot opened up when Manhattan Democratic Commissioner Gregory Soumas -- who had also served as president of the 10-member bipartisan board, quit July 11.

WSJ: "Investigators are trying to determine how two bleached-white American flags mysteriously appeared atop the Brooklyn Bridge Tuesday morning—and whether the stunt was an art project, a political statement or just tomfoolery."

TINA FINEBERG/AP

America is still astoundingly vulnerable to terror attacks, a new study by the authors of 'The 9/11 Commission Report' warns. “The world has become more dangerous over the past few years,” says the report, released Tuesday, 10 years after the original 9/11 Commission report. “The struggle against terrorism is far from over.” The study warns against terrorism’s “new and dangerous phase,” pointing out the perils of cyber attacks.

Former Mayor Mike Bloomberg, urging American authorities to lift their ban on U.S. flights to Israel, said he'd board a commercial flight to Tel Aviv Tuesday night in a show of solidarity with the Israeli people. After a Hamas rocket demolished a home near Ben Gurion Airport, U.S. and European airlines suspended air traffic into Israel — a decision Bloomberg said had “hand(ed) Hamas a victory.”

Wreckage from the doomed Malaysia Airlines plane had been "significantly altered" by the time international monitors arrived at the eastern Ukraine crash site on Tuesday — five days after the airliner was shot down. Several pieces of the downed Boeing 777 — including its cockpit — were sliced apart with diesel-powered saws, officials with the Organization for Security and Cooperation told reporters at the scene.

A New York congressman is reintroducing legislation to install anti-missile technologies on U.S. commercial airliners, prompted by the Ukraine air disaster and Hamas rockets in the Gaza crisis. Rep. Steve Israel (D-Long Island) on Tuesday confirmed his plans to dust off and recraft a 2003 proposal he made with Sen. Barbara Boxer (D-Calif.) to require the Defense Department to equip passenger planes with protections against missiles. The original legislation followed high-profile air tragedies and the 9/11 attacks.

LUCAS JACKSON / REUTERS

In the Clinton holy trinity, Chelsea Clinton is actually the one wearing the pants. The political heiress rules the roost and is operating as mom Hillary's "shadow campaign manager" in the lead-up to a likely 2016 run, according to a new takedown book by conservative journalist Daniel Halper, "Clinton, Inc." Team Clinton has laughed off Halper's claims, attributed to insiders and unnamed sources, suggesting Halper's only out to make a "quick buck" by joining the wave of supposed Clinton tell-all tomes out this summer — including Ed Klein's "Blood Feud."

A new legal battle emerged over Obamacare after two federal appeals courts issued contradictory rulings Tuesday on a key aspect of the landmark healthcare reform law. The decisions - one by a court in Washington, the other by judges in 100 miles away in Richmond, Va. - addressed the government subsidies that help millions of low- and middle-income Americans pay their premiums.

Politico: "When Eric Schultz gaggles with reporters Wednesday as President Barack Obama flies from San Francisco to Los Angeles, it will be a dress rehearsal for a new role: stepping behind the White House podium as the new principal deputy press secretary."

From our Bramhall's World:

Leaders' Lineup:

President Obama

9:20 AM: Attends a House Majority PAC event, Four Seasons, San Francisco

12:00 PM: Delivers remarks and answers questions at a DCCC event, Private Residence, Los Altos Hills, Calif.

4:55 PM: Attends a DNC event, Private Residence, Los Angeles

Gov. Cuomo is in New York City; no public schedule

Mayor de Blasio is in Italy

5:40 PM: Visits Sant’Agata Bridge, Via Vittorio Emanuele III 82019, Sant’Agata de’ Goti

5:55 PM: Visits San Mena Church, Piazza Castello 82019, Sant’Agata de’ Goti

6:10 PM: Speaks at Public Ceremony, Piazza Tiziano Della Ratta 82019, Sant’Agata de’ Goti

Dinner with Mayor of Naples Luigi De Magistris (closed press)

Tuning In:

"The Joe Piscopo Show," AM 970, 6 a.m.: Sportscaster Jared Max; Rob Astorino, Westchester County Executive and Republican candidate for governor; (Ret.) Lt. Colonel Robert Maginnis, military affairs analyst for SRN News; Bo Dietl, retired NYPD Detective and private investigator; Brigitte Gabriel, president of www.actforamerica.org and the author of 'They Must Be Stopped: Why We Must Defeat Radical Islam and How We Can Do It."

"The Brian Lehrer Show,” WNYC 93.9 FM, 10 a.m.: "Two separate courts issued opposing rulings on the Affordable Care Act yesterday. We figure out which one will stick. Plus: The debate over the HIV drug Truvada; exposing those ubiquitous charity donations bins that aren't run by charities; and discussing your favorite neighborhood celebrities."

"Inside City Hall," NY1, 7 p.m.: Metropolitan Opera General Manager Peter Gelb; The Political Rundown with Curtis Sliwa and Gerson Borrero.

"She said, in essence, to quote her, she was pissed off, so she shot him.”

News tips, schedules or suggestions?Email ckatz@nydailynews.com.