AUSTIN — Attorney General Greg Abbott hinted strongly Tuesday that Texas may impose additional training and background checks on “navigators” hired under federal grants to help people sign up for insurance through the Affordable Care Act.

A day before President Barack Obama was to meet with navigators in Dallas, Abbott said his office and the state Department of Insurance have found weaknesses in federal rules.

The flaws could allow criminals to obtain Texans’ personal financial and health information through navigator sloppiness, Abbott warned. Crooks themselves could become navigators, he said.

In a letter to Insurance Commissioner Julia Rathgeber, he urged the department to “move quickly to establish state regulations that will protect Texans’ medical privacy.”

Republican members of the U.S. House, GOP state attorneys general and Gov. Rick Perry have warned that the federal government’s rules and online 20-hour training course for navigators were inadequate.

In a mid-August letter to U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius, Abbott and his peers in a dozen other states called the grant program “a privacy disaster waiting to happen.”

Abbott, a Republican who hopes to succeed Perry as governor in next year’s election, has supported lawsuits and congressional efforts to overturn Obamacare.

Supporters of the health care law, though, have dismissed the criticism. They say the objections over navigators are efforts to discourage enrollment in health insurance offered under the law.

Community groups that for many years have received federal money to help enroll people in other programs have said their outreach workers have never caused identity theft and criminal scams.

Texas doesn’t require criminal background checks of the state eligibility-determination workers who help people sign up for Medicaid, the Children’s Health Insurance Program, food stamps and cash assistance, said Stephanie Goodman of the state Health and Human Services Commission. Background checks are performed on those working for state contractors, though.

Spokesman Jerry Strickland said he couldn’t say whether Abbott sees danger in the lack of screening of state eligibility workers. He said, though, that the state workers receive regular and comprehensive training on proper handling of sensitive personal information.

Follow Robert T. Garrett on Twitter at @RobertTGarrett.