Around midnight on Monday, October 28, 2013, Jason Huggins got an email from an acquaintance he met at a tech event in Chicago. The open

Around midnight on Monday, October 28, 2013, Jason Huggins got an email from an acquaintance he met at a tech event in Chicago. The open

Around midnight on Monday, October 28, 2013, Jason Huggins got an email from an acquaintance he met at a tech event in Chicago. The opening line read: I’m working on a big high-profile website that you may have heard needs at lot of help recently.

Huggins, frozen in his Oak Park basement, thought "Is this about what I think it is?"

The email was from Paul Smith, one of the first people in the tech surge brought in by President Barack Obama to fix the ailing Healthcare.gov website. Huggins, the creator of automated software testing tool Selenium and co-founder of Sauce Labs, called Smith the next day and soon got an offer to come to the White House and help turn around a website that was quickly becoming the biggest issue on President Obama's plate.

Huggins consulted with his wife and friends to see if this was the right move to make. It would mean leaving Chicago, dropping commitments with Sauce Labs and a new robotics startup he was building, and diving into a project that was under intense scrutiny. But it was a call with Chicagoan Harper Reed, the CEO of Modest and the former CTO of Obama's re-election campaign, that finally convinced Huggins to take the challenge in DC.

"I asked him, 'Is this for real? Should I do it?'"

"Jason, the CTO of the White House is involved," Reed told him. "You are literally the tech surge the President just announced."

"That was the sledge hammer over my head," Huggins said

By Saturday night Huggins booked a one-way flight to DC, and on Monday morning he became the 6th person brought in from the outside to help bring Healthcare.gov from the verge of collapse.



It was crazy intense. One week on Healthcare.gov felt like a month anywhere else.

Huggins and the tech surge worked furiously from November through December, attempting to put out fires as criticism poured in from users who couldn't access the site, and conservatives looking to score points for a program they didn't even want in the first place. By all accounts, Healthcare.gov was a mess, and no one understood that more than Huggins and the tech team in DC.

"Basically, every way that the site was set up, from how they launched it and how they built it, was very risky," he said. "It also didn’t help that they were creating a website that was going to be used for all of America, using almost any browser ... It was this very public shotgun launch that they could have rolled out state by state.

"So it's not a surprise that the launch didn’t go well."

The problems with manual testing

There was a lot wrong with the Healthcare.gov site. But one major concern, which happened to be Huggins' strong suit, was testing. Basically, if a bug got fixed or a feature was added to the site, it needed to be tested. The website's existing process at the time relied very heavily on manual testing, which meant the developers could only deploy once every 4 days. That was especially problematic given that the tech team, and the American public, was told that by December 1 most of the kinks would be fixed.

Huggins and Bill Nye at the White House reception for the tech team.

"We basically had a one month window to get as much stuff fixed as we possibly could. But every time you deploy--and you can only deploy once every 4 days because of our manual testing process--that means you have fewer shots to get it right. It means there's more pressure to have each one of those deploy steps correct."

Huggins was tasked with writing automated tests for Healthcare.gov, which was vital in speeding the website repair and allowing developers to have more chances to fix ongoing issues.

"It was crazy intense," he said. "One week on Healthcare.gov felt like a month anywhere else...It was trial by fire."

The fires were constant, Huggins said, including an issue of even logging into the website, which became public during a congressional hearing when Oklahoma Rep. James Lankford held up his iPad on C-SPAN and couldn't access the site. That issue was representative of the problems around manually testing on Healthcare.gov, Huggins said.

"I made it my mission that as long as I was plugged into this process, I would make sure that little green 'Create account' button never broke again. I made sure that I at least had an automated test that would click that button and run that every couple minutes to make sure that issue never happened again."

Eventually December 1 came and many of Healthcare.gov's problems had been fixed. The site was more or less running smoothly, and the tech surge team had done its job. Looking back, Huggins pointed to one major problem with how the site was built that, if changed, could have helped the site avoid many of its problems in the first place. Two companies were contracted to create the site: CGI was given the contract to write the software, and QSSI, where Huggins worked, was given the contract to test the software. These organizations hardly communicated, Huggins said, making the website repair much more difficult.

"At any other tech company in San Francisco, the developers are writing the code and writing the tests. You might also have some testers helping you out, but the weird situation on Healthcare.gov was the people writing the tests were not allowed to even look at the source code, which was ridiculous.

"So I would love in the future to have these contracts not set up in this adversarial kind of way where a very critical function—testing— is actually done by some separate organization who isn’t allowed to have any insight into how the actual code works."

A hug from the Prez

In April, Huggins found out that the team team would finally get to meet President Obama, and on May 1 there was a reception at the White House where Obama planned to personally thank each of them for their work on the website. As Obama went down the line shaking everyone's hand, Huggins, whose nickname is Hugs, said he wanted his interaction with the president to be memorable, but not too memorable. So when Obama approached Huggins, he said, "Excellent to meet you, Mr. President. My name is Jason Huggins, but my nickname on the project is Hugs."

President Obama immediately froze and stopped shaking his hand, presumably thinking Huggins was gearing up to hug him.

"At that moment I realized 'Oh no, what have I done! This is horrible.' And it felt like a lifetime in that moment ... Then he got this big smile on his face and he just said, 'Then you get a hug!' And he reached in and gave me a hug.

"I walked out and everyone’s like, how did you get a hug?"

Huggins said even though the process was stressful and the workload was at times overwhelming, he looks back on the experience of fixing Healthcare.gov fondly, and is proud of the part he played in helping the country.

"When the White House comes calling, how do you say no?"