Getty Images Hillary Clinton

Some of Hillary Clinton’s closest confidants and allies are not sold on the idea that the former secretary of state should run for president, The Wall Street Journal reports. Cheryl Mills, one of Clinton’s top advisers, believes she should stay out of the race and has told her as much, the Journal reports. Linda Bloodworth-Thomason, a longtime friend of the Clintons, says she thinks the former first lady would like to run. “I’m not in the political camp; I’m in the friends camp,” Bloodworth-Thomason says. “And the friends camp definitely has concerns about her running.”

Rep. Paul Ryan looks back at the 2012 presidential race in an interview with National Review and says a Mitt Romney/Paul Ryan White House would be “like looking at two different countries” compared to the Obama White House. Ryan, a Wisconsin Republican, says it took him “about 36 hours” to re-adjust to the House of Representatives after losing the election. Ryan also says: “policymakers have to do a better job of clearly conveying who we are, what we’re doing, and why we’re doing it. We have to persuade a majority of the country.”

Health industry officials say Obamacare-related premiums are set to double in some parts of the country, countering claims recently made by the White House. The Hill reports the expected rate hikes will be announced in the coming months amid an intense election year, when control of the Senate is up for grabs.

Google is planning to create high-resolution drought mapping for the mainland U.S. as part of a White House effort to give communities more data so they can prepare for climate change. USA Today reports the White House initiative will be unveiled Wednesday and that Google will also use federal databases to build what it says is the first terrain map of the planet to show how climate-related changes are occurring.

President Obama’s Final Four picks are in. He’s selected defending tournament champion Louisville, No. 1 overall seed Florida, top seed Arizona and Michigan State to advance to this year’s NCAA men’s Final Four. Read more on ESPN.

– Robert Schroeder

Follow Capitol Report on Twitter @capitolreport.

Follow Rob on Twitter @mktwrobs.

Read more from MarketWatch:

What’s your question for Janet Yellen?

Pit your NCAA bracket against MarketWatch’s best basketball brains