WILLIAMSBURG — First Baptist Church visitors fell silent Monday morning as renowned national singer Valerie Simpson played the first few piano keys in the historic church's sanctuary.

“Are we having church in here this morning?” Simpson asked to the crowd

The congregation responded with throaty amens before Simpson began to belt out her hit song, “Reach out and Touch (Somebody's Hand).”

Monday's service was a celebration of the first day of Black History Month, as the church commemorated the restoration of its Freedom Bell, which was done through a partnership with the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation and the Ford Foundation in recognition of the church's 240th anniversary.

Founded in 1776 by enslaved men and women, First Baptist Church is recognized as one of the oldest African-American congregations in the country. According to the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, the members first met in hiding to worship before building a brick church in 1856 along Nassau Street. In 1956, the church moved into the current location along Scotland Street.

The bell fell silent in the church because of structural issues in the 1950s.

Through the years, the church has seen prominent visitors such as the late the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. and civil rights pioneer Rosa Parks.

Colonial Williamsburg President Mitchell Reiss, U.S. Rep. Robert C. “Bobby” Scott, D-Newport News, U.S. Ambassador Suzan Johnson Cook and the Rev. Jesse Jackson Sr. each took turns pulling on a rope in the church's foyer, tolling the bell for the crowd outside to hear.

(By Heather Bridges)

The church has invited members of the public to come and ring the historic bell throughout February.

Call for unity, equality

At the service Monday, politics were high on display, as Jackson urged congregants to continue the fight for equality and said a key part would be working to expand the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, sometimes referred to as “Obamacare.” He also called for greater efforts to reduce income inequality.

“The reason we cannot catch up is because the disparity is so great,” Jackson said. “Effort and excellence means a lot. Inheritance and access means more. It's caused structural disadvantage.”

Still, Jackson lauded progress made by the civil rights generation, saying it had paved the road for the New South.

“You'll know the truth, and it will set you free,” Jackson said. “You've learned to live apart, now let's learn to live together.”

“That's the question: How do we move from a racial battleground to an economic come-around, to a moral higher ground?” Jackson later told reporters gathered after the ceremony.

The Rev. Reginald Davis, the church's pastor, called for national unity in the face of racial division.

The security posted outside of the congregation, with metal detectors for those wishing to enter, was a stark reminder of some of both the recent and historical violence targeting black churches, including the massacre at “Mother” Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, S.C., last year where nine parishioners were slain by a gunman.

“It's going to take all of us to make our nation a more perfect union,” Davis said.

“Bells were not only used to alert the people but to drive out evil spirits that were working to divide and destroy the people. So we come to ring the bell.

“We come to ring the bell and drive out the spirits of division. Drive out the spirits of hatred. Drive out the spirit of evil. Drive out the spirit of injustice. Drive out the spirit of fear and those practices that are causing us to forget that we are one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.”

The congregation rose to its feet to applaud.

Moving ceremony

Among those to ring the bell Monday were direct descendants of Thomas Jefferson — Prinny Anderson, David Works, Jeff Westerinen, Diana Redman and Shannon LaNier, as well as LaNier's daughters, Madison, 4, and McKenzie, 2.

After the ceremony, First Baptist Church member Minnie Robinson paused on the front steps of the church.

“It's beyond words,” she said. “I just can't believe it.”

After the bell's nearly 50-year silence, “to ring it now, to hear it, was just a joy,” Robinson said.

“This is really something that will mean something to us for the rest of our lives,” said Frank Brown IV, standing outside the church with Gregory Packer Jr. Both are seniors at the College of William and Mary.

“Embracing this moment about our fellow ancestors and what they had to go through in order to pave the way for us is remarkable,” said Brown, a member of William and Mary's African American Male Coalition.

“The moment itself is historical,” Brown said. “Just ringing the bell proves that you're a part of history and that you will carry on this legacy.”

Outside the church, Leo and Jene Davis talked about how moved they were by the ceremony.

“This was truly a blessing. It was all God,” Leo Davis said. “I'm still trembling from it.”

The couple hadn't planned on coming to the church celebration Monday, but when they drove by and saw the crowd, they stopped. The two snagged the last two available seats inside the sanctuary.

“We were moved by this. I'm so glad we came,” Leo Davis added

Staff writers Michele Canty and Steve Vaughan contributed to this report. Bogues can be reached by phone at 757-345-2346; Bridges can be reached at 757-345-2342.