Pin this on Pinterest Email this story

February 15th — save the date! Right after you’ve chowed down on all your Valentine’s Day chocolates, the following day will be the last time you can sign up for Obamacare this year. Just ask Vice President Joe Biden: “If you don’t sign up by the 15th of this year, you’re going to have to wait till 2016 to get health insurance through the Affordable Care Act.”

But before you rush over to the Healthcare.gov site to snag a healthcare plan, we thought it would be a great idea to let you know the progress of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) — by the numbers.

Now before we get into the stats, do you know what Obamacare is all about? According to HealthDay, 64 percent are a bit hazy about health care mandate. To demystify the ACA for you, here’s a quick run-down: Obamacare became “the Law of the Land” in 2012 and its goal is to provide accessible, quality, affordable healthcare plans for all. In a nutshell, healthcare premiums are dependent on your income level. Subsidies are available for American households who are between one and four times the Federal Poverty Level.

If you are uninsured, and you choose to not get healthinsurance (and you’re not exempt) you’ll penalized right where it hurts — your pockets. You’ll have to give up two percent of your income or $325 per adult and $162.50 per child. Right, now that you’re informed, let’s get to it!

A formidable 9.5 million Americans have signed up for the 2015 healthcare plans as of Jan. 27. According to the Washington Post. But let’s put a face on who’s signing up: Nearly 25 percent are between the ages of 18 and 34 and 30 percent are between 55 and 64. Eight percent of enrollees are Latino, while 11 percent were African-American — two groups that are reaping many benefits from the ACA, specifically the latter.

Black Americans, as the Center for American Progress reports, have seen their uninsured rates plummet from 24.1 percent to 16.1 percent between 2013 and 2014 thanks to the Affordable Care Act.

With Obamacare requiring five million private-insured African-American women to have access to additional healthcare benefits, HPV testing, mammograms, prenatal care — and other preventive services — will no longer be unattainable.

Almost 6.8 million African Americans have now become eligible for insurance since the implementation of the ACA.

Now these figures are a stark difference from what other naysayers — namely conservatives — were saying about big ol’ scary “job killer” called Obamacare. This includes Forbes’ 2012 article, “No, Mr. President, Obamacare Will Hurt Blacks & Hispanics,” TownHall‘s “Obamacare Negatively Impacts Minorities,” and most recently, BloombergView‘s “Obamacare is Working. Unless You’re Black.”

Debunking these mythological articles, The New York Times announced:

“The biggest winners from the law include people between the ages of 18 and 34; blacks; Hispanics; and people who live in rural areas.”

CNBC delved further into the figures, quoting Gallup:

“The [uninsured rate] drop has been most pronounced among black Americans and lower-income adults, the research organization said. Blacks have seen a 7 percentage-point decrease in their uninsured rate, while there has been a 6.9 percentage-point plunge in the rate among people earning less than $36,000.”

Overall, Obamacare helped the United States’ uninsured rate plunge to its lowest levels since 1997, Business Insider reports. During the first three months of 2014, the uninsured rate dropped to 13.1 percent — a decrease of 1.3 percentage points, which reflects a decline of nearly four million uninsured Americans in the country, according to the Center for Disease Control.

And, arguably, the most incredible result of the ACA is that more Americans are finding it easier to pay off those pesky medical bills, according to ThinkProgress. Researchers call it “remarkable”:

“For the first time in a decade…the number of people who had issues paying for health treatment dropped from 41 percent to 35 percent. The people who skipped out on health services because they couldn’t afford them declined from 43 percent to 36 percent.“

Bravo, Obamacare. Bravo.

Only time will tell if the Supreme Court will axe the ACA, but as MSNBC puts it, “Let’s be clear: if the Republican justices gut the law, they’ll undermine a law that’s working quite well.”