Topics: Beyonce, Books, Bruce Springsteen, Ellen Willis, Foo Fighters, iggy azalea, Jon Landau, Kanye West, Lester Bangs, Media Criticism, ramones, Robert Christgau, Talking Heads, Television, U2, village voice, Entertainment News

Robert Christgau started calling himself the dean of American rock critics around 1970: What began as a half-ironic youthful boast has become an elder statesman’s almost literal job description. Of the wave of formidable writers on popular music who hit in the ‘60s — which also includes Lester Bangs, Greil Marcus and Christgau’s girlfriend Ellen Willis — he’s always been the most succinct, the most pragmatic and the most rigorous. Best known for his Village Voice Consumer Guide feature — short, chiseled little prose poems impersonating record reviews — Christgau now offers a memoir, “Going Into the City: Portrait of a Critic as a Young Man.”

The book travels through his Queens upbringing, the intellectual jolt the preteen goy received from a batch of Jewish classmates, his youthful fascination with poetry and Dostoevsky, his time at “Animal House”-era Dartmouth, cross-country drives and conversations about sex, politics and Warhol, and his dedication to journalism in general and rock criticism in particular. The book gets near its halfway point before the author has enlisted at the Voice, which will be his home for decades until he is dumped by a new regime of corporate cowboys.

Christgau names names, writes so passionately about both the U.S. and U.K. edition of the Stones’ “Aftermath” it will make you want to find both and listen to them back to back, and gives one of the finest and most complex portraits ever of a female intellectual in his scenes with Ellen Willis, whose vision of pop — and Pop — profoundly influenced his. There’s something both boastful and oddly humble throughout: He talks repeatedly about the results of his childhood IQ tests even while later calling himself “a German hyperintellectual who’d learned manners from a fireman who ate dinner in his sleeveless undershirt.”

The result is a sometimes frustrating book that is also a consistently brilliant and fascinating one.

Christgau — who under the influence of a glass of iced coffee was sometimes so intense that he would not let his interlocutor finish a sentence — spoke from his home in New York.

Let’s start at the beginning, sort of. Unlike a lot of your peers in rock criticism, you’re not from the West Coast — you’re not a Berkeley free speecher like …

I don’t think that most of my peers in rock criticism are from the West Coast. I think most of them are from the East Coast.

Let me try to frame it. Some of the famous and storied rock critics — Greil Marcus, Lester Bangs– are from the West Coast. Others are Jewish bohemians like Ellen Willis. You come from a straighter world, don’t you?

Ellen Willis and I came from exactly the same background, Scott. That’s the reason we hooked up for three years. She was a policeman’s daughter from Queens. I was a fireman’s son from Queens. You can’t be much closer than that. We weren’t brought up as bohemians. We both became bohemians, as did many people in the early ’60s.

OK, fair enough. You don’t feel that you’re in some ways different from that first generation of rock critics in your background? I’m just wondering if that shaped your tastes, et cetera.

The end of the ’60s chapter has a three- or four-page section in which I break down the differences between myself and what I regard as the first generation of rock critics, which does not include either Marcus or Bangs because they all come in a little later. They came in in ‘69. This is through ‘68 and at that time the vast majority of rock critics were, in fact, New York Jews with a few Boston people. That’s the people I’m talking about. Even Jon Landau — I can’t remember where he grew up at the moment — but I know that he spent his childhood in Brooklyn and Queens then moved somewhere else. I don’t remember where.

And in that respect, yes. I certainly felt it was worth pointing out that unlike that early generation, I very unusually for an intellectual in Manhattan in 1965 grew up a born-again white Christian — plenty of born-again black Christians — but a born-again white Christian, and while I know former born-againers who are my equivalents, they come from other parts of the country. John Morthland came from a different kind of a background. Lester was a Jehovah’s Witness, which isn’t the same thing but is kind of like it. Very much not the same thing actually but so, yeah. A very important part of my story far as I’m concerned is that I was this born-again Christian whose first salvation came through a class full of wise-ass Jewish kids in junior high school. That was the first chapter I wrote. I wrote it as the chapter I sent around because I felt if I couldn’t make that chapter work that I wasn’t going to to do the book right.

There are a lot of chapters that take place before rock ‘n’ roll hit or before rock ‘n’ roll hit you in a hard way. Why did it seem important to get back story about your family and your upbringing and childhood in here?

Because it’s a memoir. Because you are the product of your background, even if it’s by reaction. I had conflicts with my family but basically I remained in a loving relationship with them, even at the worst of it. Unless you are just pure rebel, it’s a combination of two things.

Though I don’t talk about it in the book explicitly, it’s clear to me that aspects of my upbringing remain with me and that’s the reason that when my wife and I got married, we put our parents in the traditional service where God usually goes. We were the products of loving marriages — not perfect marriages but loving marriages — and we had loving relationships with our parents and that made marriage seem like a plausible outcome to our lives and something worth pursuing. That’s a very, very important thing that happens in this book, in part because at the very core of my conflict with Ellen Willis, who I love deeply, and who loved me too, was that she didn’t believe in marriage. Her ideas evolved in other ways. She remained adamant about that to the rest of her life even after she was married. She claimed, and I see no reason to disbelieve, that the marriage she did eventually make with Stanley Aronowitz was strictly for tax and legal purposes, medical insurance in there, and that might be plausible to me. I don’t think she would deny and I don’t think Stanley would deny either, although I don’t know anything really about the details of the relationship except that I could see that they loved each other. Nobody wants to tell me about that. Why me?

But I was just saying to my wife the other day that as painful as the breakup was and as well-suited as Ellen and I were to each other in certain ways — people said this for years after we split up. Why in the world did you guys break up? At least they said it to me. We both found far more suitable mates in the wake of that. She had a very, very serious — it wasn’t a marriage. Fine. I don’t understand what her real vision of it was. Even though I read her writing about it, I don’t quite get it. I’m not going to start asking her daughter and widowed husband, but the idea was don’t get married. If you’re a feminist, you don’t get married. After we broke up, that was a really important difference between us, where she had persuaded me and then I spent three years figuring out that I really didn’t agree with her. Believe me. If you’re intimate with a mind as powerful as that of Ellen Willis, it takes you a long time to separate yourself from her ideas. She had an extremely powerful mind.

I can tell from the writing. I was going to take you there, in fact. For someone associated with bohemia, punk rock and other things, you have an oddly earnest and conventional view of what we would call bourgeois marriage. What led you to that?

I suppose it’s earnest. I don’t think it’s at all conventional. Insofar as it’s earnest, I’m proud to be earnest. I don’t care if that’s corny. Those corny adjectives? They all have their place in life. Is there some kind of a contradiction or disconnect between how much satisfaction I get from unconventional and apparently antisocial artists? Yes, there is. In some cases, they do a kind of vicarious kind of living for me. On the other hand, you might think I have a conventional view of marriage but put me in a town in a medium-size city in Kansas and I don’t have a conventional view of marriage at all. On the contrary.

My personal experience has been that in my free bohemian subculture, I’m not unique. My experience of what a loving relationship is like rings true with a lot of people I meet. I have a theory that the people you meet, one way you choose them, is their suitability for you in that particular matter. Attitudes toward friendship and marriage are in many cases closely aligned. So I can’t say that my sample is a fair sample, but all I knew was that I kept reading people being blasé about infidelity. Not necessarily saying this is great but it happens, from sophisticated people. In my world, infidelity is a disaster. Always. I was not about to pretend that it wasn’t.

There’s a story early in the book about my friend and mentor Bob Stanley who imbued a sort of — he was very interested in sex. Painted erotic paintings. He gave me the idea that, yes, people fuck around — and then Ellen and I both found ourselves being unfaithful to each other about 10 months into our relationship. I could not believe how much it hurt. I couldn’t believe the pain I was in, so I went to Bob and he said, of course it hurts. It always hurts. And as I say, this was real, Now he tells me stuff. Suddenly I realize this guy who I admired enormously and admire him even more enormously now and miss him terribly — he’s been dead for almost 20 years — I loved still. I still love him. Nevertheless, he was trying to act cool for me in some kind of way. I said to myself I’m not doing that. He misled me here so he could look cool. I’m never going to do that.

I’m a member of a generation — I was born in 1969 — whose childhoods were dominated by infidelity and divorce by the parents. I’m an example of that and so is my wife. I applaud you doubling down on marriage, however conventional it may seem. I wish more bohos and lefties would do that.

I went into this book knowing I was going to do this. I think I didn’t know quite how much I was going to do it. It is in terms of memoir unconventional. But what could I do? I told the story I had to tell. You know that thing that novelists say about how the character takes over the story? The story took over at a certain point. That was the story and I tried to make it as credible and coherent as I could.

There’s also in addition to music and bohemia — and there’s a wonderful passage about jazz and foreign film — there’s also a lot of sex in the book.

I don’t believe there’s a lot of sex in the book. I don’t believe you will ever find a single passage where there are two consecutive sentences about it. Why? Because as far as I’m concerned, once again in my experience, I can’t say that this is true of all my friends because people are remarkably reticent on this topic. But as far as my wife and I, our relationship is a sexual relationship. As far as we’re concerned, marriage is a sexual relationship. I don’t believe that you write about sex by generalizing it. I believe you write about sex the way you write about everything else. I tell my students that they should be concrete when they write and that’s why so many are saying — in what seems to be a rather prurient and squeamish way — that there’s a lot of sex in the book.

I may have forgotten something. The scene in Jamaica. There’s a thing about Jamaica. That wonderful week we had of fucking in Jamaica. That’s more than one sentence there and I bet I could find something else, but in general, these are details meant to evoke, just as it’s meant to evoke when I say, as Mark Athitakis has the discernment to quote today, our house wasn’t the nicest on the block, but it was the second nicest on our side. It wasn’t just a detail. It’s meant to situate me in a certain way. We use details in a narrative and I don’t believe there are wasted details in this narrative.

Let’s go back to music for a minute. It’s probably easy for somebody younger, who grew up in the ’80s and ’90s, to look back at the ’50s, ’60s and ’70s and think that for a little while at least, the good stuff and the popular stuff overlapped. I’m talking about pop music. I’m also thinking about the first two “Godfather” movies and a handful of other things. Is it fair to say that that really happened or is that just a nostalgic fantasy? In other words, did the good stuff and the popular stuff start to diverge at some point? They broke apart, where we got great work and popular work that were not often the same thing.