ONE thing the House Democratic caucus does not get enough credit for is the extraordinary speed at which some of its members can read. House Republicans released a 200-page report examining federal anti-poverty programmes on March 3rd. Within a couple of hours it was being denounced by House Democrats as another heartless attack on the needy. This is a pity: the document, released by Paul Ryan, the chairman of the House budget committee, is a useful attempt to gather research on 92 different federal programmes and figure out which ones work. Should you not have time to read the whole thing, I can report that it does not propose to get rid of the poor by making recipients of government aid fight to the death in front of a large TV audience.

In fact there is not a single proposal to cut spending on federal anti-poverty programmes in there. What the report does do is document how fragmented the federal government’s poverty programmes are. Having many different initiatives is not a bad thing in itself: poverty has lots of causes and they interact in complicated ways—anyone who pretends there are simple solutions to poverty has not spent enough time thinking about it. Even so, the duplication of effort is striking.

Take the federal schemes to expand the supply of housing for people with low incomes. There is Public Housing, Moving to Work, Hope VI, Choice Neighborhoods, Rental Assistance Demonstration, Rental Housing Assistance, Rental Assistance Payment, the Housing Trust Fund, the Low Income Housing Tax Credit, the Private Activity Bond Interest Exclusion, the HOME Investment Partnerships Program and the Self-Help Homeownersip Opportunity Program. The programmes on the demand side, in other words that help people pay their rent, are almost as numerous.

This looks like an inefficient way to spend money, but that may not be the worst thing about it. Imagine being unemployed and trying to work out which of the federal government’s 24 different job training programmes you might be eligible for. When the affluent are confronted by government complexity they hire accountants; the poor must navigate it all by themselves.

Then there are the programmes that sound like parodies of liberalism, such as the Seniors Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program, which encourages low-income retirees to buy food at farmers’ markets. This is the kind of anti-poverty programme that I might have dreamt up while wandering among the heritage tomatoes and artisanal goat’s cheese on a Sunday morning. It is troubling to learn that it ever got further than that.

Within this miscellany there are some clues as to the future direction of Republican anti-poverty policies. Mr Ryan recently gave a speech in which he praised Britain’s Universal Credit, a plan to roll lots of government anti-poverty programmes into one. In some ways Britain is a strange place to seek inspiration: the British scheme is hopelessly behind schedule, a victim of the kind of IT snafu that has hobbled the Affordable Care Act. But the thinking behind it is sensible.

The other initiative that looks to have Mr Ryan’s blessing is the expansion of the Earned-Income Tax Credit (EITC) to people who do not have children (at the moment the childless are eligible for this credit but there is a low cap on the maximum payment they may receive). Marco Rubio has already spoken in favour of this. The report from the House budget committee cites plenty of evidence on the power of EITCs to boost the number of people in work. The president’s budget, published on March 4th, includes an expansion of this programme too.

Most of the commentary on the budget committee’s report suggests that it is filled with the same stuff that Republicans have been peddling for ages. And to be sure it includes plenty of studies that are critical of food stamps, Head Start and Pell grants. But read the whole thing and you get the impression that there are House Republicans who understand that there is more to poverty reduction than getting the government out of the way. They should be braver about saying this.