COLLEYVILLE, Texas, July 8, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Today Dr. Rick Redalen MD., The founder, CEO and Chief Medical Officer of Quest Global Benefits announced a strategic partnership with First Source Interactive to spread the word about his new evidence based education company for industrial and occupational medicine to improve healthcare outcomes for employers, employees and families.

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150707/233115

Redalen was the founder of ExitCare, the premier healthcare education company in the United States.

First Source Interactive is recognized around the world as being on the cutting edge of digital marketing, public relations & advocacy. "Together, Quest Global Benefits and First Source Interactive make a powerful team to empower healthcare customers around the world to manage their own healthcare engagements and outcomes. Quest Global Benefits was founded to reduce healthcare costs, and to address employers critical concerns as a result of the Affordable Care Act," said Redalen.

"It is a fact that employee health education not only impacts employers bottom lines but can also positively impact an employee's health. Quest Global has developed the most comprehensive benefit cost containment program, delivering substantial savings to both employer and employee as well as improved healthcare outcomes," Said Redalen.

Quest Global's unique system, coupled with Redalen's 40 year history as the leading provider of medical information and First Source Interactive's proven messaging tools combine for a powerful team that will revolutionize the way employers provide employee healthcare benefits.

"Today, in the midst of the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, employers and employees face the highest costs for healthcare benefits the US has ever seen. These unsustainable costs are being passed on to employees at a time when many Americans are struggling to make end meats," said Redalen. "Our mission is to fuse education, communication and technology in a way that changes the face and efficacy of healthcare benefits."

"Dr. Redalen is a humble humanitarian with a servants heart who has helped people all over the world. He is a man with a deep and enduring sense of compassion who has dedicated his life's work to caring for and empowering others," says First Source Interactive CEO Avi White. "Our entire team is honored and humbled to work with him in finding sustainable solutions to rising healthcare costs while at the same time helping to care for the poor, disadvantaged and medically underserved throughout the world."

Quest Global Benefits looks to be the leader in providing affordable employee healthcare benefits in the United States and around the world. For more information, call 1.855.733.7794 or visit the main website at http://www.questglobalbenefits.com/.

Contact Information:

Avi White

General Counsel

First Source Interactive

5125011974

avi@firstsourceinteractive.com

This release was issued through WebWire(R). For more information, visit http://www.webwire.com.

SOURCE Quest Global Benefits