DENVER (AP) - Troy Tulowitzki is gone. Carlos Gonzalez might be next. Maybe even just-acquired Jose Reyes.

The Colorado Rockies are overhauling their roster in the midst of another dreadful summer, and this time nobody is off-limits.

For years, Tulowitzki was considered untouchable, especially in the eyes of owner Dick Monfort. That changed when the Rockies sent the face of their franchise along with 42-year-old reliever LaTroy Hawkins to the Toronto Blue Jays on Tuesday for Reyes and three pitching prospects.

Reyes is scheduled to join the team Wednesday, but even he may be available to the right bidder, Rockies general manager Jeff Bridich acknowledged.

“Our eyes and ears are open. We’re open-minded. It’s how we are operating,” Bridich said. “That doesn’t mean that we have some huge elaborate plan to sell the farm and completely start from scratch.”

Before the 2011 season, Colorado signed Tulowitzki to a deal that added $132 over seven seasons through 2020. Combined with his previous contract, it meant the Rockies agreed to pay Tulowitzki $157.75 million over 10 years.

The concept was to build around him and Gonzalez, who signed an $80 million, seven-year contract about the same time.

It didn’t work.

Colorado has a 319-426 record since 2011, and a good portion of that time, the sluggers weren’t in the lineup together because of injuries.

“Rebuild … it’s not like it’s a word we use around here,” Bridich said. “A rebuild connotes that we’re going to go and sell off what we have, whatever assets we have at the major league level. That’s not part of our process. It’s more nuanced than that.”

For now, the notion is to keep the 32-year-old Reyes, a four-time All-Star who’s signed through 2017 on a $106 million, six-year contract he received from Miami that includes a $4 million buyout in ‘18.

That could change.

“We are thrilled to have him be part of the team,” Bridich said. “But I guess anything is possible, certainly.”

As for Gonzalez, interest is increasing for the Gold Glove outfielder, especially after his recent power surge. Gonzalez has six homers in his last four games. His average has climbed all the way up to .278 as he finds his groove. He missed significant time last season after undergoing surgery to remove a tumor from his left index finger and then another operation to repair a tear in his left knee.

“Carlos, save for the last three weeks of the season, it’s been somewhat of a rocky road. It’s been some good, some bad up to this point of the season,” Bridich said. “It’s not like people have been banging down the door early and often on him leading up to this deadline. His improved play over the last couple of weeks has changed that a little bit.”

Gonzalez is trying to keep his attention on the field amid speculation.

“My No. 1 motivation is to play good for this team and whatever happens in the future is up to them - it’s not up to me,” Gonzalez said. “If I’m playing for the Rockies, I’m going to play as hard as I can.”

Bridich was surprised at how fast negotiations heated up for Tulowitzki on Monday, going from “zero to 60 in a matter of minutes” and leading the Rockies to pull Tulowitzki out of their game against the Chicago Cubs in the ninth.

Tulowitzki spent his entire 10-year career with the Rockies but has been the subject of trade talk for some time - at least when he was in the lineup. Staying healthy has been his biggest challenge. During his career, he’s had stints on the disabled list for a quadriceps tendon tear, lacerated right hand, broken left wrist and a groin injury.

Last season, Tulowitzki played in 91 games before undergoing hip surgery. This year, he’s been injury free, with manager Walt Weiss resting him on occasion.

“It’s not lost on us the type of impact and type of effect Troy’s had on this organization,” Bridich said. “It’s bittersweet.”

Not for teams within the division.

“That’s definitely nice to get him out of the NL West,” Giants shortstop Brandon Crawford said.

The Rockies also get right-handers Jeff Hoffman, Miguel Castro and Jesus Tinoco.

Hoffman was a first-round pick in 2014 who’s coming off elbow surgery. He’ll report to Double-A New Britain. Castro will pitch out of the bullpen at Triple-A Albuquerque and Tinoco will likely start at Single-A Asheville.

Down the road, Bridich can envision a rotation that includes Jon Gray, the third overall pick in 2013, Eddie Butler (No. 46 in 2012), Kyle Freeland (No. 8 in 2014) and Hoffman.

___

AP Baseball Writer Janie McCauley and sports writers Ronald Blum and Arnie Stapleton contributed.