Art by Mike Lucas

The former security leads at e-commerce marketplace Etsy on Thursday planned to publicly launch a new security product for teams that are quickly creating and shipping new software. Signal Sciences wants to provide a next-generation Web application firewall to developers who are creating and modifying applications multiple times a day. The Venice Beach, Calif., company grabbed a $9.7 million Series A funding round led by Index Ventures. Chief Executive Andrew Peterson, a former Etsy product manager, and Chief Security Officer Zane Lackey, Etsy’s former security lead, said they saw firsthand in their former roles that security information needs to be brought closer to the developers. “What was out there didn’t solve our problems,” Mr. Lackey said. “We have a deep empathy with our customers, we’ve lived the life that they live.”

ALSO IN TODAY’S VENTUREWIRE (subscription required):

San Francisco-based ThousandEyes raised $35 million for networking technology that gives corporate customers visibility into their software services, letting them see which ones they are using and how each service is performing.

PolyPid, an Israeli specialty-pharmaceutical company that withdrew a registration to go public in the U.S. last year, has closed a $22 million Series D financing to advance a lead antibiotic product for cardiac-surgery patients.

A San Francisco startup called REVL has raised $2 million in seed funding to make waterproof digital video cameras that create a stable picture even if they’re shooting from atop a skiers’ helmet or the strut of a kiteboard.

WigWag has raised $3.2 million in seed funding to continue developing its open-source platform for developers working on smart household products.

(VentureWire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals and personnel moves involving startups and their venture backers. For a two-week trial, visit http://on.wsj.com/DJPEVCNews, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

ELSEWHERE AROUND THE WEB:

China’s Homegrown Uber Competitor Adding to War Chest. Didi Kuaidi Joint Co. is planning to raise around $1 billion from investors on terms that would value the Chinese car-hailing company at more than $20 billion, according to people familiar with the situation, The Wall Street Journal reports. Didi Kuaidi’s new fundraising would bring in more cash for its escalating battle with Uber Technology’s Chinese affiliate, UberChina.

Microsoft to Buy Software Developer Xamarin. Microsoft Corp. has agreed to acquire Xamarin Inc., a four-year-old San Francisco maker of software development tools, extending the software giant’s reach deeper into devices that don’t run its Windows operating system. The startup’s venture-capital investors include Charles River Ventures, Floodgate, Ignition Partners, Insight Venture Partners and Lead Edge Capital.

Insurer Oscar Health Valued at $2.7 Billion in New Round. With investors funding startups that help consumers and health-care providers adapt to changes in the federal health-care law, Oscar Health Insurance Corp. has closed a $400 million financing that values the medical insurer at $2.7 billion. Oscar aims to sign up customers through online exchanges that were created by the 2010 Affordable Care Act.

Write to Russ Garland at russell.garland@wsj.com