It’s the little things Brian Shaw hates. The times when his players don’t box out. The times when the ball bounces in front of them and they still don’t go for the ball. The (many) missed free throws. The shoddy defense.

He must have had a hard time sitting through Friday’s game against the Minnesota Timberwolves at the Pepsi Center.

Coming off a blowout loss at Charlotte and a sloppy defeat at Brooklyn, the Nuggets returned home to host the Timberwolves, the worst team in the West, in a game that, on paper, should have been Denver’s for the taking.

And until the fourth quarter, Kenneth Faried appeared to be the only Nuggets player who wanted it.

Faried, who turned in one of his finest showings of the season against Brooklyn three nights earlier, came back with an even better one Friday with 26 points and a career-high 25 rebounds while leading the Nuggets to a 106-102 victory over the Timberwolves.

“After 26 points,” Shaw said, “I want him to understand that we didn’t call plays for him. He got those 26 points going after offensive rebounds every single time. And probably four times, I would say tonight, the ball got volleyballed around and it fell right in his hands and he was able to put it right back up and in. But that was just because he put himself in the right place by being in there in the first place. That’s what I want him to take away from that.”

Said Faried: “My back wasn’t tight. I felt loose and limber, like I was playing back at USA Basketball. I was able to keep going. Teammates were missing shots, but I was just there at the right time. They played hard, Minnesota did, but I just wanted to keep going and keep us in it, some way, somehow.”

But with every one of his baskets, as well as those of his teammates, the Timberwolves seemed to have a response on the other end, ones that were often handed to them by the Nuggets’ miscues.

Eighteen turnovers. Too many wide-open shots to count for Minnesota. Many poor decisions.

“We’ve had droughts at the wrong time,” Shaw said before the game. “But when you’re not shooting the ball well, you can live with that if you’re defending. And I thought our defense has slipped. We haven’t been accomplishing our goals in terms of keeping teams to 24 each quarter on a consistent basis.”

The Timberwolves (5-23) arrived in Denver sporting the worst defensive rating in the NBA, allowing 113 points per 100 possessions and letting opponents shoot a league-worst 49.8 percent from the field and 65.3 percent from within 5 feet of the rim.

It was a defense, or lack of one, that was tailored to point guard Ty Lawson. But the guy who came in leading the league with 13 drives per game couldn’t get in the paint much and settled for 6-of-17 shooting from the field for 16 points, while adding 11 assists.

Wilson Chandler, who has been a model of consistency for the Nuggets for much of this season, added 21 points. But he hit only 7-of-21 attempts from the field, including just 2-of-9 shots from 3-point range.

The victory?

Sure, the Nuggets (13-17) will take it. They have to. They need it. As Shaw said before Friday’s game, the Nuggets “have to make a run and do something right now.”

Maybe this was the start.