With state water restrictions impending and the gardening season in full swing, many California residents wonder what they can do to manage their water consumption, and the city of Roseville has organized an event specifically to share a few suggestions.

The city’s third annual Greener Gardens Tour and DIY Expo, scheduled for 9 a.m.-3 p.m. Saturday at the Roseville Utility Exploration Center on Pleasant Grove Boulevard, will give visitors access to examples and experts that will demonstrate what sustainable living can look like.

Cheryl Buckwalter, event organizer and executive director of the non-profit organization EcoLandscape California, said entry to the DIY Expo/Marketplace at the exploration center will be free, offering about 15 booths with experts like University of California Master Gardeners, river-friendly landscaping professionals from EcoLandscape, and Roseville Environmental Utilities irrigation staff.

“It’s all about learning and getting resources, getting your hands on irrigation parts, learning how to convert sprinklers to low-volume drip, how to identify and fix leaks, learning about controllers, making sprinklers more efficient by inserting rotary nozzles, (et cetera),” she said. “We also will have information about converting lawns by sheet mulching, learning how to incorporate plants that are appropriate for our climate and good for attracting habitat for birds and (insects), we’re going to have information on how to help your trees survive drought, as well as rainwater harvesting, a rain garden demonstration, and permeable paving examples so water from your site can soak into the ground instead of running off.”

Buckwalter said event organizers will also conduct three free, 30-minute workshops – at 9:30, 10:30 and 11:30 a.m. – on how much water different kinds of plants use and how best to irrigate them.

For $5 per family, visitors can also get a map to guide themselves through the annual Greener Gardens Tour, a circuit of 13 homes throughout Roseville that have implemented sustainable living techniques in their gardens, lawns and landscapes.

Buckwalter said most of them have participated in the city’s cash-for grass program and combined California-native, drought-resistant plants with efficient irrigation methods – “the way that we should be landscaping.”

“We’re really focusing on helping people to meet the water-use reduction mandate and make their landscapes be beautiful but still very, very water efficient,” she said “It’s a variety of styles and looks. It’s a really good way to show examples of how people have significantly reduced their outdoor water use but still have very attractive landscapes.”

Buckwalter said anyone interested can register in advance at www.roseville.ca.us/gardentour to receive a link to the tour map by email, but it’s not necessary, as space is not limited and people can simply show up and get a map on the day.