Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, speaks at a Conservative Business League of New Hampshire Rally on March 27, 2015 in Merrimack, N.H. (Photo: Darren McCollester, Getty Images)

Amid the cascade of news last week following Sen. Ted Cruz's official entry into the 2016 presidential race was one storyline rich with irony.

It was reported that Cruz's wife, Heidi, left her job at Goldman Sachs to work on the campaign — one consequence of which was that the family would lose her employer-sponsored health care and have to find coverage elsewhere.

What's ironic about that?

The cheapest and most obvious place for the family to get coverage now is through an exchange created by the Affordable Care Act — President Obama's signature health care law. Cruz, a Republican and unabashed conservative, has built his national reputation on trying to dismantle the law.

Liberal advocacy groups and media outlets jumped at the news that Cruz might "sign up for Obamacare." So did many conservatives.

But what does obtaining coverage through an exchange created by Obamacare actually mean? Does it come with extra benefits, better coverage or subsidies?

CONCLUSION: It's true that members of Congress who choose to obtain insurance coverage through the federal government are required to purchase it through an online health insurance marketplace, or exchange, created by the Affordable Care Act. But experts say there's no practical difference in the insurance they obtained as federal government employees before Obamacare became law and what they get now through the exchange. Members of Congress receive no improved benefits or extra subsidies.

BACKGROUND: For decades, members of Congress and their families received health insurance just like workers at almost any other large employer: through plans arranged and largely paid by their employer.

Under the Federal Employee Health Benefit Program, government workers can choose from among dozens of health care plans, and the feds pick up about 75% of the cost.

That's still the case for the vast majority of the federal government's millions of employees. But for members of Congress and the staffers in their offices, things changed with passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010.

An amendment proposed by Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, prohibited members and their staffers from obtaining coverage through the traditional benefit program. It instead requires them to buy insurance on an exchange set up under the ACA.

In 2013, months before the exchanges came online and the changeover took effect, the government's human resources department issued rules for how Congress would obtain insurance through the exchanges.

Under those rules, senators, representatives and staff seeking insurance through the federal government are required to purchase it on a Washington, D.C.-based exchange intended for local small businesses. But they still receive the same employer contribution as other federal workers — about 75%.

The companies offering policies through the exchange may be different from those with plans in the federal benefits program and there may be "slight differences in benefit design," said Sabrina Corlette, project director at Georgetown University's Center on Health Insurance Reforms. But on the whole, the options are about the same.

"Essentially those folks are being treated as if they're still in an employer-based plan with an employer contribution to make the premium affordable for members and staff," she said of members of Congress and staffers.

In short, the Affordable Care Act — as amended by Grassley's proposal — created a new bureaucratic pathway that members of Congress and their staff must follow to obtain health insurance, but it's virtually indistinguishable from what they had previously.

THE SPECIFICS: So, how does that all relate to Ted Cruz?

Cruz has said he received no health insurance coverage through the federal government since becoming a U.S. senator in 2013. Instead, he and his daughters have been covered under his wife's employer-provided plan.

Now, he has options.

He could enroll in congressional coverage, thereby going on the Washington, D.C.-based exchange, shopping for a plan and then paying roughly 25% of the premium while the federal government picks up the rest.

Because of the Grassley amendment, this technically means he's obtaining coverage under Obamacare, but it's a distinction without a difference, Corlette said. Under this scenario, Cruz would still get insurance with a major contribution from his employer, the federal government.

He wouldn't be enrolled in Medicaid — which was expanded in many states under Obamacare — or receive any of the government subsidies provided to moderate-income Americans obtaining private insurance through an exchange, according to the federal Office of Personnel Management.

Another option is to purchase health insurance on his own, and pay the full premium costs without an employer contribution. He could presumably do this in Washington or in his home state of Texas, and could do it by shopping on an exchange created by the ACA or by working with an independent broker.

Using the federal COBRA program, the Cruzes may also be able to continue their coverage under Heidi Cruz's Goldman Sachs plan, but they'd be required to pay up to 102% of the full cost of the plan.

Cruz initially told The Des Moines Register and other outlets that he would sign up for insurance through the federal exchange. Later, a spokesman said he was evaluating his options.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Cx7L3j