By Kevin McKenzie, The Commercial Appeal, Memphis, Tenn. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

Sept. 06 --As the owner of a Memphis nail salon, Lauren Boyd agreed that inspections by state regulators looking for missing name tags or uncovered trash containers can be very detailed.

But then, the $500 fine that one Memphis nail outlet received after an inspector found a hot wax machine at the shop only licensed to provide manicures is an example of why the state regulations are important, Boyd said.

And why broader public knowledge of the results of such checkups would help consumers. Shelby County is awash in about 1,100 licensed cosmetology shops -- nail as well as beauty salons -- including about 800 in Memphis , according to state figures. That doesn't include nearly 300 licensed barber shops, with more than 80 percent of those in Memphis .

In the case of the hot wax machine, someone not trained and licensed could improperly heat the wax, fail to kill bacteria and easily cause a staph infection through a break in the skin, Boyd said.

"I think that the regulations are perfectly fine, especially in the beauty industry, because the beauty industry affects health in more ways than one if you do it wrong," said Boyd, owner of Graffiti Nail Shop on Southern.

A list of nail, beauty and barber shops penalized by the state's Cosmetology & Barber Examiners Board in Memphis and elsewhere in Tennessee is issued each month, but gets little public attention.

In July alone, a dozen businesses were cited in Memphis and Shelby County . July was no aberration. As many were cited in June.

Among the firms identified in the July report:

Having no manager on duty and sanitation violations cost Beautiful Nails, at 4230 Summer, $500 .

Beautiful Nails at 6168 Shelby Drive earned a $1,000 penalty for unlicensed activity and sanitation violations.

Pro Nails, 3192 N. Thomas, received a $500 fine for a license not properly displayed, name tag and sanitation violations.

Creation's Nail Salon , 295 S. Bellevue, was fined $750 for an inspection sheet not properly displayed and sanitation violations.

Repeated attempts to contact those shop owners or mangers produced similar answers: They weren't in and couldn't be reached for comment.

Beyond small nail salons, an array of beauty and barber shops and cosmetology schools are among the firms paying penalties for violating state regulations.

In the July report, The Salon at Macy's, 4545 Poplar, was fined $750 for having no manager on duty, unlicensed activity and a sanitation violation. Supercuts , 6045 State in Bartlett , received a $1,250 penalty for unlicensed activity, name tag and sanitation violations.

Paul Mitchell the School-Memphis, on U.S. 64 in Bartlett , received a $750 fine for unlicensed activity and a sanitation violation. "As far as our citation, it was a paperwork oversight and state board did the right thing by calling it to our attention," said Lauren Whitaker , director of the cosmetology school.

"The sanitation portion required lids on trash cans that we had enclosed in cabinetry, but we took care of that as well," Whitaker said, adding that the school has scored 100 on two subsequent inspections this year.

Looking for those inspection scores, which are required to be publicly posted in the salons and shops, like restaurant health scores, is one action consumers can take, said Rachel Powers , program and policy director for two dozen regulatory boards in the state Department of Commerce and Insurance .

The monthly "Regulatory Boards Disciplinary Action Report" that lists penalties for nail, beauty and barber businesses and individual license holders also shows fines and license revocations by other regulatory boards. They range from accountancy to funeral directors, motor vehicle and real estate commissions, private protective services and soil scientists.

Powers said that with 16 or 18 inspectors in its field enforcement division, including one dedicated to cosmetology in Shelby County , the state "absolutely" has enough to do the job.

At Graffiti Nail Shop, Boyd said the industry regulation is "a little tedious," but "kind of cuts down on the amount of lawsuits that we would probably get."

It also would pay for consumers to know which shops aren't measuring up, she said.

"You don't want to be caught in one of those situations," Boyd said.

Shaping up salons

Nail and beauty salons, barber shops and those licensed to work in them can face fines and revoked licenses when violating regulations enforced by the state Board of Cosmetology and Barber Examiners .

Each month, a list of the board's actions is included with those of two dozen boards and commissions in a disciplinary actions report available online at tn.gov/regboards/archive.shtml.

The June report included these fines for Memphis shops following inspections months earlier that found violations:

Atena Nails , $250 , two unlicensed employees, unlabeled products, unclean ventilation.

Nails by Mary J, $250 , advertising as a mobile salon.

X'Pert Nails, $500 , hot wax machine at a shop only licensed for manicures, no license displayed for one person providing services, trash containers uncovered, buffer and file not properly stored.

Mame's Hair Braiding, $250 , unregistered cosmetology shop.

Hawa Hair Braiding, $250 , unregistered cosmetology shop.

Trimmers Barber Shop & Styles , $100 , one person with a suspended license providing services, no manager present.

Source: Dept. of Commerce and Insurance regulatory boards disciplinary action report, June 2014

___

(c)2014 The Commercial Appeal (Memphis, Tenn.)

Visit The Commercial Appeal (Memphis, Tenn.) at www.commercialappeal.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 883

[jetpack-related-posts]