BOSTON, Oct. 22, 2014 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- The Center for Connected Health today announced a co-development agreement with Daiichi Sankyo, Inc. to create a mobile app to serve as a coaching platform for patients with atrial fibrillation who have been prescribed oral anticoagulation therapy. The goal of this mobile app will be to support patients living with atrial fibrillation by helping improve patient adherence and compliance to medication, as well as fostering feedback loops that connect the provider to the patient.

"Over the years, our research collaborations with industry have been focused on using connected health strategies, including mobile technologies, sensors and remote monitoring, to improve patient engagement, behavior change and support healthier lifestyle choices. We are pleased to collaborate with Daiichi Sankyo, Inc., marking an important milestone in creating solutions to help patients with atrial fibrillation, a complex and high-cost disease condition," said Kamal Jethwani, MD, MPH, Corporate Manager for Research and Innovation at the Center for Connected Health, who will oversee the development program with Daiichi Sankyo, Inc.

Many pharmaceutical and life sciences companies are incorporating mobile and connected health tools to support clinical trial recruitment and data collection, as well as medication adherence, patient engagement and disease management programs. At the same time, the Affordable Care Act (ACA) is changing the way providers think about and deliver care to patients. Many innovative pharmaceutical companies are responding to these changes via connected health solutions as a way to help improve patient care and clinical outcomes.

"Our work with forward-thinking pharmaceutical companies like Daiichi Sankyo, Inc. signals an important shift in the role of mobile and connected health. By leveraging ubiquitous mobile technologies, we can help enable providers to engage patients in new ways that provide disease education, motivation, reminders and other medication compliance strategies," added Joseph C. Kvedar, MD, Director, Center for Connected Health. "Our research has demonstrated that mobile health tools, including apps and text messaging programs, are effective means to engage patients in their care, supporting healthy behavior change and overall patient engagement. In today's era of accountable care, creating opportunities for successful treatment, improved outcomes and patient satisfaction is critical. By embracing connected health technologies, pharmaceutical companies can truly move 'beyond the pill.' We are seeing this first hand at the Center for Connected Health."

The Center has created and deployed mobile technologies in a number of patient populations and care settings. The Center's research team is also conducting innovative clinical studies to test the effectiveness of mobile health technologies in various clinical applications, including medication adherence, care coordination, pain and chronic disease management, and prevention and wellness.

About Partners HealthCare

Partners HealthCare is an integrated health system founded by Brigham and Women's Hospital and Massachusetts General Hospital. In addition to its two academic medical centers, the Partners system includes community and specialty hospitals, a managed care organization, community health centers, a physician network, home health and long-term care services, and other health care entities. Partners HealthCare is committed to patient care, research, teaching, and service to the community. Partners is one of the nation's leading biomedical research organizations and a principal teaching affiliate of Harvard Medical School. Partners HealthCare is a non-profit organization. Visit www.partners.org.

About the Center for Connected Health

The Center for Connected Health is creating effective, new solutions and innovative interventions to deliver quality patient care outside of traditional medical settings. Our programs use a combination of remote-monitoring technology, sensors, and online communications and intelligence to improve patient adherence, engagement and clinical outcomes. The Center also offers expert online second opinions, virtual visits, and engages in innovative research to uncover new models for better care. The Center's Consulting Services assist companies, providers and other organizations to learn more about entering the connected health space and to prepare products and services for integration into the healthcare delivery system. The Center for Connected Health is a division of Partners HealthCare, a Boston-based healthcare delivery system founded by its Harvard Medical School affiliated teaching institutions, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Massachusetts General Hospital. Visit www.connected-health.org.

CONTACT: Gina Cella

Cella Communications

T: 857-239-9198

ginacella@comcast.net

SOURCE Center for Connected Health