Gov. Terry McAuliffe has proclaimed Nov. 19, 2015, as National Rural Health Day in the Commonwealth of Virginia. This designation reminds us to thank all of the nurses, physicians, physician assistants, dentists, social workers, psychiatrists, volunteers and other health professionals who work day in and day out in rural communities across the commonwealth. It is a day that we are reminded of the importance of our rural hospitals, clinics and emergency medical services (EMS), which provide vital services to keep us healthy and safe. They are also the foundation upon which our rural communities are built and sustained.

Today I want to call attention to an increasingly important issue throughout the rural towns and counties of Virginia. We face a critical challenge of keeping our rural hospitals open and thriving. The threats to these hospitals are numerous and include sequestration cuts, the constant threat of shrinking reimbursement rates, geographic areas that serve lower patient volumes than their urban counterparts and a population with unique health challenges that can often be more costly.

Roughly half of our hospitals in the state are operating at a loss. Our rural hospitals in particular see a higher percentage of Medicare and Medicaid patients — a payer mix that provides lower rates of reimbursement. This puts a significant burden on rural hospitals to meet rising costs amid ever-shrinking revenues. The risk of this environment is that these hospitals might have no choice but to close. This is something our rural communities cannot afford.

Virginia has already seen one rural hospital close in the past few years; others could be in jeopardy. Hospitals in rural areas serve as vital access points for citizens to get critical health care. When Lee Regional Medical Center closed in 2013, our neighbors in Lee County, Va., were forced to seek care outside the community, sometimes traveling long distances to get treatment for medical emergencies. For our rural areas a hospital closure not only impacts a community’s health, but drastically impacts a community’s economic viability.

It’s time Virginia faced this problem head-on. We must provide some relief to the hospitals that serve the roughly 1.5 million Virginians in rural parts of the commonwealth. These hospitals provide much-needed health care access and serve as strong economic and social anchors for the communities, and it is time we celebrate the important work these institutions do.

To help Virginia’s rural hospitals remain open and continue to serve those in need, Governor McAuliffe and I continue to work to expand access to health care. Expanding access increases the opportunities for citizens across the commonwealth to get needed health insurance, and allows our state system to reimburse hospitals that care for those citizens not currently covered. This will help rural hospitals keep their doors open and create opportunities for these hospitals to develop innovative programs and practices to prepare them for the future.

The rural areas of our state should be valued not just for their beauty, culture and history, but for the health of their residents as well. That is a goal of our Rural Health Plan, and it requires providing rural Virginians an equal opportunity to be healthy. It requires creating an atmosphere in which rural hospitals can thrive.

National Rural Health Day is an opportunity to thank all of the hardworking individuals bringing health care services to rural communities, and to recognize the need for quality affordable health care throughout the commonwealth. To that end, I wish you all a happy National Rural Health Day.