Buy Photo Herman Fuselier (Photo: The Advertiser )Buy Photo

What a music month we had in October. Thousands grooved to live bands at Festivals Acadiens et Creoles. Downtown Alive, Rhythms on the River, Bach Lunch, Blackpot Festival, Music & Market, the Mercredi Shows, the Latin Festival, Zydeco Breakfast, Acadiana Symphony Orchestra concerts, KBON Music Festival and more.

Imagine if half of the musicians providing those sounds suddenly disappeared. It’s a real possibility.

Statistics show that musicians, with their cyclical incomes, are uninsured at half the rate of the general public. A good number of local music makers are dealing with diabetes, high blood pressure and other significant ailments in emergency rooms.

Moriba Karamoko, an avid local dancer who also works with the Louisiana Consumer Healthcare Coalition, said, just like the general public, musicians can have better health through regular, primary care.

“Chronic diseases are hard to manage with primary care,” said Karamoko. “They’re almost impossible to manage when you’re outside of care. Insurance allows you to secure the regular care that you need for chronic disease management.

“We had people in the (musicians) workshop last year that have been uninsured most of their professional career and are trying to manage some chronic disease. They’re suffering adverse consequences of the disease and having the disease without a primary care relationship.”

LCHC and the Tipitina’s Music Office Co-Op of Lafayette are hosting a free musicians health insurance workshop at 6 p.m. Wednesday at the Co-Op office, 203 Jefferson St.

The workshop is not a sales pitch. Musicians will only receive information on health insurance through the Affordable Care Act. Enrollment starts Nov. 15.

Commonly called Obamacare. the ACA is a hot button issue in politics. But Karamoko stresses the

ACA is a legal resource available to small, independent contractors, like musicians.

“I didn’t come here to persuade you to like, vote for or embrace Barack Obama,” said Karamoko. “We’re talking about an option for health insurance. If you find it useful, take advantage of it. If you find it’s not useful, or any of the material I’ve given you is not useful, there’s a trash can right over there. Throw it in the trash and we can still be friends. It’s purely for information. The decision is each individual musician to decide what they want to do.

“But I’ve seen people avoid significant medical expenses this past year because they had insurance. I’m talking as little as $1,700 and as much as $17,000. Hernia operations aren’t cheap. As a musician, you’re not doing the same kind of work as a painter does with the risk of falling off the top of a building.

“But accidents do happen and musicians are involved in accidents.”

Karamoko said 25 musicians attended last year’s sessions. Several now have health insurance for the first time in their professional careers.

Kamamoko said those musicians now have better personal and financial health.

“Insurance gives you some protection against the financial insecurity and devastation that comes with high medical debt. The way this country handles medical debt, it can spill over into your attempts to buy a house or secure a business loan to further your career as a musician.

“From a health standpoint, coverage gives you access to the prevention service, early diagnosis. Like Wayne Singleton, who’s been very public about his bout with prostate cancer. He benefited from early detection that he got access to from being insured. He’s in a better place today because of that.

“Without that kind of insurance, his prostate cancer would have gone undetected. He would have found out at a later stage of the disease, which is harder to treat. It would have devastated him financially.”

Herman Fuselier is food and culture editor for the Times of Acadiana and Daily Advertiser. Contact him at hfuselier@theadvertiser.com.

Musicians Health Insurance Workshop

6 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. Wednesday

Tipitina’s Music Office Co-Op Lafayette

203 Jefferson St., downtown Lafayette

Admission: Free. registration by Monday is suggested

Information: 337-534-0951, 337-781-8745

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/entertainment/music/2014/11/05/workshop-aims-inform-music-makers-insurance/18554367/