Nearly a year has passed since the head of the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) took on the role of Acting Assistant Secretary Health of the Department of Health & Human Services and nearly half a year since she was nominated to fill the role permanently. And Karen DeSalvo, MD, MPH, MSc, could face further delays in her appointment related to the federal agency's handling of implementing the Affordable Care Act.

Senator Ben Sasse (R-NE) is threatening to stonewall the nomination of all HHS nominees until the ACA provision of the Consumer Operation and Oriented Program (CO-OP) is addressed by HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell.

"I will act to block consideration and confirmation of every HHS nominee until families who lost their co-op insurance plans get straight answers. Hundreds of thousands of enrollees lost their plans when co-ops in nine states collapsed and these victims deserve clear and honest answers from the bureaucrats who oversaw the mess," the junior senator from Nebraska claimed in a public statement Monday.

"Until these families are given complete answers, the Senate should not confirm any HHS nominees," he continued. "This isn’t a partisan crusade—frankly, Republicans and Democrats from these nine states have an opportunity to stand together and demand answers for our constituents so that this kind of failure never happens again."

I will block consideration & confirmation of every HHS nominee until families who lost their co-op insurance plans get straight answers. — Senator Ben Sasse (@SenSasse) October 19, 2015

According to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) website on the CO-OP Program, its purpose is to provide "low-interest loans to eligible private, nonprofit groups to help set up and maintain health plans" and "directed by their customers and designed to offer individuals and small businesses additional affordable, consumer-friendly and high-quality health insurance options" beginning on Jan. 1, 2014.

Sasse's criticism of the program centers on its failures of one-third of the total 23 co-ops created, the most recent in Colorado, Oregon, Tennessee, and Kentucky. The Nebraskan senator questioned HHS in May letter about the causes of the program's financial troubles and its overall solvency, requesting "greater detail and clarity surrounding the issues with CoOpporunity and the rest of the CO-OP Program."

Sasse has claimed that $2.4 billion in taxes have gone toward the program and that CMS has failed in properly addressing its financial problems and potentially having prevented them altogether.

Herein lies the problem for the National Coordinator's rise within HHS. The nomination process for DeSalvo began in May when President Barack Obama officially named the National Coordinator as his nominee for the Assistant Secretary. Since that time, the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions reported on her nomination and placed it on the Senate Executive Calendar pending testimony before members of Congress. Congress was expected to vote on DeSalvo's nomination prior to its August recess, but there it sits.

DeSalvo's potential departure last October coincided with significant personnel changes at ONC that saw ONC Chief Medical Officer and Deputy National Coordinator Jacob Reider resign from his post. Prior to Reider's resignation, both ONC Chief Nursing Officer (CNO) and Director of the Office of Clinical Quality and Safety (OCQS) Judy Murphy and Chief Science Officer Doug Fridsma, MD, PhD, called it quits at the federal agency.

DeSalvo began her role at head of ONC in January 2014, ten months prior to assuming the role of Acting Assistant Secretary.