Under health reform, insurers can no longer deny health coverage to people with pre-existing conditions, charge higher premiums based on a person's health status or gender or place annual or lifetime caps on covered benefits. The law, however, didn't close a significant health care gap – access to high-quality, long-term care for all Americans who need help with basic daily activities, such as walking, eating, bathing and getting out of bed.

It's a tough problem, but experts across the political spectrum have worked hard to find a solution – and three organizations recently issued complementary analyses and recommendations. One is the Long-Term Care Financing Collaborative, a diverse collection of experts, including my colleague Paul Van de Water. While the collaborative and other groups didn't offer fully developed legislative proposals, their efforts provide an informed guide to moving forward.

The shortcomings of the current system are well known, as Van de Water notes in his precis of the Long-Term Care Financing Collaborative report. Long-term care is expensive and insurance is limited. (Medicare doesn't cover long-term care.) The substantial out-of-pocket spending for prolonged care can impose financial hardship on families. An alternative – unpaid family care – carries its own economic and emotional costs. In the end, many people don't get as much or as good care as they need. Medicaid covers long-term care, but only after a person's savings are gone.



[READ: Obamacare Hasn't Fulfilled Promises to Small Businisses and Entrepreneurs]

The key to improving long-term care is recognizing that, as Van de Water says, the need for it is a risk, not a certainty. About half of all seniors will need a high level of assistance before they die – about a fifth for less than a year, but about 14 percent for more than five years, according to the report.

That's why the report recommends a new, universal, catastrophic long-term care insurance program, concluding, based on new research, that no voluntary insurance program will be broadly affordable. This group recognizes the importance of universal coverage to making such an insurance program viable. Universal coverage ensures that risks are spread broadly, keeping costs as low as possible by avoiding the consequences of "adverse selection" – in which the pool of people who would buy insurance voluntarily includes a larger share of people who will likely claim benefits than the population at large.

This catastrophic insurance alone would not cover all costs in all circumstances. The report recommends modernizing Medicaid financing and eligibility to address the needs of low- and moderate-income families before the catastrophic coverage kicks in and to cover costs beyond those covered by the standard benefit. In particular, it recommends that Medicaid offer home and community-based services on an equal footing with institutional care and that it modestly expand income and asset limits for long-term supports and services through an income-based sliding scale.



[READ: Mental Health Caregivers Are Essential and Endangered]