Reading today’s headlines, it would be easy to get the impression that the country is moving—even galloping—left. Same-sex marriage, something only the most progressive Democrats supported a decade ago, is now legal in every state. Marijuana legalization has gone from a punch line to a majority preference. Young people tilt left; one poll last year found that 42 percent of them prefer socialism to capitalism.

White, married Christians—the core of the Republican Party—are a shrinking percentage of the population, and the Democratic Party is considered to have a structural advantage in presidential elections. The party’s left-wing champions—Elizabeth Warren, Bernie Sanders and Bill de Blasio—are increasingly setting its agenda, with relative centrists like Hillary Clinton having to court the party’s left-wing voters.

Story Continued Below

In 2008, Barack Obama’s “yes we can” slogan had a special meaning for progressives. His campaign held out the hope that America could move past the Reagan Revolution that had pulled both the country and the Democrats to the right a generation before. Conservatism would be vanquished; the triangulation that marked Bill Clinton’s presidency was no longer necessary. Looking at the political landscape, one might get the impression that Obama succeeded—that he has indeed been the liberal Reagan, or rather the anti-Reagan.

It’s even possible to wave away some of the retorts that conservatives often make. Sure, Republicans are doing very well at the state level and in Congress. Arguably, the party is as strong as it has been since 1928. As a result, government spending has been falling and school choice has been spreading. But it can reasonably be argued that these conservative victories are due to geography and low turnout. Maybe the party’s strength in the states and Congress is a last stand, not a good omen.

The real defect in the theory that America is moving left is that the polling evidence does not back it up. The country might not like the GOP, but it is generally not abandoning conservative views.

In fact, the longer you look at polls on specific issues, the less you see a picture of a country moving left. Obviously, there are specific and well-known exceptions—the surging marijuana legalization movement is generally considered a liberal cause (even though National Review, the leading conservative magazine, has favored it for years). Ditto same-sex marriage.

But on many other issues, even as the country’s demographics are changing, our core beliefs are not. It’s instructive to compare today’s polls on a range of other issues with those from 1999-2000, the last time we were nearing the end of a two-term Democratic presidency. Look at issues through a conventional left-right prism, and you see a public that has either not changed its views or has even shifted in a more conservative direction.

The most spectacular rightward shift is on guns. An ABC/Washington Post poll from August 1999, a few months after the Columbine massacre, put those favoring stricter gun control 29 points ahead of those opposing it. The same poll in March 2013, a few months after the Newtown massacre, cut that margin to 7 points. In 1999, Pew asked whether it was more important to control guns or protect gun rights. The controllers won by 29 points. In 2014, the gun-rights side had a 6-point advantage.

More people approve than disapprove of labor unions, according to Gallup—but the gap has shrunk by more than half since 1999, and the percentage of Americans in unions has dropped. Gallup also shows that opinion on whether America is doing too much or too little to protect the environment has moved right over the past 15 years.

Given the “populist” hype surrounding Occupy Wall Street and Elizabeth Warren, one might think the financial crisis has made Americans eager to see business regulation. But the numbers are basically flat. Pew reports that in 1999, people who thought “government regulation is necessary to protect the public interest” slightly outnumbered those who thought it “usually does more harm than good.” In 2014, they were tied.

The numbers on defense spending are also flat. In 1999, according to Gallup, 28 percent of Americans thought we were spending too little on defense and 32 percent too much; now the same portion says too much and 34 percent say too little.



It has been a long time since Republicans have presented themselves as problem-solvers.



Asked whether the federal government does too much or too little, Americans generally lean conservative. Gallup found that 54 percent of Americans thought government did too much in August 2000, the same number as in its most recent poll. Americans think the government should combat inequality—but there has been no upward trend during this century in this view.

Abortion has been the leading social issue in the United States for decades, and Americans remain just as ambivalent as ever, according to Gallup. In 1999, 58 percent of Americans thought it should be available in few or no circumstances and 39 percent in most or all circumstances. In 2015 the numbers were 55 and 42 percent. But Americans were more likely to call themselves “pro-choice” than “pro-life” each time—by the same 6-point margin.

The absence of a pronounced shift to the left is remarkable considering our country’s demographic changes. Whites are more conservative than nonwhites on many of these questions, as are married people compared with singles, and regular churchgoers compared with the “unchurched.” All else equal, one would expect the demographic decline in core conservative groups to show up in polls. Yet conservative views have held their own and in some cases made gains.

These numbers leave open the question of why, if the public isn’t moving ideologically left, it has nonetheless tilted Democratic in presidential elections. Democrats have won the popular vote in five of the six races since the end of the Cold War.

There are any number of ways to explain these results. In 2008, the economy’s near-collapse was enough to win Obama some votes from people who favor gun rights, or think we have too many regulations. Democrats seem to have gotten better than Republicans at getting their less-engaged supporters to show up and vote. Maybe—according to two of the most popular theories on the right—Republicans have just nominated weak candidates or they are worse communicators than the Democrats.

If these explanations were the full story of Republicans’ problems in presidential elections, it would point toward a simple strategy to address them—the strategy outlined in the Republican National Committee’s “autopsy” report after the 2012 defeat: Move left on same-sex marriage, since the country has, and immigration, since Hispanic voters will not give a hearing to candidates they think hate them; improve the party’s ground game; create a long-term presence in minority communities; nominate candidates who don’t scare anybody; and count on the fact that the rest of the party’s message remains attractive.

Although much of this strategy makes sense, it is at least incomplete: What a lot of Republicans still don’t grasp is that a lot of voters—even some who are as receptive as they have ever been to conservative viewpoints on most issues—don’t think the conservative economic agenda has anything to offer them. These voters might think there’s too much regulation or dislike Obamacare. But they also worry about the cost of college or health care or child care, and they don’t think Republicans have ideas to help them. They think Republicans are more interested in helping Big Business and the wealthy. Fifty-three percent of voters in the 2012 exit polls thought Mitt Romney’s policies would “favor the rich.”

The association of Republicans with Big Business is long-standing, but they have succeeded in the past by making the case that their policies directly benefit most people. In the early 1980s, for example, Republicans said they would end gas lines, raise people’s take-home pay and make streets safer from crime. It has been a long time since Republicans have made a similar offer. It has been a long time since they have presented themselves as problem-solvers.

Republicans have established theirs as the party of conservatism, but not the party of conservative solutions. Building that reputation will be a tall order. But if their eventual presidential nominee wants to start, he will have two things on his side. The public has not turned to the left ideologically—and it remains unhappy with the status quo under Obama. An NBC/Wall Street Journal poll from late July finds 65 percent of Americans think the country’s “on the wrong track.” Sorry, liberals: Barack Obama’s no Ronald Reagan.

Ramesh Ponnuru is a National Review senior editor, Bloomberg View columnist and visiting fellow at the American Enterprise Institute.

This story tagged under: Polling

GOP

Marijuana Legalization