Leslie Lawrence, a caster assistant at Century Aluminum, searches molten aluminum for any possible solidified particles at the Berkeley County smelter.

Dee Davidson was on his honeymoon in Aruba about 22 years ago when he learned his job as a nuclear engineer at the former Charleston Naval Shipyard was being eliminated.

Later that same day, Davidson checked his telephone answering machine and learned he’d been hired at the Mount Holly aluminum smelter in Goose Creek.

“There was about eight hours of wondering what we were going to do, and then ... it’s the second-best wedding present I ever got,” Davidson said, adding that his wife was No. 1. “Truly when God closes one door, he’ll open another one.”

Davidson and about 600 of his co-workers are concerned that the doors at Century Aluminum’s smelter soon will close because of an impasse between the company and state-owned electric utility Santee Cooper over a new contract to provide power to the facility.

Century Aluminum, which bought out Alcoa’s majority stake last year to become sole owner of the Mount Holly site, said it will shut down the plant on Dec. 31 if a deal can’t be struck.

With the Christmas holiday approaching, the uncertainty weighs heavily on Mount Holly’s workers.

“I will cry like a baby if I lose my job,” said Leslie Lawrence, a caster assistant at the smelter who regularly works 60-hour shifts or more to help co-workers who need time off. “When I came out here 14 years ago, my kids were small, I was divorced and struggling and this job allowed me to send my kids to private school and get them the things that they needed.”

The smelter is among the highest-paying employers in Berkeley County, with average full-time wages of $92,634 per year, according to a University of South Carolina study.

It’s money that’s well-earned — the work is physically demanding, dangerous and extremely hot.

“It’s like you’re stirring (metal) in hell,” said A.J. Nelson, the plant’s safety coordinator. “This is not easy work, and you will never know that unless you experience it. It’s tough on your body,”

That money gets poured back into the economy, with Mount Holly accounting for a nearly $1 billion annual impact on the Charleston region, according to the USC study.

Anxiousness

Many of Century Aluminum’s workers say they realize how lucky they are to have such jobs.

“My kids are 6 and 7 years old,” Nelson said. “My wife hasn’t had to work since we got married and this job provides a good living for us. Things will change a lot for my kids if this place closes. With my wife probably having to go to work and me having to find another job, we’d have to put them in day care. And there’s a big difference between them being with mom and being with someone else.”

Stephen Howard, a process control technician, worries about the time he’ll lose with his 11-year-old son if Mount Holly shuts down and he has to find a job that doesn’t allow him to work a day shift.

“If I had to go on a second shift working somewhere, I might only see my son twice a week,” Howard said. “I was with him through Cub Scouts, Boy Scouts, taught him baseball, coached him in football. His dad might not even be involved in his life except to provide for the family if things were to change.”

Family and work relationships play a key role in Mount Holly employees’ lives, Davidson said.

Employees not only work together, but they worship together, live in the same neighborhoods, watch after each other’s kids and take care of those who are sick or have fallen on hard times. When a co-worker learned his wife had cancer, for example, Lawrence led a fundraising campaign that paid the medical bills and “let them have a joyful Christmas,” she said.

The plant’s employees are among the Charleston region’s biggest givers to food banks, Junior Achievement, Ronald McDonald House, Toys for Tots, Miracle League and the Basket Brigade that feeds low-income children. It’s one of a handful of area companies with 60-plus “leadership givers” to Trident United Way, meaning individuals who give at least $1,000 per year to the organization.

Lauren Cox, an environmental engineer at Mount Holly, said the Charleston region will miss that charitable giving if Mount Holly goes away. She hopes the smelter remains open so she can eventually show her 1-year-old son the importance of community, as practiced by her co-workers.

“Giving back is really supported here, and I want to show that to my son,” Cox said. “I would hope that I can continue my job and have that opportunity.”

With the prospect of a plant shutdown just weeks away, Mount Holly’s workers are finding it more difficult to keep their minds on their jobs. Rumors spread quickly, and the unknown future is a frequent topic of conversation.

“I try to always stress to the guys that when you’re on the clock, you do the best job you can do as safe as you can do it. When you’re home, you can worry about power deals and stuff like that,” said Joe Harnage, a casthouse worker since 1980. “But I can feel their anxiousness. You can see the concern in their faces every day.”

Seeking a lifeline

Some workers, like Nelson, say they don’t understand why Santee Cooper can’t accept Century Aluminum’s proposal to pay the utility about $60 million in transmission fees over the next five years so the smelter can buy cheaper power from out of state. Santee Cooper officials say they can’t accept the deal because it would force other ratepayers to subsidize the smelter.

Among the utility’s missions, Nelson said, is to be a leader in economic development.

“Why aren’t they helping?” he said. “They’re charging us an arm and a leg, and we are struggling to survive. It’s confusing.”

Santee Cooper spokeswoman Mollie Gore said the utility values the jobs and people at Mount Holly and wants to find a solution.

“We have a lot of employees who live in the same neighborhoods, have children playing on the same sports teams and go to the same churches,” Gore said. “If there was a way that we could come to terms that satisfy Century and keep our other customers whole, we would do that. We’re still looking.”

Some Mount Holly workers blame Gov. Nikki Haley, saying her administration has turned its back on existing industry to focus on luring new businesses that garner media coverage, such as the Volvo manufacturing plant that will be built in Berkeley County.

Lawrence said Haley has gone back on her word.

Following a speech at Mount Holly in 2011, the last time electricity prices threatened to shutter the plant, Haley said: “We are not going to let a government-owned utility company be the reason a company shuts down.”

Last month, however, Haley said she has done everything she can to help Mount Holly stay open.

“She could do more than what she’s done,” Lawrence said.

Nelson said he cheered when he heard Haley make her statement four years ago. “But now we’re writing these letters telling Gov. Haley we need your help and we get a letter saying I’ve done all I can do. I don’t understand.”

“We thought we had someone in our corner,” Howard said.

Davidson said his co-workers realize the economics of the aluminum industry are working against them, with cheap — Century Aluminum officials say illegal — exports from China depressing prices to pre-recession lows. He said he’s confident the government eventually will crack down on the exports to help save the U.S. aluminum industry. And he points to a deal last week in which New York will give nearly $70 million in power assistance and other funds to Alcoa’s Massena West smelter to keep the facility from closing as something South Carolina officials should consider.

“We just need a lifeline until they can address the flooding of the market from Chinese metal,” Davidson said. “We just need that lifeline to get us a future.”

The first of Mount Holly’s two potlines will be shut down Dec. 14 if no agreement is reached. Layoffs could begin soon after and the smelter would reduce operations through the end of the year.

As the Dec. 31 deadline nears, Davidson said he draws strength from that honeymoon day decades ago when one door closed and another opened.

“There’s a lot of faith,” he said. “God will provide. He might not provide at the level you are right now, but he will give you what you need.”

Reach David Wren at 843-937-5550 or on Twitter at @David_Wren_