Des Moines City Council member Christine Hensley (Photo: Special to the Register)

The most concerning aspect of the Des Moines City Council’s recent decision to extend the availability of a controversial tax abatement for multi-family housing developers has nothing to do with taxes.

Long before the vote took place at the Dec. 7 council meeting, Councilwoman Christine Hensley requested a legal opinion as to whether she could vote on the matter given the potential conflict of interest related to her job at Midwest Housing Equity Group, a syndication firm that purchases and reinvests tax credits for developers.

Apparently, the city’s legal staff gave Hensley an opinion that said there is no conflict of interest. We say “apparently” because the legal opinion is being kept confidential.

This didn’t sit well with Councilman Joe Gatto. The city attorney, Jeff Lester, pointed out that legal advice given to a council member is not something that is made public — at least not by the city’s legal staff. “It’s a confidential opinion, as we discussed earlier,” Lester told Gatto. “It will not be made public.”

But attorney-client privilege belongs to the client, not to the attorney, which means the client — in this case, the council — could choose to make the opinion public. At the meeting, Gatto asked Hensley if she would be willing to share the legal opinion with others.

“No,” Hensley replied, “I don’t have to.”

If that comment didn’t raise a red flag for citizens, the other comments Hensley made at the meeting probably did.

“I have to tell you,” she said, “in my 22 years on the Des Moines City Council, I have never seen such a difficult issue that has been before this council — and the doings that go on behind the scenes to really cause one or the other of us not to participate in the discussion. I’m not proud of it, and I think it’s very unfortunate. I’m sorry to say I wish I could share more with you as to what has gone on, but I am going to take the high road. I’m not going to recuse myself, and I’m going to vote to support this.”

After Henley spoke, the mayor and council voted 4-3 to extend the tax abatement program. The vote came less than two months after the council voted down a different, but similar, request from Hensley, which followed a year of discussion and a dozen public meetings on the issue.

As Hensley indicated, she has been on the council for almost a quarter century, and during that time she has no doubt witnessed all sorts of unsavory political machinations. And yet the “behind the scenes” maneuvering on this particular issue trumps all of that and, like the city’s legal opinion, is not going to be shared with the public. That's a problem.

So is the fact that Hensley and fellow council member Bob Mahaffey have been using private email accounts to conduct official city business. For years, the city’s website has included email links for all council members. In Hensley’s case, one of the links has routed people to her personal Gmail account. After The Des Moines Register asked the city for Hensley’s recent emails on the tax-abatement issue, pointing out that some would likely be on her personal computer, Lester said the newspaper would have to pay $194 for access.

Asked how the city would retrieve the emails from Hensley’s Gmail account, Lester said Hensley herself had already searched for, and turned over, the records she feels are relevant. Copies of just those emails would cost the newspaper $48, he said.

Whatever the merits of the tax abatement, it seems clear that Hensley should have recused herself from the vote. The city’s double-secret legal opinion speaks only to the requirements of the law, not to good public policy.

After all her years on the council, Hensley should know that the appearance of a conflict of interest can be every bit as damaging as an actual conflict. Given the fact that it was she who sought the legal opinion, she can’t possibly argue that no such appearance exists.

As for her emails, the city’s policy needs to change. The city should never have routed citizens to council members’ private email accounts, which aren’t set up to preserve communications on public business.

What’s more, the city shouldn’t be delegating the task of locating and disclosing emails to the individuals whose accounts are being searched. These people not only lack the technical expertise to conduct document searches, but they also have a strong motive to withhold damaging emails they have sent or received.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1YmlDWL