A race car going 200 mph can cover about 293 feet in one second. Martin Truex Jr. bolted to the front of the pack after the final turn Sunday in the season-opening Daytona 500 — he took the lead 10 feet from the finish line. But the 0.034 of a second remaining to cover those 10 feet, at full speed, took an eternity.

Denny Hamlin inched past Truex door to door at the checkered flag. In a photo finish — the closest ending in the 58-year history of the Daytona 500 — Hamlin edged Truex by about 4 inches to win the “Super Bowl of stock car racing.”

Hamlin’s extraordinary margin of victory over Truex: 0.010 of a second.

“I don’t know where that came from,” Hamlin said from the track after winning the Daytona 500 for the first time. “I don’t know what happened. I can’t even figure out what I did.”

Hamlin led a race-high 34 laps. Truex, driving for Denver-based Furniture Row Racing, led once. But for a flash, it seemed to be the perfect time.

Truex started the final lap running second, drafting behind Matt Kenseth in the lead. The top four broke away from the pack. And when Hamlin made a move to the outside from the fourth spot, Kenseth rose to block him. That gave Truex a line to the inside. He took the lead. Kenseth nearly spun out of control as Hamlin went by. But Hamlin got a bump forward from a teammate, Kevin Harvick.

Then through the final turn, Hamlin and Truex bumped twice, fighting for position.

“He just side-drafted me,” said Truex, who posted his first top-five finish in the Daytona 500. “I probably should have rode him up a little more. He got me by a couple feet.”

The previous closest finish in Daytona 500 history was Kevin Harvick’s 0.020 margin of victory over Mark Martin in 2007 — twice as long as Hamlin’s victory over Truex.

Sunday, the finish was jammed. Kyle Busch, the defending Sprint Cup champion, placed third. Harvick finished fourth — just 0.15 of a second behind.

Kenseth, who led to start the final lap, fell to 14th. It was that crowded.

“They don’t get much more crushing than that,” Kenseth said.

Truex’s runner-up effort was startling. After crashing on the final lap in qualifying Thursday at Daytona International Speedway in Daytona Beach, Fla., he was forced to a back-of-the-pack starting position at 28th. And his ride was wrecked — Truex used FRR’s backup car for the Denver-based 78.

Truex dropped to 31st at the start Sunday. But even in a substitute car, he found some of the fastest speeds in the field.

“It hurts a little bit,” Truex said. “We were in the right spot. We made the right moves. You can second-guess all day long; the only thing I could have done different was be more aggressive to the line.”

FRR, which switched its manufacturer from Chevrolet to Toyota and changed its technical alliance from Richard Childress Racing to Joe Gibbs Racing, entered the season opener with a trunk full of question marks.

Truex finished last year in fourth place in the season standings — a shocking rise for FRR, the only Sprint Cup team based outside North Carolina. Truex’s rise started with seven consecutive top-10 finishes in 2015.

Three of the top-five finishers Sunday at Daytona race for Joe Gibbs, and Truex acts as a kind of extra teammate. A second-place finish Sunday in NASCAR’s season-opening race, the biggest race of the year, seems to bode well for Truex and Denver’s 78. Even if he came up a split second short of a huge win.

“I felt like I had enough momentum to keep him behind me,” Truex said of Hamlin. “And I did until those last couple feet. He just shot out front in those last couple inches.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or @nickgroke

The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Race to a photo finish

Martin Truex Jr., in the Denver-based Furniture Row Racing 78 car, finished mere inches behind winner Denny Hamlin at Sunday’s NASCAR season-opening Daytona 500. It was the closest finish in the history of the race. What happened on the final lap:

• Truex started the final lap in second place, drafting right on Matt Kenseth’s bumper.

• Denny Hamlin, from the fourth spot, made a move to the outside, trying to reach the front. Kenseth drifted high to block him.

• Truex zipped on the inside line into the lead. Kenseth nearly spun out of control as Hamlin went by. But Hamlin got a bump forward from Kevin Harvick.

• After the final turn, Truex and Hamlin bumped each other twice side-by-side in a drag race. Hamlin won by 0.010 seconds.

The Top Five (start position in parentheses)

1. (11) Denny Hamlin, Toyota, 95 laps led

2. (28) Martin Truex Jr., Toyota, 2 lap led

3. (4) Kyle Busch, Toyota, 19 laps led

4. (9) Kevin Harvick, Chevrolet, never led

5. (10) Carl Edwards, Toyota, never led