When Pope Francis arrives in Washington this month, he'll be greeted enthusiastically. Among American Catholics, the pope is remarkably popular — 87 percent have a favorable opinion of him — and he's the U.S. church's best chance of overcoming a bad case of spiritual anemia.

But excitement alone cannot heal one of the deepest rifts in Catholic life, not only among American Catholics but worldwide. It has to do with sexuality, although not the priest abuse scandals that have quite properly received attention in recent years. Nothing has divided the church more than its prohibition against contraception, even among married couples.

Approximately 80 percent of U.S. Catholics, including the thoroughly devout, disagree with that stance (support for changing the ruling is nearly as high around the world). And the vast majority ignore the teaching altogether — one study suggests that 68 percent of sexually active American Catholic women have used birth control, sterilization or IUDs.

Perhaps the fact that so many Catholics shrug off the condemnation tempts church leaders to imagine the question is moot. Aren't there bigger things to think about?

Indeed, while Pope Francis has again and again called for a more responsive church, he has shown little interest in revisiting its teaching on contraception. Although he has derided the notion that being Catholic means reproducing "like rabbits," he has praised Humanae Vitae, the 1968 encyclical that reaffirmed the church's birth-control prohibition. At last October's Extraordinary Synod on the Family, bishops grabbed headlines by debating controversial topics such as admitting remarried Catholics to Communion and acknowledging the upsides of same-sex relationships. But the discussion of contraception was perfunctory. The bishops simply called on the church to do a better job of propagating "the message of the encyclical Humanae Vitae." In other words, the widespread rejection of the birth-control ban is simply a messaging problem.

President Obama will greet the pope President Obama will greet the pope during his visit to D.C. next week. Sept. 14, 2015. (WGN-TV) President Obama will greet the pope during his visit to D.C. next week. Sept. 14, 2015. (WGN-TV) See more videos

That's not true. The church's unwillingness to grapple with a deep and highly visible gap between official teaching and actual practice undermines Catholic vigor and unity at every level. It encourages Catholics to disregard all manner of other teachings, including those on marriage and abortion. If the church wants to restore its moral authority, it must address this gnawing question.

The church's sexual norms were woven out of the Old Testament, apostolic injunctions and classical doctrines such as Stoicism, which held passion suspect and condemned sexual acts not directed toward procreation as "against nature."

But unlike, say, adultery or fornication or defining the conditions of a valid marriage, contraception was a relatively marginal issue until the 20th century, when reliable methods replaced a brew of folk remedies. Before that, birth control was associated with prostitution or illicit sex and decried by virtually all Christian churches. When Anglican churches broke that pattern in 1930, followed by many Protestant denominations, Pope Pius XI reacted with a stern encyclical reasserting the condemnation. Opposition to birth control soon became a kind of identifying mark of Catholicism.

By mid-century, though, resolve had begun to weaken. The Second Vatican Council had transformed Catholicism, and theologians were stressing the emotional, bonding aspects of marital sex along with the procreative. The emergence of the birth-control pill in 1960 led some theologians to argue that whatever general principles of sexual morality one might draw from human "nature," they did not extend to specific judgments about particular methods and uses of birth control. The faithful seemed to agree — by 1965, 61 percent of U.S. Catholics thought the church would eventually allow contraception.

That was also the thinking of the high-powered Pontifical Commission for the Study of Population, Family and Births, established by Pope John XXIII in 1963 and renewed in 1964 by his successor Pope Paul VI. By late June 1966, an overwhelming majority of the commission — made up mostly of cardinals and bishops, along with theologians, scientists and lay people — concluded that the church should no longer condemn contraception as "intrinsically evil." The commission's recommendation was eventually leaked to the press.

The pope stayed silent, though, for two years. Meanwhile, as scholar Robert McClory wrote, "married couples, unwilling to put their marital lives on hold, made practical decisions on the morality of contraception, more and more often with the approval of priests and bishops."

Finally, in July 1968, Pope Paul VI rejected his commission's recommendation. The world's bishops fell in line but with noticeable hemming and hawing. A public protest, signed by more than 600 prominent Catholic scholars, argued that spouses could responsibly decide "according to their conscience" to use artificial birth control.

Ironically, a handful of conservative prelates and theologians had warned Pope Paul VI that accepting the commission's recommendation would severely damage papal authority which is exactly what happened when he rejected it.

Sociologists, theologians, pastors and bishops have dated a sapping of Catholic confidence in other church teachings about sexuality, and indeed in church authority in general, to the 1968 encyclical. Some researchers have linked frustration over the measure with declines in church attendance, financial contributions and parental support for sons to enter the priesthood. The prominent Catholic theologian Bernard Haring went so far as to write that "no papal teaching document has ever caused such an earthquake in the Church as the encyclical 'Humanae Vitae.'"

Many Catholics now disregard the church's teachings on premarital sex, same-sex unions and divorce. According to a recent Pew poll, 70 percent of American Catholics believe it's acceptable for same-sex couples to live together; 86 percent say premarital cohabitation among heterosexual couples is fine. Fewer than half say homosexual behavior or remarriage without annulment is a sin.

Meanwhile, an outspoken conservative minority insists on making opposition to contraception a litmus test for separating "faithful Catholics" from "dissenters," and the past two popes seemed to count it far more than many other qualifications in naming new bishops. In short, the contraception issue has injected paralyzing doses of tension, suspicion, dissemblance and dysfunction throughout Catholic life.