SPRINGFIELD - Emergency rooms seeing more patients with mental illnesses, hospitals losing money treating such patients and a shortage of outpatient care for such patients upon discharge.

Daniel P. Moen, president and chief executive of the Sisters of Providence Health System, knows the challenges involved with behavioral health care here in the commonwealth. This is why he is calling Attorney General Maura Healey's recent release on the delivery of mental health and substance abuse care in the state a "watershed report."

"This is a watershed report because it summarizes the most critical issues of behavioral health. I feel it has at least gotten the attention of the public and of elected officials about the seriousness of the problem we are talking about," Moen said.

"It lays out the issues in a very accurate way, and is something we can work with going forward to solve the problems in the system."

The report highlights a growing reliance on community hospitals for behavioral health care, as well as a disturbing lack of coordination and reimbursement for such care. Things, Moen says, "all hospitals have been dealing with them for a long time."

Moen gets calls "regularly from people I know in the community who are having problems with a family member in need of behavioral health care and don't know where to turn for help."

Moen said a "big part of the mission of the SPHS" has been to "make sure we find a way to keep our services going for these patients." The system's Mercy Care network includes Mercy Medical Center, an acute care facility, and Providence Behavorial Health Hospital in Holyoke, whose services include in-patient psychiatric care for adults of all ages, as well as children.

"So many people are getting stuck in ER's across the state. That is the issue. They don't know where to turn. The ER is the provider of last resort. We take everybody, including behavioral health patients. Placing those patients is a real challenge, even for us with Providence," Moen said.

"Sometimes there are no beds available. The patient stays longer than they should in the ER. This is what other hospitals across the state are experiencing. It is difficult and extremely challenging."

The 104-bed Providence, is the only dedicated psychiatric hospital in the region, and is the largest single site provider of inpatient behavioral health care for adults in the commonwealth.

Moen says the hospital has to turn away "multiple referrals a day" for 30 of those beds in its detoxification unit for adults with addictive disorders, because of the unit being full, a scenario he says exists across the state, and patients diagnosed with behavioral health issues in Mercy's ER may wait more than a day to be discharged to in-patient care at Providence.

"Low reimbursement rates have caused access problems. Many hospitals have given up behavioral health services, and community based facilities have closed or limited services. These are the underpinning of some of the problems we now experience," Moen said.

He was referring to both state cut backs in funding over several years, as well as a patchwork of who pays for what behavioral health services today.

"It is well known that Medicaid does not pay hospitals the full cost to render such care in a acute care or behavioral health medical facility," said Moen, who expects less funding in the next cycle for Disproportionate Share Hospitals, a program administered by the state that compensates hospitals with a large percentage of Medicaid patients.

He added, "The payer mix issue tends to exacerbate the difficulty with services."

"Many of the managed care plans, not only here but around the country, subcontract behavioral health services to other organizations. They pay other organizations to oversee the care and the payment for care for those services," Moen said.

"In my mind, this creates a gap between behavioral health care and acute care services. The behavioral health payment center is separated from acute care, and care is rendered in silos. This puts pressure financially on providers, and makes it difficult for patients."

The nationwide rise in heroin addiction, tied to the abuse of opioid prescription medications, has made more communities aware of the lack of treatment services for both mental illness and substance abuse, Moen noted. He called it the "one good thing" to come from the addiction crisis.

"People are understanding the problems that are present in behavioral health, in this state and across the country, with the opioid and heroin epidemics, and associated deaths," Moen said.

"This has been a wake up call to payers, providers, government officials and the general public. It has crystallized the problems in the health system in terms of access, payment, continuum of care. It has brought it out the open to discuss as a real priority."

Moen said this "carved out" payment structure means the link is "not as strong as it should be" between what care someone receives in an in-patient setting for a chronic mental issue with the care received for a physical medical condition given in a primary care setting.

"We are actively looking for ways to improve the flow of information to include primary care physicians," said Moen.

"We are looking at a behavioral health provider embedded in the primary care model now. We are also thinking about primary care services potentially on site at Providence. A lot of patients who comes to us with behavioral health issues do not have primary care physicians," Moen said.

He added this problem is made worse because of a shortage of primary care physicians, as well as of psychiatrists and psychologists.

"There are long waits lists for those kinds of services. There are long waits for patients being discharged from places, like Providence, to be seen as outpatients," Moen said.

Moen said the SPHS has contracted with Springfield-based Behavioral Health Network to "make sure the transition between the services at Providence and outpatient are well coordinated and there is a comprehensive plan in place for the patient when they are discharged and get those services on a timely basis."

"If they don't have the right out-patient support, or another level of care, they they will bounce back to the in-patient setting," Moen said. The network also operates 24-hour crises services.

One idea, raised initially by Dr. Robert Roose, chief medical officer of addiction services for SPHS, is for a behavioral health access information center in Western Massachusetts.

"One point of contact that could point a family or patient in the right direction to various providers of care," said of the idea Roose raised in terms of addressing the state's prescription drug abuse crisis.

Moen said SPHS is "now bringing the conception" of what he called a patient care hub to Providence. He compared it to a "traffic control system for every patient" that is already operational at Mercy. It is overseen by a clinical care coordinator who ensures the system documents every aspect of a patient's care plan.

"This has been a tremendous success at Mercy," Moen said. "It helps with the transition of care across the system. It tells when a bed is available for a patient, what test is scheduled, who is ready for discharge. It results in better care, and fewer patients in the ER waiting for medical beds."

The Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008, as well as the Affordable Care Act, mandate treatment for behavioral health be covered by insurance. However, proof that there is not parity with medical care coverage, Moen said, is the long waits in hospital ER's for patients needing to be discharged for inpatient care behavioral health care to hospitals that can provide it, or for related outpatient care.

"One of the most public and visible parts of the lack of parity is the hours and hours, or even day, that a behavioral health patient can spend in an ER waiting for placement. This never happens for a physical medicine patient. They may be held for a period of time, but nothing like the behavioral health patient experiences," Moen said.

Moen added better access to behavioral health care, more and better coordinated care and how it is paid for are problems that will not be solved overnight."

"A lot of things have to change," Moen said.

"The underpinnings are what resources are available, and what have been under-resourced for a period of time. What are the additional dollars going forward and using those dollars effectively and efficiently. We need to have this fully under public discussion and the broad spectrum of community and state leaders addressing the situation. We are happy to be part of this."