One of the key sticking points in the industry is the controversial in-play betting system. Photo: Phil Carrick

Social Services Minister Scott Morrison is open to updating online betting laws to keep pace with technology changes but warns wagering operators he will not approve any change that compromises Australia's sports and racing industries or leads to new risks for problem gamblers.

The federal government on Monday issued the terms of reference for a review into the Interactive Gambling Act, which will look at how to handle surging demand for new methods of live sports betting along with the regulation and taxation of illegal overseas operators.

The potential for in-play wagering to compromise our national sports and racing industry can't be underestimated. Scott Morrison

Former NSW premier Barry O'Farrell will conduct the review with final recommendations due to be submitted to Mr Morrison and Communications Minister Malcolm Turnbull by December 18.

Social Services Minister Scott Morrison is concerned by an Australian Institute of Family Studies report showing problem gambling rates are three times higher among online gamblers. Photo: Daniel Munoz

Mr Morrison said the 2001 act clearly needed an overhaul but maintains he will approach the review with an open mind.

Advertisement

"The potential for in-play wagering to compromise our national sports and racing industry can't be underestimated," Mr Morrison said. "But then to what extent are you able to prevent people engaging in wagering activity? There are technological issues there which need to be considered."

The issue of problem gamblers falls under the minister's social services portfolio.

Mr Morrison said he was concerned by an Australian Institute of Family Studies report showing problem gambling rates are three times higher among online gamblers than traditional betting methods.

One of the key sticking points in the industry is the controversial in-play betting system, promoted by international players William Hill and Bet 365, which allows punters to bet live on sports via their smartphones.

Punters in Australia can bet on the outcome of an event after it has begun but only via the telephone or in person.

However, companies like William Hill claim that as long as punters keep their smartphone microphone on, it still adheres to the rule that live bets during sporting events are made by phone only.

British rival Ladbrokes withdrew its in-play betting service in July after complaints to the Australian Communications and Media Authority; and William Hill, headed locally by Tom Waterhouse, may face an investigation by the Australian Federal Police following a similar referral.

The review will seek to estimate the size and economic impacts of illegal overseas wagering; international regulatory regimes that could provide a template for Australia; new technological and legislative options to mitigate the costs of illegal wagering; and whether consumer protections could be strengthened.

Mr Morrison said overseas wagering generated $1 billion in illegal revenue each year and more must be done to address enforcement in the sector, noting other countries have tapped financial and telecommunication legislation to help act on the issue.

"Australian-headquartered organisations are attempting to avoid legal obligations by basing their operations in unregulated international regions such as the Pacific and Asia," notes the terms of reference. "By avoiding the proper checks and balances and evading the fees, this arrangement has the potential to undermine the integrity of racing and sports in Australia."

Last week Independent senator Nick Xenophon urged the federal government to ban gambling advertising during live sport broadcasts.

He is also calling to restrict a controversial online betting loophole as part of an impending review of the IGA.

Mr Xenophon said he was drafting legislation to be introduced in October as part of a reform package.