When Republican Mark Kirk ran for the U.S. Senate in 2010, he campaigned as a politician more of his own making than of his party's. Where some in the GOP veered right, Kirk stuck to his canon as a social moderate, fiscal conservative and national security hawk.

Kirk's brand of centrist Republicanism worked well for the five terms he served in the U.S. House representing the decidedly purple 10th Congressional District north of Chicago. We endorsed Kirk in his first Senate run because of the experience he brought to the table, and the fact that he was no party robot. A glance at current headlines is enough to know Kirk hasn't changed course: He is one of the few Senate Republicans willing to give a hearing to whomever President Barack Obama nominates to fill the vacant Supreme Court seat.

Kirk is running in the March 15 Illinois primary against challenger, James Marter, to retain his seat. In November, the winner of this race faces the winner of a three-way Democratic primary contest.

As we've noted previously, you don't have to agree with every one of Kirk's positions to appreciate his decision to call the issues as he sees them. It's a legitimate philosophy and practical, too, if he wants to survive in a state where five of the last seven elected senators were Democrats.

Kirk has joined the Republicans opposing Obamacare, but he's voted with Democrats on other issues, such as protecting funding for Planned Parenthood. In December he was the only member of his party to support a failed proposal that would have stopped people on the government's anti-terrorist "no fly" list from buying guns.

A former intelligence officer in the U.S. Navy Reserve, Kirk has strong opinions about how to cope with the risks America faces from rival nations and terror groups. We like him in that role, even when we disagree. He was outspoken in his opposition to the Iran nuclear deal. We were skeptical, too, but ultimately supported the agreement. In the fight against Islamic State, Kirk pushed for a pause in the Syrian refugee program until officials certify the ability to stop terrorists from infiltrating the U.S. We agreed with him.

Our assessment of Kirk's performance in the Senate comes with an important proviso: Because of a health crisis, he missed significant time on the job, and we are still waiting to judge for ourselves the full state of his recovery.

In January 2012, Kirk suffered a serious stroke. He spent nearly a year in rehabilitation — relearning to walk and talk — and returned to the Senate on Jan. 3, 2013, slowly climbing the Capitol steps. It was a triumphant moment.

But since then several of Kirk's public appearances have been marred by embarrassing slips of the tongue — gaffes that made us wonder if there was a connection to the stroke's effects. To keep his seat, he'll need to assure the people of Illinois that he's still up to the job.

Kirk's opponent is Oswego business owner James Marter, a newcomer to politics who ran unsuccessfully last year as a write-in candidate for the Oswego Village Board.

Marter, an information technology consultant, tells us he believes in limited, constitutional government. He thinks Kirk's voting record is out of touch with Illinois values, citing the senator's votes in support of Planned Parenthood and negative rating from the National Rifle Association as examples. With no other Republicans challenging Kirk, Marter told us, he decided to step up. "I looked up the ladder and saw a need for someone who would vote for our party and stand for our principles."

In terms of Washington spending and the nation's $19 trillion debt load, Marter says he advocates modernizing a Social Security system sliding toward insolvency. Over time, he says, taxpayers should have the option of investing privately for retirement: "Let people choose."

Marter lacks experience in national and global affairs. But he's a thoughtful citizen-candidate running for the right reasons. We hope he'll stay engaged in politics. Kirk is endorsed.

You'll find the candidates' answers to our survey, and all of our endorsements to date, here: elections.chicagotribune.com/candidates/.

Follow the Editorial Board on Twitter @Trib_Ed_Board and on Facebook.