Tweet It: New Aug/Sept issue of @AARP The Magazine

chats w/ @ViolaDavis; Life on Medication; Sex After 50; The Aging Human Body & more!

www.aarp.org/magazine/

Viola Davis on Growing up Poor: As a child, the star of ABC’s hit series How to Get Away with Murder and two-time Oscar nominee Viola Davis dreamed of nothing more than to own a house of her own and overcome poverty. In a revealing interview with AARP The Magazine, Davis shares her thoughts on the crippling effects that growing up hungry have on youth today and reflects on her early years, when she faced the same adversity. Using her voice to affect change, Davis also puts the spotlight on her work with Hunger Is, a new nonprofit focused on ending childhood hunger. (Page 36)

Don’t Let Fear Guide Your Treatment Decisions: In a given year, about one in four American adults — approximately 61.5 million people — experience mental illness. With more than 260 million antidepressant prescriptions filled each year, the problem is staggering. In this issue of AARP The Magazine, AARP Entertainment Director Meg Grant shares her personal struggles with depression and the same uncertainties many Americans face when considering taking an antidepressant. (Page 51)

Keeping Things Hot and Heavy After 50: Studies show that sexual behavior is highly correlated to overall happiness and health. However, as we age, new challenges — both mental and physical — may cause us to rewrite the sexual playbook. In this issue of AARP The Magazine, AARP Dating and Relationships Expert Dr. Pepper Schwartz reveals how to keep the spark from fizzling out in the bedroom. (Page 46)

The Ground Rules of Giving: We all want to help when it comes to a struggling coworker or family member in need, but there are several factors to consider before pulling out the checkbook. The August/September issue of AARP The Magazine outlines six common lending scenarios to help you assess the situation and avoid being a sucker. Three experts weigh in with advice and unique perspectives on how to protect yourself when giving money to others. (Page 40)

Cheaper Than Ever to Travel to Europe: The August/September issue of AARP The Magazine takes a look at exquisite European travel destinations that are now more affordable than ever with the current low Euro exchange rate. From Barcelona to Berlin to Paris and beyond, the time is now to take advantage of exploring some of the Continent’s most magnificent architecture and amazing historical wonders. (Page 56)

Burnt Out? Tips to Recharge and Find Joy in Your Job: One of the leading causes of workplace dissatisfaction for older workers is burnout, which leads to earlier-than-expected retirements and subsequent financial challenges. With more people planning to work well past their 50s, the August/September issue of AARP The Magazine offers eight tips from AARP Jobs Expert Kerry Hannon to help employees learn how to reengage and love their current jobs once again. (Page 28)

Solving Unpleasant Age-Related Conditions: As we age, our bodies begin to react differently than they once did when we were younger. From increasing bathroom usage to avoid the “laughter leak” to dealing with the sudden appearance of dark spots on our skin, this issue of AARP The Magazine provides advice on how to combat ten age-related concerns of the human body. (Page 16)

The 80th Anniversary of Our 9-Digit Identity: Signed into law in 1935, the Social Security Act became one of Franklin D. Roosevelt’s greatest legislative accomplishments. Beyond linking us to retirement benefits, the 9-digit Social Security number serves as an identification number and insurance plan for all Americans. This issue of AARP The Magazine honors the 80th anniversary of the Act, taking a look back at the history and what Social Security means today. (Page 34)

Sam Elliott Dishes the Dirt on Grandma: In this issue of AARP The Magazine, Sam Elliott, best known for his roles in Justified and The Big Lebowski, discusses meeting his wife, Hollywood’s forgotten film genre, the tough choice to take on his new role in Grandma, and a pair of musicians that make him cry! (Page 14)

EXCLUSIVE: Check out an exclusive behind the scenes video of ‘Desperado’ actor Danny Trejo as he shares his story of transitioning from a life of substance abuse and violence to becoming a drug counselor, Hollywood actor and mentor for young people. This exclusive video content can be found at http://bit.ly/1JAFlKU or through AARP.org’s downloadable tablet app at www.aarp.org/mobile.

# # #

About AARP The Magazine

With more than 35.2 million readers, AARP The Magazine is the world's largest circulation magazine and the definitive lifestyle publication for Americans 50+. AARP The Magazine delivers comprehensive content through health and fitness features, financial guidance, consumer interest information and tips, celebrity interviews, and book and movie reviews. AARP The Magazine was founded in 1958 and is published bimonthly in print and continually online. Learn more at aarpmagazine.org .