<p>CONTRIBUTED PHOTO</p><p>Nurse Jeanine Ishak (left), of Camarillo, and her family recently returned from a two-week medical mission to Ethiopia with the Christian charity Samaritan’s Purse.</p>

SHARE CONTRIBUTED PHOTO Brandon Ishak (far back center), of Camarillo, and his family recently returned from a two-week medical mission to Ethiopia with the Christian charity Samaritan’s Purse. CONTRIBUTED PHOTO Orthopedic surgeon Andre Ishak and son, Brandon, recently returned from a two-week medical mission to Ethiopia. CONTRIBUTED PHOTO The Ishak family of Camarillo recently returned from a two-week medical mission to Ethiopia with the Christian charity Samaritan’s Purse.

By Rachel Mcgrath

Members of a Camarillo family said they hope they made a difference in the lives of those they encountered and treated during a two-week medical mission to Ethiopia with the Christian charity Samaritan's Purse.

Orthopedic surgeon Andre Ishak; his wife, Jeanine, a nurse practitioner; and their son, Brandon, 15, traveled to Soddo Christian General Hospital in the southern region of the African nation in June where Andre performed surgeries and Jeanine helped out in the intensive-care unit.

Samaritan's Purse has received recent media attention since two missionaries working for the charity in Liberia contracted the Ebola virus.

"Samaritan's Purse is the Christian equivalent of Doctors Without Borders. They are very well respected, competent and have a very good reputation around the world," Andre said.

Soddo Christian General Hospital, which serves about 2.5 million people, is a regional hub for orthopedic surgery and was in need of a hand surgeon, which is why the family decided to apply to go there.

The family members, who attend Camarillo Christian Church, paid their own way and took with them 700 pounds of medical and humanitarian supplies in 10 checked bags.

"The hospital was kind of what you would expect: not up to Western cleanliness standards and crowded, and the electricity would go out all the time so they had to have a generator that would kick in," Andre said. "But then they had some other things that were surprisingly modern.

"The surgeon that's there full-time, Dr. Duane Anderson, is a very accomplished surgeon and they teach residents there that come from the national teaching hospital," he said. "Every resident had a tablet and had all the textbooks in digital form and they were constantly studying and reading."

Jeanine said the need is so great that surgeons could operate nonstop around the clock for months and only make a small inroad into the numbers of adults and children needing treatment.

"You had people all around the hospital who are waiting for surgeries and care and will sleep there for days just waiting to be seen," Jeanine said. "They will stay there as long as it takes, and it's pretty amazing to see that.

"One man whose son needed an amputation had sold a cow, one of the only animals he owned, to bring his son to the hospital to try and get his leg fixed," she said.

"I worked in the ICU while we were there. There was no ventilator that worked and we had to hand bag a child for eight hours straight."

The child died, she said.

Andre performed hip, ankle and leg surgery and treated chronic wrist traumas and tendon lacerations during his mission. Brandon helped his dad in the operating room as well as by visiting with hospital patients and their families.

Brandon, who is going into his sophomore year at Oaks Christian School in Westlake Village, said spending two weeks in Ethiopia was an eye-opening experience.

"Just realizing how lucky I am, like you've won this birth lottery basically," Brandon said.

"The first person I saw was this guy on crutches, and he didn't have legs so he was kind of balancing on a wooden one and a crutch and it was kind of tough to see that. It's changed me in the sense that I definitely would want to go back there, to go back to a place like that, because what we did is ?this much' compared to what we can do."

Jeanine said: "Although it was a drop in a bucket, it makes a difference for those people. Going to Ethiopia just makes you realize how truly blessed we are living in this country. Very few people live like we do when you look at the world as a whole and it was a privilege to give back to the Ethiopian people."