WASHINGTON — Chronic disease, much of it stemming from lifestyle choices, accounts for more than three-fourths of the money spent on health care. But precious little is spent to prevent it.

Kenneth Thorpe is chairman of the Washington-based Partnership to Fight Chronic Disease. He doesn’t give much hope to the idea of bringing down the cost of health care unless prevention gets a much bigger role.

“If we can’t find ways to keep people out of the hospital, to keep people on medication adherence and managing their blood sugar levels, if we don’t do that, none of the things I hear being discussed to control the cost of care are going to work,” he said.

Ninety-seven percent of the nation’s $3.1 trillion medical bill goes toward treating the sick. Three percent is spent on prevention.

Thorpe, who is also chair of the health policy and management department at the Rollins School of Public Health of Emory University in Atlanta, is particularly vexed with the problem of Type 2 diabetes. (Young children without the ability to produce insulin have Type 1 diabetes.)

Type 2 diabetes is usually a consequence of obesity. Unchecked, it can lead to blindness, amputations, kidney failure and death.

About 700,000 people in North Texas have Type 2 diabetes, including a fourth of the seniors on Medicare.

Nationwide, half of the nation’s seniors are pre-diabetic — that is, their blood sugar is high though not yet at diabetic levels. This condition is preventable and reversible. There’s a well-established regimen of exercise and diet, developed by the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, taught by the YMCA.

“The CDC worked closely with the YMCA to put this in place. The last part of the puzzle is we’ve got to find a way for it to be reimbursed,” Thorpe said. “It’s $350 for an 18-week course. Medicare doesn’t cover it. But it will pay for the amputations.”

The only preventive measure for diabetes covered by Medicare is bariatric, or weight-loss, surgery, Thorpe said.

Private insurance policies do little better at prevention. Under the Affordable Care Act, screening and counseling for obesity has to be covered by most private insurance plans. Some employer-sponsored health plans go further with wellness programs similar to the YMCA’s Diabetes Prevention Program.

There’s a real reluctance among companies, however, to wade into the welter of weight-loss diets, fads and arguments over which one offers the best results.

Yet obesity is the public health crisis of our time. In the mid-1980s, chronic disease accounted for 66 percent of health care spending. Thorpe now pegs that at 84 percent, and other estimates are as high as 86 percent.

In the same period, national obesity rates more than doubled.

Medications to treat obesity, a condition now regarded as a disease by the American Medical Association, are few. More studies so far show community-based nutrition and exercise programs are much more effective.

But these cost money. Businesses, hospitals and foundations in Fort Worth are spending $45 million to $50 million over the next five years to support a communitywide program called the Blue Zones Project that aims to “make the healthy choice the easy choice.”

Thorpe is hoping Congress will expand Medicare’s obesity and diabetes prevention efforts to avoid the much more expensive alternatives.

Follow Jim Landers on Twitter at @landersjim