Extended-stay hotel sets sights on Cranberry

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

By next summer, Cranberry is likely to have a new 122-room hotel.

Woodspring Suites, a Wichita-based company, says it is attracted to Cranberry because of the large number of people in the natural gas industry who are working in Butler County temporarily from out of state, said Jack Knowles, senior entitlement manager for the company.

“That is one of the many types of clients we expect to have,” Knowles said.

The extended-stay Woodspring Suites would sit at Wisconsin Avenue and Route 19, behind a Rite Aid store. It would bring the number of hotels in the township to 10 — several other hotels in Marshall are only blocks away from Cranberry.

“We think it a great use of this property. There is demand for this type of hotel in the area,” said Ron Henshaw, Cranberry's director of community development.

The township's planning commission is reviewing the developer's plans, which could go before Cranberry supervisors as soon as Aug. 23, Henshaw said.

Formerly known as Value Place hotels, Woodspring Suites has 196 hotels in 32 states.

The company expects to start work on 30 additional properties by the end of this year, according to its website. Expansion plans through 2017 for the company include the addition of corporate and franchised properties in markets such as Los Angeles, Chicago, Philadelphia, Boston, Seattle, Miami and Minneapolis.

Cranberry would be the hotel chain's second location in Pennsylvania and first in Western Pennsylvania. It will be corporate-owned. The chain's only other Pennsylvania hotel is in Allentown, Lehigh County.

Construction of the hotel is expected to cost between $6 million and $8 million, Knowles said.

The hotel will offer only a few rooms for nightly stays, which will be at a different rate than a weekly or monthly stay, Knowles said.

With the exception of the city of Butler, residential rental properties in the county are scant and expensive — a condition made worse by job growth and demand for temporary housing from out-of-state natural gas drillers, local officials have said.

It's also generally not profitable to be a landlord — at least in southern Butler County, real estate experts have said.

In the city of Butler, the loss of manufacturing jobs left many homes vacant and up for rent.

Only 12 percent of Cranberry's residential units are rentals, according to the Census Bureau.

Rick Wills is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-320-7944 or rwills@tribweb.com.