MONDAY, July 20, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- The number of people with Alzheimer's disease is set to skyrocket in the United States due to the aging of the baby-boom generation, and the cost of caring for these patients will devour a large chunk of Medicare's budget, a new study suggests.

More than 28 million baby boomers will develop Alzheimer's disease during the course of their lifetimes, the researchers estimated.

By 2050, all baby boomers will be older than 85 and half of those still alive will suffer from Alzheimer's disease, said lead author Lisa Alecxih, senior vice president of The Lewin Group and director of the Lewin Center for Aging and Disability Policy.

That's up from an estimated 1.2 percent prevalence of Alzheimer's among boomers in 2020, when most boomers will be in their 60s and early 70s, Alecxih said.

Improvements in medical science are allowing people to live longer, but a long life is the main risk factor for developing Alzheimer's disease, she said.

"The incidence of the disease increases as you grow older, as does the severity," Alecxih said.

That means that by 2040, more than twice as many baby boomers will have Alzheimer's disease (10.3 million) compared with the equivalent age group in 2015 (4.7 million), the researchers said.

The cost of caring for more than 10 million Alzheimer's patients will consume nearly 25 percent of Medicare spending in 2040, the study predicted.

Findings from the study are scheduled to be presented Monday at the Alzheimer's Association International Conference, in Washington, D.C. Findings presented at meetings are generally viewed as preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

As baby boomers with Alzheimer's live longer, they will begin to develop more severe forms of the disease and the cost of caring for them will go through the roof, said Keith Fargo, director of scientific programs and outreach for the Alzheimer's Association.

"During the time they are living, they continue to degenerate," Fargo said. "Many people end up in long-term care or nursing homes, and require around-the-clock care for many years. This isn't like you get a heart attack and you pass away. You get this degenerative disease and it requires that you get care for many years."