Meeting News Coverage

WASHINGTON — Donald Trump, thus far, has only presented a “borrowed and lip-synched repeal and replace” idea of what he will do in regard to the Affordable Care Act, said one presenter here at the ACP Internal Medicine Meeting.

“I will repeal it and replace it with something great,” Miller predicts will be the sentiment of Trump should he be elected US President.

Moderator and ACP Senior Vice President of Governmental Affairs and Public Policy Robert B. Doherty, MD, introduced Thomas P. Miller, JD, Resident Fellow, Department of Economic Studies, American Enterprise Institute, who was charged with discussing the impact on the health care system if a Republican is elected as US President in November 2016. At press time, it is being regularly reported that Donald Trump is the presumptive nominee and so Miller’s remarks centered on him.

“Republicans can’t party like it’s 2010 or even 2014,” Miller said. There are reduced fiscal pressures and the Republicans can be accused of “crying wolf too often on the economy,” he said.

There have been fewer legal threats to the Affordable Care Act (ACA). However, now that the ACA is the law of the land it will be much harder to take away than it was to resist it in the first place, Miller said.

“Donald Trump has transformed the Republican Party,” he said. But “health policy is a lower-tier issue” for Trump.

While there is little to go on due to the fact that there was limited debate about health care during the primary season, Miller predicts that Trump would support “block-grant Medicaid to the states,” present a “karaoke-version of repeal and replace,” expand Health Saving Accounts, and allow more individual insurance tax deductions.

When Trump says “hands off senior entitlements – he means it,” Miller said.

“Honestly, whatever a Republican Congress gives to me is fine – I have too many Muslims to deport,” will be the spirit of a Trump presidency, Miller said.

Regardless, Miller said there needs to be longer-term steps toward meaningful reform, noting that 72 million Americans are on Medicare and Medicaid.

We must “rebalance the mix of health investments more toward improving social determinants, economic mobility, family stabilization, early childhood development and educational opportunity,” he said, with many in the audience applauding in reaction to his recommended approach.

Miller concluded saying that there are signs of “leaner federal subsidies ahead” and forecasts “new rounds of chronic conditions, broader politicization of health care” and a spirit of “who’s in charge?”

For information on ACP’s views of the 2016 Elections, visit acponline.org/advocacy/where-we-stand/election-2016 — by Joan-Marie Stiglich, ELS

For more information:

Miller T. Working on mysteries, without (m)any clues. Presented at: ACP Internal Medicine Meeting; May 5-7, 2016; Washington, D.C.

donaldjtrump.com/positions/healthcare-reform

Disclosure: Miller reports he has stock holdings with Express Scripts, Merck and Pfizer.