Just about everything conservatives were saying about Obamacare is coming to pass. Among other things, now even the government is admitting that people enrolled in health care exchanges will be at increased risk for identity theft

With just 12 days before the president's new national health insurance program kicks in, the White House is warning that Obamacare users could face massive fraud, theft of their personal financial and health information, and even "cybersecurity threats." The problem is so serious that the administration held an 11th hour summit at the White House today to kick off a joint federal-state anti-fraud effort that will include building a whole new bureaucracy to handle consumer complaints and educate Americans about the anticipated Obamacare scams in the works.

A "whole new bureaucracy." I feel so much better already.

But it doesn't stop there. Not from this administration -- the administration that really cares.

"Today, we are sending a clear message that we will not tolerate anyone seeking to defraud consumers in the Health Insurance Marketplace," said Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius in a statement issued after the summit. "We have strong security safeguards in the marketplace to protect people's personal information against fraud and we will work with our partners to aggressively prosecute bad actors, just as we have been doing in Medicare, Medicaid and the Children's Health Insurance Program."

Whew! They're sending a "clear message" that fraud will not be tolerated.

There's something for everyone in the administration's efforts to assuage any concerns about Obamacare and fraud. How do I know this? Because "Attorney General Eric Holder and Federal Trade Commission Chairwoman Edith Ramirez were at the White House Obamacare anti-fraud summit."

A summit! With the Attorney General! If that doesn't make you feel assured I don't know what would.

And as an extra bonus "Congress is currently checking to make sure that the federal data system is protected and can't be hacked."

Uh huh. Right.

But the biggest, most meaningful step the administration has taken is this.

To show just how bad the administration expects the situation to be, consider what's being put in place to fight Obamacare fraud: a call center will have trained staff to take consumer complaints; the Obamacare website will connect consumers with the FTC's complaint center

A Complaint Call Center. Who would have thought of it?