President Barack Obama’s State of the Union address was a blowout, ending with the president taking a knee and rising to accept his trophy. But it turned out that he was throwing one deliberately deflated ball after another.

The president portrayed the economy in rosy terms – “growing” with “bustling industry.” This is based on the 11 million new private sector jobs created in the last five years. But wait a minute – hasn’t Obama been president for six years? When we total his record, America has created fewer than 6.5 million new jobs, with a labor force participation of just over 62 percent – the lowest since the dog days of President Jimmy Carter.

“At every step, we were told our goals were misguided or too ambitious, that we would crush jobs and explode deficits,” the president said. “Instead, we’ve seen the fastest economic growth in over a decade, our deficits cut by two thirds, a stock market that has doubled and health care inflation at its lowest rate in 50 years.”



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Barack Obama]

Yes, after years of anemic recovery, the last quarter finally registered strong growth. This year will probably (can you hear me knocking on my desk now?) be a good one for the economy. But we’ll see what happens to health care inflation as more provisions of Obamacare take effect this year, and consumers are hit with explosive increases in insurance premiums. And cutting the deficit? It is still close to half a trillion dollars, on top of a total federal debt of almost $18 trillion, topping current U.S. annual gross domestic product.

When one considers the deep structural problems our economy faces – unsustainable entitlement programs, a hideously complex tax code, a reliance on quantitative easing – it is clear that future growth is anything but guaranteed. That is, perhaps, the biggest problem with the president’s speech. Some recent good numbers don’t counter the pervasive sense that there is still something deeply, fundamentally not right with this economy.

Obama also took credit for things that he actively opposed. Take the domestic boom in oil and gas production that has created – along with energy gamesmanship from Saudi Arabia – astonishing levels of cheap energy. In Austin, Texas, where I live, it is not uncommon to see gasoline at $1.79 a gallon. In all, Obama noted, Americans are saving an average of $750 a year at the pump. The rise of cheap energy has also led to a manufacturing renaissance in much of America. All of which is welcome. But the president failed to spell out which of his policies brought about these benefits from an industry he regularly demonizes as “dirty.”



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

The president was gimmicky at best – delusional at worst – on domestic policy. Consider his prime proposal, to make community college free to students. He offered few details, but such an Obama proposal would undoubtedly create yet another entitlement program, federalizing an educational sector that currently is mostly funded by counties and states. Such a program would eventually require its own bureau and federal seal, a building and a staff of government workers drafting more top-down rules for American education. In short, this administration seems poised to do for community colleges what it has achieved in the care of America’s veterans.

The president was equally delusional on foreign policy, from Russia to the Middle East. Under his watch, the alienation of long-standing allies like Egypt, Turkey and Saudi Arabia represents a huge reversal in America's clout in this dangerous region. On the Islamic State group, the president made it sound as if we’re now in the last phase of a mopping up operation. Even as Obama spoke, Iranian-backed rebels were overrunning the presidential palace in Yemen, creating a new power vacuum with unforeseeable consequences.



[MORE: Political Cartoons on Congress]

To be fair, every president cherry picks good numbers and touts limited successes. What was most painful about hearing this speech is what it could have been. Obama could have offered to give Republicans something they crave – a simplified tax code to spur productivity – in exchange for something you would think he’d want, like a carbon tax. Obama could have promised to sign a bill authorizing the Keystone XL pipeline if Republicans would send him a measure on, say, sick leave. That would be the normal give-and-take of a president actively engaged in wringing everything he could get out of his last two years in office.

Instead, this president began his relationship with a new Congress with one veto threat after another. He did, of course, promise to reach out to Republicans, to hear their ideas. But when has he ever listened to anyone? The most common complaint on Capitol Hill is how distant and unresponsive this president is – and that’s from Democrats.