Growing up, Jane Shein learned her coursework through role-playing, a component of the “storyline method” of education.

“I can still remember things I did in fourth grade, and I’m 37,” Shein said. “I really, really want that for my kids.”

Through Bend-La Pine’s three-school magnet program, which is open to all district students through a lottery, Shein was able to do just that, enrolling her oldest at Highland Elementary, which employs the storytelling method. At Highland, students have become park rangers in charge of forest management and pizza parlor employees mastering the art of making change. The building even owns 20 fog machines to set the scene.

Shein did, however, have one hesitation.

“Unfortunately, Highland definitely is not a slice of Bend. It’s fairly homogeneous, economically speaking,” Shein said. “Through fifth grade, we’re concerned about them being in a bubble, but we’ll make sure to do the extra things to get them beyond that.”

Highland has the lowest poverty rate among elementary schools in the district, and overall, the three-school magnet program is significantly less disadvantaged than the district at large. All three magnets — Highland, Amity Creek and Westside Village — are also disproportionately filled with students from the city’s west side.

Principals, school board members and district administrators point to many reasons why the magnet population fails to represent the district, but there are ideas to push the schools toward serving a more diverse range of students.

School choice

Superintendent Ron Wilkinson said offering parents a choice of where to send their kids to school is “a top priority.”

“Not everyone learns the same, not everyone goes from A to B and A to Z the same way,” Wilkinson said. “Kids learn differently, and some kids really do need a different environment.”

To this end, the district makes it easy for students to transfer to any of its neighborhood schools. Many of the neighborhood schools have a special focus, such as technology at Juniper and art at Elk Meadow. There is also a Spanish language immersion program for a small group of students at Bear Creek.

The three magnet schools, however, stand apart for the manner in which students are admitted and the degree to which their specialized approach is apparent throughout the school day.

Amity Creek, which was the district’s smallest elementary school by enrollment at the start of the year, emphasizes interactions across ages and with parents, who are invited to join the school for a student-led assembly each morning. At Westside Village, which enrolls students from kindergarten through eighth grade, there’s a similar emphasis on mixing ages, with the older kids often leading the younger. The school also bases its work around a schoolwide theme that students are able to explore as they wish.

“I think our model promotes self-advocacy, high levels of self-esteem and a sense of family,” said Westside Village Principal Wendy Winchel.

How students are admitted to the magnets depends on where they live and where their siblings go to school. All of the three magnets has a “walking zone” around them, which grants any family living within it automatic acceptance. Because the three magnets are grouped closely together on the city’s west side, these boundaries overlap in some spots, giving certain families the opportunity to send their kid to one of two magnet schools and their neighborhood school.

For a student outside of the attendance zone, admission is left up to a lottery. However, if a student’s older sibling attends or is a graduate, they are generally admitted automatically.

Currently, the three magnet schools are dominated by students from the district’s four west-side elementary schools, especially High Lakes and Miller, which make up more than half of the student population at Highland.

The magnets’ students are also wealthier than the district at large, reflecting the fact that the student populations at High Lakes and Miller are the two least disadvantaged neighborhood elementary schools in the district, as measured by the rate of students receiving free and reduced lunches.

Overall, just more than 50 percent of the district’s elementary-aged students qualify for free and reduced lunch. At the magnets, the rate is about 30 percent; at Highland it is about 9 percent. In total, only 36 students from the district’s four most disadvantaged schools attend the three magnets, compared to 511 from the four west-side elementary schools.

Shein, who is the president of the Highland Parent-Teacher Organization, estimated that “99 percent” of parents don’t even realize the school has a volunteer to help low-income families.

“There’s the perception that there isn’t a need for someone like that,” she said. “That’s really the downfall of the school.”

Walking zones

Drafting the walking zones, Wilkinson said, was “a mix of art and science.”

“By design and board policy, there’s not equitable access to the magnets, because of the zones, which were made to address a revolt taking place from parents on the west side of town,” Wilkinson said. “There was a huge interest in making sure people who live right across from the school could attend.”

The zones, which overlap with the Miller and High Lakes attendance areas, are intended to only account for 20 percent of each magnet’s population, a target Wilkinson estimated the district is hitting. At its greatest distance, the zone stretches about 11⁄4 miles from Westside Village, though typically the outer reaches are just under a mile from each building.

Ron Paradis, who was a school board member from 1999 to 2005, said the policy was implemented to “give people living next door some form of a preference.”

“I think the policy, as it’s interpreted today, takes that idea way further than it should have,” Paradis said. “Because the schools are so close, some families can get their kids into almost any of them, and I think that hurts access for those left to the lottery. I would also question how many of the kids who do go there and are within the walking zones truly walk.”

Amity Creek Principal Carol Hammett said, “if we were able to change any policy, it would be the zone around the school.

“If you look at the demographics around Amity, you have to have a pretty high income to own the condos, townhomes and houses down by Drake Park,” she said. “We as a faculty believe the zone should be lifted to increase diversity.”

Highland Principal Paul Dean said he sympathizes with those who pushed for the zones.

“If I put myself in the shoes of a parent who lives within walking distance, and I thought about road congestion or the environmental impact, I think I would want to be able to send my kid to the closest school,” he said.

School board member Peggy Kinkade says the zones “seem bigger than I would have drawn them.”

“I wasn’t in the room doing it, so it’s easy to say that now,” she added. “I still support the notion of a walking zone, of them being accessible to people right there, but I understand how they may limit access across the district. It’s tricky to balance that.”

Making things worse, Kinkade said, is the fact that the three magnets are so close together.

“The district unintentionally created a monster there,” she said.

The placement of the magnets was forced, in part, by rapid population growth on the west side. The three magnet programs were originally co-located within other schools, as Bear Creek’s immersion program is today. To help with crowding, new schools were built on the west side, while the older, smaller buildings were left to the magnets, which also absorbed students crowded out of their neighborhood schools.

“The three of them located so close to each other has been problematic, because it does tend to draw a lot of students from a smaller geographical area,” Wilkinson said. “Unfortunately, once they’re located, it’s hard to relocate them. We’ve considered relocating, but there’s been a lot of issues, including whether or not we have the capacity to take that on.”

Wilkinson, however, said he thinks the sibling policy limits access even further than the walking zones, as younger brothers and sisters of current magnet school children nearly fill up new kindergarten classes before they are even open to the lottery.

“Take Amity, where over 50 percent of all the new slots are taken up by siblings; that really has a big impact,” Wilkison said.

Nonetheless, the three magnet principals said they generally support the sibling policy, as it helps develop a sense of community between the parents and schools.

“It’s so important for us to build those ties with the families, some of them we have with us for nine years or more, and that’s just been critical to developing our program,” said Westside Village Principal Winchel.

A long ride

Only two students attend Westside Village from the La Pine area, a number that has been falling, Winchel believes, because of the price of gas.

“We have buses, but they can sometimes take 90 minutes,” Winchel noted. “It’s super hard for some families, and I think we’ve lost some awesome families because they couldn’t afford the gas and didn’t want to put their kids on the bus for such a long ride.”

The district has two routes that stretch more than an hour taking kids from across Bend to the magnet schools. Neither of the routes, however, serves the La Pine area.

Wilkinson said the lack of convenient busing “is a great limitation” and something he hopes to address, though he said the cost of getting a quick route from every corner of the district to the magnets would be prohibitive.

“I think we could absolutely be doing more in terms of transportation,” said board co-chairman Nori Juba. “I believe we’re offering fair access in that everyone can put their name in the lottery, but if you don’t have the means to get there, is that really fair?”

Juba noted wealthier families may have a greater ability to drive their kids, but he also said those families are also more likely to be aware of their options and engaged in their child’s education.

“I’m not trying to say eastside families are not concerned, but I think to be involved, you need to be able to have the time and means,” he said. “There’s also the fact that if you live on the west side you may hear about these options from other parents. It’s part of the social networks over there in a way it’s likely not on the east side.”

The district doesn’t do anything specific for low-income families to make sure they know about the magnets, according to Director of Communication and Safety Julianne Repman. However, Repman noted information about the magnets is available in Spanish and distributed in all of the district’s schools.

The principals at Amity Creek and Westside Village said they do outreach at day cares, including Head Start, but Highland’s principal said his school relies on the district’s efforts to get the word out.

School board co-chairwoman Cheri Helt said she doesn’t think the district should have targeted advertising for low-income families.

“I think we should try to accommodate all children’s needs, but that we shouldn’t target based on (socioeconomic status),” she said. “I don’t think this is about marketing, and I don’t think the issue is whether or not everyone today has the same access. I think the question is, ‘Do we have enough supply to meet our demand for choice options?’ And I think we could do more.”

Juba said he would like the district to study if east-side parents are as familiar with the magnets as those on the west side.

“I think it should be our goal to make sure parents are equally aware,” he said. “We should definitely make an effort to create more diverse schools, I think that benefits all the students. We don’t do it by busing kids, but we do do it by getting the word out and making sure we match the kids to the right school. I think I’m the most adamant board member supporting diversity, and I think the others are a little scared of the idea of forcing diversity, which sounds like making kids go where they don’t want to go. But if we did a better job explaining what the magnet schools do, I think they would draw a more diverse population.”

Kinkade said she thinks “there’s certainly a perception, and likely a reality, that there’s an awful lot of choice for certain kids that limits access for others.”

“I think we need to not be afraid to look at transportation,” she added. “We have to make a choice about how we allocate resources and how much we’re willing to give to transportation. I’m open to the conversation and hope we can do what needs to be done.”

— Reporter: 541-633-2160, tleeds@bendbulletin.com