I did help some of our Republicans win and I am counting on them to ... help me do those things we need to do.

MONTGOMERY, Alabama -- I have been in the office of eight governors (Fob James counts twice).

I have seen various governors pull all kinds of stuff out of their desk drawers, from a still-smoking, lit cigar to a week-old, half-eaten slice of pizza to socks and underwear to a bag of dirt.

But until last week I had never seen a governor open a drawer and pull out what Gov. Robert Bentley did.

It was a doctor's prescription pad. It's apparently a permanent occupant of his top right drawer. He took it out following about an hour-long interview in which he suffered through watching me cough and blow my nose.

He grabbed the pad and walked over with it telling me I sounded like I needed a doctor. "And I'm a doctor," Bentley said with a laugh.

I told him I probably need a steroid pack for what I was sure was a sinus issue.

"Not sure if I've ever written a prescription for steroids," Bentley said, as we both laughed again. He put away the pad.

A physician prescription pads (today many docs write them on IPads, smartphones or other tech toys) is such a real and symbolic tool of what a doctor is: They talk to the patient. They do an exam. They consider the patient history and condition and then make a diagnosis. Then they write a prescription they believe will fix the problem, or at least make it better.

I'm not sure what it says about the governor, who will take the oath of office tomorrow to begin his second term, that he keeps a prescription pad in his desk. But I do think that probably most docs see themselves as fixers. After listening to Bentley talk, I think he sees his second and last term as his final chance to fix some of the problems confronting Alabama.

But before I could get Bentley to look forward, the governor took a few minutes to look back over the first term and a few of what he touts as his administration's accomplishments.

"The number one emphasis that we have always had has been job creation and what we have put in place is going to reap tremendous benefits for us over the next four years as the economy starts to turn around," Bentley said.

Hand-in-hand with helping to create jobs has been the effort to recruit jobs and businesses to Alabama, said Bentley.

"The big industries we have been able to recruit (Airbus, Remington, Golden Dragon, Polaris to name a few) will employ many of our workers," said Bentley.

Bentley also said he is proud of the $1 billion investment to improve roads and bridges all across the state.

"It's the largest roads and bridges program ever conceived in the history of the state. We are spending a billion dollars on 1,022 projects to repair the roads and bridges and make them safe, projects that also help create jobs," Bentley said.

The governor went on to note that high school graduation rates have improved over the past four years and that job training, much of it offered by the two-year college system, has expanded, helping to attract new industry and create good paying jobs.

Bentley said his second term will see no letup in efforts to create good jobs by recruiting industry to the state and helping existing companies - small and big - grow their businesses.

Asked to look toward the next four years and some of the needs confronting the state, Bentley wasted no time talking about expanding the state's preschool program, which has been praised by national experts, but which exists in just a handful of schools.

"What I think is the most important part of education by far is to help young minds in the state get the foundation they need and that is what pre-k does," Bentley said. "It's probably the most important time of their (students) lives when it comes to learning. Our goal is to have a quality pre-k program in every school in the state by the end of my second term. If we do that it will make a tremendous difference in the quality of our schools 20 years down the road."

Another significant goal is creation of a " first-class" convention center on Alabama's Gulf Coast.

"It will bring in hundreds of millions of dollars to Gulf Shores, Orange Beach and Alabama when we get it built," he said.

Bentley also said he wants very much to create a more accessible and affordable health care system for the state.

"It's one of the things I really most wanted to get started on in the first term but because of the confusion over the Affordable Care Act, we were not able to do it," said Bentley, who has been a vocal critic of expanding Medicaid in the state under Obamacare, saying that it would simply cost far too much once federal funding went away.

Bentley said he intends to appoint a committee to make recommendations on how to make the system better.

"We need to create a better health care system so we can help make our people healthier," said Bentley. "It's something very important and something I want to get done in the second term.

Maybe the most immediate problem facing the state is a $200 million deficit in the state's General Fund budget, the pot of money that helps to pay for health care programs, law enforcement and prisons. That budget is in crisis.

But the $200 million number is just the top of a much larger hole that Bentley said is over $700 million -- the "true" figure of just how deep the state's budget problem is, and something he wants to fix it, once and for all.

"The fact is that $700 million is the true number, the true number of what we need to effectively operate state government and provide the services our people need," said Bentley. "A few years ago that number was probably half that figure. A few years from now it will be over a billion dollars. All we have ever been willing to do is kick the can down the road for the next governor or next Legislature. I think we need to deal with the reality that this problem needs to be addressed."

Bentley said his administration, working with the Legislature, has done much to improve the efficiency of government and has saved millions of dollars. And Bentley said he is not opposed to continuing efforts to cut waste. But he warned that the deficit won't be fixed with cuts.

"We need more revenue or we are going to have to reduce or even cut some services so many people need."

Bentley didn't say during the campaign where hundreds of millions of additional dollars might come from. He said he is opposed to out-and-out tax increases but has said that some dollars might be generated through the elimination of some tax deductions and possibly by changes in state law earmarking some taxes for only specific uses, such as some education needs, a move sure to be opposed by public schools and colleges.

Other possible options might include a state lottery and entering into an agreement with the Porch Band of Creek Indians that would see the tribe increase the amount of dollars it pays in state taxes but also likely allow them to expand casino-like gambling beyond its three current locations, a move sure to be opposed by some anti-gambling groups and some voters.

Bentley will only say that he and his staff have been working with some lawmakers to try to find solutions.

The other big question lingering over Bentley as he begins his second term is just how effective will he be in the Legislature. Bentley spent eight years in the state House of Representatives, but as governor he has had a rocky and uneven relationship with lawmakers and legislative leaders who often times treated Bentley as irrelevant to the legislative process.

Bentley acknowledged that his relationship with lawmakers had its low points but he maintains that the relationship has improved.

To "help" it improve - meaning to give him perhaps a louder voice in the Legislature, Bentley donated $500,000 of his own money to the state Republican Party in the closing weeks of the campaign to help elect Republicans who he now hopes will remember his role in their wins.

"I would never expect a legislator to vote against what is in the best interest of their district," said the governor. "That said, yes I did help some of our Republicans win and I am counting on them to remember that and help me do those things we need to do to address the problems we need to address."

Bentley, who beat Democrat Parker Griffith in a landslide, winning 64 percent of the vote, said that margin is important.

"It's hard to win 64 percent of the vote in any election but we did," said Bentley. "We did because the people trust me. I want to use that trust and support to help meet the needs of this state. I think the people are with me, and I think that means something when I go to the Legislature and make recommendations on what I think we need to do."

Bentley said the time between his November re-election and tomorrow's inauguration has been like the halftime of a football game.

"We have had a chance to look back at some of the things we did and time to look forward to what we need to do in the second half, the second term. It has been a time to reflect and think.

"Now it's time to kick off and play again," he said. "And I'm really looking forward to it. We have much to do, and I'm going to do my best not to let the people down."