The Ora Pescovitz era is over at the University of Michigan Health System.

Her five-year run as CEO and executive vice president for medical affairs of the $3.3 billion health system ended when she formally stepped down June 1.



Nobody outside her family and inner circle knows for sure what led her to announce earlier this year that she would not be seeking another five-year contract from the University of Michigan.



The 56-year-old pediatric endocrinologist accomplished much in her tenure at the nationally recognized UMHS, a three-hospital system with 40 outpatient locations, 22,000 employees and 11 million square feet of building space.



She led UMHS through construction of the $754 million C.S. Mott Children's Hospital and Von Voigtlander Women's Hospital. And she guided the acquisition of Jackson-based Allegiance Health into the UM family.



Pescovitz also has been through a lot personally.





Related Links

About 18 months after she took the job at UMHS, Pescovitz’s husband, Mark, died in a December 2010 traffic accident on I-94 in Jackson County. He was a trauma surgeon at theand was returning to Indianapolis after visiting his wife over the weekend in Ann Arbor. The two often commuted to see each other.“I was married for 31 years to the most fascinating, interesting and accomplished man,” Pescovitz said in her final State of the Health System speech on May 28 . “I was really lucky to have such a wonderful marriage – and have three children.”She said, “Mark’s death opened another world and gave me an opportunity to see what is important. … As tragic as Mark’s death was, it caused me to realize life can happen in a moment, and death can happen in a moment.”In the months after her husband’s death, Pescovitz said she learned she had much in common with patients and families who receive care at UMHS. “I realized I need to live every moment of life with purpose,” she said.Pescovitz’s near-term plans are to take a sabbatical for at least six months and possibly write a book.“I have relished my time here and will forever be grateful for the growth, experiences and relationships made possible by this opportunity,” Pescovitz said in a blog post when she announced her decision earlier this year. “I have been honored to lead this organization, which is what made this decision very difficult for me.”She had been a finalist for president ofuntil David Cole, chairman of the university’s department of surgery, was selected in April.While UMHS conducts a nationwide search, Michael Johns will serve as interim executive vice president. Johns, an otolaryngologist, comes fromin Atlanta. He completed his residency at UM.Pescovitz, who acknowledged she is a “slave driver” as a boss, said she was proud of the way UMHS has grown in size and strength during a time of great change under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.“I think it is just so hard to (find) any institution that is better than this one,” she said. “With the leadership team like the one we have you will be in great hands for the future.”Pescovitz said she leaves UMHS with a renewed understanding of what it means to balance work life with home life.“There is no such thing as work-life balance because we actually only have one life,” she said. “So, when you want to find balance, you have to find that in your life. You have to find a way to live the best life you can in both your home and your work, and find a way to make that balance.”Pescovitz added: “I am the luckiest person alive because I have had the best personal life and the best work life. I am very grateful.”