From left, 7 Brooke Springfield, 21 Grayson Schleuning, 15 Jenna Putt, 22 Lauren Springfield, 33 Skylar Boom, 2 Claire Hellmann, 18 Amanda Williams, 23, Hannah Vice, 13 Sydney Herman, 3 Ella Schleuning (Photo: Photo by Chad Goodrich )

For Crosby Middle School volleyball it is ready, set, spike!

Both JV and Varsity teams have the honor of finishing with perfect 10-0 records in their regular season this year.

A total of 20 Jefferson County Public Schools middle schools participated in the tournament this year.

The Junior Varsity tournament was held on September 27 at Basketball Academy, where Crosby won and Jefferson County Traditional Middle School was runner up in the gold division.

The Varsity tournament was held on October 2 at Mid America Sports Center -- and Crosby took first, with Westport Middle School as runner-up in the gold division. Jefferson County Public Schools was represented by Varsity teams from Crosby and Westport on October 7 at Mid America Sports Center in the Regional Tournament (with Oldham County) where Crosby went on to win as well.

"On the Varsity team, we had 10 girls with only one returning from last year," said Head Coach Chris Hellmann. "Most of them played some type of club ball, which I think was a tremendous help."

Last year, Crosby won at districts but then came up short in the regionals.

"It was a very successful year," said Hellmann. "We had some competition with Westport, JCTMS and Barrett. And Oldham County schools, they have over the past couple of years built a good middle school program."

Hellmann is the Head Coach for Varsity and is co-coach of the Junior Varsity team along with Suzy Stoffel.

Brooke Springfield, Grayson Schleuning, Jenna Putt, Lauren Springfield, Skylar Boom, Claire Hellmann, Amanda Williams, Hannah Vice, Sydney Herman, and Ella Schleuning played on the Varsity roster and Addison Rogers, Emma Lott, Sydney Goodrich, Syrenty Smith, Madie Trent, Ella Schleuning, Grayson Schleuning, Destyn Carlton, Emily Richardson played on the Junior Varsity roster.

While the coach said the players work really hard, he also feels that there needs to be a sense of balance.

"They work extremely hard," said Hellmann. "I feel like they need a little free time. We do not practice every day. Once tryouts started, we did practice three times a week and once the leagues started -- played on Mondays and Wednesdays -- we practiced on Tuesdays and Thursdays. I always let them have Fridays off."

Read Stuart Ungar's Youth Sports blog at http://blogs.courier-journal.com/youthsports. Email Stuart at stuartungar@me.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1tU3y8R