Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei says he refuted the U.S. ambassador to Iraq's calls for cooperation in combating the Islamic State group. Office of the Supreme Leader/AP

As the United States mobilizes an international coalition to take on the Islamic State group, Iran has publicly said it will not work with a Western-organized effort. But the Shiite-majority state, which borders Iraqi territory where the terrorist group has spread, will still play a role in opposing the violent extremist Sunni organization.

Secretary of State John Kerry did not want Iran to participate in an international conference on fighting the Islamic State that was held in Paris on Monday, but he did not rule out further discussions with Tehran.

“We’re not coordinating with Iran, but as I said, we’re open to have a conversation at some point in time if there’s a way to find something constructive,” Kerry told reporters in Paris. “I’m never going to shut a door to something that could solve a problem if there’s a way to do it.”

Talks regarding Iran’s nuclear program will resume this fall, and Kerry said that conversations about the current terrorist threat in the Middle East have previously happened on the sidelines of nuclear negotiations. Some conversations are expected when world leaders gather at the United Nations General Assembly in New York next week.

Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei said in an interview with Iranian state television that the U.S. ambassador to Iraq requested cooperation from the Iranians in fighting the Islamic State group, but that Khamenei refused.

“We will not cooperate with the Americans in this regard since they have a corrupt intention and stained hands,” Khamenei said. "The Americans should know that if they do this, the same problems that were created on their way in the past ten years in Iraq will be created for them again.”

Jacob Stokes, the Bacevich Fellow with the Center for New American Security, says that even if the two countries are not prone to working together, the reality of the situation suggests they cannot completely ignore one another.

“Part of this is the public face that Iran’s supreme leader needs to have as a part of his domestic politics but then there’s the sort of reality on the ground,” he says. “There's going to need to continue to be not even cooperation or even coordination but sort of moving in the same direction against the same enemy.”

Tony Cordesman, the Burke Chair in strategy with the Center for Strategic and International Studies, says that Iranian volunteers are already on the ground in Syria, but actual clashes with the Islamic State have been limited to small affiliate groups.

“The problem is always volunteers are never really volunteers,” Codesman says. “But they’re not units. They are people going in to support Syrian forces and fighting with the Hezbollah.”

Cordesman says this is similar to the plan the U.S. proposes to deal with the Islamic State in Iraq. “In some ways that’s what’s going to happen with the U.S., we won’t send ground combat units in but we’ll send special forces and advisors and we’ll send in other elements,” he says. “In a way they can’t be said to be purely advisory. When you’re in a combat environment you can try to be as advisory as you want but if anything goes wrong, you’re in combat.”



The Shiite Iranian government supports the regime of Syrian Presdient Bashar al Assad, who is also Shia. The Islamic State, a Sunni group, poses a threat to Iranian interests in both Syria and Iraq, which also has a Shiite majority. The sectarian policies of former Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al Maliki marginalized the Sunni minority and played a role in the formation of the Islamic State.

Now, says Cordesman, it’s in Iran’s interest to support a more national Iraqi government where all groups are represented, rather than one that drives Sunnis to extremism. He says the Iranians have traditionally had a role in Iraq's internal negotiations to form governments, but their involvement hasn't extended to sending formalized combat units there.

Because of the close role Tehran has played with the Iraqi government, which also works closely with the United States, Cordesman says Iraq can act as a sort of intermediary between the two. “You don’t have two people acting as military advisors to the same government without it providing some feedback and discussion and warnings,” he says.

In Syria too, says Stokes, Iran has an interest in stopping extremist Sunnis.