The problem isn't the breast cancer test. It's what is done with the results.

A radiologist compares an image from 2-D mammogram to the new 3-D mammogram. (Photo: Torin Halsey via AP)

Over the past three decades, more and more women have opted to get mammograms, which, despite some discomfort and anxiety, provide the best way to detect breast cancer early.

The system has worked: In the same period, the rate of breast cancer deaths has been cut by one-third. That can’t be coincidence, and most everyone, including the influential American Cancer Society, agrees that early detection saves lives.

So it came as something of a shock last week when the Cancer Society recommended that women at average risk begin annual screenings at age 45 — five years later than it previously recommended — and that at age 55, women can cut back to a mammogram every other year.

The new guidelines repudiate the mantra that many doctors and public health advocates have chanted for years: Get a mammogram annually, starting at age 40. And it has roiled the growing debate over the timing of a first mammogram and the frequency required. The new guidelines are similar to recommendations made in 2009 by a federal task force that provoked a firestorm.

Behind this shift is an attempt to balance the benefits of yearly screening with “harms” such as false positives, unnecessary biopsies and overtreatment.

The Cancer Society doesn't argue the test itself is harmful. Its focus is on what happens after screening, including increased distress and anxiety caused by false positives.

So then why not focus on overtreatment, instead of recommending that women stick their heads in the sand and avoid finding out whether they have cancer? Are women really too fragile to handle a callback to resolve a false positive?

Of course, women should be aware of mammography's benefits and limitations, and as education goes the panel's work is important. Even so, for all its research, the panel — which to avoid conflicts of interest had no radiologists or practicing oncologists as members — opted for recommendations that invite devastating consequences for some women:

Some cancers will go undetected. In the 40-44 age group, from 2,000 to 2,500 women need to be screened annually to save one life. Large numbers of women are wasting time and money. But try telling that to women whose lives are saved by early detection. About 38,000 women in their 40s are diagnosed with cancer annually.

Some breast tumors are so aggressive that getting an exam every two years, instead of annually, will make a life and death difference.

Insurers will take note of this prestigious panel's guidelines. While panel chair Kevin Oeffinger says the society wants women in their early 40s to have the opportunity for screening and champions coverage, its finding could spur insurers to cut back.​

Mammography is far from perfect, but it's the best technology available. Cutting-edge mammography, known popularly as 3-D, might well reduce troubling false positives, as well as the number of cancerous tumors missed. So yes, research is useful and could lead to better tests or less overtreatment. In the meantime, what you don't know can hurt you.

USA TODAY's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board, separate from the news staff. Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique USA TODAY feature.

To read more editorials, go to the Opinion front page or sign up for the daily Opinion e-mail newsletter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1S4DfVm