Strong Memorial president and CEO Steve Goldstein talked to a health care industry publication about his views of the challenges and obstacles facing providers. (Photo: Provided photo)

What's on your Kindle or tablet?

Somewhere along the line, I heard from someone speaking with a mix of admiration, jealousy and just plain awe that Strong Memorial and Highland hospital CEO Steve Goldstein had downloaded the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act shortly after it was signed. He then set to reading 100 pages a night -- and understood what he was reading.

I don't think the story is apocryphal.

Some might argue that not even the president, and likely not Nancy Pelosi, can claim to be Goldstein's equal in that category.

Certainly, Goldstein now has more to talk about at parties.

But his knowledge of the system landed him among the 40 smartest people in healthcare, according to Becker's Hospital Review.

Here's what it said:

"Steven Goldstein. Mr. Goldstein is CEO of Strong Memorial Hospital and Highland Hospital, vice president for the University of Rochester Medical Center and president for long-term care at URMC — all in Rochester, N.Y. He is a professor of community and preventative medicine at the URMC School of Medicine and Dentistry. In addition, he has been an American Hospital Association trustee since 2012 and has served as a past chairman of the Hospital Association of New York State. Before joining Strong Memorial, Mr. Goldstein was an executive at Rochester (N.Y.) General Hospital, The Children's Medical Center (Dayton, Ohio), University of Nebraska Hospitals and Clinics and the Nebraska Psychiatric Institute, both in Omaha, Neb."

The list was presented alphabetically. According to Becker's "selections were made through an editorial review process, and people could not pay to be included." Goldstein also is on Becker's 2014 advisory board.

The "smartest people" list included Pres. Obama, the president and CEO of the trade association for commercial health insurers, the president and CEO of the Kaiser Family Foundation, a former head of CMS, and various health economists and health system leaders.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1ikrOqt