WHEN IS A CORONARY STENT ‘INAPPROPRIATE'? NOW, IT’S NEVER

The American College of Cardiology is changing its guidelines for when implanting coronary stents is appropriate — by banishing the term “inappropriate.”

Next year, the nation’s leading heart-doctor group will remove the word used since 2009 to describe cases in which people don’t need the metal-mesh tubes in their blood vessels. The label has become a liability in disputes with insurers and regulators, said Robert Hendel, who led the effort to update the wording.

“The term ‘inappropriate’ caused such a visceral response,” said Hendel, a cardiologist at the University of Miami. “A lot of regulators and payers were saying, ‘If it’s inappropriate, why should we pay for it, and why should it be done at all?' ”

The cardiology group replaced the “Inappropriate” label with “Rarely Appropriate.” Another category, cases in which there is medical doubt, will switch from “Uncertain” to “May be Appropriate.”

The changes reflect the controversy that has enveloped coronary stents, which are threaded through the circulatory system to open blocked arteries. With 700,000 procedures in the U.S. annually — at an estimated cost of $14 billion — use of the devices has become one of the hottest issues in cardiology.

Eight studies have found that stents are no better than drug-based therapy in preventing heart attacks and death in patients with stable heart disease. About 7 million Americans received stents over the past decade; roughly half of them had a heart attack or other acute syndrome.

— Peter Waldman, Bloomberg News

PREVENTING THE FLU MAY HELP YOUR HEART

Getting a flu vaccine is associated with a lower risk of death in people with heart disease, a review of studies has found, and the effect is greatest in those who have had a recent heart attack or chest pain.

The review included five randomized trials that involved more than 6,400 heart patients. For patients with stable heart disease, a flu vaccination decreased the relative risk for a cardiovascular event by 36 percent. For people who had had a heart attack within the last year, the effect was greater: a 55 percent reduction in relative risk. Overall, those who were vaccinated had a 19 percent reduced risk of death.

The authors acknowledge that their conclusions are based on a relatively small number of cardiovascular events and deaths. At the same time, the review, published in JAMA, covered all randomized trials done on the subject, and there is no suggestion of inconsistency among them.

“People who don’t like vaccines probably don’t like dying from heart attacks either,” said the lead author, Dr. Jacob A. Udell of the University of Toronto. “Maybe this is a good enough reason for the skeptics to go and get their flu shots.”

— Nicholas Bakalar, The New York Times

CHILDREN’S BRAIN SIZES MAY DEPEND ON UPBRINGING

Poverty and lack of nurturing in early life may have a direct effect on a child’s brain development, according to a study that found smaller brains in poor, neglected children.

The study of brain scans, published in JAMA Pediatrics, found children living in poverty without adequate nurturing had a smaller hippocampus, a brain region linked to learning and memory, than those who weren’t poor or neglected. Poor children, even if not neglected by parents, were found to have less gray matter, which is linked to intelligence; less white matter, which helps transmit signals; and smaller amygdala, key to emotional health.

The study adds to previous research suggesting the stress of poverty in childhood can have lifelong effects on learning and emotional health, said Charles Nelson, who wrote an accompanying editorial. The findings bring researchers closer to understanding how experience shapes biology, he said.

“This work adds to a growing body of evidence that early life events powerfully shape not only the course of child development but also adult development,” said Nelson, a professor of pediatrics and neuroscience at Harvard Medical School.

— Nicole Ostrow, Bloomberg News