Aberdeen, SD

The impact of a well-known South Dakota coach lives on a year after his death.

Friends and family said goodbye to former NSU basketball coach Don Meyer at a memorial service over Memorial Day weekend last year. Many people around the country knew Meyer, but his footprint wasn't just broad. It was deep for those who knew him well.

Inside the Barnett Center in Aberdeen, you can still find many reminders of Meyer. According to his players, you can also find many in them.

"The biggest thing he taught was selflessness and team above self and a greater purpose above self,” former player Kevin Ratzsch said. “He hit that home every day and when that connected with my heart, that's when my life really changed. And if I never would have played here, I definitely would be a completely different person."

Ratzsch played basketball overseas after graduating from NSU. He's now back in Aberdeen working with Fellowship of Christian Athletes and acting as team chaplain.

Ratzsch has a lot of quotes and sayings he calls Meyerisms in his head related to leadership, service and other things. He isn't alone.

Former player Brett Newton spoke at Meyer's memorial service last year and shared how the coach had impacted him then. Newton says the impact continues today.

"He had that really special ability to connect those life lessons and those quirky sayings that changed people's lives and that's why we're still talking about him today and why he's still a big part of my life and former players lives and the community," Newton said.

"He would always say, ‘Everybody picks up trash; everybody says ‘yes sir/no sir, yes ma'am/no ma'am.’’ And everywhere I go, no matter if I'm inside, outside, if I see some trash on the ground and I want to walk by that thing, I can just hear him in the back of my ear, ‘Kevin, pick that trash up,’" Ratzsch said.

His players say his example continues to impact them more than anything he said. The coach had a lot of wins and knew a lot of people, but watching Meyer live his life is what truly impacted his players and what continues to impact them a year after his death.

"You look back on what coach taught and what he stood for, I think a lot of people would say they're still profoundly impacted within their day to day lives, so that's a pretty special thing," Newton said.

Meyer died in May 2014 after a long battle with an inoperable cancer. Construction continues on a new cancer center in Aberdeen that bears Meyer's name.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.