Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)

Oregon released its Health System Transformation: 2014 Mid-Year Report earlier in 2015. Covering July 2013 through June 2014, it’s a welcome follow-up to the previous updated on the innovative CCO model.

Oregon’s Coordinated Care Organizations march ahead of the curve when it comes to improving quality and outcomes while reducing cost. With federal and state governments facing budget crises, Oregon’s CCO model plays the long game: upfront, preventive investment to curb long-term costs over time. While the work isn’t over, it is beginning to pay off.

What’s changed?

More than 990,000 Oregonians are enrolled in the Oregon Health Plan, the state’s managed Medicaid body which contracts with health plans. Despite many new members through the Affordable Care Act, Oregon hasn’t seen the feared emergency room spike predicted by critics of Medicaid expansion. Instead, Oregon has been proactive with its counties to ensure proper case and population health management is occurring.

Here are some of the new performance measures since the last report:

Ambulatory care: avoidable emergency department utilization

Health status

Initiation and engagement of alcohol or other drug treatment (initiation and engagement rates)

Low birth weight

Obesity prevalence

Tobacco use prevalence

OHA has also included previously unreported calendar year 2013 data by race and ethnicity for the Medical Assistance with Smoking Cessation measure.

Performance highlights

Decreased emergency department visits. Emergency department visits by people served by CCOs have decreased 21 percent since 2011 baseline data.

Editor’s Note: In the previous report, this was down a still impressive 17% while the the cost of services decreased by 19% at that time. Decreased hospital admissions for short-term complications from diabetes. The rate of adult patients (ages 18 and older) with diabetes who had a hospital stay because of a short-term problem from their disease dropped by 9.3 percent since 2011 baseline data. Decreased rate of hospital admissions for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The rate of adult patients (ages 40 and older) who had a hospital stay because of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma decreased by 48 percent since 2011 baseline data. Patient-centered Primary Care Home (PCPCH) enrollment continues to increase. Coordinated care organizations continue to increase the proportion of members enrolled in a patient-centered primary care homes – indicating continued momentum even with the new members added since January 1. PCPCH enrollment has increased 55 percent since 2011. Additionally, primary care costs continue to increase, which means more health care services are happening within primary care rather than other settings such as emergency departments.

We recommend reading the full report online either here or mirrored here.