ENLARGE Simon Doonan

"Good taste is an oppressive concept designed to make people feel ashamed—like they're not quite passing muster. I understand why it was something that people might have talked about in the 1950s, when women wore white gloves, but I can't believe anyone still subscribes to it as something real. I hold to the Quentin Crisp belief that you should not try to keep up with the neighbors—you should drag them down to your level. A lot of this goes back to the Duke and Duchess of Windsor. For some reason, people thought of them as beacons of good taste. Whereas they were really sort of wretched, self-obsessed, vain dandies who were highly entertaining in their own way, but in the end, they were a deranged couple that had nothing to say to each other. They would sit in a restaurant and recite the alphabet. I don't see what's so great about that. I'd rather be Tammy Wynette."

—Doonan is the creative ambassador for Barneys.

ENLARGE Ruth Reichl

Ruth Reichl

"The thing that's so interesting about taste to me as a writer is that, when you look at something, we all know that we're pretty much seeing the same thing. With sensation, we're pretty sure that when we touch a rough thing, we're feeling the same thing. But none of us has any idea if we're tasting the same taste. It's an incredibly abstract concept. Taste is the most mysterious sense—scientifically they're still not entirely sure how it works. We have a very limited vocabulary to describe it. My goal as a restaurant critic was to try and have people sitting at the table with me. I realized early on that I had to get beyond too much salt, too little sugar, and that I had to do a kind of synesthesia for people: tell them it's like running through a field, or compare it to music. The wonder of taste is that it's more than just flavor in your mouth. It's an all-encompassing experience."

—Reichl is a food writer and editor and the author of the novel Delicious!, out next month.

ENLARGE Lyor Cohen

Lyor Cohen

"In my opinion, taste is something precious. Sometimes I feel like Indiana Jones because resisting the temptation to be fooled by the really good is the thing that I have to remind myself of the most. In fact, really good is the worst thing for me. I actually prefer something really bad or magnificent. Because I know what to do with really bad. But sometimes I get tricked by really good. You need an organization that is buoyant enough that it can afford to wait for the magnificent. You can chase the moment, the frivolous, the really good, but it becomes dust and nobody remembers it. Or you could stay diligent and focused and put yourself in the cul-de-sac of finding the Aretha Franklins, the Janis Joplins, the Kanye Wests. Hits are a lovely collision of many different circumstances, and it is an arduous process of staying in the field in search of them. Being a cool kid is not a part-time job."

—Cohen is a music executive and the founder of the new label venture 300 Entertainment.

ENLARGE Anne Bass

Anne Bass

"Talking about taste is rather outdated, in a way. The former absolutes of taste no longer seem relevant. It's more about curation today, the development of personal preferences. The biggest influence on my taste was my grandmother. She was very quiet, very self-aware—there was never a big statement about what she was doing. She just knew how to create these environments, and it was always such a pleasure to be at her house. I think I've tried to re-create that feeling. And then my parents were constantly saying that restraint was desirable and that ostentation was not, and there were a lot of shoulds and should nots and notions of absolute taste, which I think may have propelled me towards a preference for orderly spaces. When it comes to gardens I love the combination of structure and freedom. I like it to feel very natural even though it's shaped. It should feel inevitable."

—Bass is a philanthropist and the director of the film Dancing Across Borders.

ENLARGE Bill T. Jones

Bill T. Jones

"Culturally, I am a polyglot. I think in terms of juxtaposition, mélange, collage. But sometimes the mixing and blending of aesthetics of taste can be anxiety-provoking. Especially when you have a wide range of acquaintances and friends as I do. If your heart is invested in something—a piece of music, for example—you have to be careful whom you share it with. Because it could contain information about the limits of your relationship. Virgil Thomson was known to say, 'You don't put all your pictures on your wall at the same time, do you? Then why would you want to put all your friends in the same room together?' Having to negotiate a very complex, multicultural, multiethnic world, I am a little less exuberant about the attitude of: Throw it up in the air, see how it lands. There's a mastery in understanding the correct time for this or that."

—Jones is a choreographer, cofounder of the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company and executive artistic director of New York Live Arts.

ENLARGE Ali Pincus

Ali Pincus

"A tastemaker has to be grounded in her own sense of taste; you have to have a clear approach. I think you get that sense from seeing a lot of stuff. I try to see as much as I can, both in person and online, everything from visiting show houses to going to galleries, museums, stores. But you also get there by being confident in the path you've chosen, whether it's for a home or an apartment. It's important to have a keen sense of what's been done before. And sometimes with interior design you need to step back and look at the whole room as a picture—how are those fabrics going to interplay with the overall look? I love color and art, but you have to navigate a path of building a room that's properly geared for art. You don't want the colors to be too loud for the eye. You don't want to overwhelm the experience. It's all about taking that step back. With that knowledge, you're able to be creative."

—Pincus is the cofounder of the interior design website One Kings Lane.