Buy Photo The Garden State Wine Growers Association held its annual Jazz it Up Wine Fest at Allaire State Park Labor Day Weekend. (Photo: Kala Kachmar/Asbury Park Press)Buy Photo

New Jersey's wine scene is growing, and has been since the state in 1981 nullified prohibition-era laws that limited its production. Since then, New Jersey has taken steps to grow the industry, including the latest measure in 2012 that allowed wineries to ship directly to consumers and open off-site tasting rooms.

Now, there are nearly 50 wineries, and new wine events are popping up all over the state.

On Saturday, the Asbury Park Press spoke with local winery owners at the Jazz it Up Wine Festival at Allaire State Park. Here are five things people might not know about New Jersey's wine scene.

1. There are 48 active wineries and five annual wine festivals in New Jersey.

There are wine events almost every weekend at wineries and various venues, like parks and beaches. But there are also five major wine festivals put on by the Garden State Wine Growers Association from Memorial Day through mid-October. These events typically have food, vendors, local makers and artists and (of course) wine tastings.

The Jazz it Up Wine Fest at Allaire State Park draws 8,000 to 10,000 people every year, according to Kathy Bullock, the festival director. The Jersey Fresh Wine Festival is at the Burlington County Fairgrounds at the end of September, the Grand Harvest Wine Festival at the beginning of October in Morristown and celebrates the end of the grape harvest and the Cape May Wine Festival is in mid-October. There's also the Blue, Wine & BBQ Festival at Schooley's Mountain Park in Long Valley.

Buy Photo The Garden State Wine Growers Association held its annual Jazz it Up Wine Fest at Allaire State Park Labor Day Weekend. (Photo: Kala Kachmar/Asbury Park Press)

2. When you drink local wine, you support agriculture, tourism and local businesses. Most wineries in New Jersey are also farms. Some wineries grow all their own grapes. Others use a combination of their own grapes, other New Jersey grapes and grapes from other parts of the country.

Festivals and wine events help promote the wine industry, which is the fastest grow agricultural industry in New Jersey, Bullock said. People have the opportunity to not only learn about New Jersey wine, but buy local wines you won't find on liquor store shelves, she said. New Jersey isn't limited in its wine selections, either.

The Valenzano Family Winery in Shamong has a type of wine for everyone — dry reds and whites, fruity wines and specialty wines, said owner Tony Valenzano. A limited release only available at the winery and at festivals is a wine made from local ciders and fermented in bourbon barrels with fresh maple and cinnamon sticks. Festivals also give tourists the opportunity to see places like Allaire State Park and Schooley's Mountain Park, Bullock said.

Plagido's Winery is a fourth-generation family-owned farm that only uses grapes they've grown. "When you come to taste (local wine), you taste what we've grown," said Candice Boblett, the manager of the winery in Hammonton. "We hand pick,ferment, crush and bottle it ourselves on-site."

Buy Photo Candice Boblett, manager of Plagido's Winery in Hammonton, New Jersey, sells bottles of wine at the Jazz it Up Wine Fest at Allaire State Park Saturday. (Photo: Kala Kachmar/Asbury Park Press)

3. The soil in southern New Jersey is perfect for making juicy grapes.

Grapes love to work for what they get. When they struggle in their growing conditions, they tend to be more concentrated and packed full of juice, Boblett said. "It's brilliant that there's no rain this year," she said. "Rain makes them lazy."

The soil in South Jersey is sandy, which makes them better at retaining heat and producing aromatic wines. John Basile, owner of Monroeville Vinyard and Winery, said New Jersey's climate and geography (for grape growing) has been compared to parts of Europe. "Our grapes make good quality wine," he said.

4. You can go to a winery and hang out, much like a bar.

Wineries offer more than just tours and tastings. There are a number of wineries that have live music and events every weekend, as well as places to relax, drink wine and socialize.

"A lot of younger crowds think that bars are always the way to go," Boblett said. "But a lot of wineries have events, music and patios to hang out on and bring your own food."

Wineries are becoming a more and more popular "scene," she said. Boblett said Plagido's is open seven days a week until 5 p.m., and offers extended evening events several times a month.

Buy Photo The Garden State Wine Growers Association held its annual Jazz it Up Wine Fest at Allaire State Park Labor Day Weekend. (Photo: Kala Kachmar/Asbury Park Press)

5. New Jersey has five wine trails.

The state's five wine trails include the Vintage North Jersey Grand Wine Trail, the Two Bridges Wine Trail, the Pinelands Reserve Wine Trail, the Cape May Wine Trail and the Jersey Shore Wine Trail.

The Passport Program allows wine lovers to get a pair of free tickets to the wine fest of their choice after they visit all the participating wineries in the passport book (a mobile app is also available). Completed passports will also put them in a drawing for a grand prize trip (this year's trip is to Spain).

If you go

The Jazz it Up Wine Fest

Noon to 5 p.m. Sunday

Allaire State Park, 4265 Atlantic Ave., Wall

Tickets are $25

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1EIv1zU