Topics: Editor's Picks, Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg, Media Criticism, Innovation News, Technology News, Business News, News

Now Trending on Facebook: Conservative Crybabies.

Actually, scratch that. Conservative Crybabies can’t be trending, because the “conservative movement”—which is itself the fancy brand name created by the for-profit conservative media to describe the corporate-sponsored manipulation of economically aggrieved white citizens—has spent decades cultivating a mindset that reframes its paranoid aggressions as legitimate and necessary forms of self-defense.

Consider Donald Trump, the Capo di tutti capi of this scam. The moment some hapless pundit works up the nerve to confront the presumptive GOP nominee for president, he opens his gaping mouth-anus and excretes his go-to phrase: Politically Correct!

Yes, it’s the mean old PC police who are the antagonists here, who are trying to silence innocent billionaires by raising moral questions about, for instance, his fascistic plan to register Muslims, or his eerily terroristic call to kill the families of alleged ISIS members, or his triumphant slandering of entire nationalities.

This rhetorical jujitsu has become such a habitual and unchallenged aspect of conservative agitprop that it’s often hard to detect, even in plain sight. Think of it as the right wing’s very own “PC movement”—a relentless blaring Persecution Complex meant to drown out any facts deemed inconvenient to the narrative.

You will, for instance, remember the fake “climategate” scandal, in which a bunch of renegade researchers were supposedly being frozen out because their data contradicted the scientific consensus on climate change. Only that story turned out to be total bullshit.

As did the whole notion of death panels, which the Obama administration was going to institute to rub out any conservative grannies who dared to oppose the Affordable Care Act.

The conservative PC movement is what allows gun-toting madmen to see themselves as religious martyrs when they gun down human beings whose “crime” is that they provide reproductive health services to poor women. At its extreme, it’s what prompts men like Timothy McVeigh to perpetrate acts of mass murder in response to the “tyranny” of the U.S. Government.

And the conservative PC movement is on full display right now, even as we speak, in the manufactured controversy over Facebook.

A brief summary of the current silliness ensues:

Last week, the tech site Gizmodo published a report in which a former Facebook employee—who remained anonymous, conveniently—alleged that the social networking site suppressed news stories from conservative media outlets in its Trending Topics section.

This allegation fit right into the narrative fostered by decades of conservative trolling: that the good old lamestream media is out to get white folks who believe in guns, God, and corporate tax loopholes.

The result was an immediate PC Red Alert, with Mandatory Grandstanding. Senator John Thune—chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee—took a break from his busy schedule of not confirming Supreme Court nominees or voting on any meaningful legislation to fire off a letter to Facebook Boss Mark Zuckerberg demanding answers, dammit! With publicity circus hearings to follow.

Meanwhile, Zuckerberg went into a predictable corporate panic and immediately invited a bunch of Conservative Crybabies to a meeting, including Glenn Beck, who is apparently still alive, along with a senior Trump advisor.

Zuckerberg will no doubt plead forgiveness, while also, perhaps, serving these luminaries ecologically sourced Freedom Fries.

Why? Because Zuckerberg is the head of the largest media company in the world—one that is pretty much an unregulated monopoly—and he can ill-afford the perception that his website has a bias against conservative users, whom he prefers to think of as loyal customers.