More plants, less coalAlthough China is by far the largest single consumer of energy from coal, and the country continues to build new coal-fired plants at a rate not seen in a decade, coal consumption in China is beginning to decline. On Monday, China announced new measures that would halt the planned construction of about 200 new coal-fired plants.

nyt standalone chart on china-coal use.

#403024

the CV of failure is at this URL:

https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/04/28/it-feels-really-good-to-read-about-this-princeton-professors-failures/

If you could read between the lines of the many successes that are recorded in a résumé, you would probably see far more failures: schools people didn't get into; scholarship essays that were toiled over and rejected; job applications that now seem harebrained. In just showing the successes, a résumé — or CV — actually reflects only a tiny slice of one's experience — and perhaps not even the most important part.

That's the idea behind a recent "CV of failures," published by Johannes Haushofer, a professor who teaches psychology and public affairs at Princeton. Haushofer's CV of failures, which he published online for all to see, includes degree programs he didn't get into, research funding he didn't receive and paper rejections from academic journals.

"Most of what I try fails, but these failures are often invisible, while the successes are visible," Haushofer writes. "I have noticed that this sometimes gives others the impression that most things work out for me. As a result, they are more likely to attribute their own failures to themselves, rather than the fact that the world is stochastic, applications are crapshoots, and selection committees and referees have bad days."

The original idea for a CV of failures comes from an article published in the journal Nature, which argued that creating a visible record of failures is a powerful way to help other people deal with their own shortcomings. Whereas we're intimately familiar with both our professional successes and our failures, other people just see a string of accomplishments — and that can be discouraging.

Many famous business people, including Henry Ford and W.H. Macy, went broke repeatedly before hitting it big. And it seems as though almost every famous writer or musician was rejected dozens of times before achieving success. The real tragedy isn't these failures — it's when these failures convince people to stop trying.

Ana Swanson, Washington Post

In an oral history in 2002 with NASA, the late Sally Ride, who became the first American woman in space in 1983, recounted some of the confusion her gender caused the male-dominated engineering corps a generation ago. Here she explains.

The engineers at NASA, in their infinite wisdom, decided that women astronauts would want makeup — so they designed a makeup kit. A makeup kit brought to you by NASA engineers. (Laughter) So, "What?" You can just imagine the discussions amongst the predominantly male engineers about what should go in a makeup kit. So they came to me, figuring that I could give them advice. It was about the last thing in the world that I wanted to be spending my time in training on. So I didn't spend much time on it at all.

But there were a couple of other female astronauts, who were given the job of determining what should go in the makeup kit, and how many tampons should fly as part of a flight kit. I remember the engineers trying to decide how many tampons should fly on a one-week flight; they asked, "Is 100 the right number?" "No. That would not be the right number." They said, "Well, we want to be safe." I said, "Well, you can cut that in half with no problem at all." (She laughs.)

And there were probably some other, similar sorts of issues, just because they had never thought about what just kind of personal equipment a female astronaut would take. They knew that a man might want a shaving kit, but they didn't know what a woman would carry. Most of these were male engineers, so this was totally new and different to them.

President Barack Obama's health-care reform law made government health insurance available to more people living in poverty or near poverty by expanding Medicaid. The hope was to improve people's physical health, but new research shows an important effect on financial health: The law has helped many poor Americans pay off the collection agent.

The analysis, conducted by a team of university researchers and members of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, estimates that those who signed up for Medicaid under the law reduced their collection balances by $600 to $1,000 each.

The financial benefits of Obamacare for the poor are an "underappreciated" aspect of the law, said economist Robert Kaestner of the University of Illinois at Chicago, who is one of the authors of the new study. "Health insurance, like any type of insurance, is first and foremost a form of financial protection," he said. "It is a real benefit."

Kaestner, working with colleagues at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the University of Michigan, showed that people who benefited from the expansion used the money they saved on health care to pay down their other debts.

Max Ehrenfreund, Washington Post

Global warming has mostly made the weather more pleasant for Americans over the last 40 years, which may explain why much of the public doesn't rank climate change as big a threat as do scientists and the rest of the world, a new study suggests. But that perceived benefit of global warming — mostly milder winters — will soon be outweighed by more oppressive summer heat, according to a study in the journal Nature that's dividing the scientific community.

"Americans are getting the wrong signal from year-round weather about whether they should be concerned about climate change," said study lead author Patrick Egan, a public policy professor at New York University. "They're getting the good parts and haven't had to pay the price of the bad part."

At least, not yet. If heat-trapping gases aren't controlled, nearly nine out of 10 Americans will have noticeably worse weather — not better — by the end of the century, especially in the summer, the study found.

Seth Borenstein, Associated Press

The water in your glass might be older than the sun. It's a mystery how the world became awash in it. But one clue to the riddle may be found in "heavy water" containing hydrogen's chunky twin, deuterium, which contains a neutron in its nucleus. Deuterium-rich water may have formed in an interstellar "cloud" billions of years ago, scientists say, before our sun was set ablaze more than 4.6 billion years ago. That may be the origin of as much as half of all the water on Earth, which means the same liquid we drink and that fills the oceans may be millions of years older than the solar system itself. A recent paper showed that these ice molecules could have survived the solar system's violent beginnings, eventually to be deposited on Earth, the moon, comets — even in your water bottle.

Nicholas St. Fleur, New York Times



If you could read between the lines of the many successes that are recorded in a résumé, you would probably see far more failures: schools people didn't get into; scholarship essays that were toiled over and rejected; job applications that now seem harebrained. In just showing the successes, a résumé — or CV — actually reflects only a tiny slice of one's experience — and perhaps not even the most important part.

That's the idea behind a recent "CV of failures," published by Johannes Haushofer, a professor who teaches psychology and public affairs at Princeton. Haushofer's CV of failures, which he published online for all to see, includes degree programs he didn't get into, research funding he didn't receive and paper rejections from academic journals.

"Most of what I try fails, but these failures are often invisible, while the successes are visible," Haushofer writes. "I have noticed that this sometimes gives others the impression that most things work out for me. As a result, they are more likely to attribute their own failures to themselves, rather than the fact that the world is stochastic, applications are crapshoots, and selection committees and referees have bad days."

The original idea for a CV of failures comes from an article published in the journal Nature, which argued that creating a visible record of failures is a powerful way to help other people deal with their own shortcomings. Whereas we're intimately familiar with both our professional successes and our failures, other people just see a string of accomplishments — and that can be discouraging.

Many famous business people, including Henry Ford and W.H. Macy, went broke repeatedly before hitting it big. And it seems as though almost every famous writer or musician was rejected dozens of times before achieving success. The real tragedy isn't these failures — it's when these failures convince people to stop trying.

Ana Swanson, Washington Post

Tampons in space

In an oral history in 2002 with NASA, the late Sally Ride, who became the first American woman in space in 1983, recounted some of the confusion her gender caused the male-dominated engineering corps a generation ago. Here she explains.

The engineers at NASA, in their infinite wisdom, decided that women astronauts would want makeup — so they designed a makeup kit. ... You can just imagine the discussions amongst the predominantly male engineers about what should go in a makeup kit. So they came to me, figuring that I could give them advice. It was about the last thing in the world that I wanted to be spending my time in training on. So I didn't spend much time on it at all.

But there were a couple of other female astronauts, who were given the job of determining what should go in the makeup kit, and how many tampons should fly as part of a flight kit. I remember the engineers trying to decide how many tampons should fly on a one-week flight; they asked, "Is 100 the right number?" "No. That would not be the right number." They said, "Well, we want to be safe." I said, "Well, you can cut that in half with no problem at all."

Old water

The water in your glass might be older than the sun. It's a mystery how the world became awash in it. But one clue may be found in "heavy water" containing hydrogen's chunky twin, deuterium, which contains a neutron in its nucleus. Deuterium-rich water may have formed in an interstellar "cloud" billions of years ago, before our sun was set ablaze 4.6 billion years ago. A recent paper showed that these ice molecules could have survived the solar system's violent beginnings, eventually to be deposited on Earth, the moon, comets — even in your water bottle.

Nicholas St. Fleur, New York Times



Degree programs I did not get into

2008 PhD Program in Economics, Stockholm School of Economics

2003 Graduate Course in Medicine, Cambridge

Graduate Course in Medicine, UCL

PhD Program in Psychology, Harvard

PhD Program in Neuroscience and Psychology, Stanford

1999BA in lnternational Relations, London School of Economics

Academic positions and fellowships I did not get

2014 Harvard Kennedy School Assistant Professorship

UC Berkeley Agricultural and Resource Economics Assistant Professorship

MIT Brain & Cognitive Sciences Assistant Professorship

This list is restricted to institutions where I had campus visits; the list of places where I had first-round interviews but wasn't invited for a campus visit, and where I wasn't invited to interview in the first place, is much longer and I will write it up when I get a chance. The list also shrouds the fact that I didn't apply to most of the top economics departments (Harvard, MIT, Yale, Stanford, Princeton, Chicago, Berkeley, LSE) because one of my advisors felt they could not write a strong letter for them.

Awards and scholarships I did not get

2011 Swiss Network for International Studies PhD Award

2010 Society of Fellows, Harvard University

Society in Science Scholarship

University of Zurich Research Scholarship

2009 Human Frontiers Fellowship

2007 Mind-Brain-Behavior Award (Harvard University)

2006 Mind-Brain-Behavior Award (Harvard University)

2003 Fulbright Scholarship

Haniel Scholarship (German National Merit Foundation)

Paper rejections from academic journals

2016 QJE, Experimental Economics

2015 AER x 2

2013 PNAS, Experimental Economics, Science, Neuron

2009 AER

2008 Science, Neuron, Nature Neuroscience, Journal of Neuroscience, Journal of Vision

Research funding I did not get

2016 MQ Mental Health Research Grant

2015 Russell Sage Research Grant (two separate ones)

2013 National Science Foundation Research Grant

2010 University of Zurich Research Grant

Swiss National Science Foundation Research Grant

2009 Financial Innovation Grant

International Labor Organization Research Grant

3ie Research Grant

Meta-Failures

2016 This darn CV of Failures has received way more attention than my entire body of academic work



Global warming feels good

Global warming has mostly made the weather more pleasant for Americans over the last 40 years, which may explain why much of the public doesn't rank climate change as big a threat as do scientists and the rest of the world, a new study suggests. But that perceived benefit of global warming — mostly milder winters — will soon be outweighed by more oppressive summer heat, according to a study in the journal Nature that's dividing the scientific community. "Americans are getting the wrong signal from year-round weather about whether they should be concerned about climate change," said study lead author Patrick Egan, a public policy professor at New York University. "They're getting the good parts and haven't had to pay the price of the bad part." At least, not yet. If heat-trapping gases aren't controlled, nearly nine out of 10 Americans will have noticeably worse weather by the end of the century, especially in the summer, the study found.

Seth Borenstein, Associated Press



Although China is by far the largest single consumer of energy from coal, and the country continues to build new coal-fired plants at a rate not seen in a decade, coal consumption in China is beginning to decline. On Monday, China announced new measures that would halt the planned construction of about 200 new coal-fired plants.