As the national conversation on the Confederate flag continues to unfold, some supporters of the flag took their message directly to the president of the United States by lining the route of his motorcade through Nashville on Wednesday.

President Obama visited Taylor Stratton Elementary School in Nashville, Tennessee, to speak about the Affordable Care Act, which a Supreme Court ruling last week kept intact. It was there that protestors gathered, The Tennessean reported.

See also: The Confederate flag is a symbol of racism. But here's where it still flies high.

Across the street from #obamatn visit site. That's at least one Confederate flag. pic.twitter.com/800LtU5ac9 — Jill Cowan (@JillCowan) July 1, 2015

Tennessean: Confederate flag supporters touted "Southern heritage" during POTUS visit http://t.co/F5Cs0fZAaN #O… pic.twitter.com/68ZY32nzM0 — Molly Sanders (@EMwwS) July 2, 2015

It was the deadly church shooting in Charleston, South Carolina on June 17 that ignited the national debate over the Confederate flag. Photos of suspect Dylann Roof and a manifesto attributed to Roof appeared online in the days after the shooting, underscoring the racially-based nature of his alleged crime. Among the photos were several of Roof appearing with a Confederate battle flag, a symbol that has long been defended by white Southerners as part of their "heritage" while serving as a difficult reminder of slavery during the Confederacy for African-Americans.

"For too long we were blind to the pain that the confederate flag stirred in our citizens... The flag has always represented more than ancestral pride," Obama said during his emotional eulogy for Charleston shooting victim Rev. Clementa Pinckney last week. "For many, black and white, that flag was a reminder of systemic oppression. It's true a flag did not cause these murders. But the flag was a reminder of oppression. By taking down that flag, we express God's grace."

#ConfederateFlag supporters gather near where President Obama is speaking today in Madison. pic.twitter.com/vgPoRWA7vc — WKRN (@WKRN) July 1, 2015

"This flag isn't a race war, it's not a race thing. It's a heritage thing," Rick Martin, one of the pro-flag protesters, told the Tennessean. Noting that "black people and white people fought under this flag," Martin added that as someone who served under Obama in the armed forces, he'd be happy to meet him.

Rick Martin said "it would be a pleasure to meet the president." But he won't be doing it in the same spot. #ObamaTN pic.twitter.com/VX4wLGRg8s — Jordan Buie (@JordanBuie) July 1, 2015

Rick Martin waves to drivers passing. Some honking in support. #obamatn pic.twitter.com/wayLNz4Nk2 — Jill Cowan (@JillCowan) July 1, 2015

Greeting Obama's motorcade as he leaves Nashville pic.twitter.com/DQDeu8xDBY — Toluse Olorunnipa (@ToluseO) July 1, 2015

Obama didn't seem bothered by the protesters' presence as he proceeded to deliver his speech at the school and answer questions about the Affordable Care Act (a.k.a. "Obamacare") and its implementations in the state, including one about Tennessee's battle over Medicaid exapansion. He even enjoyed a few moments of levity when he sang a line from the song "Davey Crockett."

Have something to add to this story? Share it in the comments.