To the Editor;

Late Sunday morning, emboldened by reports that healthcare.gov can now handle more users, I decided to explore the website myself, to see what it looked like. I would have done so earlier but didn't want to add to the crush.

I understand the mess better now. If the initial screen is any indicator, healthcare.gov is a cobbled-together effort that programmers used to call a kluge, and perhaps still do. Among the dozen or so choices of where on the screen to click are competing options like "Learn," "Get Insurance," "Individuals & Families," "See if I can get lower costs," "See plans before I apply," "Apply now for health coverage," and "4 ways to apply." It took me seven clicks to get to New York's health exchange website, nystateofhealth.ny.gov. A better initial choice could have taken me there in three or four clicks.

A more incisive design for the "Welcome" page could have taken me there in a single click. Picture this: an initial screen that presents a map identifying by name the 17 states plus the District of Columbia that run their own health-insurance exchanges and asks, "If you are seeking health insurance for an individual or family and live in one of the states shown, click on your state. Otherwise, click 'Continue' at the lower right." According to results from the 2010 Census, California, Colorado, Connecticut, District of Columbia, Hawaii, Idaho, Kentucky, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Nevada, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, Rhode Island, Utah, Vermont, and Washington account for 35 percent of the nation's 114 million households. A simple clickable map (See my suggested design here) could promptly shift a significant part of the load off the federal website. It might even encourage more states to run their own health exchanges, as the Congress had intended.

Sure, there are other first-cut issues, notably small-business owners and Spanish-speakers, whom the next screen could expeditiously be routed to an appropriate place on the website. Indeed, with proper promotion, Spanish-speakers would already know to try CuidadoDeSalud.gov. But my point is that web screens with fewer, carefully planned options could have made the ObamaCare launch less frustrating.

Though I didn't vote for Mitt Romney, I can't help admire how he made a largely similar program work in Massachusetts. Perhaps Mitt's well-publicized enthusiasm for firing people who didn't perform was a factor. I've not heard of a single underperformer who was cut loose from the Obama Administration because he or she failed to anticipate obvious flaws in the website. Thank God the president didn't get us involved in a "peacekeeping operation" in Syria.

Mark Monmonier

DeWitt

(Mark Monmonier is a Distinguished Professor of Geography at the Maxwell School of Citizenship & Public Affairs at Syracuse University.)