Morning MoneyBeat is the Journal’s pre-market primer packed with market updates, insights and must-read news links. To receive this morning newsletter via email, click here: http://on.wsj.com/MoneyBeatUSSignup

MARKET SNAP: At 8:01 a.m. ET, S&P 500 futures up 10. 10-year Treasurys yield higher. Nymex up 0.8% at $37.12; gold up 0.2% at $1,070.10. In Europe, London up 0.2%; DAX up 1.6% and CAC 40 up 1.3%. In Asia, Nikkei 225 up 0.6% and Hang Seng up 0.4%.

THE BREAKFAST BRIEFING

Biotech is back.

The Nasdaq Biotechnology Index has rallied 16% from its 2015 low in September, and is now up 11% for the year. And biotech bulls think it can keep climbing from here.

It’s outpaced the broader market since its September trough, and that puts the sector back on familiar footing: Shares of drug and health-care companies have rallied more than the broader market in recent years as investors have sought out companies that have the potential to grow earnings and revenues.

But the sector has also been prone to sharp pullbacks, including one this fall when the political focus on the pricing of prescription drugs helped drag the Nasdaq biotech index into negative territory for the year. Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton in September proposed a plan to control drug costs, while U.S. prosecutors subpoenaed Canada’s Valeant Pharmaceuticals International in October seeking information related to how it prices drugs.

As has been the case in recent years, longer-term investors used the Autumn pullback as an opportunity to snap up companies with strong earnings and revenues.

Biotech is “one of the best areas for growth,” said David Klaskin, chief investment officer at Oak Ridge Investments, which manages about $4.6 billion.

“In three to four months, either they’re up 20% or down 20%, but I’ll still like them,” he said. The aging U.S. population and the Affordable Care Act should continue to boost health-care spending–and biotech stocks–in the longer run, he said.

The S&P 500’s health-care sector trades at 22 times the last 12 months of earnings, according to FactSet. While that’s more expensive than the broader S&P 500, which trades at 18 times the last year of earnings, it’s less than the health-care sector’s price-to-earnings ratio of 23 at the end of the second quarter.

Mr. Klaskin says biotech stocks are not overpriced given their potential for future growth. He said he owns several biotech companies, including Celgene and Gilead Sciences

That said, the Nasdaq biotech index’s 2015 advance is on track to be its smallest since 2008, when it fell 13% for the year.

“Expectations have been ratcheted down so that investors aren’t expecting to make 25-30% in a year” in biotech stocks, said Sahak Manuelian, managing director in equity trading at Wedbush Securities. “You just can’t keep that up,” he added.

Still, the gains are big enough to continue luring investors.

“The volatility has been tied to the overall political environment,” said Bob Landry, portfolio manager at USAA Investment Solutions, which manages $18.2 billion. “I would expect that volatility to continue in 2016…but I look at that as more of an opportunity to buy into some companies that have good [drug] pipelines and generate good cash flow.” Mr. Landry owns shares of AbbVie

Morning MoneyBeat Daily Factoid: James Joyce’s Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man is published in New York on this day in 1916.

-By Saumya Vaishampayan

MUST READS (LINKS)

Global Stocks Up Despite Pressure on Miners Global stocks climbed Tuesday in the quiet trading week between the Christmas and New Year holidays, although another fall in beleaguered mining shares kept a lid on gains.

Hedge Funds That Cut Against Grain Made Billions in ’15 Many star traders had a rocky year as consensus predictions persistently came up short. The investors that did the best in 2015 are those that defied conventional wisdom.

Belgian Police Arrest Two on Terrorism Charges Belgian authorities arrested two people on terrorism charges, in what prosecutors said potentially broke up a planned terror attack in Brussels, officials said Tuesday.

J.P. Morgan to Increase Deposit Rates for Some Big Clients in January J.P. Morgan Chase will raise deposit rates for some of its biggest clients in January, according to a person familiar with the matter, following the Federal Reserve’s decision to raise interest rates this month.

Fannie and Freddie Give Birth to New Mortgage Bond The federal government is trying to get taxpayers off the hook for billions of dollars of potential losses if another mortgage crisis arrives—and in the process, it is quietly giving birth to a new asset class.

Key Funding Source for Miners Is Depleted Struggling mining companies such as Glencore and Vale are finding it harder to get funds through specialist lenders who in the past were eager to pay large lump sums in exchange for metal deliveries.

Election Debate Complicates Passage of Pacific Trade Pact An international trade agreement embraced by President Barack Obama and the Republican-controlled Congress is drawing fire from many presidential candidates, illustrating the populist shift of both parties in the age of Donald Trump.

Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel Faces Fresh Anger After New Police Shooting Mayor Rahm Emanuel cut short a holiday break in Cuba amid a wave of criticism at home that isn’t letting up more than a month after the release of a video showing a Chicago police officer shooting and killing a black teenager.

Tesla Ramps Up Hiring as Rivals Loom The 12-year-old company is tussling with a growing mass of auto makers crowding into California looking for people capable of helping develop software and other components needed to power electric or autonomous vehicles.

Chinese Developers Build in America, but Look for Buyers at Home Commercial property development has long been a local sport in the U.S., dominated by local firms catering to local demand. One Chinese firm’s savory sales pitch offers a glimpse at a nascent effort by Chinese developers to turn that model around, converting demand from China into Chinese-built condos an ocean away.