When John and Nell Deavenport started their poultry business, there still was plenty of space to expand. (Carnegie Branch Library for Local History, Boulder Historical Society collection / Courtesy photo)

In September 1911, Boulder real-estate developer D.E. Dobbins took out a large advertisement in the Camera to sell "Four Little Farms in Town." These "little farms" were four nearly identical brick bungalows on the southeast corners of Bluebell Avenue and 16th, 17th, 18th and 19th streets. Dobbins' plan was to encourage residential development in his new Interurban Park subdivision (today's Lower Chautauqua neighborhood).

"(They are) the very place to have a happy home and meet family expenses by keeping a cow and chickens," Dobbins wrote. "If you want one of these fine properties, get busy, for they will go like hot cakes."

The properties sold, but not as quickly as Dobbins had speculated.

In 1914, John and Nell Deavenport moved to Boulder from Lockney, Texas, with the intention of giving their children the advantages of a university town. They bought the bungalow at Bluebell Avenue and 19th Street, and John found work as a tailor at Dugout Cleaners on University Hill.

Within a year of settling in to the new home, Nell read a newspaper article about raising chickens and suggested the family buy some baby chicks. They started with an incubator in a bedroom, but the modest-sized home quickly became cramped when they had to use the dining room to stack bags of feed.

The couple's hobby turned into a family business, and they specialized in White Leghorns. Before long, they needed to expand, so Dobbins sold the Deavenports adjoining parcels of land, where they built rows of brooder houses and a hatchery.

In a few years, the Deavenports' poultry farm was doing so well that John left his job at the cleaners. In addition to working with the chickens, he bicycled to his customers' homes to make egg deliveries. Later, he replaced the bicycle with a truck and took on hired help.

Promotional literature from the time states that the family bred their flocks for egg size, vigorous health and laying capacity. In 1946, a story in the Camera noted that the leghorns averaged 245 eggs, per chicken, per year.

The couple stayed in Boulder, and three of their six children graduated from the University of Colorado. In 1946, a daughter, Hope, was a teacher at Whittier School. She introduced her class to her father, who gave each child a chick for Easter, along with instructions on how to care for it.

John and Nell Deavenport ran their poultry business until 1951. As Nell later told a reporter, "People were building homes nearby and didn't want to live where there were chickens with roosters crowing early in the morning." So they sold their farm and built a new house across the street.

John died in 1968 at age 85; Nell died in 1991 at age 102. The Deavenports' properties are close to Green Mountain Cemetery, but they are not buried there. John's obituary mentions services at Boulder's Trinity Lutheran Church, with concluding services at Crown Hill Cemetery. It's presumed the couple are buried in Denver.

As Nell predicted, the neighborhood grew up around the Deavenports' home at 1900 Bluebell Ave. It was one of the first, and it's still there.

Silvia Pettem and Carol Taylor write about history for the Daily Camera.Email Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net, Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com or write to the Daily Camera, 5450 Western Ave., Boulder 80301.