DES MOINES – The Iowa House and Senate Republicans both decided to keep their leadership teams intact following last Tuesday’s elections. Both groups caucused Monday at the State Capitol to conduct elections.

Senate Republican Leader Bill Dix (R-Shell Rock) and Senate Republican Whip Jack Whitver (R-Ankeny) were unanimous reelected to their positions.

Keeping the same leadership team intact is a rarity for Iowa Senate Republicans. Between 2006-2012, they changed leaders four times. The reelection of Dix and Whitver provides some continuity for the 24 GOP members. Senator Dix was first elected in November 2012 as Senate Republican leader. Whitver served as the Senate Republican whip during the 2014 Legislative session.

“I am honored to have the continued support of our Senate Republican caucus,” Senator Dix said. “Senate Republicans will remain steadfast in fighting for fiscal responsibility, expanding new career opportunities and creating a legacy of opportunity for all Iowans.”

However, the news is not all positive for Senate Republicans. They failed once again to wrestle control of the senate away from the Democrats. That was one of the few negative outcomes in an overwhelmingly positive Election Night for Iowa Republicans.

Democrat Senate Leader Mike Gronstal (D-Council Bluffs) and company have maintained a 26-24 majority since November 2010. Republicans were able to oust one incumbent Democrat senator this cycle. Ft. Dodge businessman Tim Kraayenbrink defeated Daryl Beall (D-Ft. Dodge) for the Senate District 5 seat. However, they were unable to hold on to the Senate District 39 seat vacated by retiring Republican Senator Sandy Greiner (R-Keota).

Senate Republicans also elected five assistant leaders Monday for the 2014 legislative session: Senator Randy Feenstra (R-Hull), Senator Rick Bertrand (R-Sioux City), Senator Dan Zumbach (R-Ryan), Senator Tim Kapucian (R-Keystone) and Senator Charles Schneider (R-West Des Moines).

Election Day was a good one for Iowa House Republicans, so it comes as no surprise that their leadership team remains intact.

Rep. Kraig Paulsen (R-Hiawatha) was selected to continue in the role of the Speaker of the House. Paulsen will be serving his seventh term. Rep. Linda Upmeyer (R-Clear Lake) was re-elected as the House Majority Leader. Upmeyer will also be serving her seventh term in the House.

“House Republicans are ready to get to work on behalf of Iowa families and taxpayers. We’ll use a common sense approach to get things done while continuing to find opportunities to make Iowans’ family life more affordable, upward mobility more likely and employment easier to find,” said Speaker Paulsen.

Republicans now hold a 57-43 majority in the Iowa House. They ousted four incumbent Democrats last Tuesday. Zach Nunn defeated Joe Riding (D-Altoona), Ken Rizer upended Daniel Lundby (D-Marion), Russ Paustian beat Frank Wood (D-Eldridge) and Brian Best knocked off Dan Muhlbauer (D-Manilla).

Also, Republican Darrel Branhagen was able to pick up the open seat vacated by Roger Thomas. No Iowa House Republican incumbents lost. Democrats did pick up the open seat created by Mark Brandenburg’s retirement. Republicans held three other open seats.

Along with maintaining his position as Iowa Speaker of the House, Kraig Paulsen will be the incoming chairman of the Republican Legislative Campaign Committee, which is a branch of the Republican State Leadership Committee. The RSLC is a national group dedicated to electing down ballot Republicans.

Following last Tuesday’s elections, Republicans now hold the majority in 69 legislative chambers across the country. They picked up a net gain of nine chambers last week.

Since today is Veterans Day, it is worth noting that military experience provided a boost to Republican candidates across Iowa. That includes Iowa National Guard Lt. Colonel Joni Ernst winning the U.S. Senate race.

Zach Nunn’s and Ken Rizer’s experience in the Air Force broadened their appeal to voters. Nunn and Rizer were successful in ousting Iowa House incumbent Democrats. Speaker Paulsen also had a distinguished career in the U.S. Air Force. Speaker Pro Team Matt Windschitl, who was just reelected to that post, is a veteran of the U.S. Marines.

UPDATE: This story has been revised to show Kraig Paulsen is the incoming chairman of the Republican Legislative Campaign Committee, which is part of the Republican State Leadership Committee.