In two recent installments of the Your Money column, I answered questions about the new health insurance exchanges. The first column discussed many of the basics, and the second column answered reader queries. You can find more readers’ questions and answers on In Practice, with the latest series below. If you’re still not sure how the law affects you and your family, please e-mail me: tsbernard@nytimes.com.

Q. For full-time students who are not working (100 percent supported by loans), how will subsidies be calculated for purchasing insurance on the exchange? —Nick Bartel

A. Subsidies for students are generally calculated the same way they would be for anyone else. If your household income is between 100 percent and 400 percent of the poverty level, you may qualify for premium tax credits (and if your income is between 100 percent and 250 percent of the federal poverty level, you may also qualify for cost-sharing assistance).

The question then becomes: Is the student still considered a member of the parents’ household or his or her own household? If the parent still claims the student as a dependent on the federal tax return, then the student must use the parents’ household modified adjusted gross income. (A household’s income includes the modified adjusted gross income of the taxpayer, and then any other person in the household who is required to file a federal tax return. If the student is a member of the household and earns enough to file a return, the student’s income would be included.)

To be claimed as a dependent for federal tax purposes, the student must meet all of the following: the student’s principal residence is the same as the taxpayer’s for more than half the year (unless he or she is temporarily away at school, along with other exceptions); he or she is under the age 19 at the end of the year or under age 24 if a full-time student; he or she doesn’t provide more than half of his or her own support; and he or she did not file a joint return, according to a Treasury spokeswoman.

If students are supporting themselves and living solely on student loans, they could not be claimed as a dependent by their parents, according to the Treasury. In that case, eligibility would be based on the student’s income.

Keep in mind that if you’re eligible for a student health plan but do not enroll in that plan, you can still go to the health insurance exchange for coverage and potentially receive subsidies, the spokeswoman said.