Todd Young wins GOP primary to replace Senator Coats

By Karen Cross, National Right to Life Political Director

In all the national news about Tuesday’s Indiana primary election –Donald Trump prevailed and Sen. Ted Cruz and Ohio Gov. John Kasich dropped out– scant attention was paid to the state’s important congressional elections.

In the Republican primary for U.S. Senate, pro-life Congressman Todd Young defeated pro-life Congressman Marlin Stutzman. They were competing to succeed Indiana’s pro-life Republican Senator Dan Coats, who is retiring.

Young will take on former Congressman Baron Hill (D), who has a mixed record on life issues. Among his votes, Hill voted to provide government funding to Planned Parenthood, the nation’s largest abortion provider; to allow government funding of stem cell research that required killing human embryos; to pass Obamacare; and against the pro-life Mexico City Policy.

In 2010, Young challenged and defeated then-Rep. Hill to become the congressman from Indiana’s 9th congressional district.

Indiana’s Senate race is considered “likely Republican” by political pundits.

The race for the open 9th congressional district seat will feature Republican Trey Hollingsworth against Democrat Shelli Yoder. Yoder lost to Young in the 2012 election.

When Rep. Marlin Stutzman decided to run for U.S. Senate, it meant the 3rd congressional district seat would be open. Pro-life state Senator Jim Banks won the Republican nomination in a crowded field. He will face Tommy Schrader, who won the Democratic nomination in a three-way race with 38%.

Pro-life Reps. Jackie Walorski, Todd Rokita, Susan Brooks, Luke Messer, and Larry Bucshon defeated challengers in their Republican primary elections. All of them will go on to face Democrat challengers in November.

Stay tuned. There are 41 Congressional primary elections to go, including Nebraska and West Virginia on May 10.

Look for updates in future National Right to Life News and National Right to Life News Today.