FILE PHOTOSome Asbury Park residents are complaining about a plan to bring food trucks, similar to these at the Just Jersey Food Truck Festival at the County College of Morris, to a green space near Ocean and Sixth avenues, fearing they’ll bring noise and trash. ASbury park press file photoFood trucks similar to these at the Just Jersey Food Truck Festival at County College of Morris will be arriving at the beach area in Asbury Park this summer. The line just begins at The Soup Man truck. The Just Jersey Food Truck Festival at County College of Morris features 20 gourmet food trucks, craft beer fest and live music. Randolph, NJ. Saturday, Aug. 9, 2014.Special to the NJ Press Media/Karen Mancinelli/Daily RecordMOR 0810 food truck festival (Photo: Karen Mancinelli)

A developer's proposal to bring food trucks to the waterfront has advanced following a city council vote.

The proposal by Madison Marquette now goes to the city's planning board for final approval. That could happen as early as this month.

The developer revised its original plan, moving the proposed food truck court just north of the Ocean and Seventh Avenue roundabout near the city's wastewater treatment plant. The council vote was Wednesday.

The change came after waterfront residents voiced opposition to placing the food trucks in the green space near Ocean and Sixth avenues. The residents, who live in the North Beach complex, said they were concerned the food trucks were too close for comfort and would bring noise and trash to the area.

MORE: Asbury Park residents fight food truck plan

By contrast, residents in the Asbury Towers complex embraced the idea of food trucks, officials said.

"We came up with a reasonable compromise," Deputy Mayor Amy Quinn said. "And that reasonable compromise was to move it a little away from North Beach and move it a little closer to Asbury Towers."

Current plans allow six food trucks in the proposed space, an amusement area with games, a picnic area including table seating, a bike rack and lighting.

MORE: Food trucks coming to Asbury Park

The food trucks would operate from 11 a.m. to 9 p.m., according to the plan. Quinn said the council rejected Madison Marquette's proposal to extend the hours to 10 p.m.

The city is also not allowing generators in the food truck court, and the developer agreed to have an employee clear tables and monitor trash during the hours of operation. The food trucks would receive water through a hose, the plan says.

Madison Marquette officials say they hope to have the food truck court set up by Memorial Day if the planning board approves it.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1FG5lAB