Hillsborough Historic Preservation Commission vote on Oct. 15

The Hillsborough Historic Preservation Commission will vote Oct. 15 whether to permit the demolition of the mansion on the Duke estate. (Photo: Photo courtesy of Duke Farms Foundation)

HILLSBOROUGH Doris Duke never knew she had this many friends.



Dozens of people wearing red "DORIS" buttons came to Thursday's Historic Preservation Commission meeting to oppose the proposed demolition of the reclusive heiress' mansion on her 2,700-acre estate.



They wanted to tell the commission why the plan by the Duke Farms Foundation should be rejected, but as the number of people waiting to speak grew to more than a dozen at the marathon and occasionally contentious meeting, the commission decided to postpone the public comments and vote until Oct. 15.



Though Michael Catania, the foundation's executive director, agreed for the second time to extend the deadline for the commission to take a vote, he asked for a time limit to be placed on public comment at the Oct. 15 meeting.



"We've been incredibly gracious," he said, adding that any more postponements could affect the timetable to demolish the 65,000-square-foot mansion that was the centerpiece of the estate.

The commission will decide at the beginning of the next meeting how much time will be allotted to the opponents, though David Brook, the attorney presenting the foes' case on behalf of DORIS (Demolition of Residence is Senseless), said that any limit would be a violation of free speech..



Brook told commission members that "You're not the Historic Demolition Commission" and they have a role to "discourage" demolition.



He argued that Duke Farms failed to present enough evidence to prove its case why the mansion, started by Doris Duke's father, James Buchanan Duke, a tobacco and electrical magnate in the Gilded Age, should be demolished.



"Demolition is like extinction," he said.



Brook said the foundation should establish a partnership with the public to explore alternative uses for the mansion.



The mansion, in the northern part of the estate off River Road, has fallen into disrepair, with asbestos and mold problems, according to the demolition application filed with the township.

Catania previously said it would "cost a fortune" to heat the mansion and to abate the problems with asbestos and bring the structure up to code.



The foundation had considered alternate uses for the mansion, started in 1893, and had consulted with architects, landscape architects and architectural historians.



Some of those other uses included using the mansion as offices and a visitors center, a conference center, a bed and breakfast, restaurant, hotel and home for artists. The foundation also considered subdividing the property.



But those possible uses were rejected because of a "discomfort" with commercial activities on the estate, a need to keep vehicular traffic out of the estate, and the uses were not "mission-related" of maintaining the property as an environmental preserve.

The demolition of the mansion would allow the foundation to restore the area overlooking the Raritan River and to provide bike and pedestrian access to the property from the river.



But Mary Delaney Krugman, a historic preservation consultant, told the commission that the estate as a whole has "national significance" and the mansion's demolition would be "dissembling" the estate.



"I think it would be a loss," she said. "It is not an isolated building and (is) central to the estate."



Krugman said though Doris Duke owned homes in Hawaii, Newport, Rhode Island and New York City, she considered Hillsborough her home.



Though the mansion has had many renovations and additions, each of the architects was "significant."



She said she was also disappointed that the estate does not offer enough information about the legacy of the Duke family.



Elisabeth McConville, Doris Duke's administrative assistant for two decades until the mid-1980s, said, "Doris was at her happiest when she was at Duke Farms."



McConville said that demolishing the mansion would be "an insult to Doris Duke."



Russell Sterling, a Somerville real estate appraiser hired to evaluate the estate after Doris Duke's death, told the commission that the estate was "a pretty spectacular place."



Because it had not been modernized, he said, it was "like stepping back in time to the 1920s."



Though Catania had testified previously that Duke did not prohibit the demolition of the mansion in her will, Willard told commission members that all mention of the will was irrelevant and they should focus on the seven criteria in the township ordinance on determining if the mansion should be demolished.



Staff Writer Mike Deak: 908-243-6607; mdeak@mycentraljersey.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1FmtjF3