A controversial commercial development in Washington Township is nearing final approvals, as the planning board is set to review final site plans for a bank and restaurant to be built at the corner of Egg Harbor and Ganttown Roads at an upcoming meeting. It granted preliminary site plan approvals in April.

The proposed plaza — situated on a lot where currently a single, white home sits — is now zoned for commercial use and developer Cedar Properties, LLC of Mt. Laurel has been in the process of getting approvals for the past year.

A handful of residents on neighboring Heather Drive spoke out against the project in September, knocking on doors and getting the word out to other residents who might not have known about the project.

They were particularly concerned about the number of buildings slated for the development. Plans originally included three phases — the first being a 8,800 square-foot "neighborhood center" of mixed-use buildings for restaurant and retail space. The second is a 2,400 square-foot bank, and the third a 13,010 square-foot medical office building.

The plans for the medical office have been dropped however, said Planning Board Chairman Al Fratalli.

"I just felt it was too much, so they worked with us and they came back," said Fratalli, who wasn't present at the April meeting, when the preliminary site plan was approved.

He said that while it may not be the kind of development he sees as best for the future of the township — he's seeking to make Washington Township a "medical hub," and thought the property's proximity to Kennedy Hospital would've made for a good fit for the medical office space — development of the land is inevitable.

"Residents don't want anything there, but [the owners] are going to develop that property... we just have to negotiate and get the best project possible on there."

Back in September, the group of Heather Drive residents said they were concerned about lights, noise and especially increased traffic on the roadway, one of the major arteries through the township.

"I have trouble getting out of here now, let alone have [plaza customers] feeding out," resident Barbara Smeresky said in September. Her property backs up to the land slated for development, separated by a small forested area.

A buffer of more than 100 evergreen trees, 250 shrubs and 47 shade trees are planned for the area between the development and homes, but Smeresky also said she was concerned about property values decreasing from the development as well.

That's one of the difficulties when it comes to developing and growing the township's economy, key to ebbing the constantly rising tide of property taxes, said Fratalli.

"People want relief from taxes, but when you talk about development, they say 'I don't want it in my backyard,'" he said. "It gets difficult at times, but if you want a bedroom community, which is houses and parks, you expect to pay high property taxes. If you don't want higher property taxes, you have to bring in business. It's not rocket science. It's one thing or the other."

He had actually wanted to see the bank dropped from the plans — "We've got banks on every corner," he said — but he thinks the restaurant included in the plans could be a good opportunity to get a popular, higher-end fast casual restaurant there, like a Chipotle, as opposed to a Subway.

"When they come in, I'll hear what they're offering, I want to find out what this retail shop is, what kind of restaurant? I want something decent," he said.

Residents will have another chance to weigh in on the proposed plaza when it comes before the planning board again, possibly at its next meeting on June 17, he said. He added that residents' approval was crucial to getting the green light from the board.

"[Residents] were concerned about what's going to go behind them," said Fratalli. "I stressed that I'm not going to give [developers] anything unless you meet with residents so they have some input and they're satisfied."

Cedar Properties, LLC could not be reached for comment.

Contact staff writer Michelle Caffrey at 856-686-3686 or mcaffrey@southjerseymedia.com