Volunteer profile: Claudia Lopez

Describe what the organization does : Family Service is a community organization that provides different services, such as informative sessions on the Affordable Care Act, as well as providing programs that support academic, physical and socio-emotional education.

What role does it serve in the community? Family Service helps provide opportunities for children to have a better future, for adolescents and adults to prepare themselves to be better citizens.

What made you want to get involved in this type of volunteer work? To me, this is the opportunity to give back a little for the many things that Family Service does for the community, including my own family. What motivated me to join the Parent Commission of the Community Soccer League was to become part of an effort that promotes physical activity in a positive way, as well as the chance to spend time with other families from our community.

What surprised you about the work once you started? There were many things that surprised me. For example, Family Service's staff members who coordinate the soccer league treat the volunteers with a lot of respect and they listen to our opinions. I was surprised that activities like the league not only promote physical well-being, but also promote friendship and working together as a community.

If you could offer local officials a piece of advice about how they could help the community you serve, what would it be? I would recommend that they offer their full support to organizations like Family Service which focus on giving help to those in need, and who work hard to give opportunities to community members so that they can have a better future.

What mistakes did you make as a volunteer? I probably should have helped more on some occasions. Also, I realize I should first listen more and then give my opinion.

What did you do right? I would say that something I have done right is to always arrive at the Community Soccer League with a smile and a positive attitude. I consider that I have respected the opinions and feelings of others. I try my hardest each time to give my best.

What advice would you give to someone else looking to volunteer? I would tell them to volunteer!! Volunteering and working together as a community only empowers the whole community. By giving a bit of time and effort, we can each make a huge difference in the life of someone else.

What is Family Service's phone number? 847 432-4981.

triblocaltips@tribune.com