There’s a big conference call taking place as I write, with HHS Secretary Sebelius, over the announcement of the official Obamacare enrollment numbers. And I’m sorry to say, the numbers don’t mean much, good or bad.

The official figures show around 106,000 people have enrolled for new insurance through the federal and state marketplaces. But only about 27,000 did so via the federal exchange.

Now, first, I have a hard time with how HHS is talking about the data. They say that 1.5m people “applied for coverage.” No they didn’t. 1.5m attempted to browse the plans. They didn’t apply for anything. But HHS keeps calling this “applying for coverage.” It isn’t, and they need to stop saying it because it’s wrong and it’s going to come back and haunt them, just as “you can keep your plan” haunts them today.

This has been a pet peeve of mine since the exchanges were launched. With the DC exchange, which covers me, in order to browse plans all you had to do was come up with a username and a password, then give them your zip and your age. That’s it. The federal exchange, which covers my sister in Illinois, is a disaster. Forget the glitches that stopped people from accessing the site. I’m talking about the rather high hurdles you have to go through in order to just browse plans on the federal exchange. I was online entering the info for my sister, and it was pretty horrific. But what was worse was at the end of the process of simply applying for permission to browse the plans, they required me to sign a legal affidavit swearing the information was true. While the info was true, it was creepy as hell signing a legal document, holding me liable, for simply wanting to browse the plans.

But it got worse. It’s been a week and a half and my sister still hasn’t browsed plans because the site won’t let her. She got “approved” to browse, but they simply won’t let her. When we called the 800 number, we were told that “Homeland Security” had to check her application first. Really? Homeland Security didn’t have to check me out in order to browse the DC exchange. Why do they have to check my sister out on the federal exchange?

But putting that aside for a moment, here’s my concern about the “only 27,000” people actually enrolling in plans. I don’t think that figure says anything about the desirability of the program. It speaks volumes, however, about how hard it is to even browse the plans in the first place.

And even putting aside the legal affidavit, which is sure to scare some people off, or the arduous form you have to fill out to even browse plans, or the several day wait to get permission to browse AFTER you “apply,” there’s another rather obvious thing that’s going to stop people from even browsing. The entire federal site keeps calling the browsing process “applying” – and HHS Secretary Sebelius herself on a conference call with reporters today talked about people “applying” for coverage when they were simply trying to “browse” plans. I wonder how many people simply got scared off because they didn’t want to “apply” for coverage at all, they wanted to browse. I honestly worried, a lot, that I was “applying” for coverage for my sister and locking her into something before we even got to browse the plans. If I thought that, and she thought that, then others thought that too.

This is not to knock Obamacare. I have high hopes for the program, and it’s why I keep trying to get my sister to go through the federal exchange, because I’m hoping she’ll be pleasantly surprised.

I’m still not convinced that the people “fixing” the federal web site even understand what the problem is. On the media conference call with Sebelius this afternoon, one reporter said he still is having problems creating an account. They told him that he’s likely an exception, that the overwhelming number of people have had their applications approved. Yeah? My sister’s application was approved too, and she still can’t browse plans. If they think the simple fact that applications are “approved” is proof that the system is working, they’re sorely wrong.

There are some very serious problems with the way the federal exchange is set up, and it’s not just bad code, it’s bad design and bad decisions by the policy people. To reiterate, here’s what the federal site has to do, at a minimum, in order to fix the problems.

1. Stop calling it “applying,” and stop calling the forms they’re filling out “applications,” when people simply want to browse plans – you’re scaring them off.

2. Emulate the Washington, DC exchange and only require that people pick a username, a password, then enter their birthday and zip code before you let them browse plans. That’s it. And honestly they don’t even need a username and password. All you should need is their birthday and zip, unless they want subsidy info.

3. Browsing plans doesn’t mean showing people the name of the plan and the price for a 27 year old (which is what the federal exchange “browse plans” button does), it means showing them the details of the plans and how much it costs for someone their age.

4. No one’s account info needs to be checked by Homeland Security or anybody else. Give people immediate access to browse the plans. Blue Cross Blue Shield let my sister browse the Illinois plans by simply entering her birthday and zip code on their Web site, why does her federal “application” have to go Homeland Security when BCBS doesn’t require those hurdles to simply browse the same plans?

5. Drop the affidavit, at least until people “pick” the plans they want. You don’t need to sign an affidavit in order to browse, that’s creepy, and you’re scaring people off.

Only then, when all of these things are fixed, will we have a true sense of whether Obamacare is a success or not.

Follow @aravosis

(I’m told that in order to actually see my Facebook posts in your feed, you need to “follow” me – so say the experts.)

Here’s the document on the enrollment numbers that HHS released today:

Mid-Nov-Enrollment-ReportEMBARGOED-UNTIL-330PMNOV-13-2013-final.pdf