Inside Obama’s White House (BBC2) | iPlayer

Last Week Tonight with John Oliver (Sky Atlantic)

Behind Closed Doors (BBC1) | iPlayer

Stewart Lee’s Comedy Vehicle (BBC2) | iPlayer

Happy Valley (BBC1) | iPlayer

“Black man given nation’s worst job” was the headline, back in 2008, in US satirical magazine the Onion, and as usual it was wryly on the money. Barack Obama, still only president-elect, yet to take the vow, was about to waltz blithely into a White House mired up to its pretty marbled porte-cochères in the bankers’ legacy of heaving wet goat dung, a storm-wash of financial oomska that was about to leave America unemployed and broke.

The way in which deals were done and compromises battered out was as absorbing as any episode of The West Wing or Veep

The greatest financial crisis since the 30s. An entirely new, untested team – and they move them all in, not just aides and lawyers and PR flacks and others miserably prone to misuse of the noun “impact”, but pot-plant ladies and those metrosexual wizards who can tell you if a picture’s hanging straight. The one good thing they all had going for them, as so patiently and painstakingly documented by Norma Percy and director Paul Mitchell in the first instalment of their captivating tale of the first 100 days Inside Obama’s White House, was of course Obama himself, a man so effortlessly cool he can walk up stairs with his hands in his pockets. It’s a daredevil trick George W is still only practising with stabilisers and friendly line-of-sight holograms.

There was tremendous access and there were trenchant insights, not least from chief Obama strategist David Axelrod, who rued the simple fact that “we hadn’t had a holy shit! moment when people realised just how serious the problem was”. They soon did, however, and it was on Obama to push through the largest stimulus package – $831bn – in US history. FDR’s New Deal cost only about $50bn, and remember that in those days 20 workers with shovels could be gainfully employed to do the work done today by one arse-scratching bozo with a hydraulic backhoe.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest ‘A man so effortlessly cool he can walk up stairs with his hands in his pockets’: President Barack Obama being briefed in the Oval Office, January 2009. Photograph: Pete Souza/BBC/The White House

The manner in which deals were done, compromises battered out, backs scratched, was as absorbing as any episode of The West Wing or Veep. Along the way we got to marvel over the Democrats’ honest mystification at just why resentful and now irrelevant Republicans were blocking their every bill. It was like watching the very bored kicking of a soft-eyed spaniel. But we also got to see Obama in full resplendent charisma, barging through a corridor at the Copenhagen climate summit to charm, ingratiate and, frankly, embarrass a dirty little cabal of naysayers into yaysaying.

Personally, I’m not only amazed that he managed so much in relatively little time – that stimulus, Obamacare, the bailout of bloodily mismanaged Chrysler, vaulting investment in renewables, continuation of the revered tradition of America making an entire toley of itself on the world stage – but that he didn’t simply retreat, in those first few weeks, to a beach in Lahaina, with a bucket of mai tais and a finger to the world, like a black Bill Hicks.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest ‘Rather good’: Last Week Tonight host John Oliver. Photograph: Late Show with Stephen Colbert

One perfect adjunct for the nights before Inside the White House airs (and also on for the next few weeks) is Last Week Tonight. It’s hosted by British (Brummie) comedian John Oliver, who is rather good. Oliver recaps, with relatively dry humour and unshowy style, the past seven days in US politics, which is extremely useful these days as we eagerly await further announcements of outsize walls and humorous stereotypes. It’s all a bit too Saturday Night Live – too-obvious joke banners flashing up and inviting one to muse on the surprising premise that no American, even though some of them are quite old, might ever have been exposed to the word “fuck”. But it’s timely, and half wise, and Oliver lessens the buttock-clenching shame in our having tried to give them Piers Morgan, like the drunk at a party forgetfully offering you the spat-out canape.

The documentary Behind Closed Doors was almost unwatchable – literally so, in the case of a friend of mine who has undergone the coy term “domestic abuse”. The courage of those women – Sabrina, Jemma, Helen – who allowed themselves to be filmed, through a year in Thames Valley and the later outcomes, was matched only by the cowardice of the big men who beat them and later cried, aptly, like little failures.

It starts of course with emotional abuse, emotional control. I’d love a foot rub… moves on to: why haven’t you given me a foot rub yet… foot rub, you fat lazy bitch… and, within a dainty little month, it’s Lawrence Feek’s boot-marks on Helen’s face.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Jemma, one of the victims of domestic abuse in the ‘horrendous and necessary’ Behind Closed Doors. Photograph: BBC/True Vision Aire

Helen, with catastrophic stupidity, agreed to meet the loser Lawrence, and the resultant fallout – heads in hands from clever lawyers as she was caught on CCTV bouncing into a bar with smiles for an Easter “treat” – woeful to behold. Helen’s hands shook like someone gripped with palsy when taking the call about Lawrence’s (nugatory, allowing him to flee this country) sentencing. She is, entirely possibly, both still in love with and terrified by him. In love with fat, ugly, charmless, pigmouth Lawrence. But that’s the thing with love. Go explain. What I wanted this, or some, series to do was to explain the need that women have to love – no, not to love, that’s a universal – but to love men in particular, with their egos and smelly teeth and needy “needs”.

Stewart Lee said in an earlier broadcast that “no one is equipped to review me”. That’s me told, bless him. The alleged theme of last week’s Comedy Vehicle was patriotism. He could so easily have been lazy. Stew is many bastarding things, but lazy isn’t one.

Somehow, he managed – mouth-farting into a mic – to turn a full three minutes of the sounds of a cat’s diarrhoea into the most plosive and gorgeous argument against deference. It was wonderful, and I still stand and applaud its sculpted perfection. A man mouth-farting into a microphone, while mumbling the national anthem badly and talking about cat shit shouldn’t have been subtle, but somehow it and its wider points were, and clog-brained oversentimental deference might want to pipe down for a bit.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest As good as it gets… Sarah Lancashire in Happy Valley. Photograph: BBC/Red Productions/Ben Blackall

Happy Valley’s ending was all it could have promised, and more. Catherine Cawood’s reading of rights to the mum who had shotgunned her killer son – a hugging arm around her – encapsulated in two tearful minutes all about Yorkshire, its difficulties and its anger and its beauties. It has been the performance of Sarah Lancashire’s life, until the next.