Few things are as important to a city than the policy decisions that lend it lasting shape: physically, culturally, economically. That's about to happen in Portland as the City Council engages with its Portland Development Commission in deciding whether to generate a possible $131 million to transform a 14-acre patch of north downtown now occupied by the U.S. Post Office and its ugly, sprawling operations.

It's not a new idea. For more than two decades city leaders have covetously eyed the property as the most promising next step in expanding Portland's downtown with an enticing mix of open space, new businesses and residences, perhaps a swank high-rise building or more. Dreamers among them would see a potentially dynamic fit, too, in making the spiffed-up property, near the Pearl District and Union Station and a bridge over the Willamette River, virtually contiguous with the city's Rose Quarter. Only money has gotten in the way: Exclusive talks between the city and the Postal Service that started in 2008 rose to a near but collapsed $64 million deal in 2011.

Now the city, at the PDC's recommendation, is poised to spend an estimated $80 million for the property – a price that includes relocating the Post Office's operations to Troutdale or Colwood, possibly – and an estimated $51 million for street improvements, parks and other public services, Andrew Theen of The Oregonian/Oregonlive reported last week. If it does so, however, it could wipe out the city's capacity to pursue other urban renewal projects, among them the hefty planned investments in redeveloping Old Town Chinatown and Centennial Mills. And if it does so, it means the city and PDC are placing a high-stakes bet that the city will eventually be able to sell off parcels of the land for profit.

On Thursday the council meets in work session to discuss it. There is little question that the northern quadrant of the city would be improved by such mixed-use development and, likely, draw investment from around the nation. But several gnarly questions need answering before a final decision is made and taxpayers are asked to join in placing the bet.

City commissioners must first reckon with the money. If development of the Post Office property were to exhaust urban renewal's bank, would the city then issue bonds to maintain momentum on other urban renewal projects? Already on the PDC boards is a planned $35-million jump start to redevelopment in Old Town Chinatown, about $20 million for the Centennial Mills redevelopment and a $7.5 million Union Station renovation, Theen reported.

Editorial Agenda 2015

Make Portland a city that works Get pot right Smart choices for education Help rural Oregon Keep people and goods moving Foster small business growth Track health reforms

_______________________________ Read more about the editorial board's priorities for Oregon.

Separately, the council for more than a year has debated overhauls to Veterans Memorial Coliseum, which could require more than $60 million for a proficient set of improvements; and gutting and reconstituting the famed Portland Building, for more than $170 million. That's to say nothing of the city's professed commitment to create more affordable housing, estimated to cost in the tens of millions of dollars. While the money sources are diverse – urban renewal is not general fund is not revenue bond, etc. – the money for spending or debt service or tax-crediting, ultimately, must be furnished by taxpayers. The spenders, however, are the city's commissioners.

The Post Office deal might well be best for Portland, enjoying a place in the sun among mid-size cities nationally and poised for nothing but growth that burnishes the city's reputation for liveability. But Portland cannot proceed without clear spending priorities. Attempting too much at once will bring the house down. Major capital and redevelopment projects must be scheduled against realistic estimates of anticipated revenue and debt loads. And any significant investments must be protected against unforeseen market adjustments that could not only sour the sale of land for profit but throw the best-intended redevelopment plan into a swamp of fiscal regret. The cities and businesses and households that withstood the recession best were those low on, or free of, debt and its carrying costs.

The Post Office deal holds risks as well as promise for a growing Portland. Only if the council knows this, and calculates its actions carefully, will it choose well on behalf of the public that pays the freight.