Under the Radar Blog Archives Select Date… April, 2016 March, 2016 February, 2016 January, 2016 December, 2015 November, 2015 October, 2015 September, 2015 August, 2015 July, 2015 June, 2015 May, 2015

Vilsack ordered to testify in Sherrod v. Breitbart libel lawsuit

Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack must give a videotaped deposition in former Agriculture Department employee Shirley Sherrod's defamation lawsuit against late conservative publisher Andrew Breitbart, a federal judge ruled Monday.

At an afternoon hearing in Washington, U.S. District Court Judge Richard Leon announced that he was denying the Justice Department's request that Vilsack be excused from testifying on the ground that he is a high-ranking government official and that his knowledge is of little relevance to the dispute.

Leon said having Vilsack testify "will have a tremendous positive effect of narrowing the scope of documents requests made to date" in the lawsuit.

The judge said the deposition could also eliminate the need for other current and former government officials and lawmakers to give depositions. One of the defendants in the case, former Breitbart business partner Larry O'Connor, has issued subpoenas seeking testimony from four former White House officials (Jim Messina, Robert Gibbs, Valerie Green and Reid Cherlin) and two members of Congress (Reps. Jim Clyburn and Sanford Bishop, Jr.).

Leon cautioned that he won't allow lawyers to ask questions that range far beyond the events that led to Sherrod's firing in 2010 and her being offered another job at the department the following day, after accounts of the broader context of her remarks were more widely circulated.

"I'm not going to permit any fishing expeditions or wild goose chases," the judge said.

Leon said Vilsack's deposition cannot exceed 2 hours and may take place on the weekend to accommodate Vilsack's work schedule.

"There no way it has to interfere with his work week, at all....It shouldn't interfere with his very busy schedule," the judge said. He set no immediate deadline for the session, but said, "I think it should be soon." He said he will be on standby to resolve any disputes that may arise during the testimony.

An Agriculture Department spokeswoman did not immediately respond to a request for comment on the order, but a Justice Department lawyer at the hearing said the government may file an appeal to seek to block the deposition. However, Leon discouraged that, saying that further delays in the case would be unfair to the parties. (The government is not being sued.)

"After all, it is the Department of Justice," the judge noted.

In legal filings, Justice Department attorneys offered to have Vilsack verify under penalty of perjury his public statements to journalists about the reasons for his actions regarding Sherrod. However, in an opinion released Monday, Leon said that was not adequate.

"The press, which had very different motivations than do the parties to this case, did not ask the type of probing follow up questions counsel expect to ask at this deposition regarding who he spoke to, what information he was presented with and considered, and how, if at all, different factors influenced his decision," the judge wrote in his decision (posted here). "The public statements the Secretary chose to make cannot possibly substitute for the answers to questions specifically directed to his underlying reasoning."

Breitbart died unexpectedly in 2012, but his wife has been substituted as a defendant in the lawsuit.

Josh Gerstein is a senior reporter for POLITICO.