Skyjacked.

Gian Lopez, 21, supports his girlfriend, Yaquira Collado, 20, and their daughter, Yliaelena Lopez, 2, working as a $9-an-hour nonunion subcontracted baggage handler for Aviation Safeguards in Terminal D of LaGuardia Airport, where he’s worked for three years.

“My first year I earned $7.25 an hour,” says Lopez. “Then minimum wage went up to $8. Four months ago we got a $1 raise to $9.”

Lopez loads baggage onto conveyor belts at the Delta Air Lines ticket desk or carries oversized bags down to the unionized Delta baggage handlers at plane-loading level.

During breaks, Lopez watches people soar 35,000 feet into the blue heavens on business trips and swanky vacations to Miami, West Palm Beach, Atlanta and all over the U.S.A. as he struggles in the underclass of New York City, deep below the poverty line with a base take-home pay of about $500 every two weeks.

“Yaquira takes care of the baby and works at Michaels, but it’s only seasonal,” he says. “Sometimes on my days off she gets a day or two as a cashier in a local supermarket. I don’t like it but we get a city rent subsidy for $600 of our $1,100 rent. Plus food stamps and WIC. I hate taking subsidies. I want to support my family on my own in a union job with a living wage and benefits so I don't need subsidies.”

Lopez loads baggage onto conveyor belts at the Delta ticket desk or carries oversized bags down to the plane-loading level at LaGuardia'a Terminal D. (AFP/AFP/Getty Images)

But Lopez claims that Aviation Safeguards has shortchanged his already meager paycheck to the tune of thousands of dollars over three years.

“I can't tell you how many times they paid me for less hours than I worked,” he says. “To get paid for those missing hours I’d have to take four trains — the 6, 4, N and F — to Kew Gardens, Queens, to the company’s main office and wait hours on the long human resources line with all the other shortchanged workers."

Then Lopez would have to fill out paperwork and prove he worked those missing hours.

“If the claim is approved then you wait two or three paychecks sometimes to get the back money,” he says. “My days off are Sundays, when the office is closed, and Mondays, which I love spending with my family. Most times it’s not worth spending the carfare and your day off trying to get paid for time you already worked. So they get away with not paying me for those hours.”

Lopez is one of 88% of 12,000 nonunion workers at LaGuardia, Kennedy and Newark airports claiming at least one form of “wage theft” in the last year in a new Local 32BJ SEIU report titled "Grounded Before Takeoff: Pervasive Wage Abuse Amongst New York City Airports’ Subcontracted Workers.”

Lopez is faced with a long journey to Aviation Safeguards' main office in Kew Gardens, Queens, to claim the pay he is owed. (TOMAS E. GASTON)

“For low-wage workers already struggling to make ends meet, the rampant wage and hour violations at the airports are a second blow,” said Hector Figueroa, president of 32BJ SEIU. “These violations are not only illegal but they expose the broader malfunction of the subcontracting system at the airports.”

Craig Coy, CEO of Aviation Safeguards, says his company is not in collective bargaining with any union at any of the New York area airports and denies his company is involved in a pattern of wage theft.

“We’re a publicly traded company that values our workers,” says Coy. “We’re paying above minimum wage and signing up workers for health care that's better than the Affordable Care Act. We have a history of respecting unions that bargain honestly.”

Meanwhile, Lopez rises each work day at 2:30 a.m. to travel to LaGuardia for his 4 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. shift. “Last time I took my girlfriend ‘out’ was to see the ‘The Hunger Games,’ ” he says, laughing at the irony. “Yaquira’s favorite restaurant is Olive Garden but we can’t even afford the $10 all-you-can-eat pasta special. But my mom works in a day care so she gave us a Cool Culture Card that gets us into museums for free.”

Here’s a young guy who’s doing all the right things that a responsible father is supposed to be doing. But like the 88% of 12,000 subcontracted airport workers screened by Local 32BJ of SEIU he says he’s getting skyjacked.