THURSDAY, Dec. 19, 2013 — By now, it’s common knowledge that sitting at a desk all day isn’t the best move for your health. What you might not realize is that who gave you that desk — in other words, who you work for — may also have a big impact on your health.

The most common way people receive insurance is through their employer, and because employers handle this interaction, they end up being financially involved. A healthy person is going to incur fewer costs than an unhealthy person. Following this logic, one of the new provisions of the Affordable Care Act makes sense: employers can choose to fine employees who smoke as much as 50 percent of their health plan costs, and people who are overweight or obese as much as 30 percent.

It’s doubtful this provision will be technically ready by the January 2014 launch date (if you haven’t heard, the launch of Obamacare has been problematic), but it’s coming nonetheless, and the administration hopes it will improve the health of the American people.

Not only is the ACA encouraging this, but a September survey of American companies found that starting next year, 36 percent of companies plan to penalize people who don’t take part in these programs — a number that’s projected to rise, according to the survey, conducted by the National Business Group on Health (NBGH) and Towers Watson.

But costs shouldn’t be the only thing at play as your employer encourages you to get fit, according to LuAnn Heinen, vice president of the National Business Group on Health and director of the Institute on Innovation in Workforce Well-being. In fact, David Roddenberry, co-founder of a company called HealthyWage that helps employers improve their workers’ health, said fines won’t actually help improve health at all.

Scientific research seems to be unclear, according to the authors of a New England Journal of Medicine paper published in August 2011. In that paper, the authors wrote: “evidence that differential premiums change health-related behavior is scant. Indeed, we’re unaware of any health insurance data that have convincingly demonstrated such effects.”

The Obama Administration commissioned the RAND Corporation, a nonprofit research think tank, to investigate this very point for them, and found that currently, most organizations simply offer incentives for participation, not for results. The NEJM authors did find one randomized control trial that showed how rewarding people with $750 for quitting smoking rather than charging them $625 for smoking tripled the smoking cessation rate.

While the ACA model may not have been extensively tested yet, corporate wellness is a big business — many companies already exist to help employers motivate their workers to be healthier. Here are some of the most effective management styles that they’ve found to work. Let’s hope Obama’s reading.

Stress Management

Creating a truly healthy work environment goes beyond adding financial incentives for people to participate in exercise programs or weight-loss, Heinen said. It also includes fostering work-life balance, providing healthy food, allowing flexible hours, creating on-site vaccinations and offering health screenings. In fact, the biggest health problem employees reported in the NBGH survey was not weight or smoking, but stress.

“Stress is really important because it drives people’s ability to be engaged and high-performing,” Heinen said. While the employers thought the main driver of stress was a lack of work-life balance, employees actually reported that it was due to inadequate staffing, which resulted in a lack of support and uneven workload, the study found.

Change the Corporate Culture

For a company to really be successful in getting people to be involved, it helps to create a strategy that appeals to that specific company. “There’s no one recipe for any company, because the most successful programs tie into the ethos at the workplace,” said Heinen.

This is a strategy that Athletes’ Performance, a training company that has transitioned from training athletes to providing fitness support for corporate companies, also employs. They try to take advantage of the fact that a community of people is participating, said Mark Verstegen, founder and president of Athletes’ Performance.

“We’re really changing the employee experience, from where they park in the parking lot to the food in the dining halls,” Verstegen said. As people become healthier, they report feeling more energized and engaged in their work.

Jeff Terrill, president of core performance for Athletes' Performance added that though the ACA will improve access to healthcare, access to insurance alone isn't a solution. Many companies will need to call in outside expertise to improve their workers' health, he said.

Find the Individual’s Motivation

It’s also important to zoom in on the more granular level, however, and find out what really motivates each person, individually.

“What we really focus on is defining those different personas inside a corporate culture — meeting those people where they’re at and providing an individual game plan, which gives them an individual structure,” Verstegen said.

Heinen agreed that structuring health incentives around people’s individual desires works best. “Most of us do have health goals,” she said. Before participating, each person should figure out what his or her personal health objectives are, she said.

Use Competition as Encouragement

A full-time employee at the technology company Intermec, Mindy Workman was also a full-time student when Intermec brought on HealthyWage to help encourage weight loss. She knew that her health was suffering because of her hectic schedule, and was encouraged to take control of the situation. HealthyWage teamed her up with four other coworkers who would work together to encourage maximum weight loss, as they competed as a team for prizes.

For Workman, having the support of her teammates and knowing there were tangible results did the trick — she lost between 30-40 pounds in the first few months. She even continued working the HealthyWage in other competitions outside of the workplace, and has won $1,200 for losing weight. Coming in 50 pounds lighter, Workman said that having a goal to work toward really helped her.

Financial Benefits as Incentives

A recent study by researchers at Ohio State University found that smokers cost their employers $6,000 annually in additional health care costs, compared to non-smokers. The National Business Group on Health study found that companies that were highly effective at engaging employees in health and well-being saved an average of $1,600 per employee per year.

Because of these high returns, employers often cover the costs of improving the health of their workers, and provide financial incentives for participation, particularly for smoking cessation, because the success of such a program can save so much money down the line, Heinen said.

HealthyWage uses financial benefits very specifically — rather than penalize people for being unhealthy, it offers rewards. Anyone can win $100 for going from overweight to a healthy weight, for starters. They also incentivize people by having them create teams where everyone puts in a little money, and then they compete for cash prizes, all the way up to $10,000.

Putting in some of your own money upfront helps people stay motivated, Roddenberry says, and using the possibility of a reward at the end can help people stay committed to the end.

But Heinen said she’s advised companies who don’t want to put in their own money, upfront, for wellness programs. In that case, the company will charge people who don’t participate in the programs higher amounts in order to cover the costs and incentives, she said. “It can be funded by the people who aren’t getting the refunds for being non-smokers,” she said, so the programs “can end up being cost-neutral to the company.”

Roddenberry said that while as a society, it may be acceptable to fine someone for smoking, he doesn’t think the same is true for obesity. “I’m thoroughly convinced people are not ready to embrace fat taxes.”