Luke Vernon is a Boulder resident, entrepreneur and founder of Luke's Circle.

He's also currently CEO of Sproutwell, a startup natural foods company. He was previously an entrepreneur-in-residence at Greenmont Capital, a venture capital firm that invests in emerging companies in the natural products and LOHAS industries.

From 2004 to 2013, he was the COO of Eco-Products, the nation's leading brand of environmental food service products, based in Boulder. The company makes a complete line of food service products (cups, plates, food containers, and eating utensils) from renewable resources and recycled materials. He helped the company grow from less than $1 million to more than $80 million in nine years. He sold the business in 2012 to Waddington North America, a manufacturer of high-end food service disposable products.

He has an MBA from the University of Colorado and a B.S. from Cornell University, where he played basketball for the Big Red. .

He operates Luke's Circle, a local job site, in his free time.

1. Since you first entered the workforce in 2002, how has job hunting changed?

Job hunting has evolved from being centered around your resume as the primary tool (along with who you know) to now needing to expend extra effort to differentiate yourself. The proliferation of job seeker tools such as visual resumes, online profiles, personal websites, videos and more, has created opportunities for job seekers to try to differentiate themselves. What's been consistent all along is that being referred into a company is the most impactful way to stand out. Now there are more opportunities to be referred into a company due to the existence of connections on social networks.

2. The big boys — the job boards like Monster, Indeed, CareerBuilder: What do they do well and what do they not do well in 2015?

What they do well is amalgamate a large number of jobs and generate a huge volume of applicants for companies. In focusing on generating as many applicants as possible, they make it difficult for applicants to stand out and they often sacrifice quality of applicants in doing so. How many people do you know who have gotten a job from one of the big boards? That leads to what they don't do well which is create an enjoyable job seeker experience. They offer no sense that when you apply to a job that your resume will actually be reviewed. They offer no personal connection between the job seekers and the companies.

If you aren't yet on LinkedIn, put this article down and go sign up. LinkedIn is a very valuable tool for professionals. It's your public career profile and where you can talk about what you've accomplished. It's how a lot of employers and recruiters now find candidates. However, you need to do more than just sign up. I recommend making a robust profile, connecting with like-minded people, join some industry groups, and use it as a tool to connect with and keep in touch with other professionals. There's a lot of value in having "weak" connections with people and LinkedIn is a tool for managing those.

3. Here in Colorado the economy is doing well, except for the energy sector. Still, finding a job can be a tough task. What advice do you give those just out of college?

Go find mentors and build a personal board of advisors who can act as confidants and advisers in your career journey. When I was fresh out of college, I sought out successful people who I wanted to learn from. They were CEOs, entrepreneurs and other people who I wanted to emulate. I wanted to know how they got to where they were. Since I was just out of college, it was completely OK for me to send an email saying something like, "Hey, I'm just starting my career and really want to pursue a path like yours. Would you be willing to spend 15-30 minutes with me so I can learn from your experience and ask you a few questions?" Right out of college, you have an opportunity to seek out mentors and form relationships that will shape your career. They did (and still do) for me.

4. What would you tell an experienced professional who is looking to make a change or just lost a job?

Finding a job is a job in itself. It takes hard work and persistence. I know it's a cliché, but it's very true that every "no" is one step closer to a "yes." Specifically, though, I'd recommend focusing your efforts on trying to become top of mind for as many people as possible. That's where the value of weak connections comes in. Let your "weak" connections know what you've accomplished and what you're looking for. That can be done through LinkedIn, other social media, or in person. I'm an advocate of putting yourself out there at events and meeting people. Also, make sure your resume looks really good. Have a former coworker or a mentor look it over. Make sure there aren't any errors on it and make sure it conveys why you are special.

5. What are the common mistakes you think job hunters make in today's market?

They rely too heavily on job boards and not enough on person-to-person connections. The number one source of hires for companies is referrals. It's not job boards. It's who you know. Job boards and sites like mine, Luke's Circle, can be a resource for hearing about companies, but the real job hunt is won by then trying to network your way into those companies.

6. OK, a sixth question: What are the keys to success for finding a job today?

A. Build as many relationships as you can and try to be top of mind in those relationships. That's done through periodic emails, tweeting, sharing articles and being helpful to others. Become a resource to others before you have to ask for any favors.

B. Put yourself out there. It takes guts to attend a networking event solo or to email someone you've never met and ask for advice. But put yourself out there. Remember, it's all about who you know.

C. Be persistent. Stay positive. Keep after it.

D. Be mindful of details (i.e. make sure there aren't any errors on your resume and make sure you follow the application instructions). I immediately disqualify any candidate who doesn't follow the application instructions or who has obvious errors on his/her resume. Sorry, but if you can't take the time, neither will I.

You can reach Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel