Caesar De Los Santos poses for a photo with some of the pottery pieces at his store in Loveland on Oct. 31. La Laguna offers authentic Mexican pottery, talavera, and glassware pieces that Los Santos transports directly from northern Mexico. La Laguna opened in May but it is now at a new location on North Garfield Avenue. ( Lilia Munoz )

Everything in Caesar De Los Santos's Loveland store is handmade by artisans from Mexico, and a few of those things carry family names.

De Los Santos sells handcrafted goods he imports from Mexico -- pottery, planter pots, ceramic talavera, glassware, chimineas, piñatas and clothing -- in his family owned shop, which he named La Laguna, or The Lake, for his frequent camping trips to the lakeside. He opened the business in May in a space on West First Street but in October moved to a larger, more prominent spot at 3321 N. Garfield Ave.

The goods, such as the margarita glasses and the chiminea fire pits he has on display, all look the same until closer inspection, when slight differences in shape, size and coloring become apparent.

"The opening is different. The thickness is different," De Los Santos said, indicating the chimineas displayed in two rows down the middle of the store.

The items are made to sell in quantity, while still being handmade on farms and ranches, De Los Santos said.

"It's not artist specific," he said, adding that a few families place their last names on the bottom of the items or in inconspicuous spots.

De Los Santos retired from the Larimer County Sheriff's Office in March and, ready for a career change, wanted to start his own business, he said. He is working full time at Vestas Wind Systems and his wife, Angie De Los Santos, as an accountant, while they try to establish the family business.

Advertisement

The De Los Santos's children -- they have six -- often are at the store helping out, De Los Santos said. He is carrying on the tradition of his extended family that also sells imports.

Every quarter, De Los Santos travels to Laredo, Texas, to buy items brought in from Mexico that are stored in a wholesale warehouse there. He selects popular and seasonal items, as well as items that customers want to see in the store, he said.

"I pick out stuff I would put in my house," De Los Santos said. "I like the product. I think it's quality product."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.