Peter Simon

“Walk with me, I’m intrigued,” said the stranger I approached in New York’s Union Square district. Then I gave her my pitch about why she must sign up for theSkimm.

I had already told her the basics – how it’s a free, daily email newsletter that gives you everything you need to start your day, whether it’s international, sports or celebrity news, and how it founded by two former NBC News producers, Carly Zakin and Danielle Weisberg. But I wanted to go into more detail, explaining what makes theSkimm unique — its voice, its wit, the community of Skimm’rs and the people who write it every day. After two blocks, she was in. I had succeeded at adding another subscriber to theSkimm.

My day-to-day was constantly changing. I spent whole days helping to develop the Skimm’bassador program and others on a series of small, varied tasks. I found myself DJ-ing for the office, managing calendars, making memes, thinking of possible partnerships and serving as the helpdesk for Google Drive.

This is the life of a startup intern. Working for a company with nine employees that has enough work for 30 means you wear more than the “coffee and lunch fetcher” hat. You are constantly pushed beyond your comfort zone and learn how to respond when in over your head. And while I gladly did my fair share of “intern-y” things, such as trips to the post office, Duane Read runs, fixing the printer, etc., I was also given real tasks and I definitely felt accountable knowing that if I underperformed, it would be visible in such a leanly staffed company and could have a real impact. The work was challenging, sometimes frustrating and always rewarding. I learned some valuable life lessons. Here are a few of the most important:

Perseverance : Getting the internship at theSkimm – even though it was unpaid – was no cakewalk. TheSkimm is flooded with applications from people much older and more experienced than me. In retrospect, I think the founders of theSkimm gave me a shot because I relentlessly showed just how much I wanted the position. I demonstrated that I was a good fit by submitting a compelling cover letter that I think could only have been written by a long-time daily reader of theSkimm, by sending a timely thank-you note after my interview, and most of all, by demonstrating perseverance. I first emailed theSkimm in January, again in February, and then again in March until I got an interview. After that, I did a homework assignment (with no assurance of a job). Then there were more emails. They finally said yes in April and we worked out an arrangement for me to come in May and June. (You can read more about how I got the job from their blog post here.)My lesson: Fight for what you want, even if it isn’t something to which you’re officially entitled. My shameless emails, begging, determination and unmistakable love and knowledge of the product got me the internship at theSkimm.

: Getting the internship at theSkimm – even though it was unpaid – was no cakewalk. TheSkimm is flooded with applications from people much older and more experienced than me. In retrospect, I think the founders of theSkimm gave me a shot because I relentlessly showed just how much I wanted the position. I demonstrated that I was a good fit by submitting a compelling cover letter that I think could only have been written by a long-time daily reader of theSkimm, by sending a timely thank-you note after my interview, and most of all, by demonstrating perseverance. I first emailed theSkimm in January, again in February, and then again in March until I got an interview. After that, I did a homework assignment (with no assurance of a job). Then there were more emails. They finally said yes in April and we worked out an arrangement for me to come in May and June. (You can read more about how I got the job from their blog post here.)My lesson: Fight for what you want, even if it isn’t something to which you’re officially entitled. My shameless emails, begging, determination and unmistakable love and knowledge of the product got me the internship at theSkimm. Humility : Juggling seven cups of Starbucks quickly deflated my ego. Although landing the internship at theSkimm made me feel important, I soon realized that I was still at the bottom rung of the totem pole. I knew I had to work hard to demonstrate my value every day and justify the risk the founders took on me.

: Juggling seven cups of Starbucks quickly deflated my ego. Although landing the internship at theSkimm made me feel important, I soon realized that I was still at the bottom rung of the totem pole. I knew I had to work hard to demonstrate my value every day and justify the risk the founders took on me. Multi-tasking : In high school, if I didn’t study for a test because I had prioritized finalizing a paper, that only affected me. But at theSkimm, lots of people counted on me. The hardest part of my internship was juggling separate tasks from marketing, business development and the founders. I soon learned that if I couldn’t multi-task, I’d sink. When no one in the company has an assistant and everyone could use one, you learn how to prioritize and rise above that “where do I start” feeling.

: In high school, if I didn’t study for a test because I had prioritized finalizing a paper, that only affected me. But at theSkimm, lots of people counted on me. The hardest part of my internship was juggling separate tasks from marketing, business development and the founders. I soon learned that if I couldn’t multi-task, I’d sink. When no one in the company has an assistant and everyone could use one, you learn how to prioritize and rise above that “where do I start” feeling. Confidence: I spent much of my time at theSkimm brainstorming; not a day went by when I wasn’t asked for ideas. For every good idea, I had 20 bad ones. At first, sharing my ideas and opinions was intimidating; however, seeing Carly, Danielle and the editorial team make themselves vulnerable to critique everyday gave me the confidence to take the creative leap. TheSkimm creates an enviable culture of constructive criticism so I didn’t feel too exposed, as everyone’s ideas got dropped at some point.

While much has been written about internships filled with food runs, dry-cleaning pick-ups and other ordinary tasks, I believe that an internship can be defined by what you put into it and how you’re treated. I approached every project, even seemingly trivial ones, as critical to the company. In a startup, everyone, including the founders, handles tasks “beneath” them. I felt that theSkimm’s team responded to my enthusiasm for even the most mundane assignments. In turn, they were sure to also include me in some really challenging, exciting work.

My two-month stint in the startup world was incredibly valuable. At just 18 years old, I had access to senior management, gained practical work experience and learned about company strategy – an opportunity nearly impossible to get anywhere but at a startup.

Mr. Kesslen is a recent high-school graduate from Tenafly, N.J., who will be heading to Tufts University in the fall. He interned for theSkimm this past May and June.

Follow @WSJstartup