“I don’t know what he’s thinking,” Mr. Kasich told reporters later. “Does he realize the family legacy?”

Mr. Bush shot back that Mr. Kasich’s expansion of Medicaid in Ohio was a costly “expansion of government,” adding: “Here in South Carolina, people are looking for a conservative candidate.”

Mr. Bush was planning to send reinforcements to the state, starting on Monday with a North Charleston rally featuring his brother, George W. Bush, whose victory here in 2000 was pivotal in his presidential campaign.

Though Mr. Trump’s campaign pulled a negative ad attacking Mr. Cruz on Thursday, saying it wanted to stay positive, Mr. Cruz’s aides released two harshly negative ads attacking Mr. Trump for his use of eminent domain to try to demolish an elderly woman’s home in Atlantic City — one suggesting his behavior was childish, the other accusing him of a “pattern of sleaze.”

Mr. Cruz also introduced a television advertisement mocking Mr. Rubio as little more than a “pretty face” and hitting him for his prior support of a path to citizenship for people in the country illegally. The Cruz campaign later took the ad down after BuzzFeed reported that one of the actresses in it had started in adult films.

Some of the most intense Republican skirmishing here is expected between the Bush and Rubio campaigns, as it appears increasingly unlikely that both will be able to advance beyond South Carolina. So each has embraced the same imperative: Take the other out.

During his swing across the state on Thursday — which started at a resort near Hilton Head and ended at a Christian school outside Greenville — Mr. Rubio was as biting about Mr. Bush as he has ever been.

Photo

“I don’t think the conservative movement would be excited about Jeb Bush,” he said in the interview with reporters on his plane. “On the major issues facing the conservative movement over the last seven years, he’s been basically missing in action. He hasn’t really been a part of that fight.” He cited Republican-led battles against the Affordable Care Act and Common Core as examples.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Responding to assertions from Mr. Bush and others that he has not made tough or consequential decisions, Mr. Rubio called Mr. Bush’s experience in world affairs inferior to his own as a member of the Senate Foreign Relations and Intelligence Committees.

“Jeb has no foreign policy experience,” he said. “None.”

“And if he wants to make this election about experience, well, the most important job of the president is to be commander in chief.”

Mr. Bush, in Columbia, S.C., pointed to his leadership of the Florida National Guard and long list of advisers. “I’m pretty fluent on the issues of foreign policy,” he said. “And Marco can say that he has a record, but what would it be? That he goes to committee hearings and talks to people?”

As he fights for a strong finish, Mr. Rubio, who was criticized for running a cautious, buttoned-up campaign, is increasingly trying to show spontaneity and sincerity.

With breakfast at Cracker Barrel, a 45-minute news conference — the longest he said he had given in almost a decade — and attempts to reveal more about himself and his family life, Mr. Rubio said he was opening up as a way to “fill in the blanks” about him.

Doing so, he hopes, will help shatter the caricature of him as mechanical and stilted that developed after last week’s Republican debate, when he repeated himself four times.

At the Christian school outside Greenville, Mr. Rubio wistfully described the importance of having his family travel with him.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Every morning when I wake up,” he said, with his family at his side, “I get to see my kids, even if for a brief moment.”

He also toed the conservative line on social issues that are important to many voters here. When asked about same-sex marriage, he said that he hoped and believed that the Supreme Court would eventually overturn its decision that the Constitution guarantees a right to such marriages.

And when asked about the removal of the Confederate flag from the State House grounds in Columbia, he said in the interview that while he thought the South Carolina lawmakers had eventually made the right call, it was their decision alone to make.

And as president, he said, he would not have weighed in. “I’m not sure a president is a positive contributor to that debate,” he said.