Immigration—particularly involving H-1B visas—is an issue that generates plenty of hand wringing among both proponents and opponents. Those in favor of allowing more foreign workers with technology backgrounds to enter the U.S. complain of a shortfall of properly trained domestic IT talent; those against it claim the number of unemployed technology professionals (combined with numbers of new STEM graduates) means a greater influx of foreign professionals is unnecessary. Likely, each side will ply congressional representatives with numbers favorable to its position, and Congress will eventually make some tweaks to the H-1B visa program. But truly resolving this issue requires looking at broader considerations.

Offloading Jingoism

An all-too-common complaint against hiring foreign workers—whether through immigration or “offshoring”—is that it gives “our” jobs to others. The collective terms we and our are particularly dangerous, because they engender a sense of solidarity that tends to hide the almost invariably unmanageable baggage. Consider some private IT firm run by a risk-taking entrepreneur. Does that entrepreneur have a claim to the jobs he or she hires out? Obviously. But does the average U.S. citizen with no stake in the company also have such a claim? Obviously not—unless ownership is delineated purely by arbitrarily drawn political borders. The erstwhile Soviet Union showed the end result of that kind of thinking.

Thus, a company hiring foreign workers is not “stealing” jobs from Americans any more than you are “stealing” business from one company by patronizing another. In each situation, the choice may be more or less wise, but as long as it involves dealing consensually in what is rightfully owned, it is economically legitimate.

Cost: Seeing Both Sides

Humorously, whenever an individual’s salary goes up, that’s good; whenever the individual’s costs go up, that’s bad. But one man’s salary is another’s cost, and attempting to separate them artificially tilts the economy. So when someone who shops at Wal-Mart (in search of the lowest prices, often regardless of where the products were manufactured) complains about companies offshoring or promoting immigration as a means of saving labor costs, he or she is applying standards unfairly.

U.S. workers may or may not be more productive than foreign (particularly offshore) workers. But if a company hires two foreign workers for slightly less than the cost of a U.S. worker who is twice as productive, that company has cut its labor expenses. Would a good consumer act much differently, albeit in the realm of products rather than labor?

This is not to argue for offshoring or increased immigration on the merits of cost. It is simply to point out the schizophrenia of the U.S. consumer with regard to costs: just as the consumer seeks products at lower costs, employers (consumers of labor) seek to hire employees at lower wages for the same reason. Thus, instead of simply opposing offshoring and immigration in technology markets for nationalistic reasons, we should consider the factors that create a disparity in labor costs.

Reducing the Cost of Labor

If you want less of something, tax it; if you want more, subsidize it. These words have been variously attributed, but the basic concept is sound. The cost of labor is far more than what is paid out in salary: health-insurance costs, for instance, are largely hidden from employees (for employer-provided plans, at least), but these costs easily exceed $10,000 annually. Furthermore, employers bear a 7.65% payroll tax, along with other regulatory costs that increase the price of labor. And as the ACA (“Obamacare”) legislation continues its (delayed) rollout, the cost of American labor will only rise further thanks to higher health-insurance costs—or penalties for many employers that choose not to provide coverage.

These costs, particularly taxation and regulatory costs, all encourage offshoring. They may have less of an effect on foreign workers who immigrate, but either way, a reduction in the cost of labor through lower taxes on U.S. labor would (if you follow the above maxim) increase employment. One might even argue that instead of propping up the health-insurance system through Obamacare, an outright ban on health insurance would force health costs to decline drastically, decreasing the cost of labor and solving another highly charged problem with a single legislative stroke.

Eliminating Moral Hazards of Immigration

To address the matter of immigration specifically, consider what would happen if the U.S. opened its borders to all comers—no limitations, such as the H-1B visa program. Clearly, a major check on hiring of immigrants would be the language barrier; English is still the dominant language in the U.S., and the average worker must be able to speak it fluently. Perhaps the biggest complaint, however, would be the following: all these immigrants will consume the services of underfunded governments, straining the so-called safety net.

Unfortunately—again applying our useful maxim—the safety net subsidizes, and therefore encourages, poverty and joblessness. It creates a moral hazard that encourages immigration because if the immigrant cannot find a job, he or she can simply go on welfare. In the absence of government-provided welfare and schooling, potential immigrants would be discouraged from taking the risks of leaving their home countries absent reasonable assurance that they will be able to find productive work. Furthermore, a working immigrant (and citizen, for that matter) who is not consuming public resources is creating demand for more products and services, thereby expanding the economy and creating more jobs.

In addition, eliminating programs like H-1B visas would remove another impediment to hiring citizens: that of companies essentially taking on these immigrants as captive or “indentured” labor. Because the company can revoke its sponsorship, the worker has a larger incentive to stay with that company—particularly when competitors in a particular industry have “no poaching” agreements.

Patents: Hampering IT

Much of the above discussion applies as much to any industry as to IT, but one area where IT is suffering is the patent system. Encouraging more IT employment and entrepreneurship may in part require elimination or significant scaling back of the patent system, which has become a legal minefield. This system makes developing new products like smartphones and tablets all but impossible without numerous payouts to (typically large) corporations for the unique privilege of, say, rounding your corners. Enabling entrepreneurs and inventors to work unencumbered would increase the incentives and opportunities in IT, allowing greater uptake of domestic talent and creating more room for foreign talent. New Zealand, for instance, has taken a step in this direction by outlawing software patents.

Conclusions

Assume for the sake of argument that all of the above measures would make the U.S. a much better place to work. Wouldn’t that mean everyone would want to come here? Probably not, but even if it did cause a “brain drain” in other countries, those countries would be forced to implement their own policies to make their economies more attractive to IT (and other) professionals—and that’s a good thing. The exceptionalist (i.e., nationalist) philosophy of many Americans is belied by their fear of immigrants somehow “stealing” jobs in technology and other sectors. But perhaps the problem is more a disconnect from the unmanageable expenses—particularly taxes—and regulations that hamper domestic hiring. Instead of worrying about competition from foreigners and setting up barriers against them, we should reduce the barriers to domestic employment. If U.S. workers are truly the most talented and productive, then unburdening employers is the best way to get them hired.