The Republican presidential candidate and DC Comics fan says Marvel cheated in doubling DC's market share.

Source: Diamond

Diamond's sales charts for January are in, and things aren't looking great for DC Comics. The beleaguered company had just 22% of the market share compared to Marvel Comics' 44%, and only managed to get a single book - Batman #48 - into the top ten. In response to the news, Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump has taken to Twitter to complain that the sales rankings are unfair and should be nullified.

"Marvel didn't win January. They stole it," Trump said of the charts. "That's why all of the projections are so wrong and they sold so many more books than anticipated. Bad."

Trump went on to claim that five of Marvel's eight top ten spots were Star Wars books, representing back door dealings with the Disney establishment, and said that Marvel spread "total lies" claiming DC supported Obamacare. Though Trump is often a blowhard at best and a borderline Nazi at worst, it can't be denied that he has a point about the Obamacare; everyone knows comic book publishers don't support health care of any kind, preferring to treat their creative talent as independent contractors in order to avoid paying any kind of benefits at all.

In other news, Democratic candidate Bernie Sanders noted that Walking Dead #150 took the number one spot for the month, showing that people are tired of a rigged comics economy where over 65% of the market share goes to the top two companies. Sanders noted that while comic book publishers are raking in record profits, citing a blog post from Marvel Vice President Tom Brevoort in which the petulant executive referenced "stacks of money" in Marvel's offices, working class people are suffering, with comic sales overall down 5% from last January.

In response to Sanders' comments, Marvel writer Nick Spencer made 6000 tweets about Hillary Clinton in the span of an hour, representing a 10% rise in his usual rate of pro-Hillary tweets over the previous hour.

Check out the charts below:

Support our sponsors: