After the Brooklyn rally last Sunday, where hundreds of people pleaded for the state to save and invest in SUNY Downstate’s University Hospital of Brooklyn, I was swarmed by folks who wanted to tell me stories about what the hospital has meant to them.

A father’s life was saved at SUNY Downstate/UHB. A sister gave birth to her children there. A medical resident was proud to say he works there and lives in Brooklyn. A registered nurse told me she said she doesn’t know what her patients would do without SUNY Downstate/UHB.

They made it abundantly obvious the role this hospital plays in the health, well-being and economy of Brooklyn, as its fourth-largest employer. Less obvious but equally important is its role as a source of physicians for all of New York.

New York has some of the nation’s best schools of medicine, anchored in some of its best hospitals. But the Affordable Care Act challenges our medical system to rethink how to provide quality, affordable, accessible medical care to current and future patients.

All of this is taking place in the context of painful financial realities facing public hospitals like SUNY Downstate/UHB that cater to low-income families. Many years of underpayment have left these institutions without reserves, the ability to be flexible when the number of in-patients declines or the ability to find funding absent state assistance.

There is a path that would help secure this vital institution and put New York in a leadership position in graduate medical education: Modernizing and transforming the hospital, including the way it trains medical residents.

SUNY Downstate, the only medical school in Brooklyn, and its teaching hospital, UHB, are jewels, serving 2.5 million people. The hospital trains nearly 1,000 medical residents at any given time — and graduates the largest number of minority doctors in the country. They typically go on to serve the medically underserved.

The problem, simply put, is that SUNY Downstate/UHB, like so many other hospitals around the country, has too many expenses on the in-patient side of the ledger and not enough revenue on the out-patient side.

Physicians at SUNY Downstate/UHB, some of whom are AFT members, have come up with a sensible, innovative way to address this situation. The hospital would remain an in-patient facility — but would also train physicians in several new, comprehensive ambulatory care centers throughout Brooklyn.

These centers would provide team-based care that would be well-staffed, well-equipped and capable of coordinating high volumes of patients with enough sophistication to deal with both acute and chronic conditions.

This not only would provide more accessible healthcare throughout Brooklyn — but would move medical education into the 21st century and provide just the kind of training future doctors need.

Now is the perfect time to consider this new model for graduate medical education. SUNY Downstate’s acquisition of Long Island College Hospital turned out to be a bad financial investment. With the imminent sale of LICH, SUNY Downstate has a real chance to get on economic sound footing — and to set an example for other struggling hospitals.

You can’t change the way medicine is practiced and the way services are provided without changing the way doctors are trained. It just won’t work. The education of physicians depends on having teaching hospitals linked to schools of medicine. And it shouldn’t be overlooked that New York gets about $2 billion in federal funds to train doctors — money that should be used to train 21st-century physicians in 21st-century facilities.

Saving and investing in SUNY Downstate/UHB and providing additional care throughout the Brooklyn community is the right prescription for reclaiming the promise of quality healthcare for the Brooklyn community.

Weingarten is president of the American Federation of Teachers.