Topics: Arizona, Barry Goldwater, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Sean Hannity, Sheriff Joe, Life News, News, Politics News

Trudging the sidewalks of Fountain Hills, it was easy to fall in emotionally with the parade of aggravated Trump supporters. No one was happy about walking three miles in the sun to the rally. Wearing weather-inappropriate jeans and socks, I was maybe unhappiest of all. I knew my near future involved chafed thighs and ointments, and it was easy to mutter along with the chorus of conservative complaint: Liberals don’t have any arguments, so they block traffic… This is what welfare people do — make chaos and ruin the weekends of people who work for a living… I heard it was mostly Latinos that blocked the road — why didn’t the police stop them when they drove in?

It was a fair question: What’s the point of passing the nation’s gold-standard in Nurembergian racial profiling legislation if you can’t prevent a caravan of activists from wreaking havoc in Sheriff Joe Arpaio’s own damn suburb, on the morning of a widely expected protest, no less?

On Saturday morning, four days before the Arizona primary, protestors formed a blockade of parked cars on the highway leading to an outdoor Trump rally co-starring Arpiao and Governor Jan Brewer. After towing the cars and arresting three, Arpaio’s deputies blockaded both entrances to the adobe Scottsdale suburb of Fountain Hills, directing arrivals to park along the shoulder of Highway 87. The resulting migration looked like the parking lot trek to a desert music festival, maybe one that culminated in the symbolic torching of a giant wooden Mexican.

Early into this walk I met Danny Riggs, an affable Scottsdale native, Trump supporter and recent Georgetown graduate. Riggs was twice angry: about having to walk, but more about his mother, a Fountain Hills resident who’d been blocked by protestor and police blockades from using her car. The inconvenience, he said, had accomplished something her son and husband could not. It had pushed Mrs. Riggs into Trump’s camp. “My mom wasn’t sure about him before all this, but now she’s into it,” he said. “She’s getting a T-shirt and everything.”

I told him there was a debate on the left about the ethics and strategy of trying to shut down Trump events. He said he thought the protests would only bring in more recruits like his mother.

“The protestors say Trump is dividing the country, but they’re the ones stopping us from exercising our rights. We came to see a conversation. Now we’re an hour late. Trump’s late. We’re walking two and half miles. My car’s parked on the freeway. A group of protestors blocks you in your own home? I’m not saying ‘violence,’ but I’m sorry, you’d be shot for that in a lot of states.”

It’s not clear if Riggs means “states” as in the Nutmeg State, or nation states. Before I can clarify, Trump’s motorcade rolls past us toward the rally grounds. At its center is the black SUV holding the candidate and the governor, fresh from a live-audience recording of “Hannity” at the Phoenix Convention Center. Arpaio had joined them onstage, but left early to oversee rally security in Fountain Hills.

“There they go,” said Riggs, gesturing at the motorcade. “That’s them, if you want to tape it, or something.”

I dutifully took a picture with my phone, but the only thing worth recording about Trump’s Arizona limousine was the backseat conversations he likely had during his visit with Arpaio, the 83-year-old sadist-avatar of his immigration platform, whose grip, Arizonans have begun to murmur, ain’t what it used to be. Did Sheriff Joe, serving a sixth term on the slimmest electoral margin of his career, coach Trump on how to win with the hardline in an age of darkening demographics and civil contempt hearings? Did he share Cosmo-style tips on How to Arouse the Maricopa County Republican Lurking Inside Every Moderate East Coast Retiree? More likely, the student has become master, and Trump has nothing left to learn from Arpaio. If Trump wanted any lessons from his Arizona friends, it was help in understanding why everyone keeps talking about the dead Arizona senator with the Jewish name, the one with the thick glasses, who they say once dropped a Trump-sized turd in the Establishment punch bowl, sending packing Nelson Rockefeller, the Jeb Bush of his day, only to get crushed by the Democrat because everyone pretty much agreed his election would mean dealing with a global thermonuclear holocaust.

It’s possible Brewer was telling Trump not to worry about the comparison with Barry Goldwater, or the fact that his widow and son had just excoriated the frontrunner as a “cowboy” and “authoritarian,” when the pair arrived at Fountain Hills Park and was greeted by many thousands of people, many carrying bullhorns and protest signs. Between the fenced-off rally area and the rest of the 60-acre park, a long white wedding tent shaded dozens of armed deputies in tactical vests. Above it all in a sky of cloudless blue hovered enough police choppers to monitor unrest in a major city.

Riggs and I arrived at Fountain Park just as Trump was taking the podium, his voice dying against a white noise of dueling chants. The most common duel had Trump supporters screaming “U-S-A!” against Trump protestors screaming “Trump Is Hate!” The three-syllable scream-offs contained both menace and a comic undercurrent, as the scene looked like a pretty tight parody of “Taste Great! Less Filling!” Roving packs of pros and antis grew and shrank as people gathered, drifted off, or took breaks after going hoarse. Some of the screaming contests winnowed into dyads, leaving two people so far into each other’s faces they looked as likely to French as fight. Snatches of Trump’s speech poked through the vitriol: Build the wall… End Common Core… Smart trade… George Patton… End Obamacare… The CEO will call me in 10 minutes… Rebuild our military… Win with the military… Winning… So much winning…

As passions rose and spread, it looked like it could be The Day. The kind of day remembered as Bloody Saturday, or the Arizona Beer Commercial Riots. The biggest story in the country was the atmosphere of violence that had come to define Trump campaign events. Just a few days before, a Trump rally in Chicago had been cancelled after street scuffles broke out, followed by reports of a nascent Trump militia called the Lion’s Guard, a group of volunteer brown shirts retailored in red, white and blue. Fountain Hills seemed too posh a venue for real bloodshed, but this was Arizona, where border politics is serious business, and the pieces were in place for some kind of mayhem. Both sides had numbers. There was plenty of space. The police were hanging back. A bloody afternoon brawl seemed a logical progression for recent events, even a perfect one.

But the pot never boiled over. After the speech, Trump supporters drifted off with more chants and parting comments like “Go back to Mexico” and “The entitlements office is that way.” But drift off they did. One guy who’d been bellowing “U-S-A!” at the top of his lungs in protestors’ faces walked over to his antagonists and quietly said before leaving, “You guys do know that you’re fucking idiots, right?” Some of the scream-offs cooled into something resembling conversations. I saw two men go from the brink of fisticuffs to a bonding session over their shared revulsion for Ted Cruz and Hillary Clinton.

Later that afternoon a similar script played out in Tucson, Trump’s last Arizona appearance before voting: Road blockade, chanting, confrontations, some chest bumping. But no blood. The protests may also have minted a few Trump supporters like Danny Riggs’ mom. After returning from the rally, a black Tucson police officer named Brandon Tatum posted a video chastising protestors for being overly aggressive and “hateful.” The video fueled the debate about how to protest Trump, how and whether to engage his supporters, and the ethics and efficacy of trying to stop his events from taking place altogether.

*

On Monday, two days before the primary, I took a long city bus ride up Cave Creek Road, passing roughly 700 strip malls, to Trump’s Arizona headquarters in a two-story office complex in North Phoenix. The operation, on the bleak outskirts of the city, wasn’t much: two modest rooms with a dozen two-person tables for phone banking. The scene was quiet and the energy flat. The campaign staff were in their early to mid-20s, mostly from outside the state. The volunteers were older, most of them over 50, and all white, with the exception of a tiny Latina woman who arrived with her husband, a taciturn fellow in a cowboy hat.