David L. Ryan/GLOBE STAFF

The State House is filled with activists and advocates, all hoping their lobbying efforts will yield new laws. We’ve invited some of them to answer our own questionnaire.

NAME: Megan Amundson

ORGANIZATION: NARAL Pro-Choice Massachusetts

YEARS WORKED THERE: 3

What’s your top legislative/policy priority this session?

A bill ensuring that all women in Massachusetts can access birth control with no copay, as promised by the Affordable Care Act. Insurers in our state, and across the country, are exploiting loopholes in the ACA regulations, a problem that is further exacerbated by the US Supreme Court’s Hobby Lobby decision. We are also fighting for everyone to be able to access health care confidentially — including reproductive health care, STI testing, and mental health visits.

Whom would it benefit most?

Advertisement

There isn’t a person who wouldn’t benefit from this, but low-income women generally are most impacted by barriers to affordable reproductive health care. If women can’t afford out-of-pocket expenses for health care, they go without.

Who are your biggest champions in the State House?

A number of women in the Legislature feel passionately about this issue. But you might be also surprised by the number of men in the Legislature who sponsor and actively push our bills. And we’re really excited about the state Senate’s new leadership.

What gives you reason to be hopeful?

Last year the Legislature passed two new bills to expand women’s safe access to health care, and in November voters elected a pro-choice majority in the Legislature. That gives us tremendous momentum. Massachusetts can buck the national trend of chipping away at access to health care and actually expand access to services for women and families.

What gives you reason to be cautious?

Issues around women’s health tend to be perceived as far more controversial than they actually are. Massachusetts voters and residents are overwhelmingly supportive of access to reproductive health care. NARAL is building campaigns to get more voters to tell their legislators they support policies that will make Massachusetts a national leader on this issue.

What’s your proudest accomplishment at work?

I’m so proud of the response that my team put together to combat the US Supreme Court’s McCullen decision to strike down the Massachusetts buffer zone law. Coupled with the Hobby Lobby decision that gave employers the right to deny their female workers access to certain kinds of birth control, it was a disheartening week for NARAL and our partners. But we channeled our disappointment into planning “The Supreme Rally” and turned out over 1,000 people, pro-choice politicians, and even Governor [Deval] Patrick in downtown Boston.

Who’s your role model/hero?

Advertisement

There are many women I look up to, and Congresswoman Katherine Clark is at the top of the list. She has the ability to take strong stands without alienating stakeholders or being pigeonholed. Even if she disagrees with you or doesn’t support your issue, you walk away from your interaction with her respecting her more.

What book are you reading now?

Judy Blume’s “Summer Sisters” (for probably the fifth time). There is a raw truth in her writing that so few people put into words. And her characters make the secret things you think and feel seem normal, which is so important for young women to realize.

What’s the biggest misconception about your group?

Many people think all we do is work on abortion, and we only fight for policies to support women. At NARAL, we truly believe in the right to self-determination about our bodies, and we fight for access to the full range of reproductive health care — preventing unwanted pregnancies, accessing safe and legal abortion, and bearing healthy children. That is why we fought so hard to pass the anti-shackling law last spring — so that all women have access to safe and humane prenatal and postpartum health care. [That law banned shackling prisoners who are pregnant, in labor, or in the postpartum period.] We also support campaigns like earned sick time and raising the minimum wage because we know that economic security is essential for women and families to make the reproductive health care decisions that are right for them.

What was your most recent interaction with the Baker administration?

I called Governor [Charlie] Baker to congratulate him on his victory. He campaigned on supporting women and families across the Commonwealth, and we look forward to working with his administration.

How did it go?

I hope he feels, as I do, that we can build a positive working relationship moving forward.