Democrats’ support in coal areas may never come back. Dems may face long coal country exile

The Republicans’ romp this week may have permanently turned coal country from blue to red.

Coal-heavy districts in West Virginia, Kentucky and Illinois that had been steadily moving away from Democrats in recent elections appear to have completed that shift Tuesday, when they overwhelmingly backed Republicans who vowed to oppose what they call President Barack Obama’s “war on coal.”

Story Continued Below

Democrats’ support in coal areas may never come back, said Andrew Wheeler of the law firm Faegre Baker Daniels, a former GOP staff director for Oklahoma Sen. Jim Inhofe on the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee.

( Also on POLITICO: GOP, Obama clash on immigration)

“This has been a growing trend in coal politics and will outlast President Obama’s tenure,” Wheeler said.

In West Virginia, once a long-time Democratic stronghold, Republicans will take control of both houses of the state legislature for the first time since 1931. Republicans picked up seven seats in the state Senate to bring the balance to 17-17, and then Democrat Daniel Hall switched parties Wednesday to give the majority to the GOP.

Voters there also elected Rep. Shelley Moore Capito as their first GOP senator in 56 years, and Republicans won three congressional contests, even kicking out 38-year incumbent Rep. Nick Rahall.

( Also on POLITICO: Landrieu faces runoff alone)

Coal was only one issue for voters, who also cited the economy and Obamacare as reasons for ditching the Democrats in the midterms. But with EPA moving ahead on rules to limit greenhouse gases from power plants, and its past pollution regulations helping push dozens of old coal-fired power plants into retirement, candidates who line up with the president became a tough sell in areas that have few other industries outside the shrinking coal-mining sector.

The “policies and priorities espoused by the national Democratic Party, as reflected in their platform, don’t resonate with the priorities, beliefs and feelings of the people” of West Virginia, said Evan Jenkins, the Republican who will take Rahall’s place in Congress.

“Southern West Virginia in particular has been devastated economically over this last six years in the war on coal,” he said. “It’s very difficult for West Virginia Democrats to explain to the voters why their party maintains such an anti-coal agenda.”

( Also on POLITICO: Boehner: Obama will 'burn himself')

But one West Virginia Democrat said the party may have a good chance of shedding that anti-coal image once Obama leaves office.

“Obviously the war on coal has been a powerful narrative for the Republicans,” said Dave Eplin, executive director of the West Virginia Young Democrats. “I think at this point they may have tied it so tightly to Obama that it may be difficult to continue it when he’s out of office.”

Eplin said Rahall’s loss surprised him, as did the defeat of Nick Casey, who lost to Republican Alex Money in the contest to replace Capito in the House.

Across coal states, the United Mine Workers of America union ferociously backed Democratic candidates, including Rahall, Senate candidate Alison Lundergan Grimes in Kentucky and Capito’s opponent, Natalie Tennant. But its endorsements didn’t appear to sway many voters.

CORRECTION: Corrected by: Daniella Diaz @ 11/08/2014 10:28 AM Correction: This story has been updated to correct a misspelling in Capito’s name.