Motivated Grimes wins feature No. 2

Contact between the driver and fellow Jamestown WISSOTA Modified veteran Randy Tarno during Saturday night's A-Mod feature at Jamestown Speedway, shifted Grimes' determination into overdrive.

After briefly being passed by Grimes for the lead on the fifth lap of the 20-lap feature, Tarno crossed over to the bottom in turns one and two where the leaders came together.

Tarno squeaked back into the lead, while Grimes slipped to third. Tarno had started on the pole, while Grimes had worked to the front of the 23-car field from the seventh starting position.

"Well, he said he didn't intentionally door-slam me out of the way, but it sure felt like it at the time," Grimes said. "I, at that point, was pretty pissed off, so I was bound and determined to make something happen."

Grimes used the high side following a restart with 10 laps remaining to make his move, winning a short-lived, three-wide battle over Tarno and Enderlin's John Nord. Once out front, Grimes protected the bottom and he would remain in the lead over the final seven laps to secure his second victory of the 2015 season.

"Being I was in third on the restart, I knew I was going to be on top so I tried packing in as much of the marbles as I could," Grimes said. "I just knew once I cleared (Tarno) I had to get back down to protect the lead.

"So that's what I did and here we are. It's the first win for my new chassis, and I couldn't be happier."

Grimes won Jamestown's season opener on May 23 when the Advantage RV's Modified Tour was at the speedway. But that victory came in a Hughes Racing Chassis.

Saturday's win came in a Grimes Racing Service Chassis, a car the driver builds himself, with a crate engine providing power to the wheels. Grimes mostly races the car as an IMCA Modified on Friday's in Mandan.

"This is primarily my IMCA car. This is the second night I've put WISSOTA tires on it, and of course the bigger spoiler," Grimes said. "Considering we're 150-plus horse short (of power), it's kind of weird. But obviously if your car matches, and it's free enough to roll through and keep your speed up, it works out."

Saturday's A-Mod race included a couple of hard wrecks, but everyone walked away. The worst of which involved Jamestown's Ryan Fike, who rolled violently down the backstretch to set up the final green-flag run with 10 laps left.

"It looked like there must have been pretty nasty stuff going on there. That's kind of a product of a faster race track," Grimes said. "But overall the track was excellent tonight. These guys are doing a helluva job on the track, and I hope they keep it up."

Tarno finished second after leading 11 of the first 12 laps. Jamestown's Ryan Mikkelson finished third from the sixth starting position, and Nord placed fourth after starting third.

"We're getting ready for the IMCA tour coming up, so let's hope we can keep this going," Grimes said.

The six-night Dakota Classic Modified Tour wraps up with championship night at Jamestown Speedway on July 10.

Bombers

A great restart by Marion's Cory Rodin in the Bombers gave the driver his second Jamestown Speedway feature win of 2015.

Running second to Nortonville's Ryan Ost with three laps left in the 15-lap feature, Rodin used a single-file restart to power past Ost on the drop of the green flag and cruised to the victory.

Ost led the first six laps from the pole position, until Jamestown's Justin Schempp used the high side of the track to sneak up into the lead on lap No. 7. Schempp has won twice here this season.

But Schempp's luck ended after leading just three circuits. The driver ran over some debris during a caution flag with six laps left, which cut down his right front tire and handed the lead back to Ost.

By then Rodin and Jamestown's Mike Sahr were making their bid toward the front, running second and third, respectively. Rodin started seventh and Sahr started 10th.

Ost was forced to settle for second, but the driver has been knocking on the door this season with three heat race wins at Jamestown Speedway. Sahr was able to hold on for a third-place finish, while Jamestown's Billy Carow took fourth and Schempp rallied to finish fifth.

Jamestown Speedway

Saturday's results

WISSOTA Modifieds

Feature: 1, Jason Grimes; 2, Randy Tarno; 3, Ryan Mikkelson; 4, John Nord; 5, Blake Jegtvig; 6, Austin Arneson; 7, Jason Wolla; 8, Corky Thomas; 9, John Corell; 10, Tyler Peterson; 11, Jayson Good; 12, Delray Dykstra; 13, Rusty Kollman; 14, Jerry Lamb; 15, Eric Edwards; 16, Randy Klein; 17, Dwight Wegner; 18, Greg Friestad; 19, Bob Banish Jr.; 20, Ryan Fike; 21, Jamie Trautner; 22, Ryan Romans; 23, Trent Grager.

Heat 1: 1, Nord; 2, Grimes; 3, Friestad; 4, Edwards; 5, Wegner; 6, Grager; 7, Romans; 8, Peterson (DNF).

Heat 2: 1, Arneson; 2, MIkkelson; 3, Trautner; 4, Lamb; 5, Corell; 6, Kollman; 7, Good; 8, Banish.

Heat 3: 1, Jegtvig; 2, Thomas; 3, Tarno; 4, Wolla; 5, Fike; 6, Klein; 7, Dykstra.

Bombers

Feature: 1, Cory Rodin; 2, Ryan Ost; 3, Mike Sahr; 4, Billy Carow; 5, Justin Schempp; 6, Clay Houchin; 7, Timothy Skeide; 8, Dale Wampler; 9, Brad Rodin; 10, Austin Geigle; 11, Erik Busche; 12, Clare Miller; 13, Larry Hanson; 14, Lane Stoppleworth; 15, Leann Christensen; 16, Jake Hieb; 17, Kasey Ussatis; 18, Josh Anderson; 19, Jay Schlotfeldt.

Heat 1: 1, Ost; 2, Schempp; 3, Skeide; 4, Miller; 5, Ussatis; 6, Geigle; 7, Stoppleworth; 8, Houchin; 9, B. Rodin; 10, Hanson.

Heat 2: 1, Anderson; 2, Christensen; 3, Wampler; 4, C. Rodin; 5, Sahr; 6, Schlotfeldt; 7, Busche; 8, Carow; 9, Hieb.