When the Supreme Court ruled in the Hobby Lobby case that companies with religious owners could not be required to provide contraceptive coverage for their employees, it did not apply the decision to all corporations, Steven Davidoff Solomon writes in the Deal Professor column. Instead, the court merely held that for-profit “closely held corporations” could be exempt from providing the coverage under the Affordable Care Act, raising questions about what, exactly, this phrase meant. In the case of Hobby Lobby, the court seemed taken with the fact that all of the shareholders were aligned in their beliefs and concluded that these beliefs could be attributed to the corporation, Mr. Solomon writes. Hobby Lobby, however, is an outlier, leaving the definition of “closely held corporation” up to interpretation. “For now, we await the public’s input and the government’s decision,” Mr. Solomon writes. “In other words, the fight over which among millions of corporations can assert religious protections has only just begun.”

TRADING PLATFORM IEX RAISES $75 MILLION | Thanks in part to attention brought in by Michael Lewis’s book “Flash Boys,” the upstart stock-trading platform IEX has raised $75 million in a new round of financing, Michael J. de la Merced writes in DealBook. The money will help the start-up become a full-fledged stock market. Several investors, including the venture capital firms Spark Capital and Bain Capital Ventures and the casino billionaire Steve Wynn, participated in the round. More than a few of the investors became aware of IEX after the media blitz that attended the publication this spring of “Flash Boys,” about the world of high-frequency trading. Mr. Lewis has argued that Wall Street’s giants, relying on high-powered computer algorithms and expensive data connections, have become too powerful and take advantage of regular traders. IEX, which opened its doors only last year, is meant to chill that computerized arms race, slowing down orders to stymie high-frequency traders, Mr. de la Merced writes.

DOLLAR STORE BATTLE HEATS UP | Dollar General ratcheted up the pressure on Family Dollar Stores on Tuesday, raising its offer to $9.1 billion in an attempt to win over its competitor from a rival $8.5 billion deal with Dollar Tree, DealBook’s Michael J. de la Merced writes. If Family Dollar does not begin talks soon, Dollar General warned that it might take its case directly to its target’s shareholders, raising the possibility of a bitter fight between two of the country’s biggest deep-discount retailers. The move increased the stakes for Family Dollar and its investors, including two prominent hedge fund managers ‒ the billionaires Carl C. Icahn and Nelson Peltz ‒ who have argued that the company has not done enough to improve returns for shareholders. It may also have put additional pressure on Dollar Tree, which is smaller than the other companies, to offer even more if it hopes to remain a competitive bidder. “The crux of the new bid lies in measures aimed at protecting Family Dollar in case the Obama administration takes a harsh look at any deal,” Mr. de la Merced writes. Dollar General agreed to pay a $500 million reverse termination fee if a merger falls apart over antitrust concerns. To further address competition issues, Dollar General has agreed to more than double the number of stores it is willing to sell off to win regulatory approval, to 1,500.

ON THE AGENDA | The ADP private payroll report is out at 8:15 a.m. Gallup’s job creation index is released at 8:30 a.m. Data on factory orders comes out at 10 a.m. The Fed’s regular report on economic activity across the country, a report known as the beige book, is out at 2 p.m. The Federal Reserve’s Board of Governors holds an open meeting at 10:30 a.m. to discuss the liquidity coverage ratio and margin requirements on noncleared swaps.