Dear Nonprofiteer,

Can a nonprofit require donations?

My daughter takes band class at our local public high school. There is a parent group that supports the band. The parent group is a 501(c)(3) organization. Every year, the parent group decides on an operating budget which in turn determines what they call a "fair share" payment and a "volunteer" fee. These fees are billed to every student. You have the option of paying the volunteer fee or working it off at the rate of $10/hr volunteering at events. There is no option to work off the fair share payment.

This year the fair share payment was $300 and the volunteer fee was $150. This is on top of the $150 fee the school district charges for music, instruments, uniforms, etc.

In addition, each year the band goes on a trip during spring break. The trip is optional and students must raise funds on their own in order to go. My daughter raised a little over half of the $2000 cost and my wife and I provided the rest. Once we paid for the trip, we were informed that since we had not paid our volunteer fee or fair share payment, those would be deducted from the trip payment. As a result, my daughter does not have enough money for the trip.

First, can a person be compelled to pay money to or join a nonprofit group? Can this nonprofit really send us a bill for $450 simply because my daughter enrolled in a high school class?

Second, can a nonprofit take funds donated for one purpose and use them for another? We were very clear that the money was for the trip, yet the parent group used it to pay for their own expenses.

Last, can we deduct the fees we've paid to this group on our taxes? Are they required to provide us with some sort of tax document?

Thank you in advance.

Sincerely,

My-kid-just-wants-to-play-the-oboe

Dear Oboe:

Nonprofits are not taxing bodies; no one can be required to donate to one.

A person can be "compelled to" join a nonprofit if it's a membership group which controls a benefit the person wants to receive. For instance, the Nonprofiteer was "compelled to" join the Illinois State Bar Association to become eligible to receive its health-insurance benefit. (No more! Anyone who wants to dis the Affordable Care Act will have to get past the Nonprofiteer.) However, as you say, the band class is in a public school and so the benefit of participating in band isn't conferred by the group---it's conferred by the school system. Therefore, you cannot be compelled to join or donate to the auxiliary organization; you can only decide to do so if the auxiliary organization confers benefits you want.

What benefits does the organization---as opposed to the school---provide? If the organization subsidizes the band trip, then it's reasonable to require people who want to go on the trip to join the organization and pay dues to help defray the subsidy. But if the kids pay for the band trip themselves, and the band teacher arranges it, the Nonprofiteer wonders just exactly what benefit the auxiliary is providing. What's in that operating budget? Even if the auxiliary arranges the trip, does that effort really justify a $450-per-family charge over and above the cost of the trip?

Supporting the band is one thing; making a public-school class into an exclusive club is another. The Nonprofiteer would have to see more benefits than you've outlined before she'd allow a nonprofit operating in a public school to charge membership dues.

The question of using funds for a purpose not specified by the donor is a bit knottier. Certainly it's best practice to honor a donor's wishes; you'll recall the hot water the Red Cross found itself in when it placed surplus funds from 9/11 into renovating its blood bank. But the people who gave money to help the Red Cross help 9/11 victims certainly had no grounds to complain when a portion of their donations went to pay the salaries of Red Cross executives; operating expenses are the necessary cost of the benefit a nonprofit is supposed to provide. And so we're thrown back once again to the question what benefits the parent association is supposed to provide and what legitimate costs they incur in doing so.

It certainly seems unreasonably high-handed to take a child's hard-earned $2000 for a trip and then announce she can't go on the trip after all. Even if the association is prepared to refund all of her money, it's deprived her on a technicality of a benefit for which she worked in good faith. (Nice lesson to teach kids about how one should behave in a cooperative civilized society.) And it certainly isn't entitled to keep $450 of the $2000 unless it's provided some concrete identifiable benefit with commensurate monetary value to her, or to you. Merely existing as a booster club is not such a benefit.

As to deductibility, according to an enrolled IRS agent on JustAnswer.com/tax,

If the dues are only for membership in a charitable or non-profit organization, they do not meet deductible criteria for personal income tax return. If there is an element of charitable donation to the dues (and if there were, I doubt they would be called dues) then the donation portion would be deductible as a charitable donation on Schedule A. If this were the case, the donation portion would have to be clearly delineated on a statement from the charity.

If the fair-share and volunteer fees are considered donations, you can't be compelled to make them and if you do you're entitled to a statement for tax purposes (though if the organization refuses to issue one you can just use your check). If, however, those fees are considered dues, you still can't be compelled to pay them but if you don't you'll be excluded from the group's benefits and if you do you won't get a tax deduction---meaning that whatever you choose to do, you're screwed.

Annoyingly, the question of whether these are donations or dues depends on what the parent organization has chosen to call them, something over which you have no control. However, if the organization styles them "dues" it's time to talk to the school board about why it's tolerating having a private group charge you for the music education the public schools are supposed to provide for free.