<p>Photos by CHUCK KIRMAN/THE STAR</p><p>Jason Hunter uses an iPad as teachers review resources in a grouped desk situation at Lesson Planet. The company provides lesson plans that members can download and put to use in their classrooms.</p>

SHARE CHUCK KIRMAN/THE STAR A sign posted in a hallway at Lesson Planet. A portion of a lesson plan is posted on a wall at Lesson Planet. Rich Dixon (from left) talks with Noel Woodward, Lu Anne Abercrombie, Judith Smith-Meyer and Jason Hunter as they review resources in a grouped desk situation at Lesson Planet. CHUCK KIRMAN/THE STAR Rich Dixon, vice president of professional learning services talks with Jennifer Gibson, senior vice president of educational content of Lesson Planet.

By Allison Bruce

For teachers, the workday doesn’t end with the last bell of the day.

Instead, there’s grading, prepping and planning that takes up nights and weekends, particularly as teachers work to meet state standards and the Common Core curriculum guidelines.

For Buena High School science teacher Sue Selle, each school year brings new demands.

“Even though I’ve been teaching science for seven years, I really change what I do every year,” Selle said. “I don’t want to be one of those teachers like I had in high school, teaching the same thing my brother learned four years before.”

About a year and a half ago, Selle started using Lesson Planet, an online site for teachers to quickly search for and find lessons, activities, videos and other supporting materials that have been reviewed by Lesson Planet staff.

Lesson Planet, which started in 1999, is based in Santa Barbara and opened offices in Ventura about two years ago so some of its 35 employees could spend less time commuting to work.

Selle said Lesson Planet saves her time on searching and she likes finding things that have worked well for other teachers and fit her needs. Since each plan shows how it is linked to Common Core, Selle said she knows the lesson is addressing that, so she can focus more on how it meets new science standards.

Jim Hurley, Lesson Planet founder and chief executive officer, said he started the company as a way to help teachers find quality educational resources out of the flood of things posted online.

For example, a teacher on Lesson Planet can go to the Common Core standards for math, select fourth grade, select the standards on fractions, click the first standard and be directed to nearly 40 reviewed resources, including printable work sheets, PowerPoint presentations, lesson plans and videos. Links then take teachers to those resources.

Helping teachers

Teachers are often thinking about their classes day and night and never feeling really done, said Judith Smith-Meyer, Lesson Planet’s education communications specialist. Creating lessons from scratch or digging through Google searches can take hours, while Lesson Planet can bring up a good idea that’s soundly integrated into a lesson plan in much less time, she said.

“What we can do helps teachers live their lives in a more humane way, a more balanced way,” she said.

Farrell Thomas, a fifth-grade science teacher in Greenville, South Carolina, started using Lesson Planet this year for more inquiry-based science lessons.

Thomas said he spends about three hours every Sunday planning for the week ahead and using Lesson Planet helps him better balance the time he has for planning and time for family.

“It’s been really, really insightful and really, really helpful for me,” he said. As team leader for his grade level, he said he has recommended the site to other teachers, particularly those early in their teaching careers.

Teachers pay about $40 to $100 a year for a subscription or are provided group memberships through their schools or districts.

Around 2004, Lesson Planet shifted from a free site with advertising to a subscription-based site, allowing Lesson Planet to grow the site, add more reviews and avoid any pressure from advertisers or other funding sources on the site’s content.

“We’ve been really excited to kind of continually grow the kinds of resource types as well as different services for the teachers,” Hurley said.

That included addressing Common Core standards early on.

“The Common Core creates a lot of new demands for teachers to modify their curriculum in new and challenging ways,” he said.

There also is more demand for integrating technology into the classroom.

Lesson Planet has gone beyond lesson planning to address professional development needs for teachers and districts. The site now offers training videos for how to use iPads in the classroom or make the most of Instagram or Google Docs.

Hurley said the site’s courses are constantly reviewed and updated.

Teachers who use the site say those videos create added value for them as members, as does the free online community added in 2014 where teachers can read articles, share ideas and talk about how they used or modified plans in their own classrooms. They like how user-friendly it is and that they can save the materials they like so they are easy to find when they need them.

Additions planned

The site should grow even more user-friendly when Lesson Planet introduces its new collections and curriculum manager viewer this year. Teachers will be better able to organize the materials they like and plan their curriculum on the site. They can upload and organize their own information — and can choose whether to share their own lesson plans with other teachers on the site or keep them private.

Vida Long, a middle school teacher and part-time administrator in Mount Pleasant, Iowa, said Lesson Planet has helped her make the most of her limited time.

“Having access to the site has made things a little easier,” she said.

Working part-time as an administrator takes up a lot of time before and after school that Long once had for planning. She also moved from teaching eighth grade to sixth grade language arts this year.

“I find it a great resource, because I’m not having to invent everything,” Long said, adding that she likes that the plans have been created by teachers and tested and tried in the classroom.

“I have confidence what we’re going to try is going to be something that works,” she said.

Lesson Planet has a current subscriber membership of more than 80,000, Smith-Meyer said. The site has more than 1 million free members, who can access a limited range of what’s on the site, such as the articles and community posts.

The professional development courses should drive additional growth. The bulk of the membership is still individual teachers, but school and district memberships are expected to increase, particularly as districts trim back budgets but continue to need professional development for their teachers.

“We’re constantly looking at what is happening in classrooms, what is happening with school budgets and assessing what people are going to need in the next couple of years,” Smith-Meyer said.

Hurley said Lesson Planet will continue adding lesson plans, professional development tools and other resources to help save teachers time and inspire students.

“Lesson Planet is really dedicated to helping teachers,” Hurley said. “We feel like there is a lot more for us to do.”

This story is part of an occasional series on how Ventura County technology companies are impacting people. If your company fits that profile and you would like to be part of the series, send information about your company and a contact number to DeAnn Justesen at dajustesen@vcstar.com.@vcstar.com.

On the Web: http://www.lessonplanet.com