The reduction in bad debt created by patients’ unpaid medical bills is a positive for hospitals, but it appears it will take time for it to influence their overall financial well-being.

Non-profit hospitals in states expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act are starting to see some benefits in the form of declines in bad debt and charity care cases, according to a new report from Moody’s Investor’s Service.

But this trend hasn’t yet translated to higher cash flow or better financial results than hospitals in states that have not expanded Medicaid, according to the report, “Medicaid Expansion Linked to Lower Bad Debt Amid Improving Hospitals’ Financials.”

According to Moody’s, the hospitals in 29 states and Washington, D.C. that expanded Medicaid experienced an average reduction in bad debt of 13 percent last year. The expense reduction was more than 40 percent in some cases. Concurrently, these hospitals in Medicaid expansion states benefitted from declines in charity care, where charges are voluntarily waived for medical care.

In contrast, hospitals in non-expansion states saw bad debt increase through much of the year before dropping slightly in the fourth quarter for an overall yearly decrease of approximately three percent. According to Moody’s, the payer mix in these states was also largely unchanged compared to 2013.

“The fourth-quarter decline in bad debt is likely the result of several factors including policy changes that shifted more people to charity care from bad debt, individuals satisfying their deductibles in order to access services at year end (deductibles are a common source of bad debt), a generally improving macroeconomic environment and the individual mandate,” Moody’s noted in its report.

“Bad debt represented only 4.8 percent of median hospital revenue in 2013 in Medicaid expansion states, so big drops in bad debt do not necessarily lead to big improvements in operating performance,” said Daniel Steingart, the author of the report and Moody’s VP Senior Analyst in a news release.

Hospitals accrue bad debt as a result of patients’ unpaid bills, while charity care expenses are from services provided at no charge.

While hospitals in Medicaid expansion states saw bad debt costs significantly decrease by the end of 2014, other factors such as macroeconomic conditions and an industry-wide push by non-profit hospitals to cut expenses and productivity also had a positive impact on the sector’s overall financial improvement, according to Moody’s.

Also, there isn’t a major difference in the level of improvement in finances caused by the decline in bad debt among hospitals in expansion and non-expansion states, Moody’s concluded in its report. “Reductions in bad debt are being consumed by other expense growth, including salaries and pensions, and strategic investments in population health management.”

“A reduction in bad debt will not result in stronger margins by itself. Other factors, particularly the overall economic environment and hospitals’ ability to control other expenses, has a larger impact on financial performance, “ Steingart said.

Medicaid Expansion and the Uninsured

Medicaid expansion was originally required as part of the Affordable Care Act, but the U.S. Supreme Court ultimately ruled that it should be voluntary, and allowed each state to choose independently whether to expand. The decisions of states on expanding Medicaid influence the uninsured rates under the Affordable Care Act as well as the financial well-being of hospitals.

The Commonwealth Fund recently studied healthcare coverage among residents of the four largest states in the U.S.: Florida, Texas, New York and California. It found notable variations in the percentage of adults with medical-related financial struggles in 2014.

According to the study, the differences among the states may be attributable to state health insurance policies before and after the Affordable Care Act took effect.

For example, California and New York both expanded eligibility for Medicaid years before the Affordable Care Act was implemented – making coverage available to more people than in many states – and then expanded Medicaid fully under the law. Texas and Florida, meanwhile, have not. As a result, uninsured rates for residents with low incomes are lower in California and New York than in Florida and Texas.

“Policy decisions states have made are likely having an effect on the number of their residents who have health insurance,” said Sara Collins, vice president for health care coverage and access at The Commonwealth Fund. “Fully expanding Medicaid would help reduce the high uninsured rates in Florida and Texas and help improve people’s ability to afford the care they need.”

Despite significant declines in uninsured rates following implementation of the Affordable Care Act, millions of people lack access to affordable health insurance in states that have not yet expanded their Medicaid programs, according to the study.

“If states don’t take the necessary steps to help their residents obtain insurance, we may see ever-widening disparities between states in their residents’ coverage and the financial protection it provides,” said Commonwealth Fund President David Blumenthal.

Read more about The Commonwealth Fund study in the June issue of ACA’s Pulse newsletter.

Follow ACA on Twitter @ACAIntl or Facebook for news and event updates. ACA’s LinkedIn Group includes news updates, member discussions, event promotions, jobs and more. Visit the group page and request to join today.