Politics

Now that Syria’s fixed, it’s time for President Obama to once again pivot to job creation, which means he’s going to give a lot of speeches containing the phrase “middle class.” From The Hill:

The White House is signaling it wants to shift back to the economy after two weeks in which the Syrian crisis has dominated President Obama’s schedule and workload. Obama will be “focusing” on issues related to the economy in the coming weeks, White House press secretary Jay Carney said Wednesday at his daily briefing. He said the president wants to push forward with economic policies that the White House believes will grow the middle class. Obama himself in his prime-time address to the nation Tuesday on Syria said voters wanted him focused on the economy and not on Syria. Public support for a military intervention in Syria is low. “I know Americans want all of us in Washington — especially me — to concentrate on the task of building our nation here at home: putting people back to work, educating our kids, growing our middle class,” Obama said. The president had wanted to use the beginning of September to press forward on his economic policies ahead of fights with Congress on government spending and debt.

What a pity we lost a whole month of the brilliant economic stewardship that brought us five years of double-digit unemployment and stagnant economic growth. We’ll never know what we could have accomplished, if Obama had been able to give a few more speeches about his enduring love for the middle class, and of course The Children.

Given that his “fight with Congress on government spending and debt” will consist of more angry demands for job-crushing tax increases, forecasters expect this to be a very short Pivot to Job Creation. Meanwhile, the greatest job-killing force to be unleashed on the American economy in a generation, ObamaCare, just wiped out another handful of jobs at Indiana University, as reported at National Review:

Indiana University, which currently spends $215 million a year on health care, will shift 50 maintenance and custodial employees to an outside contractor that will hire them and will manage their hours. According to Indiana’s WRTV, the university is doing so to avoid paying for health insurance for the workers — Obamacare will require that all hourly employees who work 30 or more hours a week be provided with “affordable” health insurance. Graduate students at IU have also fallen victim to Obamacare, as the university will be limiting the number of hours they can work to keep them under the 30-hour threshold as well.

Be sure to thank Barack Obama, Nancy Pelosi, and the rest of the crew for your conversion into temp workers, folks! You were promised fundamental transformation, were you not? You’re welcome.

This comes hard on the heels of news that the Trader Joe’s grocery-store chain killing off its excellent insurance coverage for part-time workers, and tossing them into the hellish ObamaCare exchanges, where they can get overpriced coverage with taxpayer subsidies. “I can say when I opened and read the letter yesterday, my reaction was pure panic, followed by anger,” said one part-time employee. Hey, Nancy Pelosi said we had to pass this turkey to find out what it was stuffed with. Now the Trader Joe’s folks will get to find out if their schedules will be rewritten to make more of them into part-time employees – their ticket to the ObamaCare exchange train wreck.

The idea of a “pivot to job creation” that doesn’t involve ObamaCare repeal is as ludicrous as anything Barack Obama ever said about Syria. Perhaps the American people should reconsider their opposition to attacking Syria. As long as Obama’s busy with that, he’s not “working on the economy.”