Marco Rubio laughs with Sen. Jim Risch, R-Idaho, at a campaign rally in Boise, Idaho, on March 6, 2016. Risch has publicly expressed support for Rubio's presidential campaign. | AP Photo Marco Rubio's major endorsements Here’s a list of other political figures who have vowed to support Rubio’s campaign.

Marco Rubio has become an endorsement magnet, scoring Republican support early on and maintaining a strong courting game throughout the election cycle. South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley is just one example of a sought-after rising star in the Republican Party who has pledged support for the Florida senator.

After a rough patch of debates and poor performance in Super Tuesday, Rubio has nonetheless amassed an enviable amount of praise from his Senate colleagues and others officials across the country.

Story Continued Below

Here’s a list of other political figures who have vowed to support Rubio’s campaign:

New Mexico Gov. Susana Martinez: “Marco Rubio is a compelling leader who can unite the country around conservative principles that will improve the lives of all Americans,” she said in March. “The stakes for our great country are too high — and the differences between the candidates too great — for me to remain neutral in this race. I wholeheartedly trust Marco to keep us safe and ensure a better tomorrow.”

South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley: “I'm a military wife of a combat veteran," Haley said at a Rubio rally in Chapin, a town outside the capital Columbia, in February. "I want a president who is going to have the backs of military veterans and those on active duty." She added: “I want a president who understands they have to go back to Washington, D.C., and bring a conscience back to our Republicans."

Tennessee Gov. Bill Haslam: "To win in November, conservatives need a candidate who inspires Americans from all backgrounds. With Marco standing next to Hillary Clinton on a debate stage, the choice between the future and the past will be clear to every American," Haslam said in February. "Marco has the innovative policy agenda to reclaim the American Dream for all our people, and his conservative ideas will bring the Republican Party — and America — into the future."

Sen. Jeff Flake (R-Ariz.): "I’m supporting Marco Rubio for president because he has the ideas, the principles, and the toughness necessary to bring reform to Washington," Flake said in February.

Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-Utah): "By any measure he's one of these people you can trust. He's honest, energetic and trustworthy," Hatch said. "He's an honorable person."

Sen. Pat Roberts (R-Kansas): “I think he represents the best opportunity for Republicans to win in November, which is just absolutely crucial if we’re going to turn the country back to our more traditional and constitutional principles,” Roberts said.

Sen. Tim Scott (R-S.C.): Scott’s endorsement was highly sought after by other Republican candidates. “He inspires a new generation of voters,” Scott said, according to CNN

Sen. Cory Gardner (R-Colo.): "Today I am proud to announce my endorsement of Marco Rubio to be the president of the United States," Gardner said on Fox News. "Our country needs a new generation of leadership and I believe Marco Rubio presents this nation with the greatest possibilities and opportunities to meet the challenges of this generation."

Sen. Steve Daines (R-Mont.): "I'm endorsing Marco Rubio for President,” Daines said. “Marco represents the next generation of conservative leadership and is a leader who will inspire and unite our country.”

Sen. Jim Risch (R-Idaho): "Having worked with Senator Rubio since his early days in the Senate, I have been greatly impressed with his understanding and quick grasp of the serious issues that arise here," Risch said. "Notably, his communication skills, which are so important in this business, are unparalleled. Marco brings a fresh view to the many challenges facing America today, domestically with our serious financial problems and internationally with our security and standing on the world stage both dramatically deteriorating." He added: “I enthusiastically support Senator Rubio in his campaign for the presidency."

Rep. Mike Pompeo (R-Kansas): “As a West Point graduate and proud Army veteran, I know what it takes to keep America safe,” Pompeo said in a statement provided to POLITICO. “That's why I am excited to endorse Marco Rubio for President. There is simply no candidate running that is better equipped to solve the problems around the globe in the 21st Century. “

Rep. Kristi Noem (R-South Dakota): "Marco Rubio represents the kind of next-generation conservative leader that puts our party in the best position to win back the White House next year,” Noem said.

Rep. Mia Love (R-Utah): "When he came to Utah, I saw him inspire people," Love said. "He has a positive agenda moving forward. And for the first time in a long time, I felt someone who really loves this country and doesn't take advantage of, take for granted the benefits that this country has and also willing to put himself and take on the responsibilities of being a citizen in this country." The biggest reason for her endorsement, she said, "is he didn't treat Utah like a flyover state."

Rep. Darrell Issa (R-Calif.): "Marco Rubio really is an exciting candidate, and I'm pleased to be able to endorse him and to work for him for the presidency," Issa said.

Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-S.C.): “Marco is a rock solid conservative and a leader we can trust. He is someone we can count on in Washington to stand true to his word,” Gowdy said. “And I know from experience: that is hard to find in Washington.”

Sen. Jim Inhofe (R-Okla.): “Marco and I have shared, similar values, such as working for a smaller federal government and putting an end to wasteful spending,” Inhofe said in a statement.

Sen. Deb Fischer (R-Neb.): “I know what the challenges are out there that we face, and no one knows these threats better, no one knows the challenges that we have in the world today — the dangerous world we face — than Marco Rubio,” she said. “That’s why I’m supporting him. He will be a strong commander-in-chief. He will keep us safe. He will keep our country safe. He will keep our families safe.”

Sen. Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.): "The stakes are high," he said. "If our nominee does not win, Hillary Clinton's justices will control the Supreme Court for 30 years and we'll be stuck with Obamacare forever. I have seen him take the lead in passing new laws to impose tough new sanctions on Hezbollah terrorists, and to get rid of incompetent managers who weren't doing their jobs to help veterans. He has proposed good new ideas for giving students more options for college."

Former Sen. Tom Coburn (R-Okla.): “America desperately needs a president who will appeal to people’s highest aspirations rather than their deepest fears; a president who will model servant leadership rather than self-promotion; and a president who will cast a vision and unite the country instead of denigrating dissenters as second-class citizens. Marco would be such a president," he said.