Dr. Dena Marie Minning, a biochemist and medical doctor who has been romantically linked for months to U.S. Rep. Alan Grayson, D-Orlando, filed paperwork late Friday to run for election to his seat in Congress.

A Democrat, Minning, 44, has no Florida political background. She is a medical doctor and a biotechnology entrepreneur who founded and runs MedExpert Consulting Inc.

In the past two years she was listed as a federal lobbyist with her company to represent Biocryst Pharmaceuticals, which advertises the drug Rapivab as a “first-and-only one-dose intravenous treatment for influenza.”

Grayson is declining a re-election bid for his seat, for now, to run for the U.S. Senate in 2016. That has opened up what is becoming a Democratic free-for-all to replace him in Florida's 9th Congressional District, which has a solid Democratic voter base.

Minning has not spoken to any major media about her candidacy, except in a written statement, nor even about the prospect, or about her relationship with the congressman. His marriage of 19 years ended in a contentious court battle over the past 18 months, finally coming to an annulment earlier this month. Nor has Grayson commented about Minning, except in a written statement about her candidacy.

Shawn Shahzad, her campaign spokesman, sent an email Saturday stating, "Dr. Minning is not conducting any interviews at this time. She will be doing so in the future."

Her candidacy creates political intrigue.

A former top Grayson aide, Susannah Randolph, entered the race two weeks ago. Therefore, Minning's candidacy would pit his longtime political associate, Randolph, against his reported girlfriend.

Grayson released a statement Saturday that said, “Dr. Minning, an M.D. and Ph.D., has developed cures for grave diseases, provided free healthcare to the needy, and advanced the frontiers of knowledge and health. With one-sixth of our district still without health coverage, her commitment to universal healthcare is very important to our community. I am not making any endorsements at this time, but I wish her well.”

Also in the race is state Sen. Darren Soto, D-Orlando, former state Rep. Ricardo Rangel, D-Kissimmee, and former Osceola County Democratic chair Valleri Crabtree.

Minning's possible candidacy has been rumored for months but neither she nor Grayson would comment.

Shahzad released a statement from her that spells out her support for the Affordable Care Act, expanding Medicare, ending discrimination, public education, fair pay and sick leave for workers and protection of Social Security.

"The reason I am running for Congress is to help the people," she declared in the statement.

Her filing with the U.S. Federal Election Commission Friday lists her address in the Hunters Creek subdivision in south Orange County, which is in Grayson's 9th Congressional District. Previous listings indicated her home to be in Indialantic.

She also filed to create a campaign committee, Dena For Congress. Her treasurer is Dustin P. Andersen, a former Grayson staff member.

Randolph's reaction Saturday morning:

"The great part about our democracy is that anyone can run for office. I have spent years working to make Central Florida a better place to live and raise a family. I'm eager to compare that record with all the candidates in this race."

And Soto's:

"As expected, there is a crowded field emerging. Experience and leadership sets us apart from the pack."

And Crabtree's:

"My position has remained consistent ever since launching my campaign on Jan. 10, 2015 - I am not running AGAINST anyone; rather, I am running FOR policies of social justice, transparency, responsible economics and a safeguarded future for our district and our country. The addition of other candidates doesn't change this."

And Rangel's:

"I would like to welcome Dr. Minning to the race. It's exciting to see so many people interested in running. I am looking forward to seeing everyone along the campaign trail."