In this photo taken on Feb 11, 2013, freshly dumped hypodermic syringes and a needle litter an abandoned cemetery in Myitkyina, the provincial capital of Kachin state, Myanmar. (Gemunu Amarasinghe/AP)

A startling report released this week from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention showed that deaths from heroin overdoses have quadrupled in a decade – and that the initiation drug for developing an addiction was most often prescription opioid painkillers like Vicodin, OxyContin and morphine.

The CDC has made recommendations for dealing with the issue at the federal, state and provider level. Health officials say most doctors do not appear to fully grasp the long-term damage that painkillers can cause, even though data show that in the majority of states these and other drug overdoses now kill more Americans than car accidents do. People who begin taking prescription painkillers often turn to heroin because it is a cheaper, more available alternative that gives them a similar high.

[READ: Heroin Use Skyrockets in U.S., CDC Says]

Dr. Tom Frieden, director of the CDC, is on the front lines of combating addiction to prescription painkillers and heroin. He recently spoke with U.S. News about how the drug became so widespread in the U.S. in such a short time, and what policies could enact change. Excerpts:

You have been quoted saying that in medical school you were told prescription opioids were not addictive. Is this true for a lot of doctors? Why are doctors prescribing them at such a high rate?

I think there are a lot of doctors who – like me – weren't trained to have a due respect for just how dangerous these drugs are. They are addictive, and they are highly lethal.

There are patients who want a quick fix, and doctors are concerned that patients will rate them less favorably if they don't give them what they want. I think part of this is the need to understand and address causes of pain and not just symptoms. There are lots of good medicines for pain. You don't have to use an opioid.

Is there a time in which opioids can be used appropriately?

It should be a minimum dose with a minimum number of pills, not a 30-day supply. There certainly are times when these medicines are really important. If you have someone in agony who has just had a car crash, by all means give an opioid. This can also apply to a patient in pain and dying from pancreatic cancer. But if you have an opiate-naive patient – someone who has never seen opioids – it's a momentous decision to give that patient an opioid. You may be forcing them to embark on a life of addiction.

[ALSO: The Rise of Gun Violence as a Public Health Issue]

What can the federal government do in terms of funding programs that would address research for other medications that would help treat chronic pain?

The Food and Drug Administration has approved a few new medicines for back pain and migraines. Some of tackling this is also looking at how doctors are taught and supervised, and how well the prescription drug monitoring programs work.

Are there programs in states or cities that have worked?

Dr. Tom Frieden, director of the CDC (Brett Ziegler for USN&WR)

It's very hard to swim against the tide of cheaper, more accessible heroin. There are areas where we have seen significant decreases, but one of the reasons that we are so focused on getting resources and support to states is for them to try things so we can figure it out. States have a lot of role to play here.

There are drugs that exist to help treat addiction. Are doctors prescribing them?

Not much. Unfortunately there's some resistance to these medicines in the patient and advocacy communities. It's seen as substituting one addiction for another. I don't think that's accurate. These are ways to help people stay alive. There are some people for whom they don't work and there are some people who don't need them. But getting over an opiate addiction is very hard, and anything you can do to avoid dying from it is very important.

Switching gears. The U.S. just banned trans fat , just as New York City did when you were the city's commissioner for health and mental hygiene. Can you speak to how government can help make people healthier?

Trans fat is a pretty simple case. These are artificial chemicals that are being put into our food. It's a fat that is solid at room temperature – but it's also solid in your coronary arteries. It increases the risk of a heart attack. Getting them out doesn't cost more money, doesn't reduce the taste, doesn't make foods less available and it saves lives. It also will save money for our health care system.

[MORE: FDA Bans Trans Fats in Move That Will Alter U.S. Food Landscape]

New York City life expectancy increased substantially faster than the rest of the country. Probably the leading driver of that was the reduction in tobacco use. Smoking remains the leading preventable cause of death in this country. One of the things I'm most proud of at CDC is the "Tips from Former Smokers" campaign. That campaign has probably saved at least 50,000 to 100,000 lives.

Unfortunately the House budget would eliminate it, and that would result in very substantial problems.

A report came out this week about how the World Health Organization handled Ebola. Can you tell us about about the ongoing efforts by CDC?

Ebola is off the headlines but we have never left the frontlines. I have 160 staff in the three affected countries today.

It is very difficult to get to zero in West Africa because of the things that allowed it to get so out-of-control: the lack of roads, electricity, Internet, cell phone service, 70 percent illiteracy, lack of trust of the government, lack of trust of modern medicine, and the traditional practice of burial and healing. It's a real challenge. We are not done yet. We are making real progress. We have a better handle on it than before.