It's a race to the finish line for the hundreds of Cubs Scouts who were in attendance Saturday for the annual Pinewood Derby Race. The race brings together parents and Cub Scouts together as a team. The scout builds their own unique cars from wood, and uses engineering and skills they have learned to make the ultimate car, in hopes that they'll reign supreme as the winner of the derby.

"Every year one of the highlights of Cub Scouting is for the boy to make a car out of a pinewood block of wood," Choctaw Area Council Scout Executive, Ken Kercheval said. "He can add his design, the paint, all that kind of stuff. They race it and today is the culmination of that for our council."

Each scout follows a list of specified rules to keep their cars within regulation. For many of the scouts, not only do they learn life lessons, but they learn about the importance of teamwork.

"If you're working together with a family member, it brings you closer together because you have to work together," Pack 70 Scout Braden Smith said.

"I learned building and teamwork with your parent, brother, or anything else," Pack 16 Scout Merrick Crocker said.

The event, sponsored by numerous organizations, shows the importance of the community backing scouting and their events.

"These are the future leaders of scouting," stated Kercheval. "These are the future leaders of the community. They're learning how to deal with adversity, work together, and all those carry on to better success in high school."

Behind the design of each car, many scouts say it shows the uniqueness of an individual and how important each person is.

"They have their own talents and they're not copying anyone else because they don't have anyone else's car or design," Pack 7 Scout Fulton Ascherl said.

By the end of the race everyone went home a winner by being a participant and learned a valuable lesson in having fun while working together.

"It makes me think I'm going to do better next time and get first place next time," Pack 46 Scout Chance rounds said.

"This event makes me feel excited building my car with my dad," Pack 70 Scout Troy Brown said. "It makes me feel excited and happy."

The Boy Scouts of America registered The Pinewood Derby as an official trademark in May of 2005. It was selected as part of "America's 100 Best" in 2006, as a celebrated rite of spring.