2nd Annual East Brunswick Day at the Community Arts Center

2014 photo of East Brunswick Day. (Photo: Photo Courtesy of Township of East Brunswick) Story Highlights East Brunswick and Northfield Bank announce the 2nd Annual East Brunswick Day

East Brunswick Day to be held at the Community Arts Center on Sept. 19

Event is Free

Mayor Stahl will be hosting his 7th Annual dining for a Cause at the event

The Township of East Brunswick & sponsors, TAP into East Brunswick and Northfield Bank will present the second annual East Brunswick Day outdoors at the Community Arts Center on Saturday, Sept.19, from 12 to 5 p.m. The rain date is Sunday, Sept. 20.

This special event acknowledges the many nonprofit, volunteer-based organizations in the township and will also showcase local businesses the community has to offer. More than 120 exhibitors will participate with information, literature, demonstrations and giveaways at their booths.

Added to this year’s event is the East Brunswick Farmers Market sponsored by The Township of East Brunswick, the East Brunswick Environmental Commission and the East Brunswick Green Team. The Farmers Market will have vendors from all over the Garden State and will offer locally grown products. For further information on the Farmers Market, contact Theresa Lam 732-492-6454 or therlam@yahoo.com.

There will be continuous entertainment by many talented East Brunswick residents on the outdoor stage. Entertainment will begin at noon and continue all afternoon, showcasing the wide range of talent in town.

East Brunswick’s own, Jacqueline Giancola, Miss New Jersey Teen USA 2015 will be making a special trip back from California to join the festivities. Be sure to stop by her table to say hello.

All sorts of family fun activities will be set up throughout the grounds at the Community Arts Center. The East Brunswick Youth Council will do free face painting and invite all guests to color a mural that will be displayed in the Recreation and Parks office. Also offered will be free bounce rides, laser tag, and hamster ball activities for the kids. The “Touch-A-Vehicle” display will have emergency vehicles from the East Brunswick Police Department, Rescue Squad, and Fire District 2, as well as Parks and Public Works vehicles. Safety demonstrations will be done by the rescue squad, and members of the community policing unit will be there to speak to the public. The East Brunswick Youth Council will host a silent auction to support activities at the high school and to provide drug prevention education

This event is free. Come out with your family, friends and neighbors and visit the many exhibitors participating to promote their work within the community, the services they offer, and their many talents. For more information call 732-390-6797 or online at www.eastbrunswick.org.

In addition, Mayor David Stahl will host his seventh annual Dining for a Cause event this year at East Brunswick Day. Stahl, VFW Post #133 and the East Brunswick Youth Council are partnering to raise funds for local charities and homeless veterans in need of emergency housing and supplies. Stahl will be cooking and serving some delicious food throughout the day with the assistance of the Portuguese Fisherman. For more information or to make a donation to the Stahl’s Charity Fund, call 732-690-6810 or email at mayor@eastbrunswick.org.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1F4uNDA