I think Bill Shafer is jumping the gun. Before Hillary Clinton even declared, Republicans were afraid of her! That’s a good thing! Hillary Clinton has already forgot more than any of the Republicans who’ve already jumped in! If you blame Barack Obama and Hillary for the tragic deaths in Benghazi, why not blame a Republican Congress, which voted for less embassy protection? Why not blame the Bush administration for all the embassy attacks during the Bush and Cheney years? Why not blame Ronald Reagan for the Marine barracks blow up? Not only did Reagan not go after Bin Laden, but we tucked tail and ran with Bin Laden way back then the top suspect.

As for executive orders, the president has a right to supercede a do-nothing, right-wing Congress, whose only objective it seems is trying to defeat Obamacare for the 100th time! Obama is a Constitution lawyer! He knows it backwards!

Instead of just talking about it,try reading it sometime!

Jimmy McCoy, Kingsport

Kingsport should pull the plug on bike lanes

I am writing in support of Mr. Roberts’ letter. The bicycle lanes are a waste of tax dollars. They are not safe, especially if you’re making a right turn onto a street. Since they were created, I have seen maybe four cyclists using the lanes. They’re either out in the street, on the sidewalk, or nonexistent.

Most bicyclists don’t even obey the laws of the state concerning motorists. I think the road diet program should be abolished.

Lera Smith, Kingsport

Perverted lifestyles defy natural order

If we look at the creation of God, every creature in this world knows where its place is in the natural order of all life.All animals, fish, insects and every other creature that God created knows instinctively which sex to mate with. The biggest problem is found in God’s most unique creation, mankind. We find men wanting to be joined with men,and women with women. Men and women having sex with animals, men and women exploiting little children. All of these actions are perverted lifestyles and should be recognized for what they are.

All you have to do is look at the anatomy of all creatures to know what should be joined together. God created man in his image and likeness, and he created the woman for the man, male and female he created them, and said they should be one flesh. If we step outside of God’s natural order for all life, then we place ourselves in a position of opposition or rebellion against God’s natural order for all creation. We are taught by God to love one another, but just because we love, doesn’t mean we condone one another’s sin.

Fred Redman Sr., Mount Carmel

Who’s afraid of Hillary Clinton?

Republicans are not afraid of Hillary. Why should we be? Hillary is drowning daily in her lies, corruption and scandals. Hillary never accomplished anything as N.Y. senator and U.S. secretary of state. She is ashamed to meet the public and afraid to answer questions from the press. Her Clinton Foundation fund is nothing more than a money laundering scheme accepting money from foreign governments hoping to get something in return at U.S. taxpayer expense if she becomes president. The Republicans are not afraid of Hillary,but the Democrats are.

Jerry Edds, Kingsport

Submit your own Letter to the Editor