Dr. William Takahashi, photographed in his office in 1963. took care of two generations of Boulder children. ( Carnegie Branch Library for Local History / Daily Camera Collection / Courtesy photo )

When William Takahashi completed his medical residency in Chicago, options were limited in the United States for a first generation Japanese doctor.

Born in Japan in 1914, Takahashi's family immigrated to Seattle when he was 4 years old. Shortly after the bombing of Pearl Harbor in December 1941, Takahashi's parents and other family members were ordered to internment camps. Takahashi received an exemption because by that time he was enrolled at the University of Michigan as a medical student, according to his daughter Tama. His activities at school were greatly restricted, however, because of his Japanese heritage.

During the war, anti-Japanese sentiments were high, but Colorado Gov. Ralph Carr welcomed Japanese-Americans to the state. He took a firm stand defending the civil rights of Japanese-American citizens and considered the internment camps inhumane and unconstitutional.

Coloradans followed Carr's lead and in 1944 rejected a state constitutional amendment that would have barred Japanese "aliens" from owning land.

The Boulder community had become somewhat familiar with Japanese American residents during the war. From 1942 to 1946, the University of Colorado-Boulder was home to the U.S. Navy's Japanese Language School. This wartime intelligence program brought more than 150 Japanese language teachers and their families to Boulder, according to a document written by a CU archivist.

Because of his experience with prejudice in Seattle, Takahashi didn't return there after the war. Instead, he chose University Hill in Boulder as the place he would open his pediatric practice in the summer of 1947. A few years later, Takahashi relocated to a stone house in the lower Chautauqua neighborhood at the corner of 16th and Mariposa. An extensive remodel was undertaken so the home also could serve as his medical office.

Takahashi and his wife settled into life in Boulder and raised two daughters at their Mariposa home.

"I've always thought that my parents held a special place in Boulder history," Takahashi's daughter Tama wrote in a recent email. "As far as I remember, they were the first interracial couple in Boulder and he was the first Japanese doctor. They were pioneers, in a sense, and at one time everyone in Boulder knew them — it was such a small community back then."

Longtime Boulder resident Kathryn Keller was a patient of Takahashi. She says her mother credits the physician with saving the life of one of her children: He made the tricky diagnosis of pyloric stenosis on their newborn son, and the problem was corrected successfully with surgery. Also, Takahashi stitched a facial wound on another one of the Keller children with the skill of a plastic surgeon. Keller believes the Boulder community benefited greatly from Takahashi's expertise and intelligence.

Takahashi served on the CU medical school teaching staff and the clinical staff of Denver General and Colorado General hospitals. He had the honor of being selected as the Colorado Medical Society's alternate delegate to the American Medical Association several times. He worked at the well baby clinic in the Vetsville neighborhood, in addition to his private practice.

Known as "Taki," he was a man of many interests. An avid skier and hiker, he took his family on many outdoor adventures. He and his good friend, "Doc" Geesaman, often hunted for mushrooms in the foothills.

Takahashi continued his love of Japanese culture and shared it with the community. He led a Colorado Mountain Club expedition to Japan where the group climbed Mount Fujiyama and other peaks. He was well known by Colorado art dealers for his collection of Japanese swords, and he studied Japanese music and dance.

Takahashi died in Boulder in 2000 at age 86. He is buried at Green Mountain Cemetery, not far from the place where he tended to the health concerns of two fortunate generations of Boulder's children.

Carol Taylor and Silvia Pettem write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com, Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net or write to the Daily Camera, 5450 Western Ave., Boulder 80301.