Should Jennifer Lawrence’s stolen nude photos will be used in an artist’s Fear Google exhibition? Cory Allen Contemporary Art believes so. The St. Petersburg, FL art gallery will allow XVALA share the images, along with other stolen celebrity nude pictures from the web. There will be other images included that were believed to be private.

The idea is that people still do not understand the problems with technology. They do not see that there is an issue with posting images online, even when believed to be private. Hackers and scammers can get hold of the images and other information placed online. It seems the only way people realize the dangers is when something so serious, such as the recent leaked images, happens.

A number of people are angry at the recent incident. Lawrence’s rep made it clear that it violated her privacy, and other celebrities have criticized the hacker for his actions. The hacker wanted to embarrass women for taking nude photos and storing them on their computer. It is clear there were double standards as men were not included in the embarrassing photos. But why should a woman feel embarrassed for doing something in her own time and in private? Even as a celebrity, she should be allowed to keep parts of her life to herself, and live the way that non-celebrities do.

The FBI is currently investigating the issue. At the same time, those who place the images online could be arrested as they violate privacy. Some celebrities have taken to filing legal paperwork deeming that they are the copyright holders and have not given permission for the photos to be posted.

Despite all this, the art gallery is allowing the exhibition. However, should the nude photos of Lawrence and other celebrities be used in the Fear Google exhibition? Just because it is teaching others the dangers of the search engine and the use of technology, does that mean it is acceptable to breach a person’s privacy?

There will be questions surrounding the copyright and legal right to use these photos. Copyright images can only be used with the copyright holder’s explicit permission or under a fair use licence. This usually means that an image of a book cover or a poster from a movie can be used when reviewing something or offering a commentary, but there are other times that it would qualify fair use. Educating others could qualify, depending on the circumstances.

Allen makes it clear that the actions of the hacker are not condoned in this upcoming exhibition. XVALA simply wants to show just how dangerous the internet can be, and encourage people to be more careful about the images they have stored on their computers. He wants to make it clear that privacy online is not an option anymore, and people want to know everything that a celebrity is up to at every moment of the day. While that may be the case, is it right that Lawrence’s nude photos that were stolen are being used in the Fear Google art gallery?

Opinion by Alexandria Ingham

Sources:

The Washington Post

People

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr