Ita Vaea is close to making his Brumbies dream. Photo: Graham Tidy

The ACT Brumbies are poised to offer Ita Vaea a temporary contract to complete his comeback from life-threatening blood clots after the Tongan powerhouse forced his way into Super Rugby calculations on Friday night.

But Vaea conceded even he thought he was taking "a long shot" in an attempt to revive his career after doctors told him he would never play again when clots were found on his heart.

Brumbies coach Stephen Larkham said, "Ita is definitely back", more than two years after illness stalled Vaea's career and he is set to be a shock inclusion for the opening round of the Super Rugby season on February 13.

Vaea's trademark aggression is expected to win him a supplementary contract as injury cover for Fotu Auelua (knee) and he could be offered an extended player squad deal for the season.

Advertisement

Vaea trained with the Brumbies before Christmas but cut short a family holiday in Noosa to make a mad dash to Perth for a pre-season trial against the Western Force on Friday.

"It was a long shot, I didn't know if I would ever play again. A lot of people doubted or didn't believe that I would play again," Vaea said.

"But I believed, no matter how long it would take. I wanted another crack.

"I love the Brumbies and I'm having a crack for me and my family, it's been a long wait and it's short notice ... I was nervous and excited.

"I'm not thinking about Super Rugby, I'll just do whatever is best for the team wherever they need me. It makes it all worthwhile and a bit sweeter to know I'm playing again."

The Brumbies lost their opening trial 31-21 with Larkham rotating 30 players on the field throughout the game.

They have one more chance to impress Larkham to win spots for the round-one contest against the Queensland Reds and Vaea has rocketed out of obscurity to loom as a hard-hitting weapon for the Brumbies.

Vaea was told he could have had a stroke during a game had he continued playing with the clots and was put on blood thinning medication, which limited his exercise to a slow walk around the block.

He put on almost 30 kilograms but has shed more than 20 kilograms since doctors cleared him to start training again last year.

Super Rugby was a pipe dream as he lined up for the Gungahlin Eagles second-grade team in his comeback but Larkham insists it is now a reality.

"Ita stood out, he was fantastic. He was no nonsense, he ran over the top of some blokes, big blokes," Larkham said.

"Every time he carried the ball he made big metres ... you can see it in his eyes. He's back. Ita's definitely back. He's still getting back to his playing weight but he's in the mix."

Vaea turned down a chance to revive his career in France to have one more crack at getting back into Super Rugby.

"It's funny how things turn around. I was on holidays earlier this week and then I'm in Perth," he said.

"It happens when you least expect it to be coming. It's been good, I'm just grateful to be out there and play. The Brumbies will always be a part of me."

BRUMBIES TRIAL

January 31: Brumbies v Otago Highlanders in Wagga Wagga, 7pm.

The Brumbies will take a supporters' bus to the trial match in Wagga. It will leave Canberra at 3pm and return at midnight. Seats on the bus start from $40. For more information email J.Saunders@brumbies.com.au or call 6283 8516.