Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and House Speaker John Boehner. (J. Scott Applewhite/Associated Press)

In the twilight of the 113th Congress, numerous people told me that everything would be different with the 114th Congress. Things would be better. The self-destructive battles that turned John Boehner into the Stockholm Syndrome-suffering speaker of the House would end. The shrill minority that controlled his raucous caucus would be diluted by a wave of even more Republicans with a reasonable disposition.

And then yesterday happened.

The House voted to end Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA). That’s the 2012 executive action taken by President Obama that gave temporary protection from deportation to the children of undocumented immigrants. The chamber also approved legislation that would strip funding from the Department of Homeland Security that would be used to implement the president’s executive action that would defer deportation for nearly five million undocumented immigrants.

According to the New York Times, “Republicans who supported the legislation said there was nothing cruel about their intentions.” Yeah, okay. Can’t wait to see the Republican candidates for president explain the Republican-controlled Congress to the Latino community. A community where 50,000 young people will turn 18 (voting age) every month for the next 20 years. A 2013 report from the conservative outfit Resurgent Republic pointed out that while 51 percent of the 10.9 million Latinos registered to vote are Democrats, 54 percent of them identify as “conservative.” So, Republican antics on immigration are turning away what appears to be a natural constituency. Meanwhile, a Gallup survey from late last year showed that 64 percent of Hispanics “strongly approve” or “approve” of Obama’s immigration plans. His current approval rating among Hispanics on Gallup sits at 63 percent.

As for the stripping of DHS funding, well, that just takes me back to the good ol’ days when Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tex.) convinced some of the Republican rabble in the House to shut down the government over the plainly impossible goal of defunding Obamacare. Folks insist neither DHS nor the government will shut down over immigration. But my “I’ll believe it when I see it” attitude comes from watching years of harrowing battles over ceilings and cliffs.

The difference this time is that Republicans have complete control of Congress. When Sen. Harry Reid (D-Nev.) was majority leader, Boehner could depend on Democrats to thwart the extremes of his caucus. That duty now falls to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, who not only must show that his party is not “scary,” but who also must also come up with legislative victories to prove to the nation that the GOP can be trusted to govern.

God bless him. He’s going to need it.

Follow Jonathan on Twitter: @Capehartj