Socialism is based on the principle that the economy operates for the good of the community. It doesn't require that the government own the means of production, but it does imply a fairly extensive level of regulation or control.

Government involvement in the economy is what guides Sanders' proposals. He proposes massive expenditures on free tuition at public colleges and universities, guaranteeing health care for everyone, expanding Social Security, providing universal child care and prekindergarten programs, and requiring expanded family and medical leave and vacations, among other ideas. He supports raising the minimum wage to $15 by 2020.

Sanders is largely a protectionist. He wants to limit or reverse trade agreements because he believes they have driven down worker wages and harmed small farmers. He supports immigration reform that includes a pathway to citizenship. Remember, immigration is a major concern of businesses.

He pays for his programs by increasing taxes on the wealthy, reforming the tax code to ensure that people and businesses pay their "fair share," and taxing Wall Street speculators. He also will break up large financial institutions that are "too large to fail."

In contrast to Sanders, Clinton almost seems to be a centrist, which is the odd way this election season seems to be going. Her tax plan also would eliminate loopholes for businesses and individuals, but she isn't arguing for higher rates. She, too, wants to raise the minimum wage to $15. No surprise there.

On the issue of economic growth, though, Clinton takes more of a carrot than a stick approach by looking for ways to provide targeted incentives for businesses to do certain things, and disincentives if they act in less desirable ways. For example, she wants individuals to invest in human capital, not by making college free but by providing tax breaks and cutting interest rates on loans. She looks toward small businesses, not large businesses, for growth by providing small businesses with better access to capital and markets, as well as simplifying and reducing their taxes.

As for larger businesses, to encourage profit-sharing she proposes a tax break when firms distribute part of their earnings to workers. She also wants to redirect firms from focusing on quarterly performance to longer-term planning by changing the tax code to reward longer-term investing. Regarding financial institutions, she favors strong regulation over dismantling the big banks. Finally, she has supported the trade agreements and is in favor of a pathway to citizenship for current undocumented immigrants.

Clinton also proposes a variety of typical Democratic social programs, including universal preschool within 10 years, paid family and medical leave, and incentives to develop clean energy production. On the issue of health care, her approach is to defend and expand the Affordable Care Act.

Yes, there are many proposals where Bernie and Hillary overlap. But where he wants the government to take an active role in ensuring that change occurs, such as with free health care and college education, breaking up large financial institutions, and by repealing or modifying trade agreements, she wants to regulate or provide tax incentives to reach similar goals. It's a matter of philosophy: the difference between a Social Democrat and Democrat who wants to be viewed as being practical.

The choices: On the Republican side, when it comes to taxes, all the candidates like cutting them, but Donald Trump is more willing to discuss closing loopholes. He is also more of a protectionist when it comes to trade. On the Democratic side, Sanders wants an activist government that takes specific actions to control business activities, while Clinton is more of a regulation/tax incentive and disincentive person.

The choice is yours, but the most important thing is to make one by voting on Tuesday, April 26.

jnaroff@phillynews.com