CEO and Co-Founder Sherisse Hawkins her shot at the dart board at the Beneath The Ink offices in Boulder on Wednesday. The company members take a shot at the dartboard before each meeting. The person with the best throw decides who speak first in the meeting ( Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer )

Since its formation three years ago, Boulder's Beneath the Ink has gone with the hyper-accelerated flow of startup life.

The company quickly pivoted into a developer of technology that enhances the content of eBooks through embedded links called "Binks," scored a hat trick of key business development opportunities, grew into a new market and bolstered its client roster from one to 100-plus.

"Startup years are like dog years," said Sherisse Hawkins, who founded Beneath the Ink with Alex Milewski. "Every day is a week, every week is a month."

If you watch What: Beneath the Ink on "Shark Tank" When: 8 p.m. on ABC More info: http://www.disneyabcpress.com/abc/shows/shark-tank/episodes/627/

And news delivered this week has the chance to affect Beneath the Ink for years to come.

On Friday, Beneath the Ink is scheduled to be one of the ventures featured on ABC's "Shark Tank," a reality TV series in which entrepreneurs pitch their businesses to a panel of millionaires and billionaires in the hopes of landing investment.

Per confidentiality agreements — and also for the sake of entertainment — Hawkins and Milewski are required to keep mum about the specifics until the episode airs. Without divulging the outcome, the two said the appearance was a positive learning experience.

"The pressure of doing anything big is really what drives the business forward," Milewski said.

Beneath the Ink already has a track record along those lines.

The company was formed after Hawkins, a Walt Disney "Imagineer" turned Time-Warner Cable vice president of software development, was introduced to Milewski, an enterprising University of Colorado student.

Shortly after meeting, they launched Cipher This, a company formed to embed word puzzles — also known as ciphers — in digital books. Hawkins and Milewski then jettisoned 9,000 miles to participate in Innovyz, an Australia-based startup accelerator.

Cipher This pivoted into Beneath the Ink, returned to Colorado where the company participated in CU's New Venture Challenge where it garnered additional attention that helped lead to $300,000 in early stage funding.

The company then landed nearly $250,000 from the Colorado Office of Economic Development and International Trade as part of the agency's Advanced Industry Accelerator Grant Program.

The company that had one client in 2013 now works with the likes of National Geographic, the University of Texas-Austin and a slew of best-selling authors.

"The caliber of projects that we're working on has expanded a thousand-fold," she said.

Beneath the Ink developed a WordPress-like system that allows authors to highlight words or phrases in their eBooks and embed "Binks," which could include content such as images, video, recipes and character backgrounds.

As the Binks caught on among authors, Beneath the Ink started receiving queries from those outside the traditional publishing world and in areas such as electronic newsletter, short-form writing, white papers and educational documents.

Next month, Beneath the Ink plans to launch Page Dip, a digital publishing technology.

"We realized there was an entire other market that we had not addressed," Hawkins said.

In addition to the planned expansion, the appearance on "Shark Tank" could vault a firm to another tier of growth, said Steven Sashen, founder of Broomfield-based Xero Shoes.

Xero, which makes "barefoot" recreation sandals, appeared on "Shark Tank" in early 2013, seeking a $400,000 investment for an 8 percent equity stake. Sashen and wife, Lena Phoenix, turned down cast member and investor Kevin O'Leary's offer of $400,000 and 50 percent equity.

"Being on the show generated a huge amount of sales volume for us," Sashen said. "In the weeks following the show, we probably did three months' worth of sales."

Sashen and Phoenix also applied some of the investors' suggestions to the business and launched a ready-to-wear shoe line in addition to the "rubber and string" behind the do-it-yourself Xero shoe.

"As we've been raising capital, almost everyone we've spoken to (including investors) have seen us on the show," Sashen said. "It's shown people how we deal with a very crazy, high-pressure situation."

Alicia Wallace: 303-473-1332, wallacea@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/dc_alicia