About four years ago, Z’s Bees owner Michael Zambrano ordered his first beehive as a hobby with his grandfather and soon started selling honey on the corner of Trimmier and Stagecoach roads in Killeen.

He’s since expanded the business to 65 hives, provides bee removal services and about 50 stores throughout Central Texas carry his products.

“I actually quit my (day) job in July because I couldn’t keep up,” he said. He now harvests honey and sells his wares full time.

In August, Zambrano set up shop in his first brick-and-mortar location, at 1805 Florence Road in Killeen, where he makes most of his lotion, lip balm, candles and other beeswax products. He collects the honey near Copperas Cove.

Zambrano said it wasn’t too long after opening his Killeen storefront that the Harker Heights Chamber of Commerce approached him about becoming a member.

He said he was told how it could assist him and learned about the benefits included with a $200 membership fee. Zambrano saw a few of those benefits Tuesday, as Heights chamber staff members and volunteers hosted a ribbon-cutting for his business.

“Heights is very proactive,” he said. “I get an email at least every two days. They’ve got a mixer event. They’re always promoting something or somebody. You can always reach them on the phone, and they’ve got a website that you can post your stuff on for free. I feel like the Harker Heights chamber is very well organized.”

While Z’s Bees is now a Heights chamber member, Zambrano said the Killeen chamber never approached him about joining, even though his business has been in Killeen for nearly eight months.

He said he’s not sure why the Greater Killeen Chamber of Commerce hasn’t approached him, and added the Copperas Cove chamber asked him join, though he declined.

Heights chamber

Approaching Z’s Bees was not a new tactic for the Heights chamber. Dozens of Killeen businesses are members of the chamber, which has grown to about 850 members since its creation in 1988.

President and CEO Gina Pence said about 150 of those are charter members. For a city of 28,000 people, she said there are a lot of members, even though many aren’t in the city limits.

“We’d love for every business to move in to Harker Heights, but Central Texas is a big location that we definitely support,” Pence said. “Everybody has to work together. It’s a great region, and that’s really what we focus on, and that’s why our member stats are a little higher than a normal chamber would be of this size.”

A “normal”-sized chamber, however, isn’t something easily defined, said Aaron Cox, the chief administrative officer at the Austin-based Texas Chamber of Commerce Executives, the longest-standing association of chamber of commerce professionals in the nation.

One city of 30,000 people may be a county seat and home to a lot of businesses. Another city of the same size may be a bedroom community and have few businesses.

To gauge whether a chamber has the membership it should, experts use penetration rate, Cox said.

“The (United States Chamber of Commerce Accreditation guidelines) state that a chamber should have a penetration rate of about 17 percent or more in the business community that it serves,” Cox said in an email. “This standard holds true across the industry.”

The same is true of staff size, he said.

“It could be that a chamber only has 300 members, but a $700,000 budget, which means they will have a lot more staff and likely a much more robust program of work,” Cox said. “Ideally, I would think a chamber needs one staff person per 200 members or so. Of course, this is not often the case.”

Including Pence, the Heights chamber has three full-time employees, a college intern and about 35 volunteers, or ambassadors, who help welcome new businesses. A 16-member board oversees the chamber.

Staff salaries account for about 35 percent of the chamber’s $380,000 operating budget, Pence said. The chamber’s revenues come from membership fees and a city contribution, which uses a hotel and motel tax to help fund the chamber’s effort to promote tourism. In this year’s city of Harker Heights budget, $12,500 from the hotel and motel fund was allocated to the Heights chamber for events, including the Central Texas Food and Wine Festival. Another $41,000 in the general fund is for operational purposes, according to city documents.

Membership fees for the Heights chamber start at $75 and go up depending on the type of business and number of employees. The average annual fee is $200, Pence said.

The fee includes various components — from business workshops, a social media class or information on how the Affordable Care Act would affect them, she said. During the past year, an online marketplace was added to the chamber’s website to allow members to promote and highlight their products. The chamber also hosts morning coffee connections, an after-hours mixer and a more casual “sip and social” event — all geared as ways for members to network with other businesses and potential clients.

“I think that we are really moving in the right direction, and I think probably the most difficult thing has been keeping up with the growth of our city,” Pence said. “As a chamber, making sure that we’re at that level, making sure that we’re at our ‘A game,’ that’s what it’s going to take to stay on top of it.”

Killeen chamber

Created in 1951, a board of 18 directors governs the Killeen chamber.

Its annual operating budget is about $489,000, with $212,850 budgeted for salaries of 4½ employees, said John Crutchfield, president and CEO.

The chamber receives additional funds from the cities of Killeen and Harker Heights to do marketing for the Killeen Economic Development Corporation, which this year amounted to about $677,000 from Killeen and $12,500 from Harker Heights.

With more than 200 volunteers, Crutchfield said they help with many initiatives — from participating in Hood Howdy to serving on the chamber’s councils, which include military relations, nonprofit and information and technology.

Programs for members — or as the Killeen chamber calls them, “investors” — include training for local IT departments, bringing in state officials as guest speakers and developing relationships with Fort Hood.

“We take folks out for a social at the end of their orientation day to kind of put faces on the community,” Crutchfield said.

Helping fund the chamber are investors and noninvestors who purchase products and services, such as event tickets.

Currently, there are about 725 investors, Crutchfield said.

“We don’t see ourselves as necessarily a membership organization,” Crutchfield said. “We see ourselves as being more investor driven.”

With memberships, Crutchfield said everyone tends to get the same benefits, but a business with 3,600 employees may not have the same needs as a locally owned and operated business.

Members can be complimentary members or lifetime members, and Crutchfield said the key is what sort of resources are procured.

“Chambers used to believe that a big number of members made you more influential,” he said. “I’m not sure that’s the case anymore.”

Crutchfield said there’s not a “one-size-fits-all membership,” with some investors wanting basic affiliation and exposure.

The chamber has four tiers, starting at $300 annually and going up to $3,500.

A $300 investor might get newsletter access, listings in newsletters and a ticket to a chamber event, while a higher level investor gets a different value, such as a table of eight at a chamber event or advertisement in a publication.

“We literally sit down with an investor and say, ‘How much you want to spend and what do you want to spend it on?’” Crutchfield said. “So every package is different, and when we go back with them at the end of the year, we sit down and say: ‘Did you get your money’s worth? If you didn’t get your money’s worth, what do we need to do to give you your money’s worth?’”

The Killeen chamber’s recruiting process consists of one employee following leads, making cold calls or welcoming new businesses, he said.

Copperas Cove chamber

In Copperas Cove, chamber membership dues range from annual fees of $100 for nonprofit organizations or private citizens to $1,000 for institutional businesses such as banks or utility companies, according to the chamber’s website. Most members fall in between, with small businesses paying annual dues of $250 and regional businesses, such as hotels or restaurants, paying $500, said Betty Price, chamber president.

“We currently have 432 active members of the chamber,” she said. “Our chamber goes back to at least the ’40s, maybe even the ’30s.”

The chamber’s annual operating budget is about $365,000, Price said, adding the chamber has four full-time employees, seven volunteers and two part-time employees who work a very limited schedule.

In addition to promoting business, the Cove chamber is tasked with promoting tourism in the city.

Hotel occupancy tax funds are granted to the tourism side of the Cove chamber by the Copperas Cove City Council to run events such as Rabbit Fest, Krist Kindl Markt and the cycling events hosted by the city.

“They really parallel each other, because anything you do in the community will drive business. People will shop at our stores, eat at our restaurants and stay in our hotels,” Price said. “And it helps the people in the community, too, because the sales tax provides additional funds for the city.”

One business, multiple chambers

It’s not uncommon for a business to belong to multiple chambers of commerce.

“People say, ‘Why would you belong to more than one chamber?’ That’s like asking, ‘Why would you do business in more than one town?’” said J.R. Atkins, owner of Something Different Companies in Copperas Cove. “Your business needs a base of people. For me, I do business all around Fort Hood. I live in Gatesville, have an office in Cove, work all along (U.S. Highway) 190 to Killeen, Harker Heights, Belton and Temple.”

Belonging to multiple chambers can translate to more exposure and opportunity, Atkins said.

“I belong to (chambers in) Gatesville, Belton, Harker Heights and now Copperas Cove, so I have my four-corners covered,” Atkins said. “By partnering with a chamber, my marketing and their marketing go out together to bring in more people.”

For bigger organizations, such as Metroplex Hospital in Killeen, being a member of Cove, Heights and Killeen chambers makes sense because the hospital serves residents from all three communities, said Metroplex spokeswoman Shelley Humphrey.

Carlyle Walton, president and CEO of Metroplex Health System, added: “We are privileged to serve the communities of Killeen, Copperas Cove and Harker Heights, and the chambers represent a successful means to drive economic development, community vibrance and quality of life in these communities, which is collectively beneficial.”

Healthy growth for all

As the Killeen-Fort Hood metro area continues to grow, chamber officials point to medical businesses as a reason for growth in the local chambers. Pence said she attributes that to Seton Medical Center Harker Heights.

“And that’s anything to do with the medical industry, whether it’s a hospital, a clinic or the components of the equipment standpoint of the pharmaceutical end,” she said.

Membership numbers fluctuate, as some businesses close or merge, but Pence said there’s still an overall growth.

Crutchfield said it’s not a problem for Killeen businesses to be part of other chambers, and businesses in other communities also are part of Killeen’s chamber.

“We all see the world differently, but we don’t compete,” he said, adding Bell County and Williamson County chambers get together quarterly to learn about each other’s communities.

Crutchfield said chambers have a community identity and are focused on creating economic prosperity through participating businesses and community leaders, but each operates differently.

With technology and generational changes, organizations are challenged with determining ways to “stay relevant in a world that is changing very rapidly,” Crutchfield said.

“And if your organization is not changing faster than the outside world, you’re losing,” he said.