CRYSTAL LAKE – Lisa Allan is hoping there is a cure for the cost to cure.

Allan, whose 16-year-old son has epilepsy that causes seizures, takes less than two months to blow past the family’s annual $3,000 deductible because of the high copay costs for her son’s medication. She said it’s not unusual to hit the $10,000 out-of-pocket maximum in copay expenses in six months.

The Crystal Lake resident said her son has to take six medications three times a day and she hit her premium in the first month of the year after a 90-day supply for one of the medications cost her $2,000.

“People say why don’t you just switch medications, but you can’t do that once you find something that can control the seizures,” Allan said, noting her son can have multiple episodes a day. “The prices are out of control and that’s not even counting the premium.”

The days of mortgage-like payments for medication could be over for the family and those in similar circumstances if one of two pending bills in Springfield are approved.

One proposal in the state Senate would limit out-of-pocket costs for specialty drugs to $100 a prescription or $200 a month a person for all medications in Illinois. The House proposal also would limit costs for specialty drugs to $100 a prescription a month but also cap the annual out-of-pocket maximum to 50 percent of the Affordable Care Act’s annual out-of-pocket maximum.

The limit on out-of-pocket costs under the Affordable Care Act is $6,350 for an individual and $12,700 for a family. The proposals only apply to medication in the specialty tiers of the insurance plans and not the more common prescriptions under the standard three tiers.

Opponents claim lowering the copays for the specialty tier could cause premium increases across all tiers and increases to cost sharing in lower tiers. But a study by Avalere Health – a national healthcare solution think-tank – showed premiums would increase by roughly $3 and cost sharing would increase by less than a dollar in most tiers to offset the difference.

Many states have adopted similar measures. Delaware, Louisiana and Maryland limit monthly out-of-pocket costs while New York prohibits the specialty drug tier that exists in Illinois. Main and Vermont limit annual out-of-pocket costs.

Other states have pending legislation similar to Illinois’, including California, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Michigan, Mississippi, Ohio and Virginia.

Allan said she just hopes reform comes by the time her son will need to cover the costs of the medication to treat the seizures he could have for the rest of his life.