On Thursday night, the usual heroes were nowhere to be found.

Demaryius Thomas left the Broncos’ locker room quickly. Peyton Manning, addressing the media at the podium, appeared frustrated, hamstrung. Wes Welker was absent, concussed since Sunday and held out of Denver’s 27-20 loss to San Diego.

And so the media horde settled at Andre Caldwell’s locker. Poor Bubba, he of the two touchdown receptions, six catches and 59 yards, he who led the Broncos’ offense in every category. He was the hero on a night when heroes don’t matter, but after a season sacrificing a bigger role for a spot on Denver’s roster, he’s not looking for pity.

He’s looking for playing time, and it finally came Thursday, under the least desirable of circumstances. It came filling in for Welker.

Caldwell was on the field for more than half the Broncos’ offensive plays, getting reps that would have otherwise gone to Welker. Tell anyone before the game that Welker’s replacement would post the numbers Caldwell did, and to assume a Denver victory would be logical. You see, those numbers would come with the assumption that Julius Thomas was productive, and Demaryius Thomas, and Knowshon Moreno too, and maybe even Montee Ball.

The problem is, those assumptions were false. Julius Thomas, Demaryius Thomas and Eric Decker combined for only 136 yards receiving. Moreno and Ball, though they had 10 catches between them, combined to rush for only 18 yards. Add in the Broncos’ inability to convert on third down — they went 2-of-9 — and the offense became stagnated.

It wasn’t the Denver offense the rest of the NFL has come to fear.

And then there’s Caldwell, who has the biggest game of his Broncos career and he can’t even smile. When the questions are flying about how much the team missed Welker, it’s hard not to feel a little bit sorry for the guy replacing him.

“Bubba Caldwell played excellent,” Manning said. “He had a great route on his first touchdown, then a good job getting in the end zone. … I think it tells you the confidence I have in him. Adam (Gase) called his number a couple of times, and I went right to him.”

Caldwell deserves credit. He deserves that confidence. He’s slogged through two years in a minor role to get his chance, and his performance Thursday proved he hasn’t let up.

“We believe in Bubba,” Julius Thomas said. “We see what he’s able to do all of the time, but how do you get in? How do you find time out there on the field?”

As disappointing as Thursday’s game was, the Bubba Show proved one thing: In this offense, the backups are ready, no matter when. Caldwell said he wasn’t certain before the game how much his role would expand, and he was ready for anything. As one of Manning’s receivers, he knows this: He had better be ready when his name is called.

So don’t blame Welker’s absence for the Broncos’ struggles, or the Chargers’ control of the clock.

Thursday was a night when the replacement, the mystery, was dependable, and the mainstays were miserable. It was bizarre, and the Broncos hope it never happens again.

Except, of course, for Caldwell. He’s more than welcome to take another crack at being the hero, if given the opportunity.

Joan Niesen: jniesen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joanniesen