Kaiser Permanente got top marks among HMOs and medical groups in Orange County and across California, according to the most recent edition of a state-sponsored health care report card released Wednesday.



The 14th annual report by the Office of the Patient Advocate gave Kaiser’s Southern California HMO the highest possible rating – four stars – for adherence to widely accepted standards of care and for overall patient satisfaction. Kaiser’s doctors in Orange County also got four stars for sticking to recommended treatment practices, and from patients who were asked to rate their medical groups.



“This year's results reflect our physicians and staffs’ commitment to provide high-quality health care,” said Edward Ellison, executive medical director of Kaiser’s Southern California Group.



The report card, at opa.ca.gov, rates the doctors’ groups and the health plans – including HMOs and PPOs – on the care patients receive in a number of medical areas, including asthma and lung disease, mental health, screening for cancer, heart care, diabetes and maternity.



Among other HMOs active in Orange County, Anthem Blue Cross, Health Net and UnitedHealthcare got three stars for quality of medical care and patient satisfaction. Blue Shield of California got three stars for medical care and four stars in the overall patient rating.



Among physician groups in Orange County, Edinger, St. Joseph Heritage and St. Joseph Hospital Affiliated Physicians got three stars for the quality of their medical care and four stars for overall patient satisfaction.



The report, not coincidentally, comes just as employers are enrolling their workers in health plans for next year. It also comes a month before the start of the three-month enrollment period for Covered California, the state’s health insurance exchange for individuals and families, which will start Nov. 15.



The report’s grades are aimed primarily at the 16 million people who get their insurance through an employer. Elizabeth Abbott, director of the Office of the Patient Advocate, said the information also could be useful to consumers who plan to shop for individual and family coverage with Covered California. Most of the insurance companies and medical groups participate in both markets, she noted.



“Covered California would like data specific to its enrollees, but it doesn’t exist yet, because the program is too new,” Abbott said. “They are hoping to point people in our direction to look at the report card and use that as a proxy for how the health plans and medical groups do for their enrollees.”



HMOs get an overall patient satisfaction score, based on a survey, and are also graded on specific details of their interaction with patients, including access to care and ability to get answers to questions.



The medical groups are also rated based on how well they communicate with patients and whether they promote good health, coordinate care effectively, offer timely appointments and have helpful office staff.



Patient-generated scores are more limited for PPOs.



There are some incongruities in the data, Abbott conceded. For example, even health plans with top patient ratings fare much worse if you drill down into the more detailed questions.



Though Kaiser got four stars (excellent) in its overall patient rating, it got only two (fair) when patients were asked how easy it was to get appointments or answers to their questions. Health Net had a three-star (good) overall rating from patients, but was classified as poor on those two questions.



Abbott noted that fewer patients answer the detailed questions than the general one, so the data sample is smaller. And the answers may be more negative, she speculated, because patients who are “very disappointed and annoyed“ are more likely to respond to those questions than people who either have not used their health plans or “got excellent service.”



Abbott conceded that “a relatively small number of people presently” take the time to consult the report card. “But I’m going to try really hard to fix that.”



Young Invincibles, a group that advocates on behalf of people ages 18-34, plans to work with the Office of the Patient Advocate and Covered California to spread the word about the report card, said Linda Leu, the group’s policy director.



“As young people, most of us are buying health insurance for the first time, and the more information we can have access to, the better,” Leu said.



Anthony Wright, executive director of Health Access, a Sacramento-based consumer advocacy group, noted that under the Affordable Care Act people who were previously unable to get insurance – or to switch health plans – because of a pre-existing medical condition now have no such restrictions.



“So this is a tool for people with a new ability to shop around during open enrollment,” he said.



Contact the writer: 714-796-2440 or bwolfson@ocregister.com