Map showing the boundaries of Indiana’s 9th Congressional District. (Photo: Courtesy of state of Indiana )

The most prominent contested race this year in Southern and South Central Indiana pits three candidates for the U.S. Congressional seat that represents District 9 in the Hoosier state.

The position was dominated by the Democratic party for 34 years under former U.S. Rep. Lee Hamilton, though Republicans have held the seat for three of the eight two-year terms since Hamilton retired from Congress in January 1999.

District 9 takes in all of Clark, Floyd, Harrison, Brown, Jackson, Johnson, Monroe, Orange, Perry and Washington counties, as well as portions of Crawford, Morgan and Scott counties.

Incumbent U.S. Rep. Todd Young, R-Bloomington, who has served the last two terms in Washington, is challenged by Bill Bailey, D-Seymour, and Libertarian candidate Mike Frey, of Greenwood.

Young, 42, said priority one is growing the economy and adding jobs, but "one of the biggest differences between the parties" is how they go about that. He said he has been consistently fighting since elected in 2011 for a "smaller, but more effective, federal government."

"I've fought to do this through authoring a regulatory reform bill that passed out of the House, helping to draft a package to simplify our entire tax code, and authoring bills that have passed out of the House to repeal and replace the most egregious parts of Obamacare," he said.

RELATED: Can Indiana Dems nab statewide offices?



RELATED: Indiana works to avoid record low election turnout

Democrat Bailey, a former school teacher and Seymour Mayor who served 10 years in the Indiana House of Representatives, agrees the Affordable Care Act needs work. But "the ACA is most comprehensive healthcare reform passed since Medicare and Medicaid," he said, "so it is unreasonable to assume that it would be perfect in its original form."

Access to healthcare is "a fundamental social and economic tool with personal, family, corporate and national benefits," he said, adding that it could help "level the playing field" and reduce employee turnover for small employers who couldn't otherwise afford to provide those benefits.

But Libertarian candidate Mike Frey, 64 of Greenwood, said "we need to find other solutions (for healthcare) than a government ran program which will only increase our growing national debt" — which currently stands at nearly $18 trillion.

He said he'd focus on reducing that number and increasing "common sense and fiscal responsibility."

"To me the biggest issue is the growing power of the Federal Government and it's invasion into our economic and personal lives," he said in an email. "If elected I will spend my efforts on getting our debt reduced and will vote to get the out of control spending in line and the influence of the Federal Government reduced."

Young also said he wants to help continue cutting the federal deficit while maintaining national defense, taking better care of veterans and removing "the burdens of taxes and regulations so that jobs can be created and incomes can grow."

Bailey also pushed support of veterans affairs and reducing the deficit. He said he also wants increased support for "college students, worker training and workforce development" and raising the minimum wage.

While Bailey and many other Democrats support increasing minimum wage, Young was among the GOP-controlled Congress who helped vote down amending a proposed bill in March 2013 to include language that would have increased it to $10.10 an hour from the current $7.25. The Obama administration continues urging Congress to pass the Fair Minimum Wage Act, which would raise it to $10.10.

Young also introduced a bill in June 2013 dubbed the Saving American Workers Act that currently has more than 200 co-sponsors. Among its aims are to repeal the 30-hour definition of full-time employment implemented by the ACA and bring back the previous 40-hour definition.

Campaign finance records show Young's campaign has spent more than $1 million during this election cycle and still has more than $900,000 in cash, far exceeding that of Bailey, who has spent about $87,000 and has just over $12,000 in cash, according to reports filed with the Federal Election Commission.

Reporter Charlie White can be reached at cwhite@courier-journal.com, (812) 949-4026 or on Twitter @c_write. Reporter Baylee Pulliam can be reached at bpulliam@courier-journal.com, (812) 949-4040 or on Twitter @BayleePulliam.

VOTER GUIDE

Read more from the candidates in their own words and build your ballot at courier-journal.com/voterguide.

Bill Bailey (D)

Age: 66

Residence: Seymour

Political experience: 10 years in the Indiana House of Representatives, eight years as Mayor of Seymour, four years on the Seymour City Council

Contact: (812) 271-1398, billbaileyforcongress@gmail.com

Website: bbaileyforcongress.com

Todd Young (R)

Age: 42

Residence: Bloomington

Political experience: Two terms U.S. Congress

Contact : 812-250-6399, contact@toddyoung.org

Website: toddyoung.org

Mike Frey (L)

Age: 64

Residence: Greenwood

Political Experience: None

Contact: (317) 273-3160, mfrey71450@gmail.com

Website: freyforcongress.com

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1wqoqCp