Riverside Buys One, Sells Another

The acquisition of Intelifuse is the sixth add-on for H-D Advanced, which is also backed by Hicks Equity and Weinberg Capital

The Riverside Co. is buying one company and selling another. The private equity firm, which has offices in Cleveland and New York, is purchasing Intellifuse Coating Technologies while exiting Disa Global Solutions.

Intellifuse, headquartered in Houston, provides carbide-based coatings for radial bearings, wear pads and other products used by the oil and gas industry and other industries. The company is being added to Riverside portfolio company H-D Advanced Manufacturing Co., which is a group of precision engineered product manufacturers.

H-D was formed in 2012 as a partnership between Riverside, Hicks Equity Partners and Weinberg Capital Group. Intellifuse is the sixth add-on the PE group has made under H-D. In November, H-D bought Crown Precision Machining, which makes parts for the aerospace and defense industries. In July, the group added Sungear Inc., which also makes parts for the aerospace industry. The group also bought IMech, which makes parts for the motor drilling industry, in August 2013.

Riverside also sold Disa to Court Square Capital Partners, a PE firm founded by the former members of Citigroup Venture Capital Equity Partners, after a four-year ownership period.

The Houston-based group provides testing services, including drug and alcohol testing, background screening and other tests, to safety-sensitive and labor-intensive industries. In March, Riverside added RS Occupational Health to Disa.

Court Square has invested more than $4.5 billion in more than 150 transactions. The firm's portfolio companies include AFS Technologies Inc., a software company, and Harvard Drug Group, a pharmaceutical distributor.

KPMG and Jones Day advised Riverside on the Intellifuse investment. Piper Jaffray, Houlihan Lokey and Jones Day advised Riverside on the Disa sale.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: