Topics: Baseball, David Brooks, Editor's Picks, journalists, Maureen Dowd, Media Criticism, New York Times, Soccer, Thomas Friedman, White people, Media News, Politics News

There are certain levels of job security. A tenured professorship is nice; very few are dismissed for cause. Then there’s the Supreme Court justice, which is a gig that, irritatingly — if, like me, you scan the actuarial tables whenever Antonin Scalia writes a decision — can last a lifetime. The media, you’d think, is not a realm in which such cushy gigs exist. And for the most part, you’d be right. Editors and reporters are fired all the time.

But the New York Times Op-Ed page seems to exist on a plane different even from the one occupied by the rest of the staff, which is subject to buyouts on, seemingly, an annual basis. The money crunch never seems to touch the stars of the Op-Ed page — and that’s weird, because a lot of them are fiscal black holes.

One exception should be noted: William Kristol. In late 2007, the editorial page’s editor, Andrew Rosenthal, boasted of the paper’s new pickup, and jabbed at liberals who were upset about it. “The idea that The New York Times is giving voice to a guy who is a serious, respected conservative intellectual — and somehow that’s a bad thing,” he told Politico. “How intolerant is that?” Well, the hippies were right to be intolerant; Kristol was inaccurate, careless and dull, which is precisely what you’d expect of the editor of the Weekly Standard. The paper was forced to issue a slew of corrections and Kristol’s contract was not renewed.

But, as I say, he’s the exception. And that’s a problem. Any rule for which William Kristol is the exception probably needs to be revised.

I thought about this as I read this morning’s David Brooks column. And I thought, too, of Brooks’ words from a couple of weeks ago, delivered at the Aspen Ideas Festival. Asked by Katie Couric what working for the Times is like, he said, “I’ve never attended a meeting at the Times. … We can write about anything. I’ve been at the Times for over a decade, I’ve never had a performance review. We can go anywhere we want. And we are just left alone.”