PHOENIX - Before the passage and implementation of Obamacare five years ago, women were routinely denied coverage for healthcare services like birth control, breast feeding support/supplies, genetic testing and chronic pain treatment.

Obamacare came with the promise of a new focus on providing women with coverage of those and other types of healthcare costs.

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires insurance companies to cover a variety of women’s healthcare costs without out-of-pocket charges.

But five years later—the requirements that insurers provide coverage are being ignored and the law mandating health insurance plans pay for women’s healthcare services are being violated and go unenforced.

OBAMACARE PROVISIONS FOR WOMEN'S HEALTHCARE COVERAGE VIOLATED, UNENFORCED

The National Women’s Law Center studied health insurance coverage and consumer complaints in Alabama, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Maine, Maryland, Minnesota, Nevada, Ohio, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee, Washington and Wisconsin.

Those states reflect a diverse sample in terms in terms of geography, political environment and the use of a federal or state marketplace and, according to the NWLC, what they found in all 15 states is likely to exist nationwide.

The report details violations related to maternity care, birth control, chronic pain treatment, breast-feeding support/supplies, genetic testing, wellness visits, prescription drug coverage, gender transition care and even some pre-existing conditions.

The study also found examples of discriminatory practices such as denying maternity coverage to daughters of subscribers.

A separate study found insurance plans are violating ACA requirements for providing birth control.

INSURERS ARE BREAKING THE LAW

According to NWLC Vice President for Health and Reproductive Rights Gretchen Borchelt, “Insurance companies are breaking the law by denying women coverage to which they are entitled.”

“The Affordable Care Act has made dramatic improvements in women’s health coverage, but insurers’ failure to comply with its requirements has serious consequences that affect women every day. Insurance companies must comply with the law, and regulators should do a better job enforcing it. Otherwise, women will again be at the mercy of insurers whose previous discriminatory practices drove the need for reform in the first place.”

You can read the entire study, State of Women’s Coverage: Health Plan Violations of the Affordable Care Act here.

And you can read the State of Birth Control Coverage: Health Plan Violations of the Affordable Care Act here.

In the study that focused on birth control coverage, the NWLC study found widespread violations of the ACA’s requirement that all methods be covered without co-payments or deductibles.

NWLC supplemented its review of plan documents with its own correspondence with insurance companies and with stories of real women gathered through NWLC’s CoverHer hotline, which is dedicated to helping women who are not receiving birth control coverage as required by law.

GETTING HELP IF YOU ARE HAVING PROBLEMS WITH YOUR INSURANCE COVERAGE!

The National Women's Law Center used more than just insurance policy documents, subscribers' documentation and correspondence with insurance companies—they delved into the stories of real women who contacted them through their CoverHer hotline.

The hotline is an amazing resources that allows women to call in or write in with problems they are having getting their insurance companies to cover required services.

You can also get help by writing to the researchers and filling out this form .

If you're having problems getting coverage for birth control you can connect with the NWLC CoverHer hotline here.

Both NWLC studies can be downloaded for free .

The U.S. Government also has information about the Affordable Care Act available online .

They also provide a timeline to assist consumers' understanding of how implementation of ACA impacts their coverage.