UPDATE: October 20 5:00 p.m.

The Panama City Police Department has released the name of the victim who was killed Saturday night.

Police say 21-year-old Christopher Coleman, known to many as only "Murder," was fatally shot in what police are saying was a targeted attack.

They also say they released Coleman's nickname, Murder, with his family's permission, as police say it's a crucial identifying feature in the investigation.

"There's a lot of people, his associates and peers, who that's all they know him by. So not to put that information out would be damaging to the case, because there would be people who would not recognize 'Chris Coleman,' as being murdered. But they would recognize 'Murder,'" Panama City Police Dept. Public Information Officer Richard Thore said.

Police are also asking for the public's help in identifying the suspect, a black male wearing black clothing.

Anyone with information about this shooting is asked to call Detective Rodgers with the Panama City Police Department at (850) 872-3100. You can also report information anonymously to CrimeStopperes at (850 785-TIPS.

NewsChannel 7 will keep this page updated as we receive more details.

-----

UPDATE: 12:03 am

Panama City Police are still investigating a shooting of a black male that occurred Saturday evening on the 700 Block of East 13th Court.

The victim was taken to the hospital and has been pronounced dead.

According to Police, information shows that a single gunman engaged the victim, firing multiple shots.

Police say the incident appears to be a targeted attack, as there were several other people in the area at that time, and they were not fired upon.

The victims name has not been released.

Police are still on scene, and will continue to investigate this incident.

If you have any information you are urged to call Crime Stoppers at 850-785-TIPS.

----------------------------------------------------------

Panama City Police were on scene Saturday night investigating a shooting.

An incident happened on the 700 block of East 13th Court, off of Highway 77 in Panama City.

Police say someone did suffer from a gun shot wound out in front of the apartment complex.

At this time, do not know how many people were involved in this incident.

Stay with Newschannel 7 with more details as they become available.