Gina Mazzotta doesn’t give much mind to those who say Pittsburgh comes up short when it comes to having a sense of style.

In just shy of three years, she’s turned her interest in millinery into a full-fledged business based here.

“There’s definitely that style in Pittsburgh, and it’s growing,” she says. “There is a lot of great events people can attend and be fashionable.”

She’s catering to the growing call for ready-to-wear and custom hats with a new Downtown studio. This month, she’s moving her studio from her home in Baden, Beaver County, to the Diamond Building at 100 Fifth Ave. By June 1, she hopes to be open for business.

In the new space, clients will be able to have consultations and fittings with Ms. Mazzotta for custom requests, plus try on other styles she’s designed. Typically, Ms. Mazzotta would meet with clients at their homes, but due to her expanding clientele base, juggling all of the travel was getting tricky, she says.

She channels her background in visual merchandising in her work. After college, she worked in New York for Dolce & Gabbana before moving back to Pittsburgh to take a job with Saks Fifth Avenue. She combined her eye for style with what she learned from Ohio-based milliner Amy Hamilton — and Gina Mazzotta Millinery was born.

Collaborations with several high-profile events in the city have helped her young business gain traction in a short period. Last year, she designed headwear for the Steelers Style charity runway show, and this year she created exotic floral headdresses to complement apparel by Pittsburgh-based designer Diana Misetic for the FashionAFRICANA runway show.

Spring is a particularly busy season for her because of Kentucky Derby parties. At the Pittsburgh Parks Conservancy’s annual hat luncheon this weekend, she designed six hats for the event (plus one for herself). In 2014, she created one of the luncheon’s most talked about toppers — a tall beehive hat adorned with (faux) bumblebees and drizzled honey for another Pittsburgh-based designer, Kiya Tomlin. She also has clients in other cities, including New York and Los Angeles.

“The inspiration just kind of grows out of the [collaboration] that you have with the client,” she says. “You never really know what’s going to come out of it.”

Custom orders take about three weeks, on average, to complete and tend to start at about $175. In addition to women, she does pieces for men and children, and she usually has a ready-made collection of classic styles for sale.

While her name is becoming synonymous with hats here in Pittsburgh, looking ahead she hopes to expand her brand’s presence even more across the country. In the coming months she plans to focus on building her ready-to-wear collection with the goal of marketing it to stores beyond Pittsburgh by this time next year.

To learn more about Gina Mazzotta Millinery, visit www.ginamazzotta.com. To book an appointment, contact gina@ginamazzotta.com to inquire about designer availability. For more from Post-Gazette style editor Sara Bauknecht, visit the PG’s fashion blog Stylebook at post-gazette.com/stylebook. Follow her on Twitter and Instagram @SaraB_PG or email sbauknecht@post-gazette.com.