By JACKIE CORNELL-BECHELLI AND DR. ALEXANDER HESQUIJAROSA

With less than a month before the Affordable Care Act's (ACA) Open Enrollment Period ends on January 31, more than 120,000 individuals across New Jersey are enrolled in coverage for 2016, and while this growth outpaces last year's growth, we have not let our resolve to reach the remaining uninsured waiver.

We know that those who still have not enrolled are overwhelmingly young, that cost is a primary concern for them, and that one third of them identify as people of color. In particular, the uninsured rate is high within the Latino population, and 30 percent are still uninsured, compared with 8 percent for Caucasians, and 12 percent for African-Americans. And because New Jersey has one of the highest Latino populations in America, we need a big push to reach this community in the coming weeks.

Locally, organizations like Holy Name Medical Center's Familia y Salud program are working hard to reach out to the Hispanic/Latino population to help individuals and families sign up for coverage. The hospital is providing on-site registration with free, unbiased, in-person assistance to facilitate enrollment for individuals in northern New Jersey.

In addition, ACA messaging targeting Latinos is in both Spanish and English, in part because recent research has shown that many members of this population prefer English. The more that communities realize that this is high quality, and affordable care – with 38 different plans available and most in New Jersey qualifying for rates under $75 a month – the more likely they will be to not miss out.

While it is true more Hispanics than ever now have health coverage, many more need to take advantage of what the ACA offers. According to data from the Kaiser Family Foundation, having insurance dramatically improves access to good care.

Notably, Hispanics with health insurance scored higher on many key measures of access to health care, compared to uninsured Hispanics. To highlight just two: Hispanics with coverage were three times more likely to visit a doctor and two times more likely to take advantage of preventive care.

Communities of color, including Hispanics/Latinos, struggle with multiple health issues, creating disparities between them and non-Hispanic Whites. Latinos are more likely to develop certain serious or chronic conditions such as heart disease, diabetes, cervical cancer and HIV, and more likely to suffer worse consequences from these conditions, including disabling complications and even death, according to the healthcare advocacy organization, Families USA.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's Health Disparities & Inequalities Report cites greater prevalence among certain Hispanic and Latino subgroups of obesity, high blood pressure, asthma, and periodontitis (which may lead to increased risk of heart attack, stroke and other serious conditions); in addition, the teenage birth rate is significantly higher, and fewer members of this population are vaccinated against influenza.

That's why, in this last month of open enrollment, more needs to be done to ensure Hispanic and Latino participation, whether through a Marketplace plan or through Medicaid, commonly referred to as NJ FamilyCare. The Kaiser Foundation has written: "Continued efforts by insurers and providers to target the specific linguistic, cultural, and social and environmental needs of these groups will be important to achieving greater equity in access to and utilization of care."

Central to this, is dispelling culturally ingrained fears that may be preventing some communities from seeking coverage. Some may not realize that information submitted to Healthcare.gov or at an in person enrollment center is never shared with agencies not involved in the enrollment process.

To continue to dispel these misconceptions and others, in these final weeks, Familia y Salud and others have increased outreach efforts and are organizing more workshops and have added sign-up times with navigators on hand, ready to assist enrollees.

To sign up, visit Healthcare.gov or call 1-800-318-2596. If you are interested in helping those in your community get signed up, resource materials can be found at https://marketplace.cms.gov/outreach-and-education/outreach-and-education.html.

Healthcare coverage is now a right for residents across the nation. We have an obligation to help our neighbors realize the peace of mind that comes with coverage, as we work to keep New Jersey insured and healthy.

The data is clear: increased access to health insurance leads to a healthier population, and that benefits all of us.

EDITOR'S NOTE: Jackie Cornell-Bechelli is the Region II Director of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and Alexander Hesquijarosa, MD, heads Holy Name Medical Center's Familia y Salud and practices internal medicine at Holy Name.