Rep. Pete Sessions’ strategy for becoming the next U.S. House majority whip involves touting his insider experience, while casting himself as an outsider.

As my colleague Sylvan Lane reported Monday, Sessions is pitching his stint as chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee as proof that as whip, he could unify a fractured conference.

In 2010, when Sessions led the NRCC, Republicans netted a whopping 63 House seats.

He is now the chairman of the House Rules Committee, one of the most influential assignments in Congress.

But the Dallas Republican knows he can’t win the whip race by touting his résumé, which was largely built as an ally of outgoing Speaker John Boehner.

Boehner was heavily criticized by tea party conservatives for, among other things, not killing the Affordable Care Act or defunding Planned Parenthood. Anyone perceived as a friend — or clone — of Boehner will have a tough time winning votes among the House’s tea party faction.

During Sunday’s edition of Lone Star Politics on KXAS-TV (NBC5), Sessions said the Boehner-led House was moving in the wrong direction.

“We’re in trouble,” Sessions said. “I would be the trouble guy that comes in and fixes this and puts this back together. The American people cannot win if Republicans, the majority party, cannot get it together.”

Boehner announced his resignation Sept. 25. The new speaker will be elected Oct. 29. Afterward, that person will schedule the elections for the rest of the leadership, including majority whip.

Sessions is running against Rep. Patrick McHenry of North Carolina, the current chief deputy whip, and Reps. Markwayne Mullin of Oklahoma and Dennis Ross of Florida. The winner will replace the current whip, Rep. Steve Scalise of Louisiana, who is running for majority leader as Republican Kevin McCarthy looks to move up to speaker.

It’s unclear which candidate has the advantage among House Republicans dissatisfied with the current leadership. That could be why Sessions is now taking swipes at Boehner, his ally.

“I believe we’re heading in the wrong direction. I believe we need another direction,” Session said. “It’s got to be member-driven, and we’ve got to decide if we’re going to work together.”

Sessions said he expects a close race for whip. “It’s going to be down to the end,” he said. “It will be decided by a matter of three or four votes.”

In a separate interview with NBC5 political reporter Julie Fine, Sessions summed up the race with an observation reminiscent of the late Yogi Berra:

“I’m not behind, but I have a lot of ground to cover,” he said.

NOTES

Fundraisers blossom on Texas-OU weekend

Texas-OU weekend brings more than a renewal of the Red River football rivalry, more than huge crowds at the State Fair.

It’s also a time for political fundraising, lots of it.

Between Thursday and Sunday there are more than 30 fundraisers for politicos throughout the state.

Want to catch several events in one setting? Camp out Friday at the Warwick Melrose Hotel, where there will be at least 14 receptions for various elected officials.

To my critics: Show me the barbecue!

Two weeks ago, I noted that barbecue in Memphis and Kansas City was better than the tasty offerings found in Texas. That drew outrage from an assortment of readers and so-called aficionados, including my friend R.G. Ratcliffe, who writes for Texas Monthly.

“Credibility, my man, should not rest on a platter of meat unless you are arguing which Texas town has the best,” Ratcliffe wrote on Facebook.

Democratic strategist Harold Cook replied: “This piece may make Gromer the best reporter I know who is dead to me.”

Then Ratcliffe chimed in: “It’s a basic misunderstanding. There is Texas barbecue and then there is Memphis and KC style smoked meat, not barbecue.”

OK, R.G. Show me, don’t tell me, the awful mistake I made. I’m willing to meet you, Cook and anyone else to taste what you call the best barbecue in the land.

And remember, a person cannot live by brisket alone.

On Twitter:

@gromerjeffers