Interfraternity Council warns sororities not to associate with Sigma Pi and Kappa Sigma chapters

Boulder's fraternities are warning University of Colorado sororities and their members not to associate with two chapters that were expelled by the local fraternity governing body for bad behavior.

The two chapters, Sigma Pi and Kappa Sigma, still are recognized by their international parent organizations as active fraternities in Boulder, but local leaders kicked them out of the Interfraternity Council for violations that "involved concerns for the safety and welfare" of chapter members and guests, according to a letter sent to sorority leaders.

The expulsion means that Sigma Pi, kicked out in the fall of 2013, and Kappa Sigma, kicked out in the spring of 2015, aren't subject to local oversight or rules designed with safety in mind, said Marc Stine, a spokesman for Boulder's fraternities.

Boulder fraternities are not affiliated with the university, but do recruit CU students and participate in activities with CU sororities.

"The CU IFC respectfully requests that the CU Panhellenic Council and its member sororities NOT participate in any activities or events with the Zeta Delta chapter of Sigma Pi fraternity and/or the Gamma Tau chapter of Kappa Sigma fraternity nor any other 'social fraternity' which is not a member-in-good-standing of IFC," wrote Kevin Zell, president of the Interfraternity Council.

Advertisement

Sigma Pi was kicked out of the council for a handful of rule violations, including giving potential new members alcohol during recruitment in 2013.

Stine said Kappa Sigma already was facing sanctions this spring for "previous incidents," including one that involved pledges, when the chapter broke more rules. Stine said one violation was a "threat of violence" toward one of the Interfraternity Council's leaders.

A woman also reported being fondled and groped at the Kappa Sigma fraternity house on April 12, 2015, according to Boulder police records.

Fraternity leaders are concerned primarily about safety at events and parties hosted by the two chapters, Stine said.

Fraternity party registration

Members of the Interfraternity Council must register all parties, which means fraternity leaders and police do walk-throughs at most events. They also frequently hire third-party security and emergency medical personnel for large parties and create risk-management plans.

The Interfraternity Council also has banned hard alcohol at functions and all chapters "go dark" on traditionally party-heavy holidays like Halloween and St. Patrick's Day.

They also worry that any negative event that occurs at the two ousted chapters will damage the reputation of the Greek community at large, even though local fraternities cut ties with them.

"There's a belief that if, God forbid, there was a significant incident at one of those two chapters, the nuance of membership in the IFC might be lost on the university, the Boulder community and in the media," Stine said.

Sororities seeking 'community input'

Stephanie Baldwin, a university employee who works with sororities, said the groups will discuss the letter as a community, likely when classes resume.

"They will not make a public stand unless they have community input," she said. "There's plans moving forward to get together and have a discussion."

Officials at Kappa Sigma international headquarters declined to be interviewed and instead sent an emailed statement.

The local chapter unsuccessfully appealed its expulsion from the Interfraternity Council, according to executive director Mitchell Wilson.

"The chapter and our local alumni are pursuing disciplinary action in accordance with our rules against individuals who are alleged to have violated our code of conduct, including removal from membership in some instances," Wilson wrote.

Michael Ayalon, executive director of Sigma Pi, acknowledged that the Boulder chapter had "some issues," but is working with the international organization on a rebuilding plan.

Ayalon said eventually Sigma Pi will reapply for membership in Boulder's Interfraternity Council.

He declined to comment on the Interfraternity Council's warning to sororities, saying he is focused on the chapter moving forward.

"We did a full membership review, which basically consists of finding out who shares the values of the organization and removing those members who do not share the values of the organization," he said.

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta