Movies

Until Dawn was one of the quirkier gaming titles of the past year.

GAMES

2016 PREVIEW

In the end, we'll remember 2015 as a solid rather than an epic year, with some flat spots (notably the cursory efforts from the Battlefield and Call of Duty franchises) lifted by a Fallout 4 that lived up to the hype, the rebooted Tomb Raider and a slew of quirkier titles like the detective procedural, Her Story, and the interactive horror cabin-in-the-woods-style Until Dawn. To be fair, two blockbusters that were originally destined to improve 2015 were bumped back, and are now 2016's gain: Tom Clancy's Division (a team-based shooter set in an open-world New York) and Uncharted 4: A Thief's End, both expected in March. We're also looking forward to the next Far Cry outing, Primal, set in prehistoric times (you play as a hunter called Takkar, who fights sabre-toothed tigers), a PS4 adaptation of 2010's multi-award-winning interactive move Heavy Rain, a new Legend of Zelda title (the 13th, if we're counting) and possibly a new Gears of War. There won't be a new full-blown Gran Turismo in 2016 (as we'd hoped), but there will be an interesting spin-off that focuses on sports-car racing online. It's called Gran Turismo Sport. AH

Miss Piggy is furious that Kermit booked Elizabeth Banks on her late-night talk show Up Late with Miss Piggy. Photo: Andrea McCallin

DVD

Advertisement

THE GHOST AND MRS MUIR, FOX, G

Joseph L. Mankiewicz's 1947 fantasy blends cosy eerieness, sophisticated comedy and surprising emotional intensity, a play of moods mirrored in the ebb and flow of Bernard Herrmann's beautiful score. Gene Tierney is the English widow Mrs Muir, who flees her controlling in-laws to live in a beach cottage haunted by the ghost of a crusty, somewhat misogynist sea captain (Rex Harrison). Despite their differences the two become friends, collaborating on a racy bestseller recounting the captain's adventurous life. Much of the wit of Philip Dunne's screenplay depends on undercutting gender stereotypes, in a way that feels peculiarly modern (some of this may go back to the original novel by Josephine Leslie, first published under the highly ambiguous pen name R. A. Dick). Viewers are free to decide whether the captain exists in reality or only in Mrs Muir's imagination – but this is less important, finally, than the question of what he represents. Is he her ideal companion, all the more so for being spirit rather than flesh? Or does he simply stand for the freedom which society bars her from exercising in her own right? JW

Ethan Hawke stars as a troubled war veteran in Good Kill. Photo: Lorey Sebastian

FREE-TO-AIR

THE MUPPETS​, DECEMBER 29, SEVEN, 7.30PM

They're back! But be warned, this is the Muppets, but not as you – or for many of us – remember them. This new 21st century Muppets sees the old gang in a new format: they're now the production team for Miss Piggy's late-night talk show, Up Late With Miss Piggy. We follow the action in behind-the-scenes "mockumentary" mode, which gives us a glimpse into each muppet's private lives as well. Kermit and Miss Piggy are no longer an item (but Kermit is still the show's executive producer) and this is just one of the many new "adult" themes at play in the Muppets 2.0: be prepared for a lot more M-rated gags, interspecies dating as Fozzie hooks up with a human woman, topical references to social media and, of course, a slew of celebrity guests who appear on Miss Piggy's Letterman-style program. It takes a bit of adjustment – and has met with some mixed reviews already – but if you're a Muppet fan, you're likely still going to be with this next-gen reboot. KN

Actor Sarah Michelle Gellar in Southland Tales. Photo: Reuters

DVD

SOUTHLAND TALES, MADMAN, MA

After the runaway success of his debut Donnie Darko, writer-director Richard Kelly blew up his career with this sprawling, paranoid 2006 science-fiction satire, set in Los Angeles on the eve of the 2008 presidential election and dealing with a clutch of hot-button issues just as topical today: terrorism, attacks on civil liberties, the tacky madness of celebrity culture. The convoluted plot involves kidnapping, time travel, a new energy source known as Fluid Karma, and the probable end of the world; the many familiar faces in the cast include Dwayne Johnson as a bemused actor, Justin Timberlake as an Iraq veteran, and Sarah Michelle Gellar – sometimes resembling Bulle Ogier – as outspoken porn star Krysta Now ("Teen horniness is not a crime/Free your heart and your mind"). Widely dismissed on release – as much for its anti-establishment politics as its narrative complexity – this remains one of the few American movies to confront the 21st century head-on. A couple of years later, it would have been a 13-part cable series, probably the format best-suited to Kelly's talents; hopefully it won't be long before an enterprising network lets him loose once more. JW

The Ghost and Mrs Muir 1947

DVD

GOOD KILL, ROADSHOW, M



This is a spooky movie about the here-and-now environment of war. Ethan Hawke stars as Major Tommy Egan, a US Air Force pilot with bucketloads of experience who has been drawn down to remote-control piloting of military drones in Afghanistan, from an airbase in the Nevada desert. Director Andrew Niccol (whose claim to fame is writing the original script for The Truman Show) makes a hard bid in this film to strike a debate about the inhumanity of drone warfare, and he does a convincing job of creating a military atmosphere. Unfortunately it's too cliched, doesn't sufficiently develop any of the characters, although Hawke gives it a good run as a veteran trapped in high-paying job who cannot cope with the real world, ignoring his wife (January Jones), kids and surreal suburban Las Vegas bliss, and can no longer cope with his task of high-tech killing. The movie raises some major questions about ethics, war, responsibility and burdens, but everything is delivered with hackneyed dialogue. I wanted to like this movie, and I loved the look of it, but there was no depth to allow a viewer to resonate on the issues at hand. The movie got traction at international film festivals, but did not even register on the radar in American cinemas. JK