Police say a man was shot during a series of car break-ins near Wichita State University.

According to police, three men were breaking into cars near 16th and Gentry around 4 a.m. when they came across a 37-year-old man sleeping in his car. Police do not know what transpired during an altercation between the man and the three suspects but the man in his car was shot in the stomach.

Officers arrived to find the three men fleeing the scene. They were able to capture two of the men, but the third suspect is still on the loose.

The area near 16th and Gentry was shut down for a few hours as police searched for the third suspect, who is said to be a black male, six feet tall and weighing around 150 pounds.

Officers on scene were able to located a .22 caliber rifle but would not confirm if that was the weapon used to shot the victim.

According to members of the Delta Upsilon Fraternity and residents at Varsity Vista Apartments, the thieves were targeting cars on those properties.

James Deckard has his GMC Yukon broken into while it was parked at Delta Upsilon. "They rooted through my glove box and they took my spare change," Deckard said, "everything was just kind of misplaced, but nothing was really gone."

The two males suspects that were captured - an 18 year old and a 20 year old - have been booked into jail with multiple counts of aggravated battery, aggravated assault, larceny to a vehicle, destruction of a vehicle, underage drinking and resisting arrest. Police say both men and the other they're looking for are gang members.

Anyone with information on this case is asked to contact CrimeStoppers at (316) 267-2111.

One person is in critical condition after a shooting early Saturday morning near WSU.

The victim was transported to a local hospital with a gunshot wound.

The alleged shooter was still at large and police were searching in the area between 17th and 15th street, as well as from Hillside to Belmont.

For a short time police had the surrounding area blocked off as they searched but has since opened it back up.

KAKE crews went to investigate the scene and get more information but none was available.

A briefing is expected later, this story will be updated as soon as information becomes available.