Businesses with fewer than 100 employees are at the heart of New York's economy, representing 99% of the businesses in our state and employing more than half of our private-sector workforce. The leaders of these companies rely on their ability to make independent choices in the best interests of their organizations and employees. But one of those choices—to self-fund their employees' health care—is at risk of being lost.



For employers who self-fund, stop-loss insurance is essential. It caps their liability in the event of large, unforeseen claims that would otherwise threaten their fiscal stability. Such claims can come from including accidents, illnesses, hospitalizations, or even a particularly bad flu season, like the one we had this year.



State law prohibits small companies—those with two to 50 employees—from purchasing stop-loss protection. That effectively prevents them from self-funding. Unfortunately, this prohibition is about to be extended to employers with up to 100 workers, because the Affordable Care Act requires New York to redefine small businesses that way beginning in 2016.



No other state in the nation would have this prohibition on stop loss. The expanded ban would put New York at a competitive disadvantage against New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania and other nearby states.



About 1,700 New York businesses statewide with 51 to 100 employees self-fund insurance for 127,500 workers. Self-funding allows them to offer more personalized health care plans to meet the specific needs of their employees, and provides a stronger incentive to promote employee health and workplace wellness programs. Employees benefit from high-quality, affordable care, giving them greater peace of mind.

Without the financial protection of stop loss insurance, many of these employers will be unable to provide their current levels of health benefits. The negative consequences would be profound: If an employer were forced to switch plans, its workers would risk losing in-network access to their current doctors and hospitals. Employers could also lose the edge that strong health benefits offer in attracting and retaining talent. And, ultimately, it would be far harder for these employers to comply with the Affordable Care Act's coverage mandate when it takes effect Jan. 1, 2016.



The loss of small businesses' opportunity to self-fund could have other consequences, too. Some could decide to drop health benefits altogether by downsizing or cutting employee hours. According to a 2012 RAND study model, "When self-insurance is not an option, most firms that would otherwise have self-insured decline to offer coverage rather than [purchasing health insurance on] the [public] exchanges."



At companies who do switch to the exchanges or who drop coverage altogether, employees could face serious sticker shock. Workers who move to an exchange plan in New York would likely be downgrading from a gold- or platinum-rated plan to a silver or bronze one. In doing so, they would likely face significantly higher out-of-pocket costs and much higher deductibles.



Last year, bills to let employers with 51 to 100 workers continue buying stop-loss insurance passed the state Senate but not the Assembly. Similar bills have been introduced again, and the Senate version, S. 2366 , has received unanimous bipartisan support in the Senate Insurance Committee and is poised for a vote by the full Senate. But the Assembly version, A. 1154, has been stalled for nearly four months in the Assembly Insurance Committee.



New York's small businesses leaders want to do the right thing by offering quality health benefits to their hard working employees. They should have access to the same options as larger companies. The Senate and Assembly to pass these bills to let thousands of small businesses continue to purchase stop-loss insurance.



Scott Evelyn is the tri-state general manager at the health insurance company Cigna.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments