Buy Photo Valley High School's Graham Knisley teaches language arts as part of the summer bridge program. (Photo: photos by Scott Utterback/The Courier-journal)Buy Photo

An assistant principal saw a face she wasn't expecting on one of the first days of Valley High School's summer bridge program.

A student not registered for the program had seen a yellow bus outside his house and, after telling his parents, hopped on to find out what was happening, Cindy Berger said.

"Well, what do you think?" she asked the student at the end of the day.

"I think it's kind of fun," he told her. "I think I'll be back tomorrow."

Valley High School and the newly named Frost Sixth Grade Academy (formerly Frost Middle School) each started summer bridge programs at the end of June as a way to get students who want to participate ready for next school year. All incoming sixth-graders were invited to Frost's program, and incoming seventh- and eighth-graders were invited to Valley.

The schools are undergoing big changes after the school board voted in December to move Frost's seventh- and eighth-graders to Valley. Both have been named persistently low-achieving schools, and the move was a last-ditch effort to boost students' scores at each facility.

MORE | Frost Middle School, Valley High preparing for new students

AUDIT | Audit shows Valley has room to grow

New principals at both schools — Robert Stephenson at Valley and Faith Stroud at Frost — started the summer bridge programs not only to prepare students for the change, but to work out any problems with staff and schedules before the official school year begins.

The new four-week programs aren't required, like summer school. They're not for making up credits. They just provide help for students who want to be better prepared to enter a new school.

The programs are operating on schedules typical of what school days will look like come August. The schedules at the two schools are similar, with both starting with a morning meeting for all students. Students then go to math and reading classes — as well as science at Frost — before breaking for extracurricular classes in the afternoon.

"This is summer bridge, to enhance your learning," Berger said. "That's why we put the fun stuff in there, too, because I want them to come back."

About 70 students registered for Valley's program, while about 55 registered for Frost's. That's about a quarter of the students expected to attend each school next year.

Branden Lewis, 13, said his mom told him to attend the program so he could be ready for eighth grade at Valley. Once he started going, he said, he saw it was fun, and the work wasn't too hard. He can ask teachers for extra help when he needs it — especially with fractions — and they have more time to spend with him.

Stephenie Blakely, an exceptional child education teacher, said staff members can determine exactly which state standards Branden and other students struggle with through data they collected from pre-assessment tests taken at the start of the program. The standards include choosing the main idea out of a written passage, making inferences and, in math, doing multiplications.

Valley's teachers are using the data to create individualized plans for each student that will be carried out through the program, Blakely said.

Students at Frost and Valley will take another test at the end of the programs to determine how they've developed and where they still struggle. That data will give teachers an idea of where the students stand when classes start again in August.

"These students are coming to Valley, so it gives us a good jumping off point," Blakely said. "We can almost make them like a focus group to determine what benefits summer bridge offered them throughout the year."

George Reader, 11, said he thinks he'll have an advantage over other students entering sixth grade at Frost next school year. Like Branden, he's not good at fractions, but teachers in the summer bridge program have made it fun for him to try them again through games and hands-on activities.

"It just entertains us very much and makes us want to learn," he said.

Stroud said she has encouraged teachers to use more activities in their lessons, and they've had positive results. They never lack raised hands to answer questions, and students participate without complaining.

It's no secret that, statistically, students at Frost don't tend to perform well, but Stroud said she wants to change the school's culture, starting with the handful of students already building relationships with their teachers in the summer bridge program.

"We're trying to tell them, 'Despite your circumstance, you can do well, you can achieve, you can be successful,' " she said.

Reporter Bailey Loosemore can be reached at (502) 582-4646. Follow her on Twitter at @bloosemore.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1m34LoO