"The Blowing Off Medicaid" billboards may be gone from Birmingham but they have sprouted in other Alabama locations – in Sheffield, Huntsville and Montgomery.

And four more are planned soon for the Mobile area.

The billboards are protesting Gov. Robert Bentley's decision not to participate in the Medicaid expansion offered under the federal Affordable Care Act, commonly called Obamacare.

Montgomery's billboard message, on Interstate 85 at the junction of I-65, for example is: "Blowing off Medicaid Closes Hospitals and Raises Premiums" against a backdrop of a tornado of money leaving the state. (See slideshow for other examples).

"In this state, a working mother with two kids can make 19,600 a year and not qualify for help through Mediciad," said Doug Hoffman, the man behind the billboard campaign. (The children would qualify because of their age but not the mother, he said.)

"There's 185,000 working people that have low wage jobs who make too much for Medicaid but not enough for an ACA subsidy," Hoffman said.

And that's all because the governor decided against expanding Medicaid and closing the "coverage gap," Hoffman said.

Hoffman and his wife, Pat Vandermeer, have a website EngageAlabama.org where they are soliciting donations and giving site goers an opportunity to call or email the governor.

Hoffman is a retired finance director at Children's of Alabama who became an Affordable Care Act navigator: Vandermeer is a retired Southern Progress executive.

In Birmingham, the two electronic signs were up at the beginning of June for about two weeks on the Red Mountain Expressway

Hoffman said he's under no illusions that a few billboards around the state will effect major change, but he says it's one small way to help raise awareness of the issue.

"I think we are getting a lot of interest on the Internet, and our website gets some hits, and donations are trickling in. Our main thing is to just raise consciousness of the issue."

The Huntsville billboard is on South Memorial Parkway and Governors near the mall. The one in Sheffield is at 22 Jackson Highway.