Chris Britt/Creators Syndicate

No one plans to get raped, to be the victim of incest or to find herself pregnant when her birth control fails or was not used (something that is a joint responsibility, which lawmakers trying to legislate sex sometimes forget). So why would anyone buy abortion insurance? Who plans for such a thing?

Yet, this is exactly what Michigan's legislature is requiring women to do. Using a rare procedural tactic, the state's legislature is forcing – without the signature of the governor, conservative Republican Rick Snyder – women to obtain "abortion insurance" even before they get pregnant. The idea is so extreme that even Snyder opposes it. And it flies in the face of perhaps the most important part of the Affordable Care Act, that which prohibits insurance companies from denying coverage due to "pre-existing conditions."

[See a collection of political cartoons on the Republican Party.]

It's similar to policies some people have had prior to the passage of the ACA, policies that, for example, demanded people buy special cancer insurance just in case they get the serious illness. Who thinks he or she will get cancer? But if you do, and you don't have the coverage to pay for the very expensive treatment, you're dead. Maybe literally.

What makes the Michigan law so hateful and misogynist is that it has little to do with actual cost; abortions don't cost as much as chemotherapy and tumor-removal surgery. It's about shaming women, insisting that they brand themselves with a big scarlet A on themselves to show they think they may be just the sort of irresponsible whores who might need abortion access at some point. Good girls, apparently, don't have to pay, since they won't be having sex.

And what about cases of rape or incest? It shouldn't matter, since the decision to have an abortion ought not be based on whether the female in question is a victim or sexually active. But women and girls – some of whom might be too poor to pay for an abortion or too scared to come forward after an assault – will have to pony up for an abortion or pay in advance.

[See a collection of political cartoons on Obamacare.]

This raises some interesting issues for the defense, should a female report a rape or incest to police. So, Miss Slutsmith, you purchased abortion insurance. Should we not infer that you were planning to get pregnant – and could not possibly have been raped or abused by a male relative?

But then again, the law doesn't address men's sexual health. It doesn't insist that men pay in advance, for example, for treatment for sexually transmitted diseases or for Viagra. They get to have sex without consequence, unlike the women. They don't have to give up their privacy and undergo the humiliation of paying extra to deal with erectile dysfunction or gonorrhea. But for the women – shame! The word is appropriate here. But it ought to be directed at the Michigan legislature.

Read Jamie Chandler: Megyn Kelly Insisting Santa Is White Is Everything That's Wrong With Today's GOP

Read Brad Bannon: The Wacko Right Comes After Paul Ryan and Ted Cruz