Todd Klarkowski, 43, fatally shot in California pot transaction

A Sonoma County sheriff's deputy puts up crime scene tape across a driveway the day after a triple homicide occurred on Ross Station Road in Forestville, Calif., on Feb. 6. 2013, in which Boulder resident Todd Klarkowski was killed. The fatal shootings of Klarkowski, Richard Lewin and Raleigh Butler stemmed from a botched marijuana deal, police said. ( Associated Press )

Todd Klarkowski (Associated Press)

It has been more than 1,000 days since Boulder resident Todd Klarkowski was gunned down at a home in Sonoma County, Calif., along with two other men in what prosecutors called a marijuana deal gone awry.

Beginning Monday, the alleged triggerman, Mark Cappello of Central City, is finally expected to stand trial.

Sonoma County Superior Court Judge Robert LaForge will preside over a trial that could last two to three months, according to Joe Stogner, the Santa Rosa, Calif., lawyer who is court-appointed to defend Cappello.

On Dec. 22, a hearing was held on a defense motion to dismiss all charges against Cappello, based on the alleged insufficiency of the evidence presented at Cappello's preliminary hearing — which occurred more than two years ago.

Mark Cappello (Associated Press)

That motion failed, which did not surprise Stogner.

"The motion was denied, which, in the vast majority of cases, it is," Stogner said. "That motion was denied because of the low standard of proof at preliminary hearings. But we expect it to be a different scenario in front of a jury, when the standard of proof is higher."

Stogner is not the first lawyer to represent Cappello, 49, who had been a well-known figure in Central City. He held a seat on the town's Historic Preservation Commission, to which he'd been appointed in December 2010.

The Sonoma County District Attorney's Office originally had declared it would seek the death penalty against Cappello, which prompted his original attorney, San Francisco-based lawyer Michael Meehan, to withdraw in July 2014 over his lack of experience in handling such cases.

Stogner was then appointed by a judge to replace Meehan, and he remains on the case despite the fact that prosecutors announced Oct. 16 that they are no longer seeking the death penalty.

Sonoma County Chief Deputy District Attorney Spencer Brady, the lead prosecutor on the case, said in a recent interview that the death penalty reversal came after conversations with family members of the victims, and a presentation of mitigating factors, which the defense made at the invitation of the prosecutors in a meeting at the district attorney's office, which is a routine practice in California.

The decision to no longer pursue the death penalty, Brady said, "is consistent with the wishes of some family members, but not all."

Victims' family members did not respond to the Camera's request for comment on the case.

Brady acknowledged a resolution to the legal saga has been long in coming.

"This has been a lengthy process, but is it not unusual for a case of this complexity and magnitude," Brady said. "The defense attorney was changed halfway through the process, and the new attorney had to start over, and that's the main factor" for the delay.

Key witness' credibility challenged

Stogner said Cappello is innocent of the charges against him, which includes three counts of first-degree murder.

Those murder counts are charged with special circumstances — lying in wait, murder for financial gain, murder during the course of a robbery and murder of multiple victims.

If any one of those is proven, Brady said, Cappello would be sentenced to 75 years-to-life, and would serve "every day of those 75 years."

Francis Dwyer (Associated Press)

But Stogner sounded confident about the outcome for his client, who remains held without bond at the Sonoma County Jail.

"We expect there to be literally no competent evidence presented, no reliable evidence presented, that he was in the residence where the shootings occurred, at the time of the shootings themselves," Stogner said in a recent interview.

"The prosecution is relying almost exclusively on the testimony of an accomplice, the same individual who ended up with a lot of the marijuana from the transaction and disposed of the alleged murder weapon," he added.

Odin Dwyer (Associated Press)

Klarkowski, 43, was shot and killed execution style Feb. 5, 2013, along with 46-year-old Richard Lewin, of Huntington, N.Y., and Raleigh Butler, 24, of Sebastopol, Calif. The three were slain in a bedroom of the home of Butler's mother in Forestville, a small Sonoma County community.

The prosecution has alleged that Klarkowski and Lewin had planned to buy 100 pounds of marijuana from Butler. Klarkowski, who knew Cappello, had contacted Cappello about driving the contraband to the East Coast, according to investigators.

Cappello, it is alleged, hired Francis Raymond Dwyer, 68, and his 40-year-old son Odin Leonard Dwyer, of Black Hawk, to assist him.

In an October 2013 preliminary hearing, a detective said that Odin Dwyer told investigators that Cappello used a .45-caliber automatic pistol to kill Klarkowski, Lewis and Butler as they sat on Butler's mother's bedroom floor, packaging the marijuana for transport to New York.

Odin Dwyer had told police that tension had developed between Cappello and the victims over $275,000 that Cappello was supposed to bring to the meeting, but didn't.

Odin Dwyer claimed that he was in the kitchen of the house when the shots were fired, and that he had seen Cappello standing with his arm extended, holding the gun, the victims sprawled on the floor, according to testimony from a detective at the preliminary hearing.

The detective said that according to Odin Dwyer's account to investigators, Cappello then spoke to Odin Dwyer, saying, "It had to be done."

Trial not expected to move at quick pace

Odin Dwyer and his father, Francis Dwyer, pleaded no contest in May to numerous felonies, including involuntary manslaughter and accessory, respectively, and agreed to testify truthfully at Cappello's trial.

Both men, like Cappello, originally had been charged with three counts of murder.

Francis Dwyer was alleged to have waited at a nearby motel when the pot-deal-turned-triple-slaying occurred. He was arrested a few weeks later at his home in Truth or Consequences, N.M.

Odin Dwyer -— who had briefly been a line cook at the Lazy Dog restaurant on Boulder's Pearl Street Mall — was arrested in Adams County about the same time as his father.

About 60 pounds of marijuana traced to the crime ultimately were recovered from a storage locker that police said Odin Dwyer had leased in Westminster.

Stogner, Cappello's lawyer, made clear that he believes Odin Dwyer will present major credibility issues as a key state witness against his client and has not been truthful about his role in the crimes.

"We have doubts that are very, very serious about whether the case can be proven, and specifically, about whether Mark Cappello was even present when the shootings occurred," Stogner said.

Even with the trial now scheduled to start Monday, there is little hope for a quick resolution to a case that has lingered painfully for the victims' families for close to three years.

"We think it's going to start slow, because there are many more motions that have to be litigated. That, plus jury selection, could take the better part of January," Stogner said. "We expect to begin (testimony) in late January or possibly early February."

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan