Amarilis Velazquez (Photo: South Brunswick Police Department) Story Highlights Residents in the Winding Woods neighborhood noticed strangers visiting for brief periods

Police set up a surveillance in the area and spotted a woman with backpack hearing toward the townhouses

A search warrant revealed the backpack contained more than three pounds of marijuana.

The marijuana is worth about $6,000 on the street

A New Brunswick woman is facing drug charges after police recovered $6,000 worth of marijuana stored in her backpack.

Police were on surveillance in the Whispering Woods development last Wednesday after several neighbors reported suspicious activity in the neighborhood during the past two weeks. Residents reported people being dropped off in vehicles, staying only a few minutes and then leaving the area.

Residents told police they did not recognize the people being dropped off.

Detectives were monitoring Appletree Court around 7 p.m. when they spotted an older model black Nissan drive onto the street. A woman exited the vehicle while the driver stayed in the car.

The woman was carrying a black The North Face backpack over her shoulder and began to walk toward the townhouses. A detective standing in the parking lot called out to the woman, later identified as Amarilis Velazquez, 30, of New Brunswick. The detective identified himself and asked to speak with Velazquez.

Police said Velazquez immediately dropped the backpack in the grass next to her. The detective told Velazquez he just saw her carrying the backpack and asked her why she dropped it.

According to police, Velazquez said her mother was sick and she can’t go to jail. Police said there was an odor of raw marijuana coming from The North Face backpack.

Police seized the backpack. A Superior Court judge authorized a warrant to search the backpack. Inside police recovered three vacuumed sealed bags of marijuana weighing a little more than three pounds, with a street value of $6,000.

Velazquez was charged with possession of controlled dangerous substance with intent to distribute and possession of a controlled dangerous substance. She was processed and released after posting $22,000 bail, police said.

Police Chief Raymond Hayducka credited the partnership between the community and police with stopping the drug dealing.

“It is tips from the community and good police work that stopped this drug dealing. The unusual activity observed by residents in connection with undercover surveillance led to the capture of the drug dealer,” Hayducka said.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1ybwmfE