Preparing students to 'lead their own learding'

Andrew Moore, left, IT for Boulder Valley School District, hand freshman Annika Schneider, right, her Google Chromebook at Centaurus High School in Lafayette. ( Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer )

Centaurus High freshman Perrin Ahlers was thrilled when her teacher handed her a Chromebook of her own, one she can use in class and at home.

"I have two older brothers who also use the same computer at our house," she said. "We have to schedule time, and I can't always get all my work done. It's nice to have my own device that I don't have to share. I'm excited."

The Lafayette school recently gave out about 300 Chromebooks to its freshman class, marking the start of its second year of a one-to-web initiative.

"We want students to be prepared to lead their own learning," said Principal Rhonda Haniford.

Along with using the devices in class, she said, students will spend some time learning how to care for the devices and how to be good digital citizens — from how to communicate on social media to how to find the best research online.

"It's not so much about do you know all these facts now, but can you analyze information and read it with a discerning eye," she said.

Louisville's Monarch High School was the first to try a one-to-one initiative in Boulder Valley and is now in its fifth year of requiring students to tote laptops or other devices. The small number of students who can't afford their own laptops borrow one from the school.

Advertisement

But requiring students at every district high school to bring their own devices would put too high a financial burden on families, district officials said.

Instead, the district last school year started a pilot at Centaurus, giving every freshman a Chromebook in January. Each new class of freshman will get Chromebooks, until all students have one. When they graduate, the district will gift the devices to them.

The pilot is expanding to Broomfield High School this fall, with teachers getting trained now and about 400 freshmen getting Chromebooks in November.

Andrew Moore, Boulder Valley's chief information officer, said the district's goal is providing Internet access, with Chromebooks chosen mainly for their affordable price and ease of use with the Google environment.

Because they have a keyboard, students also can use them to take the state's online tests and complete writing assignments.

"Learning is now happening anyplace, anytime," he said. "It expands the learning day. By giving students Chromebooks, we can help shrink the digital divide."

At Centaurus, students started playing as soon as they received the devices, adding digital wallpaper, bookmarking their teachers' websites and checking out what's already installed.

Students who had Chromebooks at home also offered to help classmates.

Jessie Weise said using Chromebooks in class is good preparation for college and will help with group work.

"You're not going to be taking notes on paper in college," she said. "And it will be easier to work on group projects when everybody has a laptop."

Classmate Matthew Spangler said he's looking forward to more integration of technology in the curriculum.

"We'll have more access," he said. "More and more schools are making the transition from paper to digital."

Annika Schneider added that, while she "struggles a little bit" with technology, she's expecting the Chromebooks to help with organization.

"I won't lose papers, because it's all on Google docs," she said. "You can access work anywhere. You just bring your computer."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa