Volunteer Sarah Rutherford laughs as she pets a dog named Kai while walking him at the Longmont Humane Society on Tuesday. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

To learn more about the Longmont Humane Society and volunteer opportunities longmonthumane.org

Sarah Rutherford started volunteering at Longmont Humane Society because she needed some volunteer hours for school. Three years later the Mead resident comes in Saturdays all day and Tuesdays for a few hours, and does everything from walking dogs to filling out paperwork to taking photos of pets up for adoption.

"I really started to love it, so I just stayed on," said Rutherford, 16, a Mead High School student.

The Longmont Humane Society, on a given year, works with roughly 300 teens such as Rutherford and Zach Cook, a Silver Creek High School student who's also been volunteering for three years. The teen volunteers, which make up about half of the 600 annual volunteers, are crucial to the success of the shelter, especially in the summer months.

"We really appreciate having the teens here, because a lot of adults during the summer, they don't get work off," said Emily Ingram, head of the volunteer program. "So we love it when teens come in."

The teen volunteer program

Children can start volunteering at the Longmont Humane Society at the age of 8. But from ages 8 to 12, they need a parent present.

"The parent is the main volunteer, and the (child) assists," Ingram said.

When a volunteer turns 13, he or she can start working in the Friendly Felines program, or cat socializing (playing with kittens) and the small mammals (rats and guinea pigs) area. After three months of that, a volunteer can move into other areas. For most, that means JACA, or Junior Animal Care Assistants.

"They are the ones that will be cleaning and stuffing Kongs for enrichment, doing kennel visits and cleaning the kennels if they get dirty," Ingram said.

Volunteer Mary Yao, 14, pets a Salina while out on a walk at the Longmont Humane Society on Tuesday. Go to timescall.com for more photos (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer)

When a volunteer reaches the age of 14, or starts volunteering after turning 14, he or she can start walking dogs. There is a mandatory orientation with parents required (orientation is held quarterly) but then the teen is able to start spending time with dogs.

"When volunteers start, they're a Level Two volunteer," Ingram said. "They know how to use all the training collars we use, and they have the skills down for handling a dog, such as which doors to go in and out. Safety above all is most important to us. ... After they have been here six months, they can move to an EV, Experienced Volunteer. They're going to handle dogs that are outside of the norm, either more fearful or with higher arousal. After they complete that realm, they can do more training and become a 3EV or Canine Coach."

Cook is a Canine Coach, and started volunteering because he loves dogs and working with them.

"I'm the one that trains our behavior dogs, which are the dogs the public won't get to see much," Cook said.

Of course, the only requirement for volunteers is two hours a week for at least three months. Cook and Rutherford, as Ingram said, "do a lot more" and are "excellent examples of our teen program."

In 2014, 392 teens volunteered a total of 11,405 hours, making up 20 percent of the total volunteer hours for the year.

The impact volunteers have

Pete is a 7-year-old pit bull terrier mix. He's a big, bulky guy with a giant smile. He's been at the shelter since December but is quite friendly. He comes up, licks you, let's you pet him, but then is quick to sit back and be still when commanded by Cook. Cook said he likes working with Pete, and the two got along well as they went for an afternoon walk.

"We could not do the job we do here as well as we do here without help," Ingram said. "We provide a very good quality of care here and wouldn't be possible without (teen volunteers)."

Ingram said that during the summer, when there are the most volunteers, dogs can get five to six walks a day and cats can get social time four to five times a day. She said all the interaction and training provided by volunteers makes a big difference come adoption time.

Volunteer Zac Cook, 16, walks a dog named Pete at the Longmont Humane Society on Tuesday. (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer)

"The dogs here, the cats, all the animals, are usually pretty well adjusted," Ingram said. "They're used to be handled in different situations, and used to different types of people. I've found they do seem to be happy and healthy."

Volunteering doesn't just benefit the animals, but it benefits the teens as well. Both Cook and Rutherford want to work with animals in their future careers, and a shelter is a great jumping off point.

"I have talked to the directors about what they would recommend for colleges and stuff because some of them have degrees," Rutherford said.

Ingram said that volunteers who want to work veterinary fields can also volunteer at the onsite clinic, learning what assisting a vet takes.

Rutherford said that while her favorite part of the job is watching a dog she's worked with "for such a long time" finally "go out into the world" and go home, it's the people who make it worthwhile.

"I love the people as well," Rutherford said. "All the staff, they are great people. I love coming and having friends. ... The people here, they have a difficult job. They're willing to do it, they aren't here because they have to. It's great to be with people who share the same passion."

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones