When it comes to school fundraisers, bake sale tables loaded with sugary goodies are out. Fun runs, auctions and sales of healthier treats are in.

Government rules requiring many schools to hold more nutritious fundraisers, along with a trend toward healthier eating in schools, could mean trouble for the long-beloved bake sale. In response, schools are selling everything from fruit to kid-friendly shoelaces.

In Dallas, physical education teacher Sharon Foster says her school, James Bowie Elementary, stopped selling chocolate bars and started selling Y-Ties — elastic shoelaces that don’t have to be tied.

Parent Susan Fox Pinkowitz said she helped her children’s elementary school, University Park Elementary in Denver, move from a candy-filled annual carnival to a fun run and carnival that offers apples and protein nut bars. She said the new fundraiser brings in as much as $12,000 annually, three or four times the amount raised by the old event.

Not everyone is on board. Missy Latham, a parent in Greenville, South Carolina, says bake sales are profitable.

“It’s kind of absurd that one week a year you couldn’t sell something like that without the government mandating that it’s OK,” Latham said.

The Agriculture Department rules, which kicked in last summer, require all foods sold on school campuses during the school day to meet certain nutrition standards. The rules include fundraisers, if states don’t exempt themselves. In all, 22 states have used the exemptions, according to the National Association of State Boards of Education.

Florida allows exemptions for five days in elementary schools, 10 days in middle and junior high schools, 15 days in senior high schools, and 10 days in schools that combine those grades. No exempted fundraiser can take place less than 30 minutes after the last meal period.

Last week, Arizona Superintendent of Public Instruction Diane Douglas said the state would move to exempt fundraisers after she heard that a school couldn’t sell snow cones.

“The thought that a federal bureaucrat knows better than parents what they can feed their own families is condescending and reprehensible,” Douglas said.

The federal rules don’t apply to food that is intended to be consumed at home or outside of school — so kids can still sell fundraiser mainstays like frozen pizza, frozen cookie dough and chocolate bars.