Topics: Affordable Care Act, Barack Obama, CPAC, Editor's Picks, GOP, Obamacare, Ted Cruz, The Right, Politics News

On Friday, while pretty much everyone in the national press corps was hypnotized by CPAC’s Grand Kabuki, Republicans quietly announced the biggest domestic political news of the week, and nobody wearing a tricorn hat was any the wiser, or there would’ve been hell to pay.

Politico’s Jennifer Haberkorn got the scoop, which is behind a paywall, but here is the gist:

House Republican leaders are planning to bring up three changes to Obamacare next week — but unlike dozens of prior bills, these are more minor measures that are not expected to be controversial. All three bills essentially fix drafting errors, perceived oversights or unintended consequences in the president’s Affordable Care Act. They have bipartisan support and are scheduled to be considered under a suspension of the rules, which limits debate and requires support from two-thirds of House members — a signal that leaders of both parties do not expect any heated debate. They hold some political significance, however, because they allow Republicans to push back against the Democrats’ talking point that the GOP is only interested in holding votes to pick at Obamacare’s flaws. They also represent the reality that Obamacare is now fully implemented — and not fixing errors could be more damaging to opponents than being perceived as trying to make Obamacare work better.

That pretty much covers it, though I would add that passing even a single Affordable Care Act technical corrections bills undermines the impression many conservatives are trying to create that the law is unfixable. These bills won’t codify any of the administrative measures President Obama has taken to smooth implementation of the law, and instead will address the narrow concerns of worthy constituencies like veterans and Christian Scientists.

But the very existence of the bills carries significant implications for both President Obama and the Republican Party, and those implications cut against each other in interesting ways. Let’s take them in order.

If you’ve followed the implementation of the Affordable Care Act closely, you’re familiar with the ritual that accompanies each announcement of an administrative tweak or delay. First Republicans mock Obama and Democrats, “here we go again”-style; then they argue, irrespective of the merits, that said tweak or delay is evidence that the entire law is a #trainwreck; and finally they insinuate not-so-subtly that if Obama can use his executive powers to delay parts of the law in the service of smoother implementation, then a future Republican president can just stop enforcing the whole thing, full stop.

Writing at the Incidental Economist, administrative law expert Nicholas Bagley gently lends some credence to that argument. Bagley has examined the administration’s legal reasoning for several of the measures and found some of them wanting. He worries about the precedent Obama is setting.

The lack of a persuasive legal justification matters most not for the current political battles, but for the future. Because the Constitution doesn’t crisply detail what the “take Care” clause means, the phrase accrues meaning through practice. The Obama administration’s repeated delays of the ACA now stand as precedent for future administrations that would also like to postpone statutes. The more the administration delays the ACA, the firmer that precedent becomes. There’s a risk, then, that the delays will transfer to the executive branch considerable power to refashion statutes. That could spell trouble for health-care reform down the line. What if a future president were to postpone portions of the law that were essential to the law’s ongoing success? Or provisions that protected consumers from sharp insurance practices? The recent delays might give him legal cover to do so.