The latest good news for President Obama is that the Affordable Care Act is poised to shatter his administration’s enrollment goals for 2015.

The Department of Health and Human Services released the latest numbers:

Nationwide, 9.5 million consumers selected or were automatically reenrolled in quality, affordable health insurance coverage from the Health Insurance Marketplace through the second month of 2015 Open Enrollment, according to a report released today by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Of those, more than 7.1 million were in states using the HealthCare.gov platform and 2.4 million were in the 14 states (including Washington, D.C.) using their own Marketplace platforms. As the Feb. 15 deadline approaches, HHS encourages all eligible consumers to sign up for Marketplace coverage. Most will be eligible for financial assistance to lower the cost of monthly premiums. Today’s report includes data for individuals who selected or were automatically reenrolled in coverage through Jan. 16 for the 37 states using the HealthCare.gov platform, and through Jan. 17 for the 12 states and Washington, D.C. using their own Marketplace platforms. Data for California is through Jan. 18. To have their coverage effectuated, consumers need to pay their first month’s health plan premium (today’s report does not include effectuated enrollment).

The good news about enrollment was part of a one-two punch that also included the CBO lowering the cost of the ACA by 20% due to a slowdown in the growth of healthcare costs. Meanwhile, Congressional Republicans are trying to keep the repeal charade going by voting again to repeal Obamacare next week. The disconnect between Republicans and reality has never been clearer. The Affordable Care Act is becoming a raging success. The law is doing exactly what it was intended to do. More people have access to healthcare, and the price of that healthcare is dropping.

President Obama is on a roll. His approval ratings are skyrocketing. The economy is expanding, and now healthcare is more accessible and affordable than ever before. Things are by no means perfect, but the country is moving in the right direction again. It is becoming impossible for Republicans to avoid the reality that Americans love the Affordable Care Act. The ACA will easily pass the administration’s targets for 2015 enrollment. The years of Republican fear-mongering are being proven wrong. The ACA hasn’t destroyed the health care system. It has granted tens of millions of Americans access to it.

Republicans don’t have an alternative. They don’t have a plan, and it is becoming clear that their irrational hatred of the ACA is out of step with the wants of most Americans.