It’s hard to believe that Denver International Airport is now 20 years old. I remember the first time I traveled through DIA. I emerged from the train into the Great Hall of the Jeppesen Terminal and was stunned by the aura of the space. I’m an architect by trade, so it’s no surprise that I was impressed by DIA’s iconic design and natural light. But today, there is so much more that impresses me about Colorado’s primary economic engine and the fifth-busiest airport in the United States.

In 2008, I was fortunate to be appointed CEO of DIA by then-Mayor John Hickenlooper, and then reappointed by Mayor Bill Vidal and in 2011 by Mayor Michael Hancock. Being a part of this community has taught me so much about the history of DIA and I’m humbled to be part of it.

I remember driving to work one day seeing planes taking off and landing and taking in the vast open space surrounding the airport. It occurred to me at that moment how visionary these city and state leaders were to build this incredible facility. I also credit voters and elected officials in the region who supported this idea.

That day, I walked into my office and wrote a ‘thank you’ note to former mayor and U.S. secretary of transportation, Federico Peña. Because of his vision and the tenacity of former Mayor Wellington Webb, this airport is ready to adapt and grow for generations to come.

These visionaries ensured that DIA has the land to grow at incrementally low cost and that the design of the airport is expandable and adaptable. They ensured that the airport’s master plan would guide successful investments. And today, we are delivering on that plan two decades after DIA opened.

DIA is an economic powerhouse for Colorado, growing its initial annual economic impact of $3.1 billion to an estimated $26.3 billion in 2013. The airport supports nearly 190,000 jobs, and is on track to be even more impactful in the years to come.

Later this year, the airport will open its new 519-room Westin Denver International Airport hotel and conference center, a long sought after passenger amenity. The upcoming commuter rail service, which will connect the airport with the heart of downtown Denver and the entire metro region, begins in early 2016.

We remain on the leading edge of aviation technology through the implementation of the Federal Aviation Administration’s NextGen technologies and we are reinvesting in DIA’s infrastructure so this community asset will continue to thrive. We are also evaluating options for reclaiming the Jeppesen Terminal’s Great Hall as the inviting public space it once was.

We continue to expand Denver’s connectivity to the world via new nonstop flights to Reykjavik, Tokyo and Panama City. These and other new gateways contributed to DIA’s all-time record number of travelers: 53.4 million passengers in 2014. DIA also set new records for international passenger traffic last year, with 2.2 million international travelers and we have seen 32nd consecutive months of international passenger growth at DIA. By adding new destinations, better amenities and services, we will assure the airport’s place as a global portal.

While DIA has exceeded what many had envisioned, we continue to look to the future. Mayor Hancock’s vision for future on-airport commercial development opportunities in the years ahead will further boost Colorado’s economy and support new jobs while lowering airline costs, generating more passengers and leading to more flights to more cities.

DIA has become Colorado’s leading economic driver, and it remains the newest, most modern airport in the U.S. With a defined vision, the strong support of our community and our financial stability, DIA will continue to be a critical asset to Colorado and the millions of passengers we serve annually.

Kim Day is the CEO of Denver International Airport.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.