PHOENIX — Jon Gray is a having a little trouble with the curve, so he’s shelving his new pitch — at least for the rest of the Cactus League season.

“Until it’s good enough to where I can locate it and throw it where I want to, I’m not going to use it in the game,” Gray said Saturday after an uneven, three-inning performance against the Milwaukee Brewers. “But I’ll continue to work on it (in bullpens). If (the Rockies) want me to throw it, I’ll throw it. But if it’s in a tough situation where I’m not way ahead of the batter, then I’m going to shake (off) to the slider.”

The right-handed starter gave up two runs on four hits, walked two and struck out one. Gray began working on the curveball during the winter and brought the pitch into camp, hoping to make it a new weapon. To this point, he can’t command it well enough to trust it. For example, in the first inning Saturday, Gray threw an 2-0 curve to Milwaukee’s Domingo Santana, who drilled the pitch for a run-scoring double.

Asked if the curveball would be a usable pitch in time for regular season, Gray said: “It’s possible. I’m just going to work on it to see how good it can get.”

Manager Walt Weiss said it’s not urgent for Gray to have an effective curve, at least not right down.

“I think it’s mostly a matter of when you throw it,” Weiss said. “I think he can still throw it at times. But it’s his fourth pitch, so it’s about deciding when to throw it.”

Gray currently throws a fastball, a slider and a changeup.

Anderson scratched

Lefty Tyler Anderson was originally scheduled to start Saturday’s game in front of Gray, but he was scratched about 15 minutes before first pitch because of a sore right oblique. Anderson has an outside shot at making the starting rotation, but if the oblique becomes problematic, that would hurt his chances.

“He felt it throwing, while playing catch before he got on the mound,” Weiss said. “It’s an injury you want to be careful with. We don’t know the extent of it, but we weren’t taking any chances.”

Anderson, the team’s top draft pick out of Oregon in 2011, has a 6.75 ERA in two Cactus League games. He missed last season because of a stress fracture in his left elbow suffered late in the 2014 season at Double-A Tulsa.

Saturday would have been Anderson’s first spring training start. After a rough first outing, he was coming off a scoreless, two-inning, three-strikeout, one-hit performance against the Cubs on Monday.

Catching question

Dustin Garneau and Tom Murphy are competing for the No. 2 catching job behind starter Nick Hundley. Murphy, who has only 11 major-league games under his belt, might be able to provide the Rockies with more power at the plate, but as the No. 2 catcher he would see more limited action than if he played daily at Triple-A.

“It’s something we will take into consideration as to who needs more development,” Weiss said. “Who can handle that backup catcher role when they are usually playing about once a series?”