Buy Photo Sei Ree, 54, of Burma, fills out paperwork with assistance from friend Tracy Jones and daughter Say Ler Paw to receive medical treatment during the Sojourn Medical Clinic on Saturday, Feb. 27 at Sojourn Community Church. (Photo: Matt Herp, Special to the C-J)Buy Photo

Sullivan University pharmacy student Tyler Franklin stands patiently with his hands in his lab coat pockets, talking to his classmates while waiting on potential patients in the Shelby Park area.

The Owingsville, Ky., native is entering his second year of a doctorate program but on this Saturday afternoon he took a break from medical books to join dozens of other professionals who helped Sojourn Community Church deliver free flu shots and other services.

"There's a big need to help," Franklin said.

Sojourn had nearly two dozen organizations providing free health care services for hundreds of residents in and around the Shelby Park neighborhood as part of its spiritual mission.

"For patients to come in and actually see health care professionals out helping others, it's a positive thing for the community," Franklin said.

The clinic drew several medical professionals who volunteered their time and skills to those seeking general screenings, diabetes checks, flu shots, eyes exams, blood pressure checks, chiropractic care and other basic medicine.

"We believe we are in physical, emotional and spiritual need, and this is a beautiful way for the church to serve the neighborhood," said Nathan Ivey, a Sojourn pastor who is responsible for the church's mercy and community development initiatives.

Sojourn, a youth-oriented church and ministry, has put on more than 20 free clinics at its various campus sites across Louisville in the past five years, serving thousands of people ranging from working families, foreign-born residents and the homeless. The church took in volunteers who guided guests through a maze of services for their ailments while also offering prayer for themselves or others.

Louisville's faith community is a dynamic one, Ivey said, and Sojourn wants to serve Shelby Park's diverse residents in a way Christ would according to scripture. He said there is always a hesitance in terms of the church's evangelism but that it has established meaningful relationships in the neighborhood.

"If there's a physical need, all are welcome here to be served and to be loved and to be cared for," Ivey said. "I think it's a beautiful expression of the church to be open handed to anyone in need."

The free clinic saw about 160 participants who used its medical services on Saturday. Ivey said after the federal health care overhaul, known as the Affordable Care Act, first passed, their free clinics saw a drop in the number of participants.

It's a misconception, however, that free medical clinics are no longer needed. The Congressional Budget Office, for instance, estimates around 31 million Americans will remain uninsured once the law is fully implemented in 2024.

"There are a substantive number of people in the neighborhood who are under-insured for services not covered by the ACA, in particular, a lot of the dental services we provide," Ivey said.

Sojourn's clinic also offered guests employment opportunities on-site including career counselors and resume building help.

Reporter Phillip M. Bailey can be reached at (502) 582-4475 or pbailey@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/212spC8