Cutting a path: The planned route for the 33-kilometre WestConnex motorway.

It is an exciting time to be living in Sydney. At last, real efforts are being made to ease the frustrating traffic bottlenecks clogging our great city.

Traffic congestion costs an estimated $5.1 billion a year, or nearly $1100 every year for every person living here.

Think of the new schools, better hospitals and extra police officers that could fund.

With Sydney's population expected to increase by 1.3 million over the next 20 years, the cost of congestion will only worsen unless we act now.

Advertisement

While the $8.5 billion north-west rail link, the new south-east light rail route and extensions to the inner west light rail projects are significant steps forward, the real game changer is WestConnex.

WestConnex is the largest transport infrastructure project in Australia, linking our outer suburbs with Sydney's CBD, airport and port network in a 33-kilometre motorway that will ease congestion, connect communities and create at least 10,000 jobs.

These transport choices recognise that Sydney's 650 suburbs are spread over hundreds of square kilometres, making Sydney one of the most dispersedly developed cities in the world.

WestConnex will cost $11-$11.5 billion to build in three stages over 10 years, and will deliver more than $20 billion in economic benefits to the NSW economy.

It will cut travel times from Parramatta to Sydney Airport by 40 minutes, bypassing up to 52 sets of traffic lights in a network of above-ground roads and underground tunnels.

Critically, it will put 3000 trucks a day underground, returning local streets to communities and greatly improving air quality along Parramatta Road.

The need is clear.

Ninety-three per cent of passenger travel in Sydney is by road - with 12 million trips made daily.

Future demand will continue this trend.

More than 73 per cent of the forecast growth in passenger journeys between 2011 and 2031 will be car, surpassing demand for rail, buses, taxis, bicycles and light rail combined.

The potential for improvement in the inner west is profound.

Currently, empty shops and car yards are common along large sections of Parramatta Road, making it an unwelcome place for pedestrians, as urban decay has set in.

By putting much of the traffic underground, particularly trucks, Parramatta Road can be transformed.

This is exactly what occurred to the inner suburbs of Redfern and Surry Hills after the Eastern Distributor was built in 1999, diverting trucks and cars away from local streets.

Today, these suburbs have been reborn into thriving communities, complete with schools, café cultures, child care centres, and renewed investment and energy – and the commensurate uplift in property prices.

One may ask how WestConnex evolved.

It has emerged from an exhaustive government evaluation process over the past two years, involving the development of both Infrastructure NSW's State Infrastructure Strategy and the NSW Long Term Transport Master Plan.

The State Infrastructure Strategy looked at the most pressing road, bus, light rail, passenger trains, water resources, health and social infrastructure needs over the next 20 years.

It examined all previous studies and identified WestConnex as the No.1 priority over all others.

It may surprise many people to know that urban roads receive a relatively small proportion of NSW Government investment in transport.

In recent years, Sydney motorways have mostly been privately funded and financed. In 2012-13, only eight per cent of transport capital expenditure was on Sydney's roads.

Of the $11-$11.5 billion cost to build WestConnex, only $3.3 billion will come from government.

The rest will be provided by the private sector, and raised through tolling of road users.

Having been appointed late last week for this 10-year project, the new Board of Directors will now examine how we can deliver WestConnex in the most cost effective way.

As one would expect with a long term 10-year time horizon, much detail is still to be worked out.

That is why we are inviting the best engineering and finance minds in the world to put forward their ideas on how WestConnex should be built and funded.

It is for precisely this reason that calls to release detailed design and traffic forecasts are premature.

Anyone who expects all future details to be cast in stone during the early planning stage, despite inviting industry to offer their intellectual capital and ideas on how to achieve it, simply doesn't understand how massive multi-billion dollar projects like WestConnex are developed.

We need to get this right. It is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to link the city's west with its east, and unlock the untapped potential that offers.

WestConnex is being delivered alongside a massive increase of more than $10 billion in government spending on public transport. Investment across all forms of transport is what is needed to get this city working again.

WestConnex will help connect vital intermodal transport corridors and assist significantly in the sharing of transport modes, freeing up local roads, providing dedicated express bus lanes and enabling greater take-up of park-and-ride facilities.

Major projects such as WestConnex take considerable planning and consultation to get right. They require political foresight, will and collaboration and they require sound engineering and construction methodologies and an achievable financing plan to deliver.

Tony Shepherd is the president of the Business Council of Australia.