Slapped with a 10-day suspension for misconduct, state social worker Beth Bond clapped her hands in delight and thanked her supervisor, telling her she was “amazing,” according to state personnel records.

Bond, a two-year employee with the Cabinet for Health and Family Services, was about to be fired earlier this year for alleged violations including failing to report a social service client’s claim that she had been raped and had threatened suicide.

Bond also faced termination for alleged intimate involvement with a man in the client’s home, becoming friends with and socializing with the client and her family and for emailing confidential information about cases to her relatives and others outside the cabinet.

But on March 17, cabinet officials backed off firing Bond after she appealed. They instead suspended her only for the offense of disclosing confidential case information in emails and transferred her from Breckinridge County to Hardin County.

And on Bond’s first day on the job in Hardin, April 1, her new troubles began.

Bond, who resigned her job June 1, is facing criminal charges along with Joseph W. Applegate Jr. — the name of the man she was accused of having an intimate relationship with in Breckinridge County, a relationship she denied and the cabinet dropped as part of its effort to fire her.

Bond and Applegate, identified in court records as her fiance, are charged with six counts of complicity to make false complaints of child abuse and domestic violence against Corey Chaney and April Rodgers, a young couple who lived with their infant daughter over the apartment Bond and Applegate shared in Elizabethtown.

The calls began April 1 and continued until late May, when Elizabethtown police charged Bond and Applegate with calling in false, anonymous complaints about their neighbors to the state’s child abuse hotline run by the same agency that employed Bond as a social worker.

Criminal complaints say Bond and Applegate admitted to police they made false reports over about two months.

Both have pleaded not guilty. Neither Bond nor her lawyer, Adam Cart, responded to a request for comment; Applegate’s lawyer, Evan Spalding, declined to comment.

Cabinet officials said that while they are appalled by Bond’s alleged actions and worked aggressively to fire her, they lacked enough witnesses and evidence to substantiate all of the allegations from Breckinridge. Furthermore, some of the witnesses to alleged events were children and could not be called to testify at personnel proceedings, the cabinet said in a statement by spokeswoman Jill Midkiff.

Midkiff said the cabinet must follow state personnel regulations in such cases.

“Fortunately, Bond resigned amidst the criminal charges she now faces and is no longer employed by the cabinet,” Midkiff said.

Still, Barry Sullivan, a lawyer who represents Chaney and Rodgers, said he is disappointed that Bond was merely suspended and allowed to move to a new county where within two months she was charged with the offenses against his clients.

“That is shocking and sad and disgusting,” Sullivan said.

Chaney and Rodgers told The Courier-Journal that the false reports of domestic violence and child abuse sent police and social workers to the couple’s home repeatedly to investigate, disrupting their lives and leaving them frightened and concerned.

Chaney said he is angered by the cabinet’s decision not to fire Bond and for not better supervising her. He also faults the state’s system of accepting anonymous child abuse calls as making it too easy to call in false allegations.

“Something has to be done about this,” he said. “Someone who hides behind the system and preys on children and their families is as low as it gets.”

The case in Breckinridge

The cabinet began investigating allegations against Bond involving a Breckinridge family last year.

She was assigned to work with the family in June. The household included a married couple, three children and an adult male friend of the husband’s, identified as “Client 5,” state records said.

On Nov. 7, Bond was removed from handling any social service cases and placed on desk duty while the cabinet investigated.

On Feb. 25, the cabinet sent Bond an 18-page letter detailing its conclusions and notifying her it intended to fire her. In addition to citing her for repeatedly emailing confidential information about cases to herself, her relatives and others, it listed multiple problems with her work with the Breckinridge family.

Among the allegations:

Bond frequently socialized with the family, shopping with them, visiting on weekends, eating with family members at restaurants and developing a relationship as a friend rather than maintaining a professional one as a social worker.

She helped the family clean the home, took “staged” photos for the social service file, making it appear the home was clean, and bought groceries for them.

Bond failed to report a previous relationship with the man identified as “Client 5” and continued it while he was staying at the home. Others in the home told cabinet officials that the two dated, kissed and Bond once climbed on his lap in front of others at the family’s home and gave him a “lap dance.”

Bond in a Nov. 19 memo in her personnel file denied most of the allegations and called them “hearsay without proof.” Some of the family members who gave statements to the cabinet about her behavior were “dishonest, manipulative and at one time, hated me,” she said.

She also blamed a state juvenile justice worker involved with one of the family’s children for some of the allegations, saying “she has intentionally tried to work against me with this case to cause me undue and unnecessary grief.”

She said she tried to appear friendly in order to gain the family’s trust and cooperation but denied excessive socializing with them.

As for not reporting the rape allegation, Bond said she attempted to call police but “my cellphone died.” While she was waiting for it to charge, Bond said, she fell asleep and when she awoke, had several voice mail messages from the woman begging her not to report it.

She also described the woman as unreliable because of mental health and alcohol problems.

As for her relationship with the man staying in the home, Bond acknowledged dating him “a few times” when she worked in Daviess County. When she realized he was staying at the family’s home in Breckinridge County, “I did not realize it was a conflict of interest because I didn’t work with him directly,” Bond said in her memo.

Relationship with Client 5

In an initial letter seeking to fire Bond, cabinet officials said she failed to report her relationship with Client 5, “which created a conflict in providing services to a family,” resulting in “inappropriate and unprofessional conduct.”

Bond insisted she had no involvement with Client 5 while she worked with the family, though she acknowledged knowing him prior to taking on the family’s case, having met him online and dating him.

But Bond did not tell her supervisors of any past relationship with the man until after Nov. 7, when Bond was removed from handling cases while under investigation and placed on desk duty, the records said. On Nov. 10, Bond called a supervisor and informed her she had “gone out on a date” with Client 5 and should have told her supervisors because of the potential conflict.

Client 5, while staying with the Breckinridge County family, “did ask me if I would go out with him … but I advised him while he was living in that home I could not date him,” Bond wrote in her memo.

She also denied allegations from members of the family that she kissed Client 5, gave him a “lap dance,” had sent him a cellphone photo of her in her bra and panties and that he had purchased a ring for her.

“To my knowledge, he did not buy me a ring,” Bond said in her memo.

On Jan. 7, more than two months before the cabinet took final personnel action against Bond, a co-worker in the Breckinridge County cabinet office provided a written statement that on Dec. 15, 2014, Bond showed off a ring and said she was engaged to be married to J.W. Applegate, according to personnel records.

Another worker said Bond told her in early January that she was engaged to J.W. Applegate and “wasn’t that crazy that she was engaged to a guy with the same name as the guy she was in trouble for at work.”

And a Breckinridge County woman, Shawna Beauchamp, who described herself as a longtime, former friend of Bond, told The Courier-Journal that Bond had been involved with Applegate for about a year, including the period when he was staying with the family in Breckinridge County.

On Dec. 12, Beauchamp said Bond sent her a text message with a photo of an engagement ring from Applegate with the caption “I said YES.”

Beauchamp said she knew the couple well, visited with them often and that Applegate showed her the engagement ring last year before he presented it to Bond.

“Totally excited”

Bond was allowed to present her defense to cabinet officials at a hearing March 10.

On March 17, cabinet officials notified Bond they were dropping plans to fire her and instead were suspending her.

Her reaction surprised the supervisor who delivered the news.

“Can’t say I’ve ever had someone clap and be totally excited about a 10-day suspension before today,” the supervisor noted wryly in an email to other cabinet officials.

On June 1, five days after she was charged with filing false abuse complaints in Elizabethtown, Bond resigned her job with the cabinet.

Contact Deborah Yetter at 502-582-4228 or at dyetter@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1F88Mya