NFL commissioner Roger Goodell addressed the media Friday for the first time since his CBS News interview in which he tried to explain the league’s decision and process in suspending Ray Rice indefinitely.

Since then, a handful of other cases have come up — Adrian Peterson, Greg Hardy, Jonathan Dwyer, Ray MacDonald — and a number of fumbled news conference by owners and missteps by the league have followed.

The NFL has perhaps never faced a more embarrassing and alarming few weeks than it has now, leading to even its biggest sponsors, including Anheuser-Busch and Nike, to start raising red flags and even suspending their deals with the league.

On Friday, Goodell must have felt that he could no longer hide. He, again, said that he made a mistake. That he “got it wrong.” That he “is sorry.” That he is “trying to get it right.” That the league “needs outside help.”

But the general public has heard those lines many times throughout these past few months, from him and his owners.

(The commissioner also said he has not considered resigning — “We have a lot of work to do. That’s my focus.” — and that he believes he has the full support of the league’s owners — “That has been clear to me.”)

But while Goodell may have been very sincere in his words, that he was indeed very sorry for how the NFL has handled the Ray Rice incident and the other cases that have come up since, he didn’t offer a concrete plan for how the league would change its ways.

He said the league would strive to get a new personal conduct policy in place by the Super Bowl, but he didn’t say what changes he would like to see made to the policy.

He said the league has partnered with two outside organizations for domestic violence awareness, but he didn’t say how that would change things within the league.

He said he there have been inconsistencies in how the NFL has handled the varied cases over the last few weeks, but he didn’t explain why.

He said “everything is on the table” when asked if he would consider giving up some of his power to allow for more checks and balances in the league.

When asked about Robert Mueller conflict of interests in investigating a league his firm has represented in past contract negotiations, Goodell asked why anyone would question Mueller’s credibility.

When probed by reporters, Goodell failed to answer succinctly how things will change and why things have happened as they have. In short, he said he has been in numerous meetings, that there are many things that the league “needs to consider,” that they “need to get it right.” But offered no answers and no plans with real changes.

But it wasn’t just the media who appeared baffled by Goodell’s lack of reasoning Friday. Players, fans and countless others expressed their views on his address:

All u have to do is look around social media of current and former NFL players see lack of respect for goodell. #dividedleague #usVSthem — Scott Shanle (@scottshanle) September 19, 2014

Sponsors pulling out and disassociating them selves from the nfl. Players need to do netter and so does the top down! Owners commissioner! — Brendon Ayanbadejo (@brendon310) September 19, 2014

If the guy crashing the presser was doing so as a joke, maybe that's what's wrong with our society, we don't take moments like this serious. — Brady Quinn (@3rd_Goal) September 19, 2014

Can only imagine how upset Sean Payton and the New Orleans Saints must be watching Commissioner's press conference — Troy Aikman (@TroyAikman) September 19, 2014

Accountability starts at the top….. pic.twitter.com/zJhjYuB9E3 — Jason Babin (@JasonBabin93) September 19, 2014

What @nflcommish is doing isn't easy.. . — Machine Marshall (@BMarshall) September 19, 2014

This press conference is pointless — Darius Butler (@DariusJButler) September 19, 2014