The threat of a franchise-worst season looms over the Rockies like a swarm of summer gnats. But at least they’ve sniffed the postseason since the Cold War ended.

The Kansas City Royals, who came to Coors Field on Tuesday rolling toward October as the hottest team in baseball, haven’t played in the playoffs since winning the World Series with George Brett in 1985.

Never mind the Rockies’ three consecutive losing seasons and the possibility of 100 losses this year. For 29 years, the Royals haven’t finished better than seven games back more than once.

But there’s a way out. The Royals — behind a modest lineup and sturdy, if not spectacular, pitching — are proving there’s always hope.

“What you do is, you don’t panic. You stay patient,” Royals manager Ned Yost said. “Keep putting them out there. If you have faith in them and you have trust in them, you keep putting them out there. Because sooner or later, it’s going to click.”

The Royals on Tuesday night got consecutive doubles from Omar Infante and Salvador Perez off Rockies reliever Adam Ottavino for a three-run seventh inning.

After another three-run inning in the eighth, the Royals went on to beat the Rockies 7-4, their 14th victory in their past 16 games.

Kansas City, at 70-55, maintained its two-game lead over the Detroit Tigers atop the American League Central. And the Royals are 15-4 against the National League.

With a payroll more than $1 million less than Colorado’s, the Royals are 21 games better. In other words, the Royals have spent $1.3 million per win this season; the Rockies have spent $1.9 million.

“At some point, the light switch turns on and you’re no longer just glad to be here,” Royals first baseman Billy Butler said. “You know you can win.”

Kansas City is winning in ways that would baffle a diehard Rockies fan. The Royals’ highest slugging percentage belongs to left fielder Alex Gordon, at .448. He would rank sixth in the Rockies lineup.

Instead, the Royals are winning with balance. They rarely strike out, with a 15.8 percent K rate — the best mark in baseball by a wide margin. They also rarely walk. But never mind that, because they steal bases (AL-best 110) and play defense (their defense saves 50.2 runs above average, according to FanGraphs).

“To win, if you’re talking about winning a championship, you have to be complete,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said. “If you have holes, you’re going to get exposed in October. But defense is a big part of it. We talk about defense and pitching going hand in hand, and generally they do. If you can keep the other team from scoring, by pitching well and catching the ball, that’s a good formula for success.”

Jeremy Guthrie, who pitched half a season for the Rockies in 2012 and was traded to Kansas City before Colorado finished with a franchise-worst 98 losses, revived himself in Royals blue. He has won 29 games since then. He is now hedging toward the playoffs.

“We’ve been very confident of our team as a unit for the past two seasons,” Guthrie said. “One of the big things is, we haven’t been as consistent as a winning team needs to be. We’ve had runs of good stretches and bad stretches and the bad stretches have been too long to be a team that competes at the end of the season. This year, we’ve done a better job with that.”

The Royals last lost 100 games in 2006 — a mark the Rockies have yet to reach (or fall to). But they have lost 90 or more in five of the past seven seasons.

“They have to learn that themselves. You tell ’em, you tell ’em, you tell ’em — all the time. That’s the process. You’re always telling them how good they are,” Yost said.

“But until they believe it in their heart — it hits a point when they believe it. And when they come together as a group and they believe in each other. That’s part of your job, to continue to help them grow, help them believe it.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke