By Liz Freeman of the Naples Daily News

Susan Ford Bales can reflect on being an enabler for her mother's addiction and how the entire Ford family emerged with greater compassion.

"I am in a better place personally," said the 58-year daughter of President Gerald Ford and former First Lady Betty Ford. "It made our family more open and honest."

Bales will be in Naples on Saturday as the keynote speaker at an event for the Hazelden Betty Ford Foundation at the Naples Beach Hotel & Golf Club. The event starts at 7 p.m.

Her mother's addiction treatment center, Betty Ford Center in Rancho Mirage, Calif., merged with the Minnesota-based Hazelden addiction center in 2014. Hazelden has a treatment center near downtown Naples.

Bales said Saturday's event is not a fundraiser. It aims to bring alumni of both centers together since the two programs are now one, a move she supported as the business climate and market for addiction treatment have changed.

"Part of it is the marketplace. It made sense because of Obamacare," she said in a telephone interview. "It's been a real delight working with Hazelden. I am perfectly happy with how it has gone. My mother visited Hazelden to look at their program to help design her program, so it was like completely the circle."

Bales will speak Saturday about her experiences as a family member of someone with addiction and what it was like to part of an intervention for her mother in 1978. She was instrumental in the intervention with her father.

"We said some very harsh things but we said them with love," she said.

At the time, her parents had left the White House the prior January and were building a new home and life in California. The transition was difficult for her mother who had few friends in California at the time.

"I think (those things) all accelerated the disease," Bales said.

Bales can speak about how her mother's alcoholism and addiction to pain killers impacted the family and fostered her own role as an enabler.

"I covered for my mother which I shouldn't have done. I made excuses for my mother but I shouldn't have," Bales said. "I was protecting her because she was my mother and I loved her."

She sees some progress with addiction treatment today and yet points out how more is needed.

"I am glad to see Obamacare (the Affordable Care Act) is supposed to start paying for treatment," she said.

The drawback is coverage hasn't really been implemented and program details are not firm.

"I think everybody is confused because it is still be tested," she said.

In the meantime, there are free treatment programs in communities or assistance through charitable programs ? she mentioned the Salvation Army ? and some people gain sobriety by going to AA meetings without a formal detoxification and treatment program.

Bales, who currently lives in Tulsa, Oklahoma, is overseeing the temporary closure and renovation of the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library and Museum in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and programs with the USS Gerald R. Ford aircraft carrier in Newport News, Virginia.

Tickets are still available for Saturday's event, which cost $75 per person, by visiting the website HazeldenBettyFord.org/Hope.