Please enable Javascript to watch this video

FAYETTEVILLE (KFSM) -- Arkansas Governor Asa Hutchinson defended the state's private option and proposed several changes to the hybrid Medicaid expansion Wednesday (Feb. 17).

The private option uses federal funds to buy private insurance for low-income Arkansans. More than 200,000 residents depend on the private option for coverage.

While some state Republican lawmakers criticize the private option for embracing the federal healthcare law, Hutchinson defended the program and suggested several changes, including renaming it to Arkansas Works and adding new restrictions on benefits and eligibility.

Arkansas Works would encourage subscribers to help pay parts of their premiums, as well as work programs that could put private option users on track to eventually being insured by an employer.

"This is a great example where Arkansas is moving from a world of ranking in the bottom of innovative ideas, ranking in the bottom of education, medium income, things of that nature, and moving to the point where we are the ones moving towards the solutions of the 21st century," Rep. Charlie Collins of Fayetteville, R-District 84, said. "The overall goal is to make this a hand up rather than a lifetime handout."

Several other states have programs similar to Arkansas' private option, which was adopted by the state legislature in 2013. A Gallup poll in 2014 showed 22.5% of Arkansans didn't have health insurance prior to the Affordable Care Act and the private option, but six months later that number dropped to 12.4%.

Mariah Fornoff is one of the hundreds of thousands of Arkansans who is signed up for the private option and said it saved her life after she was diagnosed with cancer. Now the private option funds Fornoff's medical visits.

“I want to see my youngest [child] graduate. I want to see my grandchildren. I want to be around,” she said.

That's why Hutchinson and Collins agree the private option is so vital and will save the state an estimated $625 million over the next five years.

“It is exciting to see this program we pioneered in 2013 is having even a greater impact on our budget than we thought, even six months ago,” Collins said.