ALLENTOWN – Workers at two Phoebe Ministries' facilities have called off their one-day strike next week and will resume negotiations with management and a mediator over reaching a new labor deal.

Karen Gownley, spokeswoman for SEIU Healthcare Pennsylvania, said in a news release Tuesday night that the mediator called both sides back to the bargaining table. Negotiations are scheduled to resume Jan. 4, said Gownley.

A one-day strike, which was scheduled for Dec. 30 as a method of highlighting what the union has called unfair labor practices, has been postponed, Gownley said.

Phoebe spokesman Adam Marles said the mediator, Barbara Lichtman, has been involved in negotiations since October. About 400 workers at Phoebe locations in Allentown and Berks County have continued to work without a labor deal since Oct. 31.

Lichtman, who is with the Philadelphia office of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, declined to comment.

SEIU Healthcare said Phoebe management is seeking more than $2.7 million in concessions from workers. The union says givebacks include wage cuts of up to $4.14 an hour for most workers, and cuts in health insurance premiums.

Marles said last week that Phoebe management presented the union a "final proposal" on Dec. 2 that provides for wages of at least $17 an hour for most workers, with any employee earning less than $15 an hour receiving no pay reduction. He has blamed the federal Affordable Care Act and a continued decline in government care reimbursements as affecting Phoebe's fiscal operations.

The 400 workers at Phoebe's West Turner Street location and a facility in Wernersville include licensed practical nurses, certified nursing assistants, housekeepers and laundry workers.

Since Oct. 31, workers have sought to publicize their conflicts with management, holding information sessions and a rally Nov. 10 in Allentown. Earlier in November, Phoebe brought in busloads of possible replacement workers as a contingency in case workers walk off the job.

Phoebe Ministries has not seen a work stoppage in recent years, according to The Morning Call archives.

asalamone@mcall.com

610-820-6694