Medical assistant Josefina Gutierrez (left) takes a head measurement from 1-year-old Andrea Vasurto as her mother, Gabrielle Vasurto, keeps her daughter occupied Tuesday at the Sixteenth Street Community Health Center clinic. Credit: Mike De Sisti

SHARE The Sixteenth Street clinic on S. Chavez Drive is at capacity. Froedtert Health is giving the community health center $12 million to open a new clinic. Mike De Sisti

By of the

Froedtert Health announced plans Tuesday to give $12 million to Sixteenth Street Community Health Centers to open a new clinic in the 43rd St. corridor south of Miller Park, an area that has been identified as having limited access to primary care and other health care services.

Froedtert plans to give an additional $3 million for initiatives to improve access to care in Milwaukee, Waukesha and Washington counties.

The health system has been re-examining its role as the expansion of insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act has reduced the amount of charity care provided by hospitals, said Cathy Jacobson, president and chief executive of Froedtert Health. It also recognized the need for better access to primary care and other services.

"We really wanted to make sure what we did had an impact," Jacobson said.

The Medical College of Wisconsin also has committed to supporting the new clinic.

A site has not been chosen, but the preliminary plans are for a 22,000-square-foot clinic that would open in late 2017 and eventually provide care to 12,000 people.

The clinic would be roughly the same size as Sixteenth Street's clinics at 1032 S. Chavez Drive and 2906 S. 20th St. The community health center also has a clinic in Waukesha and at the United Community Center Senior Center at 703 W. Washington St. in Milwaukee.

Sixteenth Street is one of four community health centers in Milwaukee. The others are Milwaukee Health Services, Progressive Community Health Centers and Outreach Community Health Centers.

The community health centers provide care to roughly one in seven people in Milwaukee.

Community health centers are located in low-income urban and rural areas and provide primary care, dental care and other services primarily to patients who are covered by Medicaid programs, such as BadgerCare Plus, or who are uninsured.

Sixteenth Street's new clinic would be the second large expansion by a community health center in Milwaukee in recent years.

Progressive Community Health Centers opened a new clinic this year at 3522 W. Lisbon Ave. that eventually could provide care for 11,000 patients. Froedtert Health contributed $2 million to the cost of that clinic.

Separately, Aurora Health Care announced plans this year to give $1.7 million to Progressive to open a clinic and an urgent care center on the campus of Aurora Sinai Medical Center.

The commitment was part of $10 million in grants that Aurora awarded community health centers and other organizations in eastern Wisconsin to improve access to primary and behavioral health care as well as for treatment and prevention programs for sexual assault and domestic violence.

"This is the next right step," said Joy Tapper, executive director of the Milwaukee Health Care Partnership, a coalition that includes health systems and community health centers in Milwaukee County.

The coalition did a study in 2009 that identified areas that lacked access to health care.

Sixteenth Street, the largest community health center in Milwaukee, provided care to more than 36,000 people last year and employs about 350 people.

The community health center eventually could provide care to 50,000 people with the new clinic, said Julie Schuller, a physician and executive vice president of Sixteenth Street Community Health Centers.

"We know there is an access issue in the area we are targeting for this new clinic," Schuller said.

Sixteenth Street's two largest clinics also are at capacity.

One challenge will be recruiting primary care physicians to staff the new clinic. But Schuller said Sixteenth Street has always been successful in recruiting physicians.

Froedtert Health and the Medical College have committed to providing hospital and specialty care for the clinic's patients.

They have similar partnerships with Progressive, the AIDS Resource Center of Wisconsin and Outreach Community Health Centers.

The Medical College also plans to use the new clinic as a site to train medical students, pharmacy students and residents — though John Raymond, a physician and president and chief executive of the school, said the details still need to be worked out.

It also could provide specialty care at the clinic.

The Medical College has a residency program at the Family Care Center at 2400 W. Villard St., in a low-income neighborhood in Milwaukee, in collaboration with Wheaton Franciscan Healthcare-All Saints.

Froedtert Health's $15 million commitment comes shortly after the end of a strong fiscal year.

The health system's operating income — which excludes gains and losses on investments — more than doubled in the first nine months of its fiscal year that ended June 30.

The health system reported operating income of $111 million for the first nine months compared with operating income of $49 million for the same period in its 2014 fiscal year.

Revenue increased to $1.4 billion, compared with $1.2 billion for the nine-month period of the previous fiscal year.

The health system — which has roughly $1.5 billion in reserves — has not released its financial results for the full fiscal year.

The strong results stemmed primarily from the health system's initiatives to lower costs and become more efficient, Jacobson said.

The health system also has benefited from the expansion of insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act.