Several Republican governors are submitting plans to accept Medicaid expansion next year, according to an article in the Washington Post.

Governors in Tennessee, Utah and Wyoming are preparing plans to accept the funds offered by the Affordable Care Act.

While the governor's might be willing to accept the money, the article says the plans could face challenges passing in the states' respective legislatures.

Maine could also potentially participate in Medicaid expansion next year if Democrats defeat incumbent Republican Gov. Paul LePage. Democrats control Maine's legislature and have attempted to accept the funds in the past, but those attempts were blocked by LePage.

To this point, 27 states have accepted Medicaid expansion funds, which are meant to compensate states for care of low-income patients by allowing more people access to the program.

The Washington Post also cited a report by the Urban Institute that found states not accepting Medicaid expansion would lose $423.6 billion in federal Medicaid funds from 2013 to 2022.

Louisiana has not accepted Medicaid, and Gov. Bobby Jindal and the Department of Health and Hospitals have made it clear they will not accept the funds.

Jindal and DHH estimate accepting Medicaid will cost the state $2 billion over 10 years in extra costs and enroll more people into a broken system.

The state instead prefers is public/private hospital partnerships to provide a safety net for low-income patients.

The Urban Institute report also said hospitals in states not accepting Medicaid expansion would lose $167.8 billion in Medicaid funding meant to offset major cuts to their Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement.

DHH officials say the public/private partnership saved the state $52 million last year.

However, non-partner hospital Baton Rouge General Mid City needed an $18 million bailout from DHH to keep its emergency room open. It threatened to close the emergency room because it couldn't afford rising uncompensated care costs associated with an uptick in uninsured people that had previously gone to the now-closed Earl K. Long Hospital.

DHH officials say Medicaid expansion would not have helped the General. They say the hospital's uncompensated care costs fell from $16 million last year to $5 million in the third quarter as more patients discovered a new urgent care clinic near Earl K. Long and partner hospital, Our Lady of the Lake.

DHH officials also prefer an education plan to help people better understand when it's appropriate to use an emergency room and when they should go elsewhere.

Medicaid expansion remains a hot-button issue in Louisiana as state Democrat leaders continue to call for the governor to accept the funds.

* * * * * * *

Cole Avery is a legislative and state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. You can reach him on Twitter @cole_avery1 or email ravery@nola.com.