Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, right, and his Democratic Senate opponent, Kentucky Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes, during a joint appearance earlier in October. Pablo Alcala/AP

LIBERTY, Ky. – For the better part of a decade, Frank McAninch ignored many of his ailments. A bad cold: “You weather it out yourself.” A torn rotator cuff from working cattle: “Let time heal it.”

Then in early 2012, McAninch noticed a spot on his right cheek that became irritated every time he shaved. A year after spotting it, he asked his primary care doctor to take a look.

McAninch said his doctor told him not to worry. But one year later, nothing had changed.

At the time, visiting a dermatologist wasn’t an option for McAninch, who didn’t have health insurance.

“If you get sick, you don’t go to the doctor unless it’s an emergency,” said McAninch, a farmer living in Liberty, a small town in rural south central Kentucky. “And if you do, you pay out of pocket.”

Fortunately for McAninch, he didn’t have to wait too long before seeing a dermatologist. On Oct. 1, 2013, Kentucky’s health insurance exchange, Kynect, went live. The website is the state’s implementation of the Affordable Care Act, which mandated health insurance for individuals and gave states the option to set up their own insurance exchanges in lieu of the federal government’s exchange, healthcare.gov. Seventeen states, plus the District of Columbia, have chosen this option.

Within two weeks of Kynect’s launch, McAninch, a husband and father of two daughters, applied for insurance and found out he qualified for Medicaid under the health care law’s new eligibility requirements. For states such as Kentucky that have chosen to expand Medicaid under the law, adults between the ages of 19 and 64 qualify if their income is less than 138 percent of the federal poverty level (or $32,499 for a family of four).

After receiving his coverage, McAninch visited a dermatologist who discovered that he had squamous cell carcinoma, a non-melanoma skin cancer that can be dangerous if not treated. The dermatologist removed it, leaving 47-year-old McAninch cancer free.

As of July, McAninch is one of some 521,000 Kentuckians who’ve received coverage through the health insurance exchange, according to Carrie Banahan, executive director of the Office of the Kentucky Health Benefit Exchange. The Kentucky exchange has become a poster child for success because of the high number of people newly insured through the system. A recent Gallup poll indicated that Kentucky’s uninsured rate has dropped from 20.4 percent last year to 11.9 percent in mid-2014, the second steepest decline after Arkansas.

To be sure, not everyone believes that Kynect will benefit the state in the long run, and the issue has cropped up in the U.S. Senate race between Republican Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell and Alison Lundergan Grimes, a Democrat. Critics have cited looming Medicaid costs and spiked insurance rates as reasons why Kynect and the ACA, also known as Obamacare, don’t work. Some point to evidence that Kynect’s success may be premature.

For one, the majority receiving coverage through Kynect – 300,000 – qualified for Medicaid under new eligibility rules, rather than enrolling in private coverage. Critics assert that this could put a strain on the state when the federal Medicaid subsidy drops by 10 percent in 2020. It could also lead to increased fees on insurance providers, resulting in higher health insurance prices.

Photos: Top 10 Senate Races EXPAND GALLERY Photo Gallery x of x Full Screen NORTH CAROLINA. Republican state Rep. Thom Tillis, left, is running against incumbent Democratic Sen. Kay Hagan, who pundits say relied on the black vote and Obama's popularity for her first-term win in 2009. Since 2011, Tillis has served as North Carolina's House speaker and has attracted endorsements from Jeb Bush and Mitt Romney. Brad Coville/The Wilson Times/AP; Gerry Broome/AP - Pool x of x Full Screen KANSAS. Three-term Republican Sen. Pat Roberts, 78, could represent an "old Washington" ideology voters are fatigued by and create an opening for independent candidate Greg Orman, right. Orman, 45, is a wild card for Republicans both in Kansas and in vying for the Senate majority, as he has said he will caucus with whichever party represents the majority. Charlie Riedel/AP x of x Full Screen COLORADO. Republican Rep. Cory Gardner, left, is looking to unseat one-term incumbent Sen. Mark Udall after successfully ousting Democratic Rep. Betsy Markey from her seat in 2010. Udall, the son of former Rep. Morris Udall, and Gardner have sparred over energy in a state aptly positioned to benefit from or be harmed by that and climate change policy. Chris Schneider, Brennan Linsley/AP x of x Full Screen GEORGIA. Republican businessman David Perdue and Democrat Michelle Nunn, the former CEO of Points of Light, are competing for retiring Republican Saxby Chambliss' seat. Experts say Nunn may have a tough time drawing in 2012 levels of the African-American vote, upsetting the party's plans to stage a surprise victory. Perdue is the former CEO of Reebok and Dollar General. Woody Marshall/The Macon Telegraph/AP; David Tulis/AP x of x Full Screen LOUISIANA. Three-term incumbent Sen. Mary Landrieu, a Democrat, has fiercely fought for coastline and oil spill regulations and is the daughter of former New Orleans Mayor Moon Landrieu. Republicans believe Rep. Bill Cassidy can unseat her during the non-presidential election year, when Democratic voters are less likely to turn out to vote. Melinda Deslatte,Susan Walsh/AP x of x Full Screen ARKANSAS. Republican Rep. Tom Cotton, left, a former Army captain and Harvard Law graduate, is challenging incumbent Sen. Mark Pryor, a Democrat, who took office in 2003 and won re-election with no GOP opposition in 2008. Danny Johnston/AP; AP x of x Full Screen IOWA. Left, Republican state Sen. Joni Ernst, an Iraq war veteran, hopes to take advantage of the state's shifting ideology and overcome Democratic Rep. Bruce Braley, seen here telling a story about his old work boots at a fundraiser. The two are battling for Tom Harkin's seat, who is retiring after keeping it Democratic for five terms. Justin Hayworth/AP; Scott Morgan/AP x of x Full Screen ALASKA. Republican Dan Sullivan, right, will attempt to unseat incumbent Sen. Mark Begich, the former Democratic mayor of Anchorage. Begich won his seat by defeating the longest serving Republican member of Senate, Ted Stevens, in 2008. Sullivan served as an adviser and assistant secretary to President George W. Bush and most recently as the commissioner for Alaska's department of natural resources. Ron Sachs/Picture Alliance/dpa/AP; Mark Thiessen/AP x of x Full Screen MICHIGAN. Former Michigan Secretary of State Terri Lynn Land, a Republican, and Democratic Rep. Gary Peters are running to replace six-term Sen. Carl Levin, who is retiring. Peters recently earned an endorsement from New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg and is the favorite in polls. Carlos Osorio/AP x of x Full Screen NEW HAMPSHIRE. Scott Brown is the Republican's best shot at swinging the state back in their favor. The former Massachusetts senator, who lost to Sen. Elizabeth Warren in 2012, challenges incumbent Democrat Sen. Jeanne Shaheen. Shaheen was the first woman elected governor of New Hampshire and the first in U.S. history to also be elected senator. Jim Cole/AP x of x Photo Gallery x of x NORTH CAROLINA. Republican state Rep. Thom Tillis, left, is running against incumbent Democratic Sen. Kay Hagan, who pundits say relied on the black vote and Obama's popularity for her first-term win in 2009. Since 2011, Tillis has served as North Carolina's House speaker and has attracted endorsements from Jeb Bush and Mitt Romney. Brad Coville/The Wilson Times/AP; Gerry Broome/AP - Pool x of x KANSAS. Three-term Republican Sen. Pat Roberts, 78, could represent an "old Washington" ideology voters are fatigued by and create an opening for independent candidate Greg Orman, right. Orman, 45, is a wild card for Republicans both in Kansas and in vying for the Senate majority, as he has said he will caucus with whichever party represents the majority. Charlie Riedel/AP x of x COLORADO. Republican Rep. Cory Gardner, left, is looking to unseat one-term incumbent Sen. Mark Udall after successfully ousting Democratic Rep. Betsy Markey from her seat in 2010. Udall, the son of former Rep. Morris Udall, and Gardner have sparred over energy in a state aptly positioned to benefit from or be harmed by that and climate change policy. Chris Schneider, Brennan Linsley/AP x of x GEORGIA. Republican businessman David Perdue and Democrat Michelle Nunn, the former CEO of Points of Light, are competing for retiring Republican Saxby Chambliss' seat. Experts say Nunn may have a tough time drawing in 2012 levels of the African-American vote, upsetting the party's plans to stage a surprise victory. Perdue is the former CEO of Reebok and Dollar General. Woody Marshall/The Macon Telegraph/AP; David Tulis/AP x of x LOUISIANA. Three-term incumbent Sen. Mary Landrieu, a Democrat, has fiercely fought for coastline and oil spill regulations and is the daughter of former New Orleans Mayor Moon Landrieu. Republicans believe Rep. Bill Cassidy can unseat her during the non-presidential election year, when Democratic voters are less likely to turn out to vote. Melinda Deslatte,Susan Walsh/AP x of x ARKANSAS. Republican Rep. Tom Cotton, left, a former Army captain and Harvard Law graduate, is challenging incumbent Sen. Mark Pryor, a Democrat, who took office in 2003 and won re-election with no GOP opposition in 2008. Danny Johnston/AP; AP x of x IOWA. Left, Republican state Sen. Joni Ernst, an Iraq war veteran, hopes to take advantage of the state's shifting ideology and overcome Democratic Rep. Bruce Braley, seen here telling a story about his old work boots at a fundraiser. The two are battling for Tom Harkin's seat, who is retiring after keeping it Democratic for five terms. Justin Hayworth/AP; Scott Morgan/AP x of x ALASKA. Republican Dan Sullivan, right, will attempt to unseat incumbent Sen. Mark Begich, the former Democratic mayor of Anchorage. Begich won his seat by defeating the longest serving Republican member of Senate, Ted Stevens, in 2008. Sullivan served as an adviser and assistant secretary to President George W. Bush and most recently as the commissioner for Alaska's department of natural resources. Ron Sachs/Picture Alliance/dpa/AP; Mark Thiessen/AP x of x MICHIGAN. Former Michigan Secretary of State Terri Lynn Land, a Republican, and Democratic Rep. Gary Peters are running to replace six-term Sen. Carl Levin, who is retiring. Peters recently earned an endorsement from New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg and is the favorite in polls. Carlos Osorio/AP x of x NEW HAMPSHIRE. Scott Brown is the Republican's best shot at swinging the state back in their favor. The former Massachusetts senator, who lost to Sen. Elizabeth Warren in 2012, challenges incumbent Democrat Sen. Jeanne Shaheen. Shaheen was the first woman elected governor of New Hampshire and the first in U.S. history to also be elected senator. Jim Cole/AP x of x ×

“How to pay for the surge in Medicaid recipients, when we haven’t had a comparable surge in paying insured is a problem that’s been put off so far,” said Stephen Voss, a political science professor at the University of Kentucky. “The Republicans here are predicting that there are going to be huge health care costs down the road and when the actual costs of Kynect and the Medicaid enrollments hit, it’s going to be extremely unpopular.”

But for McAninch and others living in rural Kentucky, health insurance means a newfound security.

***

Sitting in a pink floral chair on a porch overlooking his group of bulls, McAninch recalled the day, about four years ago, that a chain saw gashed his shin. His wife, Renee, drove him to an emergency room in town so that doctors could stitch up the wound. He paid about $500 in out-of-pocket medical costs that day.

“You do what you have to,” McAninch said in an interview Tuesday, clad in a blue and red flannel shirt tucked into light bluejeans, and a National Family Farm Coalition baseball cap.

“But what if you had cut your limb off?” said Renee, leaning next to him on the porch.

“But I didn’t,” he said. “Thank goodness.”

It’s not the first time McAninch and Renee have played the “what if” game. They’ve done it since Renee stopped working in the medical field 10 years ago to stay at home with their daughters, and the couple lost their health insurance. McAninch’s job, raising beef cattle, can be dangerous, and the fear of how he would pay for a serious injury or illness always lingered.

When the dermatologist diagnosed McAninch with skin cancer, the family knew how lucky they were to be covered. McAninch wonders how long he would have waited to see a dermatologist, and what the health impact could have been. Since qualifying for Medicaid, though, the family hasn’t had to worry.

“It gave me a sense of security to know that if anything was wrong, any health issue, that we could go to the doctor, and it wouldn’t be – that the cost wouldn’t be insurmountable,” he said. “That we could handle it.”

“A huge relief,” echoed Renee.

Just five miles away, one of McAninch’s friends, Michael Taylor, feels a sense of peace, too.

Taylor is 43, a divorced father of two who manufactures and delivers farm equipment. Before enrolling in health insurance through Kynect, he said he paid $700 a month for individual health insurance, a premium that continued to spike after two back surgeries and a stroke.

Taylor hadn’t paid much attention to Obamacare, but then McAninch urged him to look into Kynect. After enrolling, his monthly premium dropped to $120.

“It takes a lot of stress off. I bought a new truck with the money I saved from that,” he said. “It means a lot. You get to see what you’re out here working every day for.”

***

Unlike the two Kentuckians, some Americans experienced long wait times, crashed websites and frustration when they sought to enroll in the new health insurance program. When McAninch and Taylor signed up, they made a quick call.

“It took about 20 minutes,” McAninch said. “I think I was on hold for maybe five, 10 minutes. No issue.”

The Kentucky exchange’s smooth enrollment process has stood in contrast to other states that have had issues with their own rollouts. Massachusetts had to rely heavily on paper enrollment applications because of its faulty website. In Oregon, technical glitches rendered the state’s online exchange unusable, and it transitioned from a state-based operation to the federal system, which has been riddled with its own problems.

But in Kentucky, more than 32,000 people enrolled in coverage within the first month of Kynect’s operation. During the first enrollment period between Oct. 1, 2013, and April 15, 2014, three-quarters of enrollees indicated they were uninsured, according to Banahan, the state official.

“We think one of the reasons that we’ve been successful is because of some of the features and functionality available on the system,” she said.

Banahan credits the simplicity of the exchange for its arguable success. Unlike other state-based health insurance exchanges and the federal website, users didn’t have to create an account in order to plug in their numbers to determine their eligibility status. Banahan said it’s also one of the few states that offer a streamlined application process, allowing shoppers to apply for Medicaid and qualified health plans in one shot.

To get the word out, the state advertised heavily, and trained 5,000 people to support enrollment, including insurance agents and application counselors, called “Kynectors.”

And it helped that the state’s Democratic governor, Steve Beshear, has embraced the Affordable Care Act and has been a staunch advocate of the state-based exchange. Kentucky ranks 45th among U.S. states in overall health, according to the United Health Foundation.

The governor has seen Kynect as a way to boost the health of a state that the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index ranked 45th in median household income.

***

The controversy over the health care law remains a divisive political issue that’s playing out in Kentucky in the race between McConnell and Grimes.

McConnell shares the sentiment that the law has led to increased insurance prices and higher deductibles, as well as a lack of access to doctors and hospitals. During a debate with Grimes last week, he vowed to repeal it “root and branch” if re-elected. During the same debate, however, the senator mentioned that he would preserve Kynect, a notion that Banahan asserted would be impossible if Obamacare were repealed.

Kynect “would not serve its purpose any longer,” she said.

Polls have showed that in Kentucky, labeling makes a difference. In an NBC and Marist survey released in May, a 56 percent majority of those polled said they disliked Obamacare, while only 22 percent disliked Kynect. A national Gallup poll earlier this month found that more people feel they have been hurt by the Affordable Care Act than helped. Of those surveyed, 16 percent said they had been helped by the law, 27 percent said they had been hurt by it and 54 percent felt it had no effect on them.

“Obamacare on the one hand taps into the dislike that President Obama has here more generally,” Voss said. “You stick his name in front of it, it reminds Kentucky voters of a lot of things.”

For her part, Grimes has vowed that she will not take away coverage from the newly insured, but has largely avoided praising the Affordable Care Act and has said that she would work to fix the law if elected.

According to Voss, however, the issue may not prove a deciding factor in Tuesday’s election.

“I think on balance it’s really been a wash,” he said. “People who don’t like the national Democrats, people who are turned off by references to President Obama, it’s just another arrow in the quiver to use against the Democratic candidate. People who like this [government] involvement, who are inclined to support it, it helps rile them up to oppose McConnell.”

For McAninch, though, the notion that his health insurance could be ripped away disturbs him.

He believes that because he works year-round for 40 to 60 hours a week, he deserves coverage. When Renee goes on vacation, he stays home. It’s up to him to make sure that no cattle jump the fence.