Members Only The Party of No Agenda Suing the president shows just how deeply unserious Republicans are about the challenges facing the country.

As the midterm elections near, Republicans are providing the American people with a crystal-clear picture of their party’s priorities—and they have nothing to do with growing the middle class, creating jobs or expanding opportunity for more Americans. They are focused on partisan stunts that serve a singular purpose: ginning up their far-right base ahead of November.

Today, House Republicans are moving forward with their latest partisan stunt—Speaker Boehner’s plan to sue the president. The House Rules Committee will meet today to map out their ridiculous lawsuit claiming an abuse of executive powers by President Obama— the very same powers that were used more often by every president since Grover Cleveland. And while rumblings about impeachment have long existed among the party’s fringe, this stunt has moved attacks on the president just for doing his job to the forefront of the Republican agenda.

Story Continued Below

A suggestion in May by a small group of Republican senators to propose a new “Contract with America” has seemingly been ignored by Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell. Rather than proactively legislate, McConnell’s goal the last five and a half years has been to uniformly oppose President Obama. That strategy has hurt the American people, how the Senate functions and McConnell’s poll numbers in Kentucky, but hey—at least he won his primary.

We’ve already seen the GOP waste time and money on more than 50 votes to repeal or undermine the Affordable Care Act. Setting aside that these redundant votes waste taxpayer time and money, their goal is to take away the benefits of health-care reform that millions of Americans are already enjoying. They even went so far as to shut down the federal government last fall, sticking the American people with the $24 billion tab. But then, the Obamacare website started to work, people enrolled in massive numbers and the American people liked their new affordable coverage.

So what did the GOP do? Embrace the health-care law and work to expand coverage to the people that elected them? Nope. They began a desperate search for a new issue—any issue—to fire up their extreme base.

We’ve watched the endless politicization of the tragedy in Benghazi, despite the fact that their conspiracy theories have been debunked. And now we know that House Republicans are planning to spend as much as $3.3 million on the special committee they created to investigate, yet again, these attacks. That is a bigger budget than they gave to the House Veterans Affairs and Ethics Committees this year!

Over the next six months, we’ll see if Republicans have anything more constructive than political stunts and partisan obstructionism to offer the American people. But a word of advice: Don’t hold your breath. We already have a clear picture of what the Senate’s agenda would look like if Mitch McConnell were in charge. Just a few weeks ago he said that the Senate would spend even more time voting on legislation to restrict women’s access to reproductive health care if he becomes majority leader.