Bill Gibbons

Domestic violence has dominated the national headlines in recent weeks. The latest news about alleged domestic assault by professional athletes has brought this once whispered about issue to the forefront of discussion across the country. And that's a good thing, for the country and for Tennessee.

While domestic violence may be the hot topic in the national news, sadly, it is nothing new. Reports of domestic violence assaults, or even worse, domestic-related murders, occur regularly. There is no dispute that domestic violence is a major crime concern.

The crime rate in Tennessee is fueled by domestic violence. In fact, domestic-related crimes account for about half of all crimes against people reported to the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation.

Another measure is the "When Men Murder Women" report issued each year by the Violence Policy Center. In 2012, the report ranked Tennessee third in the nation for the rate of women killed by men. (This figure was based on 2010 data). In 2014, Tennessee ranked 10th-highest (based on 2012 data). This is still not an acceptable statistic and one that should drive us to make curbing domestic violence a priority.

Three years ago, Gov. Bill Haslam's Public Safety Subcabinet created an action plan with specific steps to help tackle the problem of domestic violence. While we still have a long way to go, we have made some progress. Based on preliminary TBI statistics through the end of August, reported domestic violence offenses dropped 6.9 percent statewide year-to-date compared to 2013 and 15 percent compared to 2010.

So, what is making a difference? First, the state is working to increase the number of family justice centers, like Nashville's recently opened Jean Crowe Advocacy Center. These "one-stop shops" offer legal and social service assistance for domestic violence victims and their children. Family justice centers work by giving victims help to leave an abusive situation. They help make sure victims do not fall through the cracks of the justice system and are more likely to follow through with prosecution. The first family justice center opened in 2006 in Knoxville. One opened in Memphis in 2012. Plans are underway for three more in Chattanooga, Cookeville and Jackson.

We've also enacted legislation creating mandatory incarceration for repeat domestic violence offenders. Previously, there were no real legal deterrents to committing acts of misdemeanor domestic assault over and over again and simply getting probation. Now a second domestic violence offender receives a mandatory minimum 30 days of incarceration, and a third or subsequent offender receives a mandatory minimum 90 days of incarceration.

While we are encouraged by the progress being made, we know there is much more to do. We hope the national conversation that started last month on the seriousness of this issue continues in October, which is National Domestic Violence Awareness Month, and thereafter. In Nashville and across Tennessee, we must continue our fight against domestic violence to break the cycle of abuse and help save lives.

Bill Gibbons serves as commissioner of the Tennessee Department of Safety and Homeland Security. He chairs Gov. Bill Haslam's Public Safety Subcabinet.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1xGplP5