SPRINGFIELD, Mass. (WWLP) – People are losing their jobs in the Baystate Health System and we now know that “Obamacare” played a role. It’s a story the 22News I-Team has been covering for months. We’ve been talking about the potential of higher health insurance premiums, which could still happen, but the first negative impact of the Affordable Care Act in Massachusetts is people losing their jobs.

Baystate Health laid off 24 workers last week. Baystate officials told 22News one of the factors was the estimated payments they’ll be making due to a provision of the Affordable Care Act. The provision is called risk-adjustment.

Health insurance companies in Massachusetts that have sicker patients will receive payments from the state’s other insurance companies. The estimates have been in the millions and it will impact Health New England, which is part of Baystate Health.

Congressman Richard Neal toured Baystate on Monday and defended the Affordable Care Act. “99% of the people of Massachusetts, I believe, are insured and 100% of the children, something is going right,” said Congressman Neal, (D) Massachusetts.

In April, it was estimated that Health New England will owe $30 million for risk adjustment in 2015. The latest estimates are lower, but we won’t know the exact number until late June.

Baystate said it’s facing a $22 million budget shortfall.

The amount of Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements they receive are the other main factors that resulted in layoffs. Baystate Health officials say the price of treating Medicaid patients is costing them jobs. Part of the reason for the job cuts is the amount of money Baystate receives for Medicaid and Medicare reimbursements from the government. Baystate says they only get 70 to 80 cents on the dollar.

“Seldom are wage index issues or reimbursements based on legislation they tend to be based on administrative issues that are made by CMS (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services),” said Congressman Neal.

Baystate is the 3rd largest Medicaid provider in Massachusetts.