Cynthia Prendiz, left, is the Kids Come First executive director. Board member Ron Wolff joined her at a recent fundraiser at the The Chaffey Community Museum of Art. (Photo by Suzanne Sproul)

Kids Come First is a pediatric community health center that has been helping children and families in need for years. The work done there quietly goes unnoticed by many and its new executive director wants to change that.

The clinic maintains a committed and loyal following of supporters who give their time and financial donations, but as grants become more difficult to secure and the need for services continues to rise, more needs to be done, according to Cynthia Prendiz. She worked alongside longtime executive director Beverly Speak before she retired. Prendiz now heads the clinic administration.

“We are looking for community support and engagement and we look forward to doing more," Prendiz said.

In fact, she is working to schedule casual and fun community gatherings to help change that. One was held recently at the Chaffey Community Museum of Art. The evening brought together old friends of the clinic along with new ones, all in the lovely historic confines of the downtown Ontario museum. Guests enjoyed drinks and appetizers while surrounded by beautiful art. Proceeds went to the clinic.

“The idea was to have an evening where we could get together and talk about what we do and how the community can help. It is an opportunity for partnerships and relationships. The Chaffey Community Museum of Art is another longtime local nonprofit and our board thought it was a great idea to work together," she said.

Ron Wolff retired as executive director of OPARC but wanted to stay connected to the community. He now serves on the clinic board.

“The clinic is important because every child deserves high quality medical care from a provider that truly cares about each patient’s overall health. Even with recent changes in the law that relate to insurance coverage (specifically, the Affordable Care Act), not all providers accept Medi-Cal. Kids Come First does accept Medi-Cal, so it plays a vital role in the south Ontario community, regardless of the family’s ability to pay. Without Kids Come First, some children would simply go without medical care for anything other than life-threatening illness," Wolff said.

Kids Come First has established a strong bond of trust with many families in the community throughout the years. It subsists on minimal financial support, mostly from insurance, and welcomes contributions of any size from caring members of the community, he said. For more information about Kids Come First, 1556 S. Sultana Ave., Ontario, visit www.kidscomefirst4health.org

Seen at the Scene — Judy and Dale Briggs; Sandra Forney; Ron Wolff; Maria Farthing; Leticia Acevedo; Jerry Blum; and Ontario City Councilwoman Debra Dorst-Porada.

Advertisement

Chino Valley Unified School District fundraiser success — Chino Valley Unified School District students took the challenge to read to heart, completing more than 3.5 million pages and raising more than $100,000 in the district’s annual read-a-thon.

The annual event was sponsored by Citizens for Kids Educational Foundation. Hidden Trails Elementary School in Chino Hills captured the top trophy for being the school whose students read the most pages. The grand total for the district-wide effort was $103,453, marking the first time in its 10-year history to top the $100,000 mark.

Chino Valley Unified School District Board member Sylvia Orozco is a longtime member of the Foundation and founded the Read-A-Thon. The Foundation’s purpose is to supplement the regular funding Chino Valley schools receive. To date, the read-a-thon has raised about $853,000 for the schools, Orozco said. This year, Wickman Elementary School raised the most pledges, $15,244. Following closely behind, was Cal Aero Preserve Academy’s elementary students at almost $12,000.

Proceeds were distributed to participating schools based on the money raised at the respective campuses. Top pledgers were Hidden Trails sixth grader Ria Patel, who collected the most money at $1,500; Ruby Landeros, Borba Fundamental School; Emily Darrington, Briggs Fundamental School; Mitchell McAnany, Butterfield Ranch Elementary School; Cameron Cosico, Cal Aero Preserve Academy (elementary level); Bryden Halstead, Cattle Elementary School; Dylan Ellorin Blackburn, Chaparral Elementary School; Madison Ramirez, Cortez Elementary School; Alexis Villamil, Country Springs Elementary School; Isabella Avila, Levi Dickey Elementary School; Emma Jesse, Dickson Elementary School; Steven Huang, Eagle Canyon Elementary School; and Shayne Smith, Glenmeade Elementary School.

Others were; Sebastian Samayoa, Liberty Elementary School; Malia Ishibashi, Litel Elementary School; Xenia Montgomery, Marshall Elementary School; America Aguayo, Newman Elementary School; Isaiah Wade, Oak Ridge Elementary School; Jay Mulvihill, Rhodes Elementary School; Hannah Mirasol, Rolling Ridge Elementary School; Juredmie Gonzalez Rodriguez; Walnut Avenue Elementary School; Phoenix Bruun, Wickman Elementary School; Victoria Prouty, Cal Aero Preserve Academy (junior high level); Kenli Wong, Canyon Hills Junior High; Colum O’Brien, Magnolia Junior High; Abel Diaz, Ramona Junior High; Suzanne Dickerson, Townsend Junior High; and Faith DeJong, Woodcrest Junior High.

A traveling trophy was presented to Hidden Trails Elementary School in Chino Hills who also won the trophy in 2009, 2011, and 2013. Canyon Hills Junior High received the junior high trophy for the most pages read at that grade level and also was the junior high champion last year.

Children’s Fund and Auto Club Speedway partner for students — Children’s Fund and Auto Club Speedway are joining the race to help foster children across San Bernardino County by conducting a Lefty’s Backpack Drive. The month-long program kicked off this week and race fans who donate a backpack and/or school supplies will receive a $10 discount voucher toward a ticket purchase to the upcoming MAVTV 500 Indy Car race on June 27.

“Auto Club Speedway hosts year-round programs benefiting our local youth,” said Auto Club Speedway president Dave Allen. “This backpack drive is a cool way to provide students with the tools they need to succeed in school, and we have thousands of race fans who can help with this great cause.”

Donations can be dropped off at the Speedway’s administration office, 9300 Cherry Ave., Fontana, now through June 26 from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Suggestions are new backpacks, scientific calculators, three-ring binders with 200 notebook sheets and 200 sheets of construction paper with a box of 24-count crayons. Donations also will be accepted on race day at Gates B and D. Donors will also receive a $10 discount voucher to redeem for tickets.

News of social events with charitable purposes may be sent to Suzanne Sproul at Suzanne.sproul@langnews.com or on Twitter @SuzanneSproul. Please include a contact phone number. Send high-resolution jpeg photos, by attachment, and include group name and identification of individuals from left to right.