Photo

The planet’s atmosphere is heating up, and fast. There is broad scientific consensus that as humans keep pumping carbon dioxide from burning coal and oil into the atmosphere, the gases will trap heat and drive the global average temperature up by more than 2 degrees Celsius (around 5 degrees Fahrenheit).

That’s the point at which, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the planet will experience the irreversible effects of climate change: rapidly melting glaciers and rising sea levels; extreme droughts and flooding; stronger storms; widespread disease; and streams of climate refugees.

A march through New York on Sunday by more than 400,000 demonstrators urged action. At the United Nations General Assembly, Secretary General Ban Ki-moon hosted a climate change summit, the largest gathering of world leaders devoted to staving off that tipping point. World leaders delivered lots of passionate speeches calling for action — but very few offered specific new plans from their governments.

Negotiators working to forge a deal will need a drink at the end of this week. Across the street from the United Nations is the World Bar, a popular happy hour hangout for delegations and their staff; it features a list of cocktails such as the Diplomat, the Summit and the Nobel.

There, the mixologist Steven Dragun created a cocktail that deliciously, if disturbingly, evokes the plight of the planet. It starts off with cool, fruity notes, but evolves into, as he puts it, a “hot and polluted” finish, with Montenegro Amaro, a bitter Italian herbal liquor, delivering a smoky, spicy hit to the palate.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Dragun lights a match over the drink and squeezes an orange twist over the flame, sending a hot, caramelized spray to sizzle on the surface of the liquid — allowing a moment of reflection on the heat yet to come.

The Tipping Point

(Courtesy of Steven Dragun, beverage manager for Hospitality Holdings)

1.5 oz Montenegro Amaro liqueur

1/2 oz Auchentoshan American Oak scotch

1/2 oz Combier crème de cassis liqueur

1/2 oz lemon juice

2 blackberries

orange twist

Muddle blackberries in a mixing glass, then add the rest of the ingredients. Add ice, shake, double-strain into a cocktail glass. Zest and garnish with a flaming orange twist.