DULUTH, Minn. (NNCNOW.com) --- As the onslaught of political ads intensifies, we are checking their facts for accuracy.

According to critics, Mike McFadden's recent attack ads against Senator Al Franken are making odd claims.

In a attack ad titled 'Missed the Mark', the McFadden campaign slams Senator Franken's voting record.

"Franken has a 97% voting record with President Obama, over 40 votes for higher taxes," the ad claims.

McFadden repeats the claims in another ad.

"The Franken record: over 40 votes for higher taxes," is the message the ad hammers home.

So, do these claims hold water?

According to Geoffrey Sheagley of the University of Minnesota Duluth, Franken has voted for tax hikes since he took office in 2009.

"One of the big examples that comes out is Franken's support of the Affordable Care Act, so Obamacare in other words," Sheagley said. "And that included a medical device tax increase."

According to the Franken campaign, Franken worked to cut the medical device tax in half and is now trying to repeal it.

We looked at the 41 votes the McFadden campaign says was a tax increase, but most of them need context to understand.

The McFadden campaign classifies any vote against a tax cut as a tax hike. But that is simplistic.

Most of the votes McFadden cites are procedural votes – or gotcha votes – the kind of votes that lawmakers introduce to make each other look out of touch.

"There are definitely some gotcha votes," Sheagley said. "Some of them I think are votes that some Senators say 'let's take a vote on this and put other senators on the other side of it, so when they are up for elections, we can talk about them supporting tax increases or supporting other policies we don't like'."

"Al Franken voted with President Obama 97% of the time," McFadden claims.

According to Alisa Von Hagel at the University of Wisconsin Superior, this claim also fits into a grey area.

Von Hagel says Franken is not alone when voting with his party more than 90% of the time. In fact, most of Minnesota's Congressional delegation does.

"That is not something that would be out of the ordinary," Von Hagel said. "So again, voting along party lines is what we see as increasingly common."

Nick Minock

nminock@kbjr.com