Paella seems as if it should be pretty easy to make. After all, this Spanish classic is basically rice richly flavored with ingredients from land and sea.

It can be extravagantly embellished with lobster or simply studded with sausage. Vegetarian renditions make use of whatever the earth or farmers' markets offer up.

Think of it as a one-dish masterpiece that needs only a simple salad to complete the meal.

But a pamphlet included with a recently purchased paella pan had some ominous words: "Besides the paella pan, you need a good dose of courage and confidence."

Paella does involve lots of chopping and a pinch or two of expensive saffron. It also takes practice to get the rice cooked to perfection. But courage?

One fearless maker of paella is Chef Nicolas Ramos, who owns Antigua Latin Restaurant in West Allis with wife, Citlali Mendieta-Ramos. On their menu you'll find paella valenciana with chicken and pork, as well as paella de mariscos, his seafood interpretation, adapted from a recipe given to him by his mother-in-law.

He teaches a series of cooking classes during the year including Spanish paella, which is his most popular and which often sells out well in advance. (His next paella class is from 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. Oct. 25. The cost is $50.)

When it comes to this iconic dish, Ramos is easygoing: "Making paella is a good excuse to relax and enjoy some time in the kitchen," he said. "If you're at home, have yourself a glass of wine and start cooking."

And he's certainly not a purist. He sets aside some of the traditional ways in deference to modern tastes, availability of ingredients and convenience.

Yes, paella originally hails from Valencia, Spain, but according to this Mexican-American chef, "it's become an international dish now. And it's hard to say what's traditional and what's not."

He pointed out, for instance, that "it was once usual to use rabbit" in many of the most traditional recipes for paella valenciana, but rabbit has long since been replaced by chicken in most instances.

Paella is named for the pan in which it's cooked. And most home cooks don't have one of these wide, flat, thin-bottomed pans in their larder.

So, Ramos advises, if you don't have a dedicated paella pan, go ahead and use a skillet — "make sure it's flat" — as long as it's the same size as the pan called for in the recipe.

If necessary, use two pans to accommodate all the ingredients without crowding.

So far so good, but Ramos commits absolute heresy by suggesting the use of long-grained rice rather than the short-grained or medium-grained rice considered mandatory by most other experts.

"We used to use bomba rice, but now I use long-grain rice because it's is less starchy and seems to cook more evenly," he said.

Stubby, short-grained Spanish bomba rice, grown in the Valencia region, is often recommended for paella recipes. Italian arborio is an easier-to-find alternative. Another short-grained option, available at many local grocery stores, is La Preferida brand Pearl Rice — or arroz tipo valenciano.

Because bomba rice is so absorbent, it requires a ratio of about 3 to 1 liquid to rice, while Ramos uses the standard 2 to 1 ratio for long-grained rice.

"Sometimes we worry too much about ingredients," he said. "We've been told paella has to be this way or that way, but you can do it your own way. Don't let not having the right rice stop you."

Spanish food authority and author Jeff Koehler, who lives in Barcelona, is more of a stickler.

In his most recent book, "Spain: Recipes and Traditions from the Verdant Hills of the Basque Country to the Coastal Waters of Andalucia" (Chronicle Books, 2013, $40), he refers to rice as the "protagonist" in paella because the highly absorbent grains of rice act "as vehicles for the flavors."

2 worthy recipes

There are two paella recipes in his book: the first is rabbit paella with artichokes and red bell peppers — and, yes, he does mention that you can substitute bone-in chicken for rabbit — and the second is for shellfish paella.

Neither of these lengthy, traditional recipes — with lots of detailed instructions — is included here, but courageous students of paella might want to check them out.

An earlier book of his is "La Paella" (Chronicle, 2006, $18.95), which has about a dozen paella recipes, as well as recipes for other Spanish rice dishes and desserts.

According to Koehler, celebrated bomba rice, with its high degree of starchiness and absorbency, is more resilient and less likely to "open" than other varieties.

Of course, you'll pay more for bomba. La Tienda, a well-known online purveyor of Spanish foods and cookware, sells 2.2 pounds (about 4½ cups) of this specialty rice for $14.95.

Koehler writes that paella dates back centuries in Valencia, noting that Moors introduced rice into Spain — along the fringes of Albufera, a freshwater lagoon just south of Valencia — in the eighth century.

Paella was traditionally cooked over embers, and Koehler offers tips in his book on how to accomplish that with a modern-day grill.

But even if you decide to cook indoors, two traditional ingredients, cured chorizo and smoked Spanish paprika, help to lend a smoky flavor.

For newbies, the author has 27 tips in a section called "Paella: Techniques and Advice," organized in order of preparation.

They include some age-old edicts: Do not use long-grain or parboiled rice, do not stir, do not cover the pan as the rice cooks.

(Not surprisingly, the West Allis chef doesn't worry too much about these rules.)

But it's Koehler's initial advice that shouldn't be overlooked: "A paella is always a festive occasion. But do not make a paella for the first time for a large group of people. Do a practice run first to be comfortable with the pan, the heat source, rice and amount of liquid. Take notes...."

Once you've got it down — and your picture-perfect paella is ready — carry it to the table in the pan.

And here are Koehler's words of wisdom to guests: "If you're sitting at the table, applaud appreciatively when the paella is carried out."

Paella tips

Planning to make paella? Here are a few tips to consider first:

■Paella pans are wide and flat with low sloping sides and two handles. The least expensive and most traditional are made from polished carbon steel, with common sizes ranging from 14 to 20 inches. A 14-inch steel pan costs about $22.

An easier-to-take-care-of alternative — and nearly as inexpensive — is a steel pan coated with black and white speckled enamel.

One online source is La Paella.

■Before purchasing a paella pan, find out the size of the pan, including the handles, to see if it will fit in the oven. A 17- or 18-inch pan — and that's the width across the top — is more like 22 inches by the time you take the two handles into account.

■Indian grocery stores carry some of the least expensive saffron threads around, at least in the Milwaukee market. Expect to pay about $6 per gram, with 1 gram of whole threads equaling about 2 teaspoons, enough for several recipes of paella. The saffron is usually kept behind the counter.

■Chop ahead of time. The late Penelope Casas was one of the great authorities on Spanish cooking, and she wrote in "Paella!:" "Have all ingredients chopped and measured before beginning the final cooking of paella...this can be done well in advance, especially when cooking for guests."

■The broth in which the rice is cooked is important to the success of the dish. Use a top-quality commercial product — or better yet, make your own.

■No socarrat — no problem! Paella aficionados talk about the coveted crusted rice that sometimes forms at the bottom of the pan. But in an email, author Jeff Koehler noted that not having the browned bottom crust — or "socarrat" — doesn't mean the chef has failed.

"It is quite rare, to be honest," he wrote. "And you can never 'try' to get it. As I say, it is just seconds away from being burnt."

■The traditional way is to have guests eat right from the pan. Each guest starts at the perimeter and eats toward the center. And as Koehler tells us, "It is considered bad manners to reach across the pan for that particularly plump shrimp. Stick to your own pie-shaped section of rice in front of you."