President Obama sweeps into city Monday for his fifth U.N. General Assembly as he’s set to confront some of his biggest headaches — both foreign and domestic.

All eyes will be on Obama and conciliatory Iranian counterpart Hassan Rohani, to see if they're the first heads of the two countries to actually shake hands in over three decades.

The new, moderate president claimed last week his country will never seek nuclear weapons, a pledge met with skepticism both in the U.S. and in Israel.

"It's possible that there could be some interaction at different levels, but there's just simply none planned at this moment," Ben Rhodes, Obama's top national security spokesman, said Friday.

Obama is scheduled to address the General Assembly Tuesday morning, when he's expected to address Iran's nuclear pursuits, recently resumed Mideast peace talks and the week's preeminent issue: U.S. led efforts to rid Syria of chemical weapons that killed more than 1,400 on Aug. 21.

Obama may become the first president in three decades to shake an Iranian president’s hand — in this case, the right hand belonging to moderate Iranian leader Hasan Rouhani. (Rouzbeh Jadidoleslam/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry are pushing fellow U.N. Security Council members to mandate the country give up the weapons and to agree on enforcement measures.

Top U.S. antagonist Russia, however, which holds veto power on the Security Council, questions whether the Syrian regime was even responsible for the attack.

Later Tuesday, Obama will speak with predecessor and "explainer-in-chief" Bill Clinton before a Manhattan meeting of the Clinton Global Initiative where the two will tout Obamacare - which Congressional Republicans seek to defund starting with the new fiscal year Oct. 1.

Monday, Obama meets with Nigerian president Goodluck Jonathan to discuss his country's national elections and energy sector, along with the threat of Al Qaeda-linked jihadists in the African nation.

The United Nations General Assembly is like the Emmy Awards, but for diplomatic nerds. (Frank Franklin II/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

Later Obama and Kerry will meet with members of the U.S. mission to the UN and Obama will host a reception for employees.

After Tuesday's speech, Obama is scheduled to meet with U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon, and then with Palestinian National Authority President Mahmoud Abbas.

Also Tuesday, First Lady Michelle Obama will host a reception and luncheon for dignitaries' spouses at the Studio Museum in Harlem.

Israeli President Benjamin Netanyahu is scheduled to address the General Assembly later in the month, and will meet with Obama during his U.S. visit.

jstraw@nydailynews.com