After thousands of dollars were stolen from a local junior cheer squad, the community comes together to give back.

The end of the year party for the Valley Center junior cheer squad was held Sunday. It's an annual tradition for the team that almost didn't happen this year, until the community stepped in. The Valley Center junior cheerleaders traded in their pom poms for roller blades to celebrate a season of both highs and lows.

"It's like a roller-coaster, we were rock bottom and now we're just all elated then," says coach and parent Mandy Johnson.

Johnson's girls were looking forward to getting personalized wind suits and backpacks this year, but the team could no longer afford them after the director was accused of stealing $26,000 dollars, wiping out the team's funds.

"We'll all have to raise it ourselves," says Johnson. "Police are working on it. They don't have any answers for us."

On top of their missing funds, Johnson says the former director left the team in $4500 dollars worth of debt.

"It's disheartening," says Johnson. "It was stolen from children, I mean she stole from kids. How low can you be?"

That's when the community stepped in to help the cheerleaders. Local businesses pitched in to give the girls their end of the year party, plus additional money to help chip away at their debt and replace some of the $26,000 they say they don't think they'll ever get back.

"Pizza Hut donated 20% (of funds for the night), Big Larry's Burgers donated 30% of their funds for the night, it's going right back into debts that we owe now," says Johnson.

Despite the drama, the girls are still ending this season with smiles all thanks to their biggest fans in Valley Center.

"I've been really surprised. I'm not surprised our community came together for this, but I'm surprised we had such an outcome, a great outcome," says Johnson.

There's going to be more fundraising events for the cheer team to help them get back on their feet.

11/20 Moolah Burgers - West Wichita

12/4 Genghis Grill - West Wichita

12/16 Pizza Hut - Valley Center

1/6 Chic-fil-A West Wichita