Action Points This study was published as an abstract and presented at a conference. These data and conclusions should be considered to be preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

APBI for breast cancer matched long-term disease control and survival with whole-breast irradiation.

Note that significant predictors of ipsilateral breast cancer recurrence in univariate analysis with APBI were age and negative versus close surgical margins.

SAN FRANCISCO -- Accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) matched long-term disease control and survival with whole-breast irradiation (WBI), according to 10-year follow-up data from a matched-pair analysis.

Rates of local and regional recurrence were identical at 10 years. Distant metastasis occurred less often with WBI (3% versus 6%), whereas contralateral recurrence was more frequent with WBI (9% versus 3%), reported Jessica Wobb, MD, of Beaumont Cancer Institute in Royal Oak, Mich., at the Breast Cancer Symposium.

Disease-free survival, disease-specific survival, and overall survival did not differ significantly between groups, but were consistently higher in WBI-treated patients, Wobb added.

"These data represent one of the only ABPI series with prolonged follow-up and show similar outcomes in a matched group of patients undergoing WBI or APBI," Wobb concluded in a poster presentation.

The findings could represent a case of too little, too late, according to invited discussant David E. Wazer, MD, of Tufts Medical Center in Boston. He reviewed data from the National Cancer Data Base, showing a downturn in the use of brachytherapy after breast-conserving surgery since 2008 and no substantive increase in the use of other forms of APBI going back almost 10 years.

"Why is this happening?" Wazer asked. "I think it is because of toxicity concerns [with APBI], the emergence of alternative short-course hypofractionated whole-breast regimens, and the rise of single-fraction intraoperative radiotherapy."

The emergence of breast-conserving surgery for early-stage breast cancer has been accompanied by the introduction of APBI as an alternative to WBI. As compared with WBI, APBI protocols historically have required less time to complete, offering potentially attractive quality-of-life considerations for patients and providers.

Whether the advantages of APBI came at a cost of cancer outcomes has remained a topic of discussion. Few studies have accumulated long-term data to compare outcomes with APBI and WBI.

Wobb and colleagues presented data from long-term follow-up of 3,009 patients treated with breast conservation at Beaumont from 1980 to 2012. The study population comprised 2,528 women who underwent WBI after surgery and 481 who received catheter- or balloon-based APBI. A matched-pair analysis was performed, including age, cancer stage, and estrogen-receptor (ER) status.

The analysis included 548 of the 3,009 patients. Follow-up averaged 8 years overall but was slightly longer in the WBI group (8.1 versus 7.8 years, P<0.001). Mean tumor size did not differ significantly but was smaller in the APBI group (11.4 versus 13.0 mm). T-stage, ER status, and final surgical margins did not differ significantly between groups. Nodal involvement was more common in the WBI group (14% versus 9%, P=0.07).

Use of adjuvant hormonal therapy was significantly more common in the WBI group (68% versus 54%, P=0.001).

Comparison of 10-year clinical outcomes with APBI versus WBI produced the following results, none of which achieved statistical significance:

Local failure: 4% versus 4%

Contralateral failure: 3% versus 9%

Regional recurrence: 1% versus 1%

Disease-free survival: 91% versus 93%

Cause-specific survival: 93% versus 94%

Overall survival: 75% versus 82%

Excellent cosmesis: 95% versus 94%

In a univariate analysis, significant predictors of ipsilateral breast cancer recurrence with APBI were age (P=0.05) and negative versus close surgical margins (P=0.01). Significant predictors of ipsilateral recurrence with WBI were negative versus close margins (P=0.02) and negative versus positive margins (P<0.001).

Tumor size, stage, nodal status, ER status, hormonal therapy, and chemotherapy did not predict the risk of ipsilateral recurrence with either type of adjuvant radiation therapy.

In reviewing the findings, Wazer questioned whether the two patient groups were truly well matched, noting disparities in tumor size and frequency of hormonal therapy. He also cited a recent report of a small but significantly higher risk of subsequent mastectomy (4% versus 2%) in patients treated with brachytherapy versus WBI.

"There might be a lot of issues with how the [mastectomy] study was done, but nonetheless it has raised sufficient questions for a number of investigators," Wazer said.

Wobb and co-authors reported no conflicts of interest. Wazer disclosed relationships with the American Brachytherapy Society, Advance Radiation Therapy, and the American Journal of Clinical Oncology.

Reviewed by Robert Jasmer, MD Associate Clinical Professor of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco