Tennessean reporter Shelley DuBois went shopping for health coverage Tuesday from a consumer point of view. This represents one person's perspective on searching for health insurance and doesn't necessarily reflect others' experience on the exchange.

During the initial hours of launch, a new federal government website dedicated to health insurance exchanges remained largely inaccessible to consumers looking Oct. 1, 2013, to enroll in the new program at the Dane County Job Center in Madison, Wis. (Photo: John Hart, AP) Story Highlights Health care shopping began Tuesday

People have until Dec. 15 to sign up if they want coverage beginning Jan. 1

The deadline to get insurance or face a tax penalty in 2015 is March 31

NASHVILLE — The federal health exchange is busted.

At least it was for this 28-year-old, nonsmoking female Tennessean looking to sign up for coverage on Day 1 of the exchange.

STORY: Traffic surges, glitches mark debut

STORY: Here's what to do with exchanges

To be clear, I'm not eligible for federal subsidies because my employer, Gannett Co. Inc., offers coverage. But I wanted more, possibly cheaper choices. I'm the one that Obamacare opponents said wouldn't sign up and who proponents said would, and I'm ready to subsidize some people with pre-existing conditions in exchange for, say, a fairly affordable MRI scan should I need one.

Let's do this thing.

By 9:33 a.m. CT Tuesday, I am ready to enroll. The healthcare.gov site looks good. (Tennessee officials opted not to create their own health care marketplace.) It's welcoming, full of images of smiling people. But when I enter my state as Tennessee and try to log in, I'm stalled.

"We have a lot of visitors on our site right now and we're working to make your experience here better. Please wait here until we send you to the login page. Thanks for your patience!"

No problem, Government. I can wait a little bit along with my fellow Americans. By 9:38 a.m., I've made it to the login page, and by 9:42 a.m., it's time to pick three security questions.

Here's glitch No. 2: When I scrub the spaces where I'm supposed to choose from various security questions, they're blank. To get things moving, I answer all of the phantom questions with "cookies" and click "Next."

That may seem like a dangerous clue to drop because someone might hack my healthcare.gov account, but the account doesn't make it past "cookies." The next alert says, "Important. Your account could not be created at this time. The system is unavailable."

Shelley DuBois, business reporter at The Tennessean. (Photo: Jae S. Lee, The Tennessean)

Time to hit the phones. On the contact page of healthcare.gov, a tab says "Find local help." I enter my ZIP code and pull up the names of several places that should have resources. First on the list is the Nashville Academy of Medicine, which I call at 9:48 a.m. and where I was promptly and very politely put on hold.

"OK, ma'am, we have not been trained yet," says a nice lady at 9:51 a.m. "We are listed on there, but we are not the appropriate people to help." She recommends I call an organization called Health Assist.

So I do.

"Unfortunately, we don't have any exact pricing information that's ready right now," another kind person says. If I want to enroll via phone, she says I can call the federal assistance line.

By this point, it's 10:06 a.m. I try healthcare.gov again and get kicked off. Figure that after about half an hour of messing around, it is time to call the government.

At 10:22 a.m., I get through to a person. Because of my age, she says, I might qualify for catastrophic coverage or Medicaid. I say thank you, but I'd love to know what my options are on the exchange. She tries to look. Unfortunately, her method for checking the online rates is the same one that has booted me off already.

STORY: Tennessee rules 'bind' health law navigators, critics say

"We do ask that you maybe want to go on healthcare.gov at a later time," she says. Or she can mail me a paper application.

Do officials have an electronic copy they can email me? No, snail mail or bust, she says. All right, I say, but I keep trying other, what are supposed to be faster modes of enrollment. She gives me an address where I can meet someone face to face.

By this time, it is 10:33 a.m. I try calling local "navigators," or people trained to guide those of us seeking insurance through the exchange. I'll skim the next part of the story, which involves a string of robots telling me that my call is very important, putting me on hold, then dropping the line.

...about 45 minutes later and http://t.co/9Ot1x0f7ix is having some trubs. — Shelley DuBois (@shelleydubois) October 1, 2013

At 11:19 a.m., I catch up on the government shutdown news and wonder if Tennessee navigators would be affected. Between the shutdown and the bill the state passed to limit who can qualify as a navigator, it's no wonder I have been talking to robots all day.

11:39 a.m.: No more robots, I am going to find a human being. I drive to the address the lady on the government help line gave me. Now, I understand that some help centers are up and running throughout the area, but this particular location is a vacant building next to a Holiday Inn Express. At 12:20 p.m., I exit the premises defeated and uninsured.

Try to sign up again via website at 12:48 p.m. No dice.

The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services hosts a call that was originally scheduled for 1 p.m. and then pushes it back to 3:09 p.m.

"This is certainly a historic day for each of us," says Marilyn Tavenner, CMS administrator. "Let me just start by saying that as of 8 a.m. this morning, the Marketplace is open for business and will stay open."

“This is Day 1 of a process. We're in a marathon, not a sprint, and we need your help.” Marilyn Tavenner, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services

After a few more positive sentences from the Medicare & Medicaid Services, reporters bombard Tavenner and her colleagues mostly with questions about why the agency hasn't released numbers of how many people have successfully enrolled and why the exchange isn't working in various states. The answers from agency administrators are, roughly, 1) we don't know accurate numbers yet and 2) we're doing the best we can.

Officials say the site is fixed, but I try during the call and it is still down.

At the end of the call, Tavenner says that everybody should remember that people signing up on the exchange have until Dec. 15 to get coverage that begins Jan. 1.

"This is Day 1 of a process," she says. "We're in a marathon, not a sprint, and we need your help."

After hanging up on the press phone call, Katie from United Neighborhood Health Services, calls me at 3:21 p.m. I had left a message with the center earlier in the day.

She is locked out from the website too and the phone enrollment system isn't really working, she says.

Some Tennesseans successfully signed up early in the morning before the rest of us woke up, she says, and recommends that I try the site after the initial novelty wears off. Should I need any help going forward, I can call her on her cell.

That's a wrap for Day 1 of exchange enrollment. The search for affordable health care continues.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/19ZpW1Z