Click here for additional information

UPDATE: The Omaha Eligible Income Tax Credit (ETIC) Coalition is expanding its services to help people sort through and file their taxes before April.

The ETIC has already hosted 15 tax-help events all across the metro. It'll extend hours at its main office at 36th & Q in Omaha and offer more services at mobile locations.

Those expanded services at the mobile locations are set for these dates, times and locations:

-Latino Center of the Midlands: 24th & M

Through April 15th

Monday - Thursday, 9 a.m. - 4 p.m.

Appointment only

-Family Housing Advisory Services: 24th & Lake

Through April 9th

Thursdays

5 p.m. - 8 p.m.

No appointment necessary

-Family Housing Advisory Services: 36th & Q

Through April 15th

Monday: 9 a.m. - 5 p.m.

Tuesday - Thursday: 9 a.m. - 8 p.m.

Saturday: 9 a.m. - 3 p.m.

No appointment necessary

-Metro Community College Fort Campus: 30th & Fort

Through April 12th, closed April 5th

Saturdays & Sundays

1 p.m. - 4 p.m.

No appointment necessary

Ed Leahy with the EITC says the coalition has already served more than 1,600 taxpayers, returning $3.7 million in federal refunds in the first 20 days of this tax season.

Posted Feb. 11th, 2015

Whether we like it or not, tax season is here. But this year it doesn't have to be a headache if you can get the right help.

The Omaha Eligible Income Tax Credit (EITC) Coalition is offering free help at multiple sites across the metro.

If you make less than $59,000 a year you are eligible for the free help.

Not only will experts with knowledge in advanced tax law be there to help you out, they'll also offer advice on managing your money. Spanish language interpreters are available.

For a list of all those sites, click the link on this page.

Ed Leahy is the director of the coalition, and knows just about everything there is to know about tax preparation.

"To have someone prepare those taxes at $300, $400 is a lot of money for a family," he said. "So we’re here to serve people and to help them be more financially stable by looking at what's ways can people improve?"

Most of the workers are volunteers, offering to help in any way they can to make your taxes make sense.

"Everybody needs a little bit of help in this day and age," volunteer Sarah Stein said. "Money the finances are really tight, so we try to come and help them do their taxes for free. They’re not paying out to anybody to have their taxes done."

The reason the EITC coalition bears that name is because of the tax credit it's named after. The earned income tax credit is available usually for low income families with dependents, though others qualify, as well. Depending on your filing status, income and number of children, people can get a tax credit between $500 and $6,000.

"In general the earned income tax credit is like a slingshot for families to propel them towards stability," Leahy said. "It lifts more people out of poverty every year and has been identified as the most effective federal anti-poverty program in the last 40 years."

If you think you might qualify, ask a volunteer at any of the tax preparation sites.

If you don't qualify for free taxes, experts say you can try to do it yourself. On average, people save about $270 doing their own taxes. But, they also spend almost 37 hours trying to figure it all out.

If you have an easier return, for example you only have one job, didn't have any life events, don't own property, and didn't start a business, you can probably handle doing it yourself. The only catch, you might not find as many deductions.

If your return is a little more complicated, it might be time to seek professional help. Leahy suggests going to an established place and getting to know your prepper. He said we need to ask questions about their background, if they're open year round, and if they'll back you if you get audited.

It's easy for even seasoned pros to make mistakes on their taxes, so WOWT 6 News looked into common mistakes people make and how to avoid them next year.

First, is waiting until the last minute to file. Leahy said this can be risky if you owe money.

"If I discover I owe $800 at the end of January I have almost two and a half months to save that money and pay as much of that as I can to avoid penalties and interest," he said. "If I file April 12, I have three days to come up with that $800 and I might not have it."

Another big mistake people make is not filling out their forms completely, accurately and legibly. An incorrect form can almost guarantee an audit.

When you do fill out those forms, make sure you're filing with the correct status. Single and married are easy to understand, but when it comes to head of household things can get tricky. Ask a professional if you're unsure.

Another big mistake is not keeping track of important receipts. Some items you buy can be deducted, so Leahy suggests starting with a most basic envelope system. Any important receipts go into the envelope in a safe place.

Deductions are another area people make mistakes. There are so many out there, so knowing what you can deduct is difficult, but a professional can help. Some ones most of us qualify for include charity and goods donations, new vehicle registration, and mileage if you drive for your job and don't have a company car or reimbursement.

The biggest mistake Leahy warns about is leaking your personal information. If someone from the IRS calls and you aren't sure it's them, Leahy said to make sure they give you your information, instead of you giving it to them.

"The IRS will never, and I want to stress never, email a taxpayer," he said. "If you get an email from the IRS saying something’s wrong with it, we need your bank account number, do not open or respond to that email."

Other things to watch out for this year include a new form called the 1095-A. If you got health insurance through the Affordable Care Act, you need to fill out this form.

Also new this year, if you do the direct deposit option, the taxpayer's name needs to be on the bank account it's going into. So if your child worked a summer job and doesn't have a bank account, you can't put their money into your account. Do the check option instead.

And one other minor headache to deal with this year, due to budget cuts the IRS is short staffed, so refunds may take longer this year. Ed Leahy said we need to be patient, but still diligent about checking up on our refunds.