The art market is hotter than a hoisted Rembrandt.

Last night at Christie’s in New York, Picasso’s “Les Femmes d’Alger (Version O)” sold for almost $180 million – the highest price ever paid at auction for a piece of art. There were said to be five bidders, and the winner remains anonymous.

At the same sale, a Giacometti sculpture, “L’homme au doigt,” went for a total of more than $141 million.

On May 5, at the first major auction of the spring selling season, Sotheby’s pulled in $368 million. It was the second-highest sale of Impressionist and modern art in the history of the auction house, according to The New York Times. The top seller was van Gogh’s “L’allée Des Alyscamps,” which fetched $66.3 million.

Related: 6 Traits of an Emerging Millionaire. Are you one?

The haul represented a 67 percent increase over Sotheby’s spring sale a year earlier, according to Bloomberg, which noted that many of the buyers were Asian.

The May 5 auction was only the second-highest because Sotheby’s held a sale last November that took in $422 million.

And tonight at a Sotheby’s auction of contemporary art, a painting entitled “The Ring (Engagement)” by the Pop artist Roy Lichtenstein could sell for as much as $50 million, the Times said.

What’s behind all those staggering numbers?

About a year and a half ago, the columnist Felix Salmon (then at Reuters, now at Fusion) ruminated about whether there was a bubble, which he defined as often driven by FOMO (fear of missing out), or a speculative bubble, one fueled by flippers, in the art market. His conclusion: the art market bubble was definitely not speculative.

“The people spending millions of dollars on trophy art aren’t buying to flip…,” he wrote.

Related: Get Ready for Another Real Estate Bubble

Still, Salmon said he was seeing signs that the market could be turning speculative. But they may have been false signals.

Recently, The Wall Street Journal wrote: “Spurred by the momentum of several successful sale seasons and an influx of newly wealthy global bidders, the major auction houses…say demand for status art is at historic levels and shows no signs of tapering off.”

But why?

In an April 17 article, the global news website Worldcrunch asked Financial Times journalist Georgina Adam, who wrote the 2014 book Big Bucks—The Explosion of the Art Market in the 21st Century, why so much money is rolling around the art market and driving up prices.

“Rich people used to be rich in terms of estate or assets, but not so much in terms of cash, like they are today,” she said.

“This growing billionaire population from developed or developing economies has money to spend and invest,” said the Worldcrunch article by Catherine Cochard. “For many of them, art — in the same way as luxury cars or prêt-à-porter — is an entry pass to a globalized way of life accessible through their wealth.”

That is a development that the keen eyes at the auction houses haven’t missed.