Juan Hernandez (Boulder County Sheriff's Office)

EDITOR'S NOTE: This story has been updated to reflect the suspect's correct name. Longmont police say Juan Hernandez gave a fake name when he was arrested over the weekend.

Longmont police arrested a 41-year-old man Saturday night on suspicion of DUI and reckless endangerment after a sergeant reported seeing the suspect repeatedly fire a gun into the air from his moving pickup truck.

Sgt. John Wederquist reported hearing a series of three gunshots while parked in his patrol car in the 200 block of Martin Street around 10:40 p.m. Saturday, according to a police report.

Wederquist looked around and saw a Chevrolet Silverado pickup truck drive past him, northbound on Martin toward First Avenue. According to the report, Wederquist "heard and saw four muzzle flashes from the driver's side of the vehicle." The gun appeared to be pointed straight into the air, according to the report.

Wederquist followed the truck and stopped it on the east side of Emery Street, just south of Second Avenue.

A man, later identified as Juan Hernandez, of Longmont, emerged from the vehicle.

Police said he initially followed commands, then disregarded them and "began to make comments about wanting officers to kill him," according to the report. He also "made several furtive movements towards his waistband, as if he was trying to draw a weapon," according to police.

Advertisement

At that point, another officer deployed a Taser, shocking Hernandez. He was taken into custody.

Police found a Smith and Wesson .22LR semi-automatic handgun in the vehicle, with live ammunition strewn about, as well as a "semi-full" can of beer, according to the report.

Hernandez admitted to police that he had been drinking beer and firing his gun from inside the vehicle while driving, according to his arrest report. He also told police it was the second time he'd been arrested recently for a similar offense, but Longmont police Cmdr. Jeff Satur said he was unable to find any record of such an arrest.

Hernandez was booked into the Boulder County Jail on suspicion of driving under the influence, prohibited use of a weapon, reckless endangerment, driving without a license and possession of an open alcoholic beverage.

His first court appearance is set for 1:30 p.m. Monday at the jail.