Topics: "grand bargain", Barack Obama, GOP, healthcare, Immigration, Immigration Reform, Obamacare, Paul Ryan, Tax reform, Taxes, The Right, Oscars News

Despite all the handwringing over the impending collective right wing meltdown over president Obama’s immigration orders there is one bright spot: if the Republicans decide to shut down the government it does not appear that the Democratic grassroots will have to go to general quarters again to try to save Social Security. For the first time since 2010 (and truthfully since 2009) the so-called entitlements do not seem to be on the chopping block.

It’s worth revisiting how cuts to America’s most important safety net came to be on a Democratic president’s agenda in a time of economic crisis and financial chaos. Talking about cutting such programs at a time like that has been the last thing on any liberal’s mind since Franklin Roosevelt took John Maynard Keynes’ advice and used federal money to try to put people to work and stimulate the economy. Most observers assumed that Hoover’s advisor Andrew Mellon’s, prescription to “liquidate labor, liquidate stocks, liquidate farmers, liquidate real estate… People will work harder, live a more moral life…” was an old saw that had turned into a punchline. But as we saw, Jazz-age austerity was suddenly back in vogue and everyone believed the crisis was a good opportunity to “do big things” which were all sold as being big government money savers. This was the Grand Bargain which President Obama first sprang on the nation a couple of weeks before he was inaugurated.

You’ll recall that the Grand Bargain consisted of three big reforms. The first was health care reform (to “bend the cost curve.”) The second was “entitlement” reform (to “make the program financially sound”) and finally there was tax reform which would be revenue neutral lest anyone open that tax hike can of worms. The beltway was giddy with excitement about all this in the early days of the administration signaling as it did that the president was ready to embrace both their beloved bipartisanship and obsessive deficit fetish. The media called it “audacious” not because they thought .it would be difficult to achieve but because it was so very Grand. The common thinking was that if the new president could get these pesky problems off the country’s plate once and for all, then he would be free to … well, do other things, presumably having to do with miracles and world peace.

Everyone knows what happened next. Health reform was a painful and difficult process that ended up passing on a party line vote through an unusual procedural route due to the fact that the Democrats lost their 60th vote when Senator Kennedy passed away. But the first leg of the Grand Bargain passed. And by the time it did the right wing of the Republican Party had completely lost its collective mind.

Nonetheless, the White House believed it might be able to rekindle some of that old bipartisan feeling if it put deficit reduction on the top of the agenda and feature some serious cuts to Social Security to get those Republicans to agree to raise taxes on the wealthy. They tried more than once to get that done but despite over half a century of demagogueing Social Security, when the Democrats offered to cut it, they couldn’t take yes for an answer.That would have meant giving President Obama a ‘win” and they just couldn’t stomach it. And anyway, by that time the obstruction strategy was in full effect and they were joyfully rampaging through the capitol attempting to destroy the country’s credit ratings, shutting down the government, cutting off Unemployment Insurance and all manner of other random destruction across the domestic political landscape. In a mad scramble to keep the United States government from completely imploding they cobbled together the travesty of sequestration that cut deeply into necessary programs for real people. But the second piece of the Grand Bargain — “entitlement reform” — was left on the cutting room floor.