Among the classical music cognoscenti, Russian composer Sergei Rachmaninoff has a certain reputation: gushy and opulent, certainly not serious—an old-fashioned romantic who never caught up to the modernism of the 20th century. Pianist (and super-fan) Kirill Gerstein said this isn't the composer's fault, but that of his interpreters.

"There are a lot of performances that are, let's say, uh, very indulgent," Mr. Gerstein said.

When asked to explain "indulgent," he replied: "Well, I'm being polite. There are performances that make him sound like a vodka-soaked Russian sailor."

ENLARGE Pianist Kirill Gerstein outside the Upper West Side building where Rachmaninoff once lived. Philip Montgomery for The Wall Street Journal

This Thursday through Saturday, Mr. Gerstein brings his own interpretation of Rachmaninoff—restrained yet virtuosic, nearly classical, presumably nonalcoholic—to the composer's "Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini," which he will perform with the New York Philharmonic and conductor Semyon Bychkov. This is Mr. Gerstein's subscription-series debut with the philharmonic; he previously played summer concerts with the orchestra in New York and Vail, Colo.

Mr. Gerstein has big shoes—or rather, hands, as Rachmaninoff's spanned an octave and a half—to fill; the philharmonic's first performance of the piece was with the composer himself as soloist, at Carnegie Hall in 1934. ("The composition is very difficult, and I should start practicing it," Rachmaninoff wrote.)

The other day, Mr. Gerstein stopped by the building where Rachmaninoff lived from 1926 to 1934, on the corner of West End and 84th Street. After a doorman informed some visitors that, yes, people do occasionally stop by to ask about the composer but, no, he doesn't know the apartment number, Mr. Gerstein headed to a nearby coffee shop to extol the virtues of the man he views as underappreciated and misunderstood.

A treasure trove of information about Rachmaninoff can be found in recordings of the composer playing his own music, Mr. Gerstein said.

"As I revisit these recordings, every year Rachmaninoff plays better and better," he said, laughing. "Which means that every year my own development makes me understand how incredibly good his playing is."

Mr. Gerstein talks about interpreting Rachmaninoff in phrases associated with Mozart: classicism, sense of control, restraint. (Granted, these traits are coupled with "some of the hottest music.")

"When the performance is transparent, when its classicist roots are clear, and yet there is this so-called quote unquote Russian sound, then it's quite clear that he's really a great composer," Mr. Gerstein said.

He said Rachmaninoff's aura is ever-present in the cultural ether in Russia, where Mr. Gerstein, who is 33, was born. He took a detour into the jazz world—he moved to the U.S. at age 14, to study at Boston's Berklee College of Music—but eventually came back to classical music. These days, he splits his time between New York and Stuttgart, Germany, when not on the road.

If Mr. Gerstein were to have met Rachmaninoff, what would he have said?

"I think I'd be happy just to be in his presence, just to feel his strong magnetism," said Mr. Gerstein, who had been talking about the composer with such nonstop vigor that a companion occasionally reminded him to pause and take a bite of a grilled-cheese sandwich. "I'm not sure it would be so necessary to talk."