Please enable Javascript to watch this video

DES MOINES, Iowa -- More than 1,300 Iowa activists had plenty from which to choose Saturday night and it had nothing to do with the menu at the Republican Party of Iowa's Lincoln Dinner.

11 potential presidential candidates, which included three already declared candidates, spoke.

Party Chairman Jeff Kaufmann said it was a chance to make a strong case in front of influential Iowans.

"Sometimes it's which one differentiates the most from Hillary (Clinton) and makes the case strong enough that have people, say, 'Yeah, that's the person who can beat her in the general election,'" Kaufmann said.

Here are some highlights from the speakers:

Rick Santorum, 2012 Iowa Caucus winner and former Pennsylvania Senator, reminded Iowans of his 2012 win and focused much of his time on the importance of strengthening U.S. relations with Israel and stopping Iran and other Middle East threats.

Ben Carson, declared candidate and former neurosurgeon, said iconic President Abraham Lincoln also had very little experience in public service before winning his election. Carson has never held public office.

Bobby Jindal, governor of Louisiana, focused his time on his upbringing and what he calls a present-day assault on religious liberties.

Jeb Bush, former governor of Florida, said he was proud of his brother, former President George W Bush. Jeb Bush struggled during the week explaining his views on whether his brother's military invasion of Iraq was a mistake.

Rick Perry, former governor of Texas, drew some of the most frequent applause with his fiery speech and took credit of leading much of the country's economic gains, thanks to Texas' economy.

Rand Paul, declared candidate and U.S. Senator Rand Paul from Kentucky, welcomed the debate on whether the government should tap phones of American citizens in the interest of national security. Paul is not a fan of that.

George Pataki, former governor of New York, pitched reducing the federal workforce by 15 percent.

Lindsey Graham, U.S. Senator from South Carolina, drew by far the most laughs with numerous one-liners.

Carly Fiorina, declared candidate and former CEO of Hewlett-Packard, won applause from criticizing Hillary Clinton numerous times. She also had the distinction of getting her microphone cut off after ten minutes (per pre-established rules of the event), since she hadn't finished her remarks. Many in the crowd stood and cheered as she walked off stage.

Donald Trump, businessman and "Celebrity Apprentice" host, told the crowd he plans an announcement next month about his future and that it would surprise some people.

Scott Walker, governor of Wisconsin, was the only one to bring a visual aide. He showed a boyhood photo of himself in Iowa holding the state flag with his brother.

Click here for more on the speeches from the Des Moines Register.