Annual event set for Sept. 18-20 in downtown Fort Morgan

A few of the vintage cars brought to downtown Fort Morgan for the 2013 Fall Harvest Car Show are shown here, including one at left made out of a 1919 Chevrolet body found in a meadow in the mountains. The 2015 Fall Harvest Car Show will happen Sept. 18-20. ( Fort Morgan Times file photo )

Find out more What: 2015 Fall Harvest Car Show When and Where: Sept. 18 to 20 in downtown Fort Morgan. Events: Free and open to the public to enjoy the cars on streets around City Park and in downtown Fort Morgan. Other events include: live Rockabilly music Friday night by the Atomic Drifters; more music and vendors in the park on Saturday morning, as well as a scavenger hunt at businesses, a free showing of "American Graffiti" at the Cover Theatre and live music by Beach Boys tribute band Kahuna Beach Party in the evening; and the Sunrise Optimist Poker Cruise and awards and door prizes on Sunday. More info: Visit fallharvestcarshow.org/ for registration info or full events schedule.

The Fall Harvest Car Show is gearing up for another big gathering of cars and people, and the Fort Morgan City Council granted the committee's request to waive $2,060.05 in fees and provide in-kind services.

"We're all well-aware of the car show and the tourism and the draw that exists with that event," Community Services Director Josh Miller told the council in presenting the request.

"It's a big event for us," Mayor Terry McAlister agreed. "It's turned into the main event. It's something that's always exciting to see this time of year roll around."

Advertisement

Part of what makes it special is that the Fall Harvest Car Show is something for all ages, he said.

"Even people who are age 16, 17 years old, they like classic cars. You know that the 16-year-olds don't have memories of the '49 Chevy, or shouldn't have anyway ... so it's something that goes from the young people clear up through, and they just get excited when they see these cars coming into town.

"I know it's a lot of work. I'm just really happy that you've been able to hang in there and keep it together and keep it going."

The mayor hopes to see the next generation of Fort Morgan residents also start getting involved in the Fall Harvest Car Show Committee, he said.

Brad Parker, who is on the car show committee and teaches automotive technology at Morgan Community College, likes to get his students involved in the annual car show, both coming to it and helping with putting it together.

"Cars are something near and dear to my heart," Parker said, and he hopes to pass that passion on to his students.

In addition to organizing the Fall Harvest Car Show, the nonprofit committee also raises money for scholarships and sometimes provides funding for city projects. For example, the committee funded the speaker system that plays music in downtown.

Providing more money to expand that speaker system further down Main Street or to surrounding streets or something like that is a real possibility for the committee, according to committee member Dave Cornwell.

And last year, the car show committee provided a scholarship to an MCC student who sought to get Automotive Service Excellence certification and "scored higher than anybody else who took the test last summer," Parker said.

That same student will travel to Arizona later this year to accept ASE's "Technician of the Future" award, according to Parker. "The only one in the country."

The fees the council waived and in-kind services the city will provide this year include: use of the Dahms-Talton Band Shell with electricity, use of City Park, picnic tables, roll-out trash cans, street closures and police patrols, according to the request.

As usual, there will be street closures on Main Street, Beaver Avenue and Bijou Avenue to accommodate all the cars people bring for the show.

There were 58 cars registered as of Aug. 18, according to committee member Oneida Petrino, but the committee expects lots more people to register in coming weeks.

So far, the furthest place someone is bringing a car to Fort Morgan from is North Dakota, she said.

And car show committee members will recognizable by the T-shirts they will wear that sport '55 T-Birds, according to Petrino. Every year, the committee chooses a different classic car to put on their T-shirts.

The council expressed excitement about the coming car show, unanimously approving fee waiver and in-kind services request.

"It's always a big draw for the community," Councilman Ron Shaver said. "It's a great weekend."

Jenni Grubbs: jgrubbs@fmtimes.com, Twitter @JenniGrubbs or tout.com/jennigrubbs