4693274

Ben Carson plans to eliminate Obamacare and replace it with health savings accounts comparable to the system Singapore has in place.

Carson, in an interview with Dave Ramsey Wednesday, stated the health savings accounts would make “every family essentially their own insurance company with no middleman. It gives you enormous flexibility to cover almost anything that comes up.”

Dave Ramsey: So, what do you do with Obamacare then?

Ben Carson: Well, we are going to get rid of it, but you can’t get rid of it without having a replacement. And the replacement would be health savings accounts that work extremely well everywhere they’re utilized. And you look at the people in Singapore, how happy they are, they pay a quarter of what we pay for healthcare. But I would change it to a health savings account over which you have compete control. Like you have control over your savings account, not one that has six bureaucrats in it. And you pay for it with the same the same dollars that we pay for traditional healthcare with, except you wouldn’t have to use as many of them. And you give people flexibility so that if you were $500 short for a minor procedure, your wife could give you it out of hers, or your daughter, or your uncle, or your cousin, or your grandfather. It makes every family essentially their own insurance company with no middleman. It gives you enormous flexibility to cover almost anything that comes up. And it also makes every family concerned about each other. If Uncle Joe is smoking like a chimney, everybody is going to be hiding his cigarets. It’s a good thing. It also makes the cost of catastrophic insurance drop dramatically. Because the only thing that is coming out of your catastrophic policy is real catastrophic events. How often do they occur? Not very often. So it’s just like having a homeowners policy with a bid deductible, versus a homeowners policy where you want every scratch coved. Two different animals. And if you let it to be bought across state lines, introduce you know that free market aspect, you are going to drive that cost down even further. It makes it very affable for three quarters of the people. Not so much for the indigent. What do you do for them? Well, we have, we take care of them now with Medicaid. $4-$5 hundred billion in annual Medicaid vouchers… [End of Interview]