“Truckers for the Constitution” organizer Zeeda Andrews on Friday circulated a list of demands that will supposedly be delivered to Texas Congressman Louie Gohmert.

Among them are suggestions that “Barry Soetoro, aka Barack Obama,” is a fake president because “his documents” are “forgeries.”

From the document:

From 2003 to 2008, several members of Congress introduced legislation, attempting to change Article 2, Section 1, Clause 5 of the Constitution on eight separate occasions to make it possible for Barack Obama to meet the eligibility requirements for the office of president. Of which, a legal investigation has proven that his documents provided are forgeries, which is a felony offense.

The document goes on to state that the president, “with the help of corrupt politicians, and individuals in authoritative positions” is trying to destroy constitutional rights.

“Today, we again face another day in which we must declare our freedom, from yet another tyrannical, abusive form of government,” it reads. ”We are here, to send a resounding affirmation. We are here, to breathe life back into our Constitution. We are here, to declare our independence.”

“… a legal investigation has proven that his documents provided are forgeries…” Share:

The document also includes criticisms of National Defense Authorization Act, the Affordable Care Act, the Department of Homeland Security and the Transportation Security Administration. It also accuses the White House of violating the War Powers Act.

Here’s what it has to say about the Department of Homeland Security:

The Department of Homeland Security is a non-military security force, which is violating the Constitution by using tax money to build a standing army, on American soil, training to engage with the American People.

And here’s what it has to say about the War Powers Act:

They have illegally put our military in a “War Zone” where they currently, guard opium productions and transport, police the people of other countries based on US law, they get authorization for military action from the United Nations Security Counsel [sic], which is High Treason, and they are exposing, and administering experimental, psychotropic, mind altering drugs for control over soldiers during secret, clandestine operations.

As of early Friday afternoon, the trucker group had not yet arrived in Washington, D.C. to deliver its list of demand to Gohmert.

They were also supposed to meet with members of Congress at the World War II Memorial, but apparently missed their opportunity due to traffic.

[blackbirdpie url="https://twitter.com/charliespiering/statuses/388697026923606016"]

Here are some photos of the trucker convoy (via Weasel Zippers):

(H/T: National Review Online)

–

Follow Becket Adams (@BecketAdams) on Twitter

Featured image via Weasel Zippers.