GRAND RAPIDS, MI — Some West Michigan business leaders who once threw their support — and money — behind U.S. Rep. Justin Amash have jumped ship and united behind local businessman Brian Ellis.

Past Amash donors like J.C. Huzienga, former Perrigo CEO Mike Jandernoa and Bissell Inc.'s Mark Bissell were among seven local business leaders who, in a recent letter, urged their colleagues to rally behind Ellis.

Other signatories included former Meijer Inc. President Mark Murray, retired Old Kent Bank President John Canepa; Marge Potter, executive director of corporate affairs for Continental Rail Gateway; and Grand Rapids banker and philanthropist David Frey.

Huizenga, Jandernoa, Bissell and Frey donated to Amash during his 2010 and 2012 election-year bids. Jandernoa stood out, having funneled $1,000 toward Amash's August 2014 primary race — when he runs against Ellis — according to the most recent Federal Election Commission filing.

So far in his brief campaign, Ellis contends he has a finger on the West Michigan business community's pulse more so than Amash. The former East Grand Rapids school board member also pushed back against Amash's voting record during the latter's second term in Congress.

Related: Rep. Justin Amash defends record during argument with Brian Ellis on radio show

Amash's vote not to reopen the federal government in particular seems to have irked the Grand Rapids businessman and other business leaders to a point that seems to intensify an ever-increasing rift in the Republican Party, prompting the letter from the Ellis campaign to donors.

The letter, recently obtained by MLive Grand Rapids Press, was distributed earlier this month to individuals Ellis described as Republican supporters in an effort shore up cash for his campaign and highlight what it contends are Amash's votes against the business community.

Written on campaign stationery, the letter alleges "(Amash, R-Cascade Township) and others have effectively nullified the Republican majority in the U.S. House. Their actions gave the GOP a black eye while simultaneously re-energizing the Obama administration."

Although not going as far to affirm the government shutdown shook up the West Michigan business community, Ellis said he's received a good deal of attention since then.

"I've got a lot of people very interested in my campaign over this very issue, and I'll leave it at that," he said.

Of course, Amash is not without his own deep-pocketed donors. The wealthy DeVos family, perhaps some of the most well-known faces of West Michigan business, gave $39,000 in combined donations to Amash during this current election cycle.

In Amway co-founder Richard DeVos' first endorsement of Amash, he said, "Justin understands that freedom, entrepreneurship, and family values are cornerstones of our great nation, and I trust him to pursue policies in Congress that ensure all Americans have the opportunity to succeed."

Ellis previously said Amash was in the middle of the government shutdown debacle, joining several other House Republicans to help send the country on the brink of the default over the Affordable Care Act, or "Obamacare.”

“The premise was right. ‘Obamacare’ is and has been a disaster but the tactic,” Ellis said, “… you do not threaten to default on our debt, you do not threaten the full faith and credit of the U.S. government.

“That’s something you do not fool around with.”

In the middle of the second month since announcing his campaign, Ellis has received a good deal of national attention as the businessman hoping to unseat a congressman riding the waves of smaller government.

But conservative commentator Rush Limbaugh told his radio audience last week the country needs more people like Amash.

Citing a story from The Hill, Limbaugh said “Amash is among a rebel bloc of House Republicans who pushed Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) to make a stand on ‘ObamaCare’ in the fight over the government shutdown and the debt ceiling.”

To that extent, Limbaugh didn’t have issue with Amash or his vote.

“In the world I live in,” Limbaugh said, “those are résumé enhancers. In the world I live in, Justin Amash and these guys get a standing ovation. We need everybody in the House being like this, we need some brawlers. …

“In addition to everything else going on, the Republican donor class, they don’t think there’s any emergency."

Andrew Krietz covers breaking and general police/fire news for MLive | The Grand Rapids Press. Email him at akrietz@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter.

Brian Ellis letter to Republican supporters