In a decision prompted by low fill rates and Obamacare, the Allentown School District will outsource some of its substitute teaching positions effective Jan. 1.

The district will continue to employ substitutes who fill short-term assignments, as well as salaried substitutes, who are contracted to work at least 90 consecutive days and are members of the teachers union.

Those who work between 15 and 89 cumulative days for an average of at least 30 hours a week will now be hired through Substitute Teacher Service Inc., which is based in based in Aston, Delaware County, but opened an office in the Lehigh Valley.

The district hopes that outsourcing will provide a greater pool of available substitute teachers. It currently has a roster of about 300 substitute teachers but only about 200 are actually "available talent," according to the proposal passed last week in a 6-2 school board vote.

Through the first month of the school year, the substitute teacher fill rate was under 80 percent at some buildings and 193 districtwide substitute requests went unfilled, Director of Human Resources David Elcock said earlier this month.

Superintendent Russ Mayo has said the district's substitute teacher shortage appears slightly worse than last year, when some schools were forced to combine classes or send students to mass study halls in the gymnasium.

Bethlehem Area School District already contracts with STS and after about seven weeks into this school year, STS's fill rates were about 2 percent below the level Bethlehem had achieved on it own, school officials said.

On its best days, STS has plugged every teaching hole across Bethlehem Area with a substitute. On its worst day, it filled only 68 percent of the holes. The district believes its own fill rates would have been lower this year anyway.

Both districts attributed the outsourcing of subs to the Affordable Care Act mandate to offer health care to substitutes who work an average of 30 hours a week or more.

By outsourcing, a school district doesn't have to worry about limiting substitutes' hours or facing fines for not providing health care to those who qualify.

It's not that the district doesn't want to offer health care for those employees, Mayo has said, but rather that it has to expend taxpayer money as wisely and efficiently as possible.

Though the district will avoid the possibility of fines, it will pay STS 31 percent more than it currently pays substitutes, Elcock said.

Delta-T, another provider of substitute teachers, will be used as a secondary pool in case STS cannot fill all of the district's needs.

adam.clark@mcall.com

610-820-6168