Small cities are among the biggest beneficiaries of a wave of foreign students studying at U.S. universities, according to a Brookings Institution study.

Ithaca, N.Y.; Corvallis, Ore.; and Jonesboro, Ark., have among the highest concentrations of foreign students in the country, Neil G. Ruiz, senior policy analyst with the Brookings Metropolitan Policy Program, finds in a new story of the nation’s F-1 visa program.

Ithaca, home to Cornell University, includes 71.2 foreign students for every 1,000 enrolled in higher-education programs, istock

Ithaca, home to Cornell University and Ithaca College, includes 71.2 foreign students for every 1,000 enrolled in higher-education programs, the highest concentration of foreign students in the nation. Corvallis, home to Oregon State University, is fourth with 62.6 students per thousand. It also had the fastest-growing population of foreign students between 2008 and 2012, according to Mr. Ruiz. Jonesboro, home to Arkansas State University, was fifth with 62.2 students per thousand. Champaign, Ill., and Lafayette, Ind., were among the top 10.

The common denominator in many of these cases is public universities drawing students in science, technology engineering and math (or STEM) programs, often at a lower cost than at private universities.

The schools have helped to manage state budget cuts by drawing foreign students, Mr. Ruiz said. In Corvallis — population 54,520 with aggregate personal income of $3.45 billion in 2012 — foreign students were a source of $79 million in income from tuition and local living expenses from 2008 to 2012. Ithaca drew $426 million from foreign students during that span.

“Foreign students constitute a large source of export earnings for U.S. metropolitan areas,” according to the study.

Mr. Ruiz built a database of enrollments in 118 metro areas after conducting a Freedom of Information Act request of the Department of Homeland Security’s database of applicants for F-1 student visas. The findings are published online.

Mr. Ruiz said small towns could use foreign students as a bridge for local businesses to generate export earnings, but these cities are having a difficult time keeping the students around. Only 14% of foreign students stayed in Ithaca after graduating, while 75% of New York City foreign students remained in the area through “Optional Practical Training” visas, which allow people to temporarily work after studying in the U.S.

“If you’re a big city like New York with lots of employment opportunities then people will stay there,” Mr. Ruiz said.

Meantime, the small-town foreign students are coming from big cities around the world, including Seoul, Beijing and Shanghai.

One outlier: Kathmandu, Nepal, a small city of 1.8 million people, sent 10,721 students between 2008-2012. Its students mostly receive business and marketing degrees, and are concentrated in the Dallas and Washington, D.C., metro areas.

Hyderabad, India, is shipping some of its students to “diploma mills” in remote areas. Mr. Ruiz found a large number of students from Hyderabad showing up at places like Tri-Valley University and University of Northern Virginia, programs that were shut down by the Department of Homeland Security in 2011 and 2013 respectively due to allegations they served only to provide F-1 visas to individuals looking to enter the U.S. to work.

Businesses in Hyderabad seem to be using the visa program as “a back door into the United States,” Mr. Ruiz said.