By of the

Madison— In a marathon session that stretched into Wednesday, Republicans on the Legislature's budget committee voted to require drug tests for some people receiving public benefits, funnel more money to public schools and greatly expand voucher school programs.

The sweeping schools plan by Republicans on the Joint Finance Committee would boost spending on public schools instead of cutting it by $127 million over two years as GOP Gov. Scott Walker has proposed.

It would also require the state to come up with education guidelines separate from the Common Core standards and have the state rate schools on a five-star scale — instead of the letter-grade system Walker wanted.

The votes came as the committee ramped up its efforts to complete its work on the state budget by the end of the month. The Senate and Assembly — like the committee, both controlled by Republicans — are expected to vote in June and then hand the budget off to Walker, just as he prepares to launch a likely bid for the presidency.

The committee began its meeting four hours behind schedule, at 2 p.m. Tuesday, and wrapped up its work at 1:30 a.m. The proposals passed on party lines, with all Republicans supporting them and all Democrats opposing them.

Under one plan, schools would get $150 more per student to fill the reduction recommended by Walker. In the second year of the budget, schools would receive an additional $100 per student. But the increase in funding would be partially reduced by allowing more state money to flow to religious schools and other private schools under the state's voucher program.

The 29-page Republican package would increase how much taxpayer-funded voucher schools would receive under a statewide expansion of that program. It allows students who meet income thresholds to attend private schools at taxpayer expense.

The statewide voucher program was created two years ago and is limited to 1,000 students. The latest plan would increase the cap to 1% of the student population of each district in the 2016-'17 school year. That percentage would increase annually for 10 years, when the limit would be removed entirely.

That voucher expansion is expected to cost $48 million over two years. That funding would eat into the increase public schools would receive.

Under another voucher expansion, special needs students could attend private schools at taxpayer expense if they have been denied transfer into a public school under the state's open enrollment program. The schools would receive $12,000 per student each year.

The GOP proposal would also phase out the Chapter 220 school integration program, put the Milwaukee County executive in charge of some low-performing Milwaukee Public Schools, create an alternative system for licensing teachers and require that high school students take the civics test given to those applying for U.S. citizenship.

Another provision would allow home-school students, virtual school students and private school students to participate in public schools' athletic and extracurricular programs.

The plan would also reshape how the Racine Unified School Board is constituted, requiring it to have members representing different regions of the school district. Some of the students in that district are represented by Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R-Rochester) and Sen. Van Wanggaard (R-Racine).

Republicans were able to come up with more money for public schools and voucher schools in part by making a $105.6 million payment to public schools in July 2017 — outside of the two-year spending plan they are developing. That means the payment wouldn't be counted in the budget lawmakers are writing, even though taxpayers would ultimately bear those costs.

Democrats blasted the plan as insufficient for public schools and a giveaway to special interests loaded with pet issues.

"You've crammed this all in as if it was a Christmas tree," said Sen. Lena Taylor (D-Milwaukee).

Rep. Dale Kooyenga (R-Brookfield) said Democrats want to boost taxes for public schools, while Republicans want to find innovative ways to get better results.

"Our plan is going to focus on opportunity, flexibility and accountability," he said.

In general, proponents of expanding public charter schools and voucher schools are Republicans and conservatives who believe education improves when there's less bureaucracy and more parental choice.

Democrats, school employees, and many public school parents say diverting more money from traditional schools reduces the quality of the programming and resources districts can provide.

Advocates for children with disabilities say that's especially important when it comes to special education, because districts serve students with significant needs that many charter and voucher schools don't have the resources or will to educate.

Drug-testing approved

On the drug-testing plan, the committee on party lines went along with a modified version of a proposal by Walker.

In one of the most significant changes to Walker's plan, the committee decided the state wouldn't ask permission from the federal government to implement drug testing for single, able-bodied recipients of FoodShare, the state's food stamp program.

That would likely provoke legal action because the federal government funds food stamp benefits and has not allowed other states to to set up drug testing regimens.

Sherrie Tussler, executive director of the Hunger Task Force in Milwaukee, said that she expected President Barack Obama's administration would intervene to block the FoodShare drug testing. She pointed to a similar case in Georgia.

Under the GOP plan, drug testing would also be implemented for those receiving unemployment compensation; health coverage through BadgerCare Plus; or job training through Wisconsin Works, or W-2, the state's welfare program.

Many applicants for those programs would have to pass a screening to receive benefits. If they didn't pass that questionnaire, they would be required to provide a sample for drug testing.

Those who failed the drug tests would get taxpayer-funded treatment and would still receive benefits as long as they stuck with the program.

Republicans appropriated over two years $500,000 for treatment for those in the unemployment insurance program and $500,000 for those in jobs programs. Democrats argued the testing could cost far more than that.

In an analysis, the Legislative Fiscal Bureau found that the state is losing money on the drug testing that it currently does on the more than 300 W-2 applicants each year who are drug felons. The state levies about $5.50 in sanctions on average for each drug felon tested, but the screening costs between $20 and $100 per test.

The treatment costs would come on top of the expense of conducting the drug tests. The Legislative Fiscal Bureau told legislators the treatment could cost $825 per person.

"This is punitive, this is probably unconstitutional and this is probably going to cost us money," said Rep. Chris Taylor (D-Madison).

Kooyenga said the proposal would help people better themselves.

"The reason we do this is because we care," he said. "We really care about people and we all agree that drug use is detrimental to that individual, is detrimental...to our whole community."

Drug testing programs in other states have faced legal challenges, with Florida recently abandoning a plan to test welfare recipients after a federal appeals court struck it down.

State employee benefits

In another budget development, the state Group Insurance Board approved a plan Tuesday to double what state employees could pay out-of-pocket for health care. The effort is expected to save $85 million over two years.

The plan, which Walker called for in his budget, would mean the out-of-pocket limit would increase from $500 to $1,000 for individuals and $1,000 to $2,000 for families. The new deductible would be $250 for individuals and $500 for families.

The new limits were intended to avoid the "Cadillac tax" on high-end insurance plans that will be implemented in 2018 under the Affordable Care Act.

The changes are slated to take effect on Jan. 1, according to the state Department of Employee Trust Funds.

However, hours after the insurance board approved the change, the Joint Finance Committee voted to require the board's health care decisions to be sent to another legislative committee for approval.

In other action, the Joint Finance Committee voted to:

■ Mostly go along with Walker's proposal to pay a $2,000 incentive to state employees who opt out of state insurance coverage.

Lawmakers modified Walker's original plan to say state employees who opted out of the insurance plan in 2015 would not be eligible for the incentive payment. They also would bar employees from getting the payment if their spouses were also employed by the state.

It is unclear whether the move would save taxpayers money or end up costing them more than they pay now. An initial study of a plan like Walker's found it could save taxpayers up to $18 million, or cost them up to $4 million.

Republicans are banking on the maximum amount of savings to help balance the budget.

■ Eliminate 60 jobs at the Department of Corrections and stop staffing prison towers on overnight shifts.

The committee agreed to delay cutting six of 11 jobs at Waupun Correctional Institution until January 2017.

Sen. Jon Erpenbach (D-Middleton) said Republicans were playing politics by addressing concerns only at the prison in the district of Rep. Michael Schraa (R-Oshkosh), a committee member.

Andrew Hahn of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.