NEW YORK--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The National Hemophilia Foundation (NHF) and Impact Education, LLC (IMPACT) are pleased to announce four unique, continuing education workshops specifically designed for hemophilia treatment center (HTC) clinicians- physicians, nurses, and social workers. Program chairperson, Steven A. Pipe, MD, from the University of Michigan, along with eight health plan and managed care executives will serve on the faculty panel and highlight key payer issues and recommended solutions to improve care of patients with hemophilia and support the continued success of the coordinated care model. This free, CME/CNE-certified lunch program is scheduled to take place on July 23, 2016 from 2:00 PM – 6:00 PM EDT at the Gaylord Palms Resort & Convention Center in Orlando, Florida, in conjunction with NHF’s 68th Annual Meeting, “A Brighter Future Together.” Lunch will be provided from 1:00 PM – 2:00 PM EDT. This is the only CME/CNE-certified program being offered that is focused on HTC clinicians and payers. Registered participants who submit a case study before the event will be entered into a drawing for a free iPad.

As the Affordable Care Act (ACA) seeks to improve quality and reduce costs, hemophilia providers require enhanced skills to succeed in the new health care ecosystem. At the same time, rapidly evolving payer strategies, including medical necessity guidelines and benefit designs, are affecting patient access and out-of-pocket expenses, which can impact long-term outcomes for patients with hemophilia. Due to the advent of new and more costly treatment modalities, the management of pediatric and adult hemophilia patients has become more complicated for physicians, nurses, case managers, home health providers, social workers, and family/caregivers. In the absence of a collaborative educational effort, the full benefits of care coordination have not yet been achieved.

This program will offer key insights from the faculty panel who will engage in an interactive, case-based discussion with hemophilia physicians, nurses, and social workers attending NHF's 68th Annual Meeting. Through four unique workshops, the faculty will highlight best practices to collaborate with various managed care, specialty pharmacy, and payer professionals to provide appropriate access, adequate reimbursement, and comprehensive care for their patients with hemophilia.

Register today at http://www.impactedu.net/nhf16; space is limited. The symposium is jointly provided by NHF, IMPACT, and the Postgraduate Institute for Medicine, and is supported by independent educational grants from Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Baxalta US, Inc., Biogen, and Novo Nordisk, Inc.

About the National Hemophilia Foundation

The National Hemophilia Foundation (NHF) is dedicated to finding better treatments and cures for inheritable bleeding disorders and to preventing the complications of these disorders through education, advocacy and research. Established in 1948, NHF is based in New York City with 51 chapters throughout the United States. NHF’s programs, initiatives and events are made possible through the generosity of individuals, corporations and foundations as well as through a cooperative agreement with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). For more information, visit the National Hemophilia Foundation Web site and follow us on Facebook and Twitter.

About Impact Education, LLC

IMPACT is an independent medical education and communications company dedicated to providing high quality educational programs. IMPACT’s mission is to develop education that improves patient outcomes in combination with increased health care efficiency and cost-effectiveness. The majority of activities developed by IMPACT are focused on the needs of the managed care and payer audiences. IMPACT has received the Alliance for CME Award for Outstanding Collaboration, which recognizes organizations that best demonstrate innovation or uniqueness in achieving effective CME/CE collaboration. For more information, visit www.impactedu.net and follow us on Facebook and Twitter.