Former Georgia QB reunited with Rams' coach Mike Bobo

For Faton Bauta, the decision to leave Georgia was one he said was bittersweet. It was hard because he invested so much in his time with the Bulldogs, but he also came out the other side excited about the opportunity that awaited.

As it turned out, he found familiarity in his landing spot, rejoining Mike Bobo at Colorado State when the school announced Friday that Bauta had signed to join the Rams.

It was Bobo who recruited Bauta to Georgia, the man who guided his progress for three years before leaving for Fort Collins to take over the CSU program. That connection was most definitely a "pro" on his list when the decision came down to CSU and James Madison.

"He was a great coach to me; he was always a great coach to my teammates at Georgia, and we all respected and liked him," Bauta said. "We always thought he was an incredible coach. He's a pretty tough coach, but that's just how you have to be if you want to be good. You have to set the bar high for the offense and for the team, and I can see how high he set the bar at Colorado State when I was visiting. That's what I love about him, and it was pretty cool to see him in a head coaching job."

Bauta comes to the Rams with one year of eligibility remaining as a graduate transfer, having earned a degree in sports science. He will be on campus for spring drills, ready to compete for playing time at quarterback.

Advertisement

He will help fill a void as CSU loses junior Craig Leonard to early graduation and Coleman Key, a redshirt freshman who has elected to transfer out of the program after the Arizona Bowl.

He gives the Rams three scholarship quarterbacks in the program, including incumbent starter Nick Stevens, a second-team all-Mountain West pick this season after completing 62 percent of his passes, throwing for 2,369 yards with 21 touchdowns and 12 interceptions.

Bauta appeared in all 12 games for Georgia this past season, making just one start. He hit 15 of 33 passes against Florida for 154 yards and four interceptions. His arrival provides competition at the spot, which Bobo said is key for a team to improve.

"It's one thing to talk about competition, but if I'm going up against you every day at practice and I know I'm better than you, I'm really not worried about you," Bobo said. "So I've got to get some guys in there who are going to raise the talent level at practice every day, and guys who love football."

Some CSU fans have already handed the keys to the offense to Bauta, but he knows better.

"If that's what the fans are saying, thank you to them, but the truth is I have to go in there and earn the trust and respect of my teammates first," Bauta said. "I am joining a new team, and doing that isn't the easiest thing, but I'm excited to have the opportunity to do it. If people are telling me I'm already anointed the starter, that's not how this works. You've got to earn it every day, and that's with no question. A quarterback can't just be a guy who comes off the street and jumps into practice. A quarterback has to be ingrained in the culture, ingrained in everything that is part of his team."

He'll get a chance to start that process when classes begin in January and he takes part of the CSU fourth-quarter offseason training program. That will give him the opportunity to do what he says has to be his first step as the new guy on the team.

"What I'm going to do is go in there and work as hard as I can, do the most with this opportunity I have," he said. "The first thing is being a great teammate. I'm going to go in there and be a great teammate before anything."

He already has a knowledge of the CSU offense, having run it under Georgia for three seasons, but he also understands he's been away from it for a year, as changes were made under new Georgia offensive coordinator Brian Schottenheimer. He compared it to studying for a test, going back over old notes and getting refreshed with what he remembers and reacquainted to what he may have forgotten.

In the end, he's just ready to make the most of his new home with his old coach.

"Sometimes change is inevitable, and I felt I had to make a change in my life for my career," he said. "It's exciting to go meet people on a new team. I kind of feel like a freshman again, and I feel younger than I am actually in college years. I'm excited. There's nothing like having great people and a great team to be around, and that's why I chose Colorado State."

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/mbrohard