Forecasts of snow, ice and sleet have forced officials with the Oklahoma Secondary School Activities Association to postpone high school football playoff games by one week.

The postponement includes state championship games at Boone Pickens Stadium in Stillwater. OSSAA leaders say they have been in meetings throughout the week with the goal of producing a contingency plan ahead of the freezing temperatures and precipitation.

"Everything is off [this week] … we're talking about a week from now," Executive Director Ed Sheakley of the OSSAA said.

On Wednesday, News 9 meteorologists were calling for 2 to 5 inches of the white stuff from Oklahoma City to Stillwater during much the scheduled playoff game times. Those games were originally planned take place on Thursday, Friday and Saturday in the first week of December.

"It's not just the safety of our students in Guthrie but the safety of our students as they travel," Guthrie Public Schools superintendent Mike Simpson said.

The 5A championship game of Guthrie versus McAlester is now set for Saturday, December 14th at Oklahoma State University's stadium, along with three other championship games. Six semi-final games are now set for venues across the state on Friday the 13th. The OSSAA says normal procedure is to delay an event one day at a time, but what's in store is forcing the entire week.

Here is the complete revised schedule:

Thursday, Dec. 12

6A Final : Jenks vs. Union at Chapman Stadium (University of Tulsa), 7 p.m.



Friday, Dec. 13

3A Semifinal : Blanchard vs. Plainview at Moore High School, 7 p.m.

3A Semifinal : Seminole vs. Kingfisher at Choctaw High School, 7 p.m.

2A Semifinal : Vian vs. Davis at McAlester High School, 7 p.m.

2A Semifinal : Millwood vs. Hartshorne at East Central University, Ada, 7 p.m.

A Semifinal : Talihina vs. Ringling at Southeastern Oklahoma State University, Durant, 7 p.m.

A Semifinal : Hollis vs. Boone-Apache at Cache High School, 7 p.m.



Saturday, Dec. 14

4A Final : Anadarko vs. Poteau at Boone Pickens Stadium, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 1 p.m.

B Final : Laverne vs. Pond Creek-Hunter at Southwestern Oklahoma State, Weatherford, 1 p.m.

C Final : Tipton vs. Cherokee at Southwestern Oklahoma State University, Weatherford, 7 p.m.

5A Final : Guthrie vs. McAlester at Boone Pickens Stadium, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 7 p.m.