What happens when you give college students a taste of Obamacare?

They spit the taste right out of their mouths.

Cornell University students are up in arms over a $350 student health fee that will be assessed to any student who doesn’t buy the university’s health insurance, Casey Breznick, editor-in-chief of the Cornell conservative student paper the Cornell Review, wrote on Legal Insurrection Saturday.

He also noted that Cornell’s fee resembles a national program: the Affordable Care Act’s penalty for those who don’t purchase health insurance.

Breznick wrote:

As Obamacare dictates people must either buy health insurance or pay a tax, Cornell is now requiring students who do not purchase SHIP [university health insurance] pay the health fee. Of course, there are distinctions between each case–namely, attending Cornell is optional whereas paying taxes is required. Still, the underlying principle behind the fee implementation and Obamacare are the same: the redistribution of wealth in order to provide “for the common good,” as Skorton stated. [...] Essentially, both the fee and Obamacare are redistributionist policies which seek to extract from some in order to subsidize others. In some ways, however, the Cornell student health fee is worse, because it’s not only a redistribution of wealth, it is an administrative bailout to the tune of a cool $4 million. It’s a double-whammy of liberal ill-logic and progressive policy.

Some of the most vocal opponents of the fee, Breznick said, are “liberal” students.

“These are the same students who almost surely all vote for Democrats and support redistributionist, big government policies,” Breznick noted, “but when it comes to their own pocket books they are suddenly outraged.”

Some students went so far as to “occupy” the university president’s office last week.

Breznick appeared on “Fox and Friends” Sunday morning to discuss the issue — and he labeled many of the protesters hypocrites.

.@CaseyBreznick of @cornellreview and @LegInsurrection: #FightTheFee students who "vote Dem Party line" hypocrites pic.twitter.com/52qDiOUp72 — Legal Insurrection (@LegInsurrection) February 15, 2015

Watch Cornell students protest the fee below (content warning: strong language):

On Twitter, many people used the hashtag “FightTheFee” — initially used by student activists to rally against the health fee — to mock the Cornell students protesting their university’s decision and “welcome” them to socialism.

#FightTheFee Because some Cornell Students actually believe there is no cost to "free" stuff. #UnicornsWishlist — Larry (@vsgrules) February 15, 2015

#FightTheFee represents young people finding out socialism costs money. Your money. Not someone else's money. — VibeVal1 (@VibeVal1) February 15, 2015

If I let myself laugh at #FightTheFee I won't stop. Pro-Obamacare students don't want to pay the fee. Really trying not to laugh. — Azaelia Brambleburrن (@cchanldy) February 15, 2015

—

Follow Zach Noble (@thezachnoble) on Twitter