The United States Air Force Academy Band, Rampart Winds will perform a program of classical, contemporary and patriotic music at the Stanley Hotel Concert Hall. The Nov. 2 program is part of the Winter Music Festival. Admission to this concert is free. The performance begins at 2 p.m.

As one of ten performing ensembles in The United States Air Force Academy Band, Rampart Winds is featured as the traditional woodwind quintet. Each member of the ensemble brings to the forefront a wealth of musical knowledge and experience, having performed in numerous orchestras and music festivals around the world. This great crowd favorite will perform a diverse repertoire: including original works, standard and contemporary compositions, and patriotic favorites. The United States Air Force Rampart Winds exemplify the highest standards of musical excellence.

Master Sergeant Heike J. Gazetti, clarinet, received her master of music degree from Yale University in 1998 and a bachelor of music degree from the University of Louisville in 1996. Gazetti has performed with the Colorado Symphony Orchestra, the Philharmonia of Yale, and New Music New Haven.

Master Sergeant Sarah Stewart, bassoon and Non-Commissioned Officer in Charge, hails from Honeoye Falls, N. Y. She completed the bachelor of music degree at the Boston University School for the Arts, and the master of music at The Juilliard School. As an avid chamber musician, Stewart co-founded Ariel Winds, a New York City based woodwind quintet dedicated to educational outreach.

Advertisement

Technical Sergeant Monica Ding, oboe, hails from Mount Prospect, Ill. Ding attended the Peabody Conservatory of Music in Baltimore, Maryland on a full scholarship where she received a B.M. degree in 1996. Ding then attended Northwestern University, graduating in 1997 with a M.M. degree in oboe performance.

Senior Airman Jennifer L. Nelson, flute, joined the United States Air Force Academy Band, Peterson Air Force Base, Colorado, in September 2013 and serves as the tour manager for Rampart Winds. A native of Wheaton, Ill., Airman Nelson attended Wheaton Warrenville South High School and was a member of the Chicago Youth Symphony. She also had the distinct privilege of appearing on NPR's "From the Top" radio program at age 15. Nelson holds a Bachelor of Music degree (Magna Cum Laude) from the University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign; and a master's degree in music from DePaul University.

Senior Airman, Manuel A. Collazo-Llantin, horn, joined the United States Air Force Academy Band, Peterson Air Force Base, Colorado, in June 2013. He also performs on bagpipes when needed. A native of San German, Puerto Rico, Airman Collazo-Llantin graduated in 2001 from the Escuela Libre de Música, Mayaguez, Puerto Rico. Collazo-Llantin continued his education at the Conservatory of Music of Puerto Rico, earning a bachelor of arts in horn performance in 2007. In 2010, Airman Collazo-Llantin completed his master of music in horn performance at Georgia State University in Atlanta, GA.

This free concert is normally packed, so be sure to come early to ensure a seat. Let's honor our military.

For more information, contact the music festival business office at 970-586-9519 or visit estesparkmusicfestival.org. To receive weekly updates on concerts and upcoming events, send an email to: estespark@gmail.com.