Firefighters help one of the victims stung by bees. (Source: Maricopa Fire Department)

Six people were stung, one of them nearly 300 times, in a massive bee attack in Maricopa Saturday afternoon.

Two firefighters were also stung but did not require treatment..

Victims were screaming and running for help in the attack that extended for two blocks, Maricopa Fire Capt. Chip Wright said.

The bees began attacking at 5 p.m. in the 21000 block of N. Van Loo Drive in the Rancho El Dorado subdivision.

[Tip sheet: Africanized honeybees safety information]

Paramedics took three adults and three children to the hospital.

“Firefighters were able to wear the bee veils for protection before stepping out of the engine as the extremely aggressive bees immediately attacked them as they rescued the residents,” Wright said.

Fire hoses with foam were deployed while victims were quickly moved to a safer location for evaluation by paramedics.

The hive was located in an opened water valve box at the one of the homes in the neighborhood, Wright said.

The bees were sprayed with foam and the hive was contained and destroyed.

The whole operation lasted two hours.

A parent of one of the children stung, Becky Check, posted the following message on the Maricopa Fire Department's Facebook page:

"Would like to express my heartfelt appreciation to the Maricopa Fire Dept and Paramedics responding to the bee swarm tonight. My son was one of the kids that was stung and due to their response and attention he was only in the ER a few hours and is now home resting. We hope the others recover quickly as well."

Wright advised if you are ever attacked, cover your face and get out of the immediate area.

He said bees may follow victims for up to a half mile in some cases. Be aware of your surroundings, as hives can be found in many different places, he added.

Aggressive Bee Attack Sends 6 To The Hospital https://t.co/yciMTOxFo3 — City of Maricopa FD (@MaricopaFirePIO) November 1, 2015

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.