The University of Pennsylvania topped the list of the best undergraduate business programs, according to the 2015 Best Colleges rankings by U.S. News & World Report.

Surveys were sent this spring to deans and other senior collegiate faculty members from business schools with programs accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB). The results of the survey led to the best undergraduate business rankings.

Here were the top-ranked undergraduate business programs for 2015:

No. 1 – University of Pennsylvania

No. 2 (tie) – Massachusetts Institute of Technology

No. 2 (tie) – University of California—​Berkeley

No. 4 – University of Michigan—​Ann Arbor

No. 5 – New York University

No. 6 (tie) – University of North Carolina—​Chapel Hill

No. 6 (tie) – University of Virginia

No. 8 (tie) – Carnegie Mellon University

No. 8 (tie) – Indiana University—​Bloomington

No. 8 (tie) – University of Texas—​Austin

With the consistently top-ranked Wharton Business School at its helm, the University of Pennsylvania ranks No. 1 for best undergraduate and graduate business programs. Having a six-year graduate rate of 96% and a 98% average freshman retention rate were among the factors that made Penn’s undergraduate business school come out on top.

The No. 2-ranked undergraduate business schools also had high averages for freshman retention, with MIT at 98% and UC Berkeley at 97%.

The survey, conducted by Ipsos Public Affairs, also asked respondents about specific undergraduate business specialty areas like finance, accounting, entrepreneurship and marketing.

The University of Pennsylvania ranked No. 1 in the finance category, while the University of Texas—Austin topped the accounting category.

For marketing undergraduate programs, the University of Michigan—Ann Arbor ranked No. 1 and for entrepreneurship, Babson College, a private school in Massachusetts, came out on top.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments