The stakes are high, and Gary Harris knows it.

As crazy as it might sound — and how could a 21-year player get used to this? — this is the biggest season of Harris’ NBA career. Already.

“It’s a huge season,” Harris said. “I don’t think it because other people are saying it. I just think it’s going to be a huge season for myself personally, just for me.”

As odd as it sounds for a player in only his second year, this season could color how Harris is viewed for the rest of his career. The Nuggets are in search of a long-term solution at shooting guard. They drafted Harris in 2014 in the first round with the intent of watching him grow into that role. And after one year on the job, they need him to show he is that guy.

What’s not entirely fair to Harris is the urgency of the situation, although some of this is simply part of a professional basketball player’s life. The former Michigan State star could not get a foothold during his rookie season mostly because he just wasn’t afforded consistent playing time. Even new Nuggets coach Michael Malone could see that immediately after he was hired.

“Gary Harris is coming back as a second-year player, but in my mind I call him a rookie because he never got a chance to really get comfortable and play consistent minutes,” Malone said. “So, I don’t think any of us know really who Gary Harris is and what kind of NBA player he is. So we’re going to give him that opportunity this year.”

Harris entered the NBA with the reputation as a perimeter defensive stopper who also could score. He showed flashes of both during his rookie season, but playing an average of just over 13 minutes in 55 games wasn’t enough time for him to get into a rhythm, and it certainly didn’t help his confidence. Harris struggled to get out of an early shooting slump and finished his rookie season wanting to show more.

He’s getting a chance to do that now. Malone played him 29 minutes in the Nuggets’ preseason opener against the Los Angeles Clippers, and Harris responded with 11 points on 4-of-8 shooting from the field. And,as is his trademark, Harris excelled defensively with four steals in the contest.

“Really not getting much playing time last year, and not really being able to produce and help the team like I wanted to, I want to really go out there and make it a great season for myself and the team and just continue to build confidence,” Harris said. “It’s going to be fun just going out there and getting more playing time, just being able to go out there and play.”

One of the only true competition situations on the team during training camp is at shooting guard. Veteran sharpshooter Randy Foye has been the steady starter in recent years, but Harris will be given every opportunity to earn the job.

“Competition is healthy,” Malone said. “I love when you go into a camp and people are fighting for jobs. It’s not personal. But it’s Randy’s responsibility to push himself and make Gary better, and it’s Gary’s responsibility to push himself and make Randy better.”

Mostly, though, Harris wants everyone to actually see the real him.

“Yeah, for sure,” he said. “I feel like there’s a lot to offer, you know?”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or @dempseypost