A new report ranking the energy systems of 105 countries reveals that Norway, Sweden and France are the best providers of sustainable energy in the world.

The Global Energy Architecture Performance Index Report by the World Economic Forum and Accenture indexes countries from an economic, environmental and energy security perspective in order to help the countries compete in the transition to a global clean revolution.

The report findings show that high-income countries are best at managing this transition, with Norway currently topping the index thanks to strong energy policy and multiple clean energy resources. Following Norway, seven other European countries fill out the top 10 as well as New Zealand (5th) and Colombia (6th).

89 of the 105 countries indexed have renewable energy support policies in place in the form of regulation, economic incentives or public financing. The report also reveals that the average total primary energy supply from alternative or renewable energy sources is 36%.

Roberto Bocca, Senior Director, Head of Energy Industries, World Economic Forum, comments: “Energy decisions can be simplified through a common understanding of the trade-offs they require. With clear objectives to achieve a balanced energy system that is environmentally sustainable, drives the economy and is secure, decision-makers should facilitate quicker and more cost effective transitions. The index is a tool to help in this process.”

While Brazil leads the BRIC economies (21st) followed by the Russian Federation (27th) and South Africa (59), the Index shows some rapidly growing and developed countries underperform due to soaring energy demand which casues reconsideration of renewables and CO2 reduction commitments. With the US sitting in 55th place in the index, India 62nd and China 74th, the report calls for bold action to address the lack of dwindling places of these high-income countries.

Arthur Hanna, Managing Director, Energy Industry, Accenture, and a Member of the World Economic Forum’s Global Agenda Council on New Energy Architecture explained that the Index could be utilized to address such deficit from emerging economies: “The scale and complexity of the global energy industry demands a country-by-country approach to managing change. The Energy Architecture Performance Index helps nations take stock of their energy architecture challenges and identify specific focus areas coupled with best-in-class examples to use when managing their transition.”

Map of top performers

Read the report

Editor’s Note: EarthTechling is proud to repost this article courtesy of The Climate Group. Author credit goes to Clare Saxon.