WALLINGFORD >> The Town Council has approved new contracts for three unions that represent workers in the school district.

The contracts that were approved Tuesday night were for the teachers union, as well as for unions representing the district’s administrators and secretaries. All three deals previously had been approved by the Board of Education.

Of the three, only the contract with the secretaries union take effect immediately. The other two contracts take effect on July 1 of next year.

Superintendent of School Salvatore Menzo said getting the council to approve all three contracts allows the district to “move forward and focus on the rest of the school year.”

Advertisement

In terms of the number of members, the teachers union is the biggest of the three with 580 members. Menzo said the administrators union has 25 members while there are 71 unionized secretaries in the district.

Of the three contracts, the deal with the secretaries is the longest at three years. But it is retroactive to October 2013 and calls for 5.7 percent in wage increases over the life of the contract.

The administrators’ new contract is for one year and calls for a 1.5 percent wage increase.

The teachers’ contract is a two-year deal that calls for wage increases of 1.5 percent in the first year and 1.68 percent in the second year. The board and the union agreed not to seek a third year on this contract because in 2018, a 40 percent excise tax will be imposed on the value of health insurance benefits exceeding a certain threshold under the Affordable Care Act.

The contract calls for teachers’ stipends for coaching and other activities to increase by 1 percent.

Of the eight council members, only Republican Craig Fishbein voted against the contracts. Democrat Larry Russo was not at the meeting and John Sullivan abstained from voting because his wife works for the district.

Fishbein called the wage increases “egregious given the current state of the economy.” He said the district should adopt contract model where teachers are paid based on merit.

Menzo said the board was able to achieve $500,000 in savings by reducing the amount that teachers are paid if they waive taking health insurance from the district.

Currently, teachers get a payout equal to 35 percent of the value of the benefits for waving insurance coverage, he said. They will see the payout reduced to 25 percent if the new contract is approved by the council.

The teachers’ new contract also will eliminate “double dipping,” which Menzo described as the ability of a married couple who both work for the district to have one spouse take advantage of the waiver while both are fully covered by the health insurance policy of the other.

The new deal also stipulates that teachers hired after July 1, 2015, no longer will be offered the health insurance waiver payout, Menzo said.

Wallingford Education Association President Louis Faiella has an unlisted phone number and did not respond to an email seeking comment on the council’s vote.

The secretaries’ contract reduces the payout they receive for waiving insurance coverage. The payout will drop from 40 percent to 25 percent. The administrators will see their payout cut from 30 percent to 25 percent.

Call Luther Turmelle at 203-680-9388. Have questions, feedback or ideas about our news coverage? Connect directly with the editors of the New Haven Register at AskTheRegister.com.