<p>Sen. Lamar Alexander (left) and Sen. Bob Corker.</p>

By Michael Collins of the Knoxville News Sentinel

WASHINGTON — U.S. Sen. Bob Corker has golfed with President Barack Obama, dined with him at a fancy restaurant and called him possibly the worst president in modern history.

U.S. Sen. Lamar Alexander has broken bread with the president at the White House, squabbled with him on national television about health care, accused him of Nixonian tendencies and blasted him for acting like a king.

The two Tennessee Republicans’ sometimes-amiable, sometimes-argumentative relationship with Obama and his administration has at times read like a Facebook relationship status. It’s complicated — and about to get even more complicated when the senators become chairmen of two high-profile committees in the new GOP-led Congress.

Though committee chairmen won’t be formally appointed until January, Corker is expected to head the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, a position that will make him a key player in the oversight of Obama policies on everything from Syria to Iran to the recently announced plan to restore U.S. relations with Cuba.

Alexander is in line to chair the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, putting him at the center of GOP efforts to undo the Affordable Care Act, reauthorize the Bush-era No Child Left Behind school-reform law and other potentially controversial issues.

The new roles will require the senators to work more closely with Obama’s aides and cabinet secretaries — and possibly Obama himself — further testing a relationship that both sides say must include frank talk and mutual respect, the essential elements of policymaking in Washington.

“Part of being here is discussing our differences, but also trying to move the country ahead through seeking common ground,” Corker said.

Two hours after Corker declared on Fox News in November that Obama is on course to be one of the worst presidents ever, the White House called — not to complain, but to discuss another issue, Corker said. Obama himself sometimes phones from Air Force One when he has something important to discuss.

“I deal with people throughout the administration every single day,” Corker said. “I’d say the relationship is one of understanding that while there are differences, the constant purpose of our interactions should be seeking solutions.”

Alexander describes his relationship with Obama as “cordial, courteous, proper and infrequent.”

At a recent bill signing at the White House, Obama singled out Alexander and Sen. Tom Harkin, the Iowa Democrat who currently chairs the HELP committee, for their work on child-care and block-grant legislation and praised them as lawmakers who know how to get things done. Obama also got involved during negotiations on student loan debt in 2013 and was good at helping Democrats and Republicans reach a deal that cut nearly in half the interest rate paid by all undergraduates, Alexander said.

But Alexander said his dealings with the White House have often been frustrating.

“The problem with the White House is they seem to have no capacity for crafting a consensus, for making a deal,” Alexander said, arguing the administration should be digging deep into issues with congressional Republicans and Democrats and then helping them forge an agreement.

“I spent most of my last six years wondering if they don’t know how,” Alexander said. “There has never been a clumsier White House in dealing with members of the Senate, whether Democrats or Republicans.”

Both senators say they have a better working relationship with members of Obama’s cabinet. But those conversations, too, can turn testy as the two sides air their policy disagreements.

“I had a conversation yesterday with (Secretary of State) John Kerry that was pretty intense,” Corker said in early December. “I had a conversation yesterday with (Treasury Secretary) Jack Lew that was pretty intense. But the purpose of those conversations is to move us to a place where the legislative body and the executive branch can work in unison to move our nation ahead.”

Whether he’s talking with Kerry or Lew or Obama himself, Corker said he always says exactly what he thinks—something he thinks the administration has come to respect.

“I have conversations that point out (policy) weaknesses directly with the president,” Corker said, citing Obama’s recent executive actions on immigration reform as an example. “We’ve had sitting-three-feet-from-each-other discussions about my concerns about foreign policy.”

Kerry, who chaired the Senate Foreign Relations Committee before becoming secretary of state, said he appreciates Corker’s candor.

“I like that he’s blunt,” Kerry said in a statement. “He tells me when he thinks we can do better, and he keeps our conversations confidential. He doesn’t blow smoke, and he delivers. His word is stronger than oak. I think he can be a really consequential chairman, and I’ll tell you, that is a committee that can really matter and do a huge service to the Senate and the country. And knowing Bob, I think that’s what he’ll provide.”

Alexander also said Obama has strong cabinet members, particularly Education Secretary Arne Duncan, Energy Secretary Ernest Moniz and Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell.

Alexander, who served as education secretary under President George H.W. Bush, has been critical of Duncan at times, arguing he often acts like the chairman of a national school board by granting states waivers from No Child Left Behind and then requiring them to meet other federal demands.

Still, Alexander said, Duncan is a good education secretary.

“He cares about children,” Alexander said. “He stays in touch. He’s easy to work with.”

Duncan, likewise, offers praise for Alexander.

“Secretary Duncan has great respect for Senator Alexander, and while he may not always agree with him on policy, he looks forward to continuing to work with Senator Alexander to ensure educational opportunity for all students,” said Dorie Nolt, a spokeswoman for the Education Department.

Alexander and Corker say their past disagreements with the administration shouldn’t — and won’t — impede their ability to work together on important issues when they become chairmen of their respective committees.

“Every day when I wake up, it’s a new day, and I’m moving ahead trying to solve problems,” Corker said.