Focus on how the speech affected rape victims, not sportsmanship.

Oregon head coach Mark Helfrich during the 2015 Rose Bowl against Florida State. (Photo: Robert Hanashiro, USA TODAY)

Should Oregon football coach Mark Helfrich discipline some of his players in Monday's national championship game against Ohio State for chanting "no means no" after the team's Jan. 1 Rose Bowl victory over Florida State?

A video after that game showed several Oregon players chanting "no means no" to the tune of the Seminoles' "war chant," an obvious reference to the rape allegations against Florida State quarterback Jameis Winston.

Members of the news media and the public expressed outrage at the perceived offense, and Helfrich rushed to reprimand the players for what he termed "inappropriate" behavior. Apparently, brandishing an anti-rape slogan publicly crosses the line of all decency. I disagree.

Like this column?Get more in your e-mail inbox

There is no reason for penalizing the Oregon players. Subordinating their freedom of speech on an issue as serious as sexual violence to an expectation of sportsmanship is simply not justified. And although former Florida Supreme Court justice Major Harding last month found Winston not responsible for violating the student code of conduct, this does not close the door on public discourse about the facts of this case and others like it.

Some have objected that Oregon players inappropriately trivialized sexual assault. If this is a concern, the better response would be more discussion about the gravity of campus rape.

Lee Rowland, a staff attorney with the American Civil Liberties Union, called Helfrich's decision to punish the players "extremely troubling." The private speech of public university students "lies at the core of First Amendment protection," Rowland explained.

Sports fans seemed to chafe in reaction to the "no means no" chant mainly because they found it offended the traditional code of gentlemanly conduct. This was the subtext of most sports reporting on the incident, revealing primary concern not with how the speech impacted rape victims, but rather how it affected Winston, who is considered one of the top picks for the 2015 NFL draft.

To be clear, the university's adjudication of the disciplinary action does not place the rape allegations off-limits to public debate. In fact, Florida State's Board of Trustees now must respond to a federal civil suit filed by Winston's accuser for alleged violations of Title IX. She claims that FSU's response to her report of rape was "clearly unreasonable," and that the university tolerated a "hostile" environment on campus. Florida State also remains under investigation by the U.S. Department of Education over its handling of the Winston matter.

The post-game "no means no" chant was embarrassing for Winston and Florida State, but not nearly as embarrassing as our community's failure to affirm publicly, in the context of our zealous, high-profile football culture, that rape is wrong.

Allyson McKinney, a Florida State alumna, is a human rights lawyer and advocate for gender equality. She is pursuing a master's degree at Yale Divinity School.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to theOpinion front page or sign up for the daily Opinion e-mail newsletter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1BRp6o7