West Virginia wide receiver Shelton Gibson (1) makes a catch as he is pushed out of bounds by Arizona State defensive back Kweishi Brown (10) during the first half of the Cactus Bowl NCAA college football game Saturday in Phoenix. (AP Phot

Arizona State wide receiver Devin Lucien (15) scores a touchdown as West Virginia linebacker Shaq Petteway (36) defends during the first half of the Cactus Bowl NCAA college football game, Saturday, Jan. 2, 2016, in Phoenix. (AP Photo/Ross D. Franklin)

The season began with hope and excitement on a national stage. It ended with a resigned whimper well after midnight in a lower-tier bowl.

Saturday night's Cactus Bowl was a game filled with no shortage of impressive plays that showcased the Sun Devils' immense talent. It also featured just enough errors to turn victory into defeat. In doing so, this season finale served as a perfect microcosm of Arizona State's 2015 season.

"We just didn't finish," said ASU head coach Todd Graham after the game.

For the fifth time this season, the Sun Devils blew a fourth-quarter lead that they would never reclaim. A controversial decision not to attempt a two-point conversion following the go-ahead touchdown proved costly, as a David Sills touchdown reception with 2:19 left in the game was the difference in West Virginia's 43-42 victory.

The game was an offensive explosion, with the teams combining for 85 points, 1,196 yards of total offense, and nine lead changes. Despite playing what essentially amounted to a home game at Chase Field in downtown Phoenix, the Sun Devils were unable to keep pace with the Mountaineers.

"We were the underdog," said WVU head coach Dana Holgorsen. "We were the visiting team, foreign state, playing a team that's from here, their turf. They wanted to win. We found a way to win."

As had been the story throughout the second half of the season, ASU's pass defense was the primary culprit. West Virginia quarterback Skyler Howard rewrote the Cactus Bowl record books with 532 yards passing and five touchdowns on the night, repeatedly picking on ASU cornerback Kweishi Brown in coverage.

"We saw a matchup we had out there, and obviously we wanted to take advantage of that," Howard said. "Take some shots over there on his side. We watched a lot of film."

The Mountaineers started the game in a rhythm, outgaining ASU 236 to 42 in the opening quarter, but could only post a 9-3 lead thanks to some stout redzone defense from the Sun Devils.

That margin allowed ASU to claim a 10-9 lead early in the second quarter on a 10-yard Devin Lucien touchdown reception. ASU was breaking in their new offensive coordinator Chip Lindsey, who was calling his first game with the program after replacing Mike Norvell earlier in the month, and some kinks still needed to be worked out.

"Coach Lindsey did a wonderful job," said ASU wide receiver D.J. Foster. "Seeing how his tempo was and his communication, we finally adjusted to it (after the first quarter). That's all it was."

Howard would toss a pair of touchdowns later in the quarter—a 59-yard strike to Shelton Gibson and a 10-yarder to Daikiel Shorts—as WVU moved out to a 22-13 lead with 28 seconds left in the first half.

"We tried to roll to Cover 3, stuff we don't do that much," said Graham. "We blew the coverage. We blew a couple of coverages."

But the Sun Devils were able to close the half with some much needed points. They blocked the extra point after the Shorts' touchdown, and ASU's Tim White returned the ball 98 yards for two points. The Sun Devils were then able to move upfield in the final seconds for Zane Gonzalez's third field goal of the half to cut the lead to 22-18.

The offensive output continued for both teams in the second half.

White caught a pair of touchdowns in the third quarter from quarterback Mike Bercovici, with each giving ASU the lead.

"Tim White is unbelievable, phenomenal," Graham said of the junior wideout who finished with 79 yards receiving and a Cactus Bowl-record 177 kickoff return yards. "A warrior today. I thought he definitely stood out on the football field."

In between those scores was another long Mountaineer touchdown reception, this one a 64-yard connection from Howard to Gary Jennings.

"We knew if was going to be high-risk, high-reward," Howard said. "If we would hold up front, we would have shots down the field."

Indeed the Mountaineers did hold up front, holding ASU, who finished the regular season tied for the nation's lead in sacks, to just two takedowns on the night. Howard and shorts connected for their second touchdown of the night late in the third quarter to give WVU a 36-32 edge.

"We made a couple of adjustments," Holgorsen said. "Those young receivers started making things happen towards the end of the second quarter and then the second half."

Yet despite getting consistently hit for big play after big play—no team in the nation has surrendered more 40 or more yard plays this year than ASU's 30—the Sun Devil defense stiffened and the offense mounted a rally in the fourth quarter.

Gonzalez's fourth made field goal of the night early in the fourth quarter made it a one-score game, and the offense began to find a groove as Bercovici took on the playcalling duties.

"He gave me a lot of freedom," Bercovici said of Lindsey. "He allowed me to be comfortable out there on the field, to see checks, make those checks."

"We stuck to our basic plays we ran this year, but some of the stuff we've seen, that is some of our offense for next year," said ASU running back Demario Richard. "It's going to be a very explosive offense. We put up 42 points, and there's a lot more to come."

In his final start as a Sun Devil, Bercovici threw for 418 yards and four touchdowns. His final scoring toss was his 30th of the year, which tied the school's single-season touchdown pass record. More importantly, the 58-yard strike to fellow senior Gary Chambers gave ASU a 41-36 lead with 4:56 left in the game.

Then came the two-point conversion that never was. ASU shockingly kicked the extra point to only go up by six points. It was a critical error for which Graham took full responsibility.

"In the fourth quarter, we have a chart in the box that we go by," Graham said. "We're supposed to be going for two. We didn't. Mismanagement on our part. That's my responsibility. We have a game management meeting, have a chart, go for two. Ball was snapped, kicked the extra point, but we tried to call a timeout."

"When a lot of people are talking, when a lot of voices are going around,you kind of hurry it up," Foster said. "We decided not to go for it. With the look that we saw, we took it off."

It was one of many failures that contributed to the loss.

On the next possession, WVU marched down the field, converting a third-and-22 along the way, and capped it off with the 15-yard catch-and-run touchdown to Sills. Four incompletions on ASU's ensuing drive ended any hope of a tenth and definitive lead change.

"We made too many mistakes today," Graham said. The mistakes are what beat us today. It wasn't our effort."

In Graham's prior three seasons at ASU, mental toughness in the fourth quarter became a hallmark. This year, it has all fallen apart as the Sun Devils have posted their first losing season since 2011.

"You look back to last year, some of those games we won, we won in the fourth quarter," Foster said. "We found a way to win it. This year, we came up short."

Four months ago, ASU was the nation's 15th ranked team. Now they are 6-7 and looking for answers of what went wrong and how to fix it. With this defeat and an entire offseason of questions now to face, Graham is looking to use it to fuel a return to form in 2016.

"We're going to be motivated to go. These guys have laid a great foundation. Our goal and our purpose of this program is to teach men to live championship lives and win championships.

"We're going to go to work and use this as motivation."

Follow @BDenny29 Follow @SotDpodcast

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.