No one on the Broncos will be asking who is David Bruton when they see his name listed as a starting safety for Sunday’s season opener against the Baltimore Ravens.

Bruton is tied with punter Britton Colquitt for longest Broncos tenure at seven years on the 53-player active roster. He also is starting his third season as special teams captain by vote of his teammates.

Bruton’s assignment Sunday wasn’t up for vote. When Pro Bowl safety T. J. Ward was suspended for one game for violating the NFL personal conduct policy, Bruton was summoned to make his sixth start dating back to 2009 when he joined the team as a fourth-round draft choice from Notre Dame.

Broncos coach Gary Kubiak proclaimed a comfort level with Bruton ready to step in.

“David has worked as a starter a lot in camp. He was in the battle with “Stew” (safety Darian Stewart) a lot. David is a talker. He’s being put into an environment where he needs to lead and he’s a leader. His teammates named him captain.”

Bruton at 6-foot-2, 217 pounds, brings a little more size into the defensive backfield than Ward’s 5-10, 200 pounds.

“As a professional, I’m always ready to go out and play when my number is called,” Bruton said. “I know what I’m doing. I’m going to continue to try and make a name for myself in this league. It’s very touching that the guys see me as a leader. I feel like they have confidence in me.”

Bruton knows the Ravens pretty well, and understands he’ll be facing a strong-armed passing team with quarterback Joe Flacco and a productive running game.

Broncos defensive coordinator Wade Phillips noted that the change of personnel will cause some adjustments, but he also is high on Bruton’s qualities.

“He’s really a smart player, and he’s not going to make any mistakes,” Phillips said. “He makes a lot of plays and we’re glad to have him.”

Cornerback Aqib Talib looks forward to having Bruton in the defensive backfield.

“I don’t think there will be a drop off at all,” Talib said. “Bruton has a lot of experience. He’s been in games before.”

Irv Moss: 303-954-1296, imoss@denverpost.com or twitter.com/irvmoss