Dallas’ Tenet Healthcare Corp. closed 2014 with its most successful quarter in a decade. Shortly after announcing it, CEO Trevor Fetter hopped on the line with D CEO partner David Johnson, who heads KRLD’s interview program CEO spotlight. Here is that interview in full.

David Johnson: It’s horrible to be judged, I guess, every three months but that’s a fact of life. The Street has expectations, but in the broad view it seems you guys are doing very well.

Trevor Fetter: The fourth quarter volume growth was actually the highest in a decade for us, and even if you eliminate all of the benefit that we got from newly insured people under the Affordable Care Act, it was the highest volume growth we’ve had in five years.

Johnson: Well isn’t this one of the fall-outs of the Affordable Care Act, that more people are going to the doctor, getting tests done, taking care of themselves?

There are people now who have insurance who didn’t have it before, and they are presumably taking care of health needs that they may have known about—and maybe they didn’t know about—and that’s a relatively small part of the story for us. The bigger part of the story is we’ve been doing a lot of things right in our markets, and we’re gaining market share, and I think the economy’s better; people are feeling a little bit more confident, and I’m glad to see people who have health needs take care of them.

Johnson: You’ve also gone after the people who are taking revenue out of your pocket all of these individual clinics—you drive down Central Expressway and you’ll see them—but you’ve got, what, 214 outpatient facilities from none?

Fetter: We do, we do.

Listen, the reason that you see all of these clinics is that that’s what consumers want. They want to be able to drive up, park in a place that’s convenient, see a physician, maybe get a surgery done, and walk out. As long as that’s what the consumers want, that’s what we’re going to provide to them—even if it cannibalizes business that was in our hospitals traditionally.

Johnson: But I would assume that you would adjust the business your hospitals are doing. Would your hospitals actually refer someone out to your outpatient clinics?

Fetter: Yes, that could happen. The outpatient clinics operate on a more limited number of hours, and they perform services that have lower acuity. So what actually happens is that the patient flow goes the other direction, where people, let’s say, come into a surgery center or they go into an urgent care center, and at that point they may be referred to the hospital for a more intensive level of treatment. But the simple things that are very routine can be done—even things that are done in emergency rooms—can be done in these less intensive settings.

Johnson: We’ve followed you as you’ve gone through this long and sometimes excruciating period of getting rid of non-performing hospitals; you were a big seller for a long time, now you’re a buyer and your’e expanding. So what’s next for Tenet? You’re not right-size, I assume.

Fetter: I think we have great opportunities both in our markets and in some new markets. We announced on the call, and we’ve announced previously, that we’re expanding dramatically in Birmingham, Alabama; we’re expanding into Tuscon, which is a place we’ve never been; we decided not to pursue an acquisition of several hospitals that was pending in Connecticut; but we have other markets where we have acquisitions, we have joint ventures, we have partnerships—really a tremendous pipeline of opportunities for us.

Johnson: It sounds like you’re also seeing organic growth.

Fetter: The business, and what we really report to The Street is the organic growth numbers—those are quite strong, like I said, record-setting growth over the last decade.

Johnson: We’ve also been following this service of yours, Conifer, which does businesses for hospitals and in many cases other people’s. What’s the growth there? How is that coming along?

Fetter: Oh, it’s incredible. Confier, which we started in 2008, is now exceeding $1.3 billion in revenues. They are growing so fast that they’re already outgrowing the new headquarters they moved into just last year up in Frisco. Demand for the services that Conifer performs, which it performs very well in the revenue cycle and in helping hospitals make this transition to value-based care, the demand is high and the customer base is growing quickly.

Johnson: So tell me about The Street. Healthcare stocks, or healthcare in general, has been a hot area for Wall Street. What sort of analyst, Street reaction are you getting? Are your conference calls crowded?

Fetter: Our conference calls are more crowded, the number of “buy” recommendations we have is at an all-time high. I can never figure out what The Street is thinking, that’s your job, David! Why are you asking me to do it? But they understand we have a solid business, it’s a growing business, it’s one that’s not subjected to all of these risks that you read about, about currency fluctuations and the West Coast ports and oil prices or anything else. This is a solid business of Americans helping other Americans right in their hometown.