Photo

ALEXANDRIA, Va. — Last week, with the midterm elections fast approaching, the conservative website Independent Journal Review was not focused on the control of the Senate or crucial statehouse races. Instead, it led its home page with a gruesome beheading on Long Island and a video of a belligerent drunk being arrested at a Dallas airport.

But sprinkled throughout the attention-grabbing fare was a steady stream of articles critical of President Obama and other Democrats. “Obama’s schedule from today shows how toxic he is to Democrats running for Senate,” read one headline. Another asked, “Did Hillary intentionally talk over a crowd singing ‘Happy Birthday’ to her?” (The sub-headline: “If elected president, she would be the second oldest in history.”)

IJReview, a two-year-old site started by a pair of Republican operatives, has emerged as one of the most popular online destinations for conservatives. The site mixes entertaining, shareable topics like pets through a conservative-values lens (for example, a recent piece about a dog helping to heal a sick veteran) with articles about politics and policy.

“It’s like if you crossed RedState with BuzzFeed,” said Alex Castellanos, a Republican political consultant and an adviser to IJReview.

IJReview has roughly 24 million unique visitors a month, according to the most recent Quantcast rankings. Its traffic exceeds that of more seasoned right-wing sites like the Drudge Report, Newsmax and Breitbart News, and is not far behind other conservative brands like Fox News and TheBlaze.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The site’s founders, Alex Skatell and Phil Musser, say that its popularity comes from having mastered “social sharing” on websites like Facebook and Google. They boast of the ability to generate maximum traffic from a minimum number of articles. In August, for instance, IJReview received 14 million shares on Facebook from just 646 articles, according to NewsWhip, a site that tracks social sharing. By contrast, Huffington Post, the leader in Facebook shares, had four times as many shares at nearly 55 million, but with 38 times as many articles.

Such a model has economic advantages. IJReview generates revenues in the low seven figures a month, up 500 percent from this time a year ago, the men said. The Media Group will earn revenue of $30 million this year, they said. While they declined to disclose their bottom line, Mr. Musser said, “we have been profitable from Day 1.”

When Mr. Skatell, a former digital director of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, looked to start a site after the 2012 election, he saw a huge gap in reaching what he calls “a more mainstream center-right audience.” He teamed with Mr. Musser, a former executive director of the Republican Governors Association. The two “bonded over being generally dispirited about our party’s approach to all things digital,” Mr. Musser said.

They pledged to change things. “We shared a goal of building a new ecosystem to communicate our message,” Mr. Musser said, “and to develop practitioners who could deliver it.” Mr. Skatell, 28, had already earned a reputation as a digital wunderkind in the Republican Party. At 22, he started the Republican Governors Association’s first Facebook page and increased online fund-raising.

He had also started his own Facebook page, called Conservative Daily, that aggregated stories across the web. Mr. Skatell experimented with how to promote the page (including paid ads), and it took off, inspiring him to start IJReview as an independent website.

Using $40,000 he had saved from a game app he made in college and $20,000 from his parents, he hired Bert Atkinson, a friend known as Bubba who had been working as a waiter, as editor and chief writer.

While the site continued repackaging content from others with eye-catching headlines, Mr. Atkinson and a growing staff began adding their own content too, like amusing explainers of current events. They also began to be fed content by readers. When Mr. Obama told a factory worker at a plant that he had been using Obamacare the wrong way, IJReview received a video of the exchange and posted it.

In 2013, Mr. Skatell joined with Mr. Musser to build a larger company. At the time, IJReview was still receiving fewer than two million unique viewers a month. The men started to focus on audience development.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“We put more of an emphasis on watching how our audience responded to certain content, tracking real-time analytics much more closely, and lastly reinvesting in growing our distribution channels: Facebook and email lists,” Mr. Skatell said.

A breakthrough insight was figuring out that if they could identify readers who felt strongly about health care and alert them to all their Affordable Care Act articles, there was a higher likelihood they would share them. Putting the right content in front of the right audience became their mantra. Traffic took off. “There is an art and science to this,” Mr. Musser said.

IJReview’s roughly 30 reporters and editors work from an open-office space in Old Town Alexandria, Va. At a recent news meeting, the young staff members sat on beanbags while brainstorming how to compare the Obama administration to characters in the 1990s sitcom “The Fresh Prince of Bel Air.” (The idea never panned out.) The half-dozen reporters at the meeting said they did not do reporting outside the office, although one ventured she would look up something health-related on the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website.

The IJReview’s lighter approach belies the deep political focus in the rest of Mr. Skatell’s and Mr. Musser’s business, Media Group of America. The 62-employee company also runs IMGE, a digital consulting firm for Republican candidates and corporate clients, and IMGE Labs, which builds technical tools like mobile apps for clients, also largely Republican campaigns.

Mr. Skatell and Mr. Musser said they plan for the site to widen its reach by becoming a platform for other viewpoints — including Democrats. That could alienate their core readers, but they say they believe that will not happen because of their ability to target specific content to specific readers.

For now, their audience reflects the typical conservative base, with an outsize share of readers under 18 and over 45. A broader base would be good for politics and good for business. “This isn’t just a Republican primary voter play,” said Mr. Castellanos, the consultant. “It is much bigger and more valuable.”