The first data sent back from NASA’s Mars Atmosphere and Volatile Evolution has resulted in images of the Red Planet.

MAVEN entered Mars’ orbit on Sunday night.

Scientific evidence shows the planet once had liquid water on its surface, which could be an indicator of an environment that could support life. MAVEN’s mission is to discover what happened and to study, among other things, the sun’s effect on the early atmosphere.

The images — released in four colored panels: blue, green, red and composite — are constructed from data gathered by MAVEN’s Imaging Ultraviolet Spectrograph, which studies Mars’ atmosphere.

The blue panel shows hydrogen gas extending away from the surface, while the green one depicts oxygen remaining closer to the surface.

These two elements are important because they come from the breakdown of water and carbon dioxide in Mars’ atmosphere, as well as match what his team thought they would see, said Nick Schneider, who leads the Imaging Ultraviolet Spectrograph science team at the University of Colorado.

“The fact that the images matched our simulation means that it exceeded our expectations,” he said.

Scientific data gathering officially begins in early November, when MAVEN enters its final orbit. Then, Schneider said, they can do some comparative work.

“We want to take these same images when the sun is very active because we expect that hydrogen atmosphere to be heated up and expanded and maybe even even dissipate,” he said.

On Tuesday, India’s Mars Orbiter Mission — or MOM, and named “Mangalyaan” (Hindi for “Mars craft”) — successfully entered the planet’s orbit, making India the first Asian nation to accomplish this feat and the first nation to do it on a its first attempt.

The MAVEN team will work with MOM’s team to help construct a precise picture of Mars.

“The missions are complementary,” Schneider said. “They have a UV instrument on board. We’re going to be looking in closer in for the rest of the mission, and they’re going to be looking farther out. They can provide important data.”

Laura Keeney: 303-954-1337, lkeeney@denverpost.com or twitter.com/LauraKeeney