Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

Why a man who nailed his scrotum to the pavement in Red Square could be Russia's next human-rights champion

If the Kremlin actually follows through with prosecuting Pyotr Pavlensky, then hold onto your hats—it promises to be one hell of a show. Pavlensky, of course, is the 29-year-old St. Petersburg artist who seized Russia's attention on November 10 when he stripped naked on Red Square and nailed his scrotum to the cobblestones—an act of protest on the Police Day holiday against what he called a creeping police state. He dubbed the act "Nail." "I used a metaphor," Pavlensky told DozhdTV after being released from police custody the next day. "It was a metaphor for the political indifference that threatens to become irreversible." Prosecutors have opened up a criminal case against Pavlensky for "hooliganism motivated by political, ideological, racial, ethnic, or religious hatred" and he has been summoned for an interrogation on November 21. He could face as many as seven years in prison.

As Kevin Rothrock, editor of Global Voices' RuNet Echo project, notes in a recent post, his case is based on the exact same article of the criminal code used to prosecute Pussy Riot members Nadezhda Tolokonnikova, Maria Alyokhina, and Yekaterina Samutsevich for their anti-Kremlin protest in Moscow's Christ the Savior Cathedral. And if the authorities decide to prosecute Pavlensky, the case should just be picking up steam by March—just as the two remaining Pussy Riot prisoners, Tolokonnikova and Alyokhina, are due to be released after completing their two-year sentences. In many ways, a Pavlensky trial could turn into a Pussy Riot redux—another example of guerilla artists taking on The Man. Writing in the online magazine Russia! Sean Guillory of the University of Pittsburgh's Center for Russian and Eastern European Studies called his Red Square action "an assault on the stasis that grip contemporary Russia" and a challenge for it to rise up. "The greatness of Pavlensky’s work is that by nailing himself to the pavement, he neutralized police power," Guillory wrote. "With a nail, a hammer, and a naked body, Pavlensky symbolized Russian society’s impotence at the same time he reveals its potential power." If the Pussy Riot trial in the summer of 2012 was, in the words of the playwright Natalya Antonova, "a circus of grandiose proportions and with sinister overtones," one can only imagine what the spectacle of Pavlensky in the dock might entail. "Opening a criminal case against me would be the the authorities' latest colossal mistake," Pavlensky said. "It would only serve to amplify my actions." During the Pussy Riot trial, media in Russia and around the world endlessly played the video of the feminist collective's "punk prayer" appealing to the Virgin Mary to free Russia from Vladimir Putin. In a prospective Pavlensky trial, we would presumably see—over and over again—the artist, nailed to Red Square's cobblestones and shivering naked in the cold November rain in the shadow of the Kremlin.