Like so many days lately, this one appeared to be vanishing before my eyes. Despite the lingering sunlight and casual pace of clouds lolling overhead, I was about as frantic as a man trying to catch a trout can be. You might say I was on a fishin’ mission.

Absurd as it may seem, I needed a picture of a fish. And I had 15 minutes to get it. After a quick glance out the back window, the strategy was obvious: I rigged up a rod I’d never used with a fly I’d never seen and headed across the street to a creek I’d never fished.

Five minutes later, I had my fish, my photo and a new appreciation for home.

We moved last week. And while I can hardly recommend the back-wrenching and time-sucking experience, I’m quite pleased with the result. For the first time in a long while, I feel like I’ve found my home waters.

Living in proximity to water has been a priority throughout my life in Colorado, albeit with varying degrees of success. Sometimes a short drive, other times a bike ride and occasionally a quick walk, each offered satisfaction if not complete gratification. The easier the access, it seemed, the less fulfilling the experience, whether because of crowds, development or longstanding frustrations with Colorado’s private property rights extending beyond the high water line to include ownership of a forbidden stream bed.

For the moment, at least, my new home water appears to have escaped such issues, meandering through a mostly public valley and beckoning through the window to anyone curious enough to venture out and explore its braids and pools. It seems there are few.

My hunch is that has less to do with the quality of the fishing than the proximity to more noteworthy destinations capable of floating bigger boats and presumably growing bigger fish. Even during peak runoff, you’d be hard pressed to paddle a kayak down this creek. Still, it’s not every day that we stumble into pristine streams generous enough to offer up a chubby 10-inch brown trout in 10 casts or fewer of an unproven fly.

I’m told there are fish twice that size lurking in the stream, although I suspect it will demand considerably more casting to discover where. And I’m fine with that. In fact, that may be what excites me most, the anticipation of exploration and opportunity to reveal the riches of a new nearby treasure chest.

The plan is to spend more than five minutes fishing the neighborhood stream next time. And the time after that. With a couple hundred items still remaining on the postmove “to-do” list, it could take a little while. But if I do get another chance just to take five, I know exactly where to go: home.

Footnote. Those curious about the hot spots in their own backyard should mark the calendar on July 31 and Aug. 14, when Orvis expert Kerry Caraghar will provide a free seminar on fly-fishing at the Colorado Parks and Wildlife Hunter Ed Building, 6060 Broadway. To register, send an e-mail to wildlife.neoutreach@state.co.us or call 303-291-7804. Limit is 60 attendees.

Scott Willoughby: swilloughby@denverpost.com or twitter.com/swilloughby