SITKA, Alaska (AP) - Baranof Island Brewing Company is growing.

Five years ago the company was hauling its beer from the storage unit it was brewed in to the tap house it was served in on the other side of Smith Street. The operation has since spread outside of their glasses-and-growlers operation and a new canning system will allow them to continue their growth 12 ounces at a time.

The Sitka brew is already found across Alaska and in parts of Seattle in 22-ounce bottles and on draft, but on Aug. 29, the first 50 cases of Baranof Brewing’s Silver Bay IPA left for Juneau in 12-ounce cans.

Six months ago the Sitka City and Borough Assembly approved a $350,000 economic development loan for expansion of the brewery and the canning operation.

It was the second loan BIBC has received from the Southeast Alaska Economic Development Revolving Loan Fund, and Sales Manager Nick Feurey said that will enable the company to can more than 60,000 gallons of beer in the coming year.

“They doubled down on us so we can afford a whole bunch of new things. The biggest thing was the canning line that we got from the Kenai River Brewing Company, and that 40-foot container full of cans,” Feurey said, pointing to a shipping container filled with empty cans decorated with BIBC’s colorful label and graphics.

Feurey said enough cans are on hand to package more than 2,000 barrels of their IPA. Hitting this production benchmark is big for the brewery’s growth, he said.

“It’s something we’ve always wanted to do. It’s something that’s been really big for craft beer in the last decade or so. It’s just been a matter of logistics and money,” Feurey said.

Twenty years ago craft breweries would have recoiled at the thought of aluminum cans, but advances in the process, such as the use of can liners, have made it a preferred way to package beer. The process is less wasteful, easier to ship and, unlike glass, won’t let the beer be exposed to sunlight, which has a bad effect on the flavor. The advances in canning technology also make it easier for companies like Baranof to get into the business, allowing them to grow their brand.

“It’s a huge investment. We don’t operate at a huge margin when we sell (beer in) cans. We want to get the product out there and get people drinking our beer,” Feurey said.

The brewery’s first Silver Bay Indian Pale Ale was canned last month. Feurey said they picked the IPA because it’s the brewery’s most popular brew.

The new canner is small, but can turn out a six-pack in around two minutes. With cans on hand for about 2,000 31-gallon barrels, the brewery would need to can nonstop for about five-and-a-half months to fill them all.

Feurey said the brewery is ready to produce that kind of volume. Baranof beer is in nearly every restaurant in town, and the summer tourist traffic already pushes the brewery to produce in large quantities.

“Brewing in Southeast Alaska during the summer, consistency and volume and speed of getting it out is everything,” Feurey said. “We’ve hammered out the kinks, and now that we have the winter coming up to really hammer down our efficiency, I don’t believe consistency or the quality of beer will ever change.”

Canning is a fairly simple process with the new machinery. A worker fills the can and then the top of the can is spun on. The Baranof staff worked with graphic designer Kerri O’Toole and the can manufacturer to create the new design. Feuery said they took their time to come up with the right look.

“We have some great graphic design artists and worked very closely with the canning company itself and were able to come up with something really cool,” he said. “There was a lot of thought, a lot of love.”

Rick Armstrong and Suzan Hess started BIBCO in 2009. Feurey said the canning operation will be at the center of their next set of goals as they hope to spread the product farther into Washington state.

Six-packs of the IPA are already on sale in Sitka, and Feurey said Baranof Island Brewery hopes soon to have its spruce tip ale and root beer also available in cans. Feurey said the spruce tip ale is unique to Sitka and has helped grow the brand in Anchorage. While BIBCO is not yet ready to name a flagship beer, Feurey could see spruce tip being a big seller for the brand.

“I don’t say we have a flagship beer just yet,” he said. “I believe the quality of all of our beers is what has gotten us popular so far. I do one day hope that the spruce tip, just because it is so good, will be sort of the tip of the spear.”

___

Information from: Daily Sitka (Alaska) Sentinel, http://www.sitkasentinel.com/