Since JFK's speech, progress has been made. Four steps today would help solve crisis.

President John F. Kennedy in 1962. (Photo: AP, 1962)

What if we told you there was an issue that virtually everyone — Democrat, Republican and Independents — agreed on? Would it further surprise you that it's a subject on which we've been silent for generations?

But now, an overwhelming majority (96%) of the public agrees that mental health conditions, such as depression, anxiety and alcohol or drug abuse are serious public health problems, according to a new poll by Public Opinion Strategies. Almost as many (93%) believe that the current way we are handling mental health needs to change.

This call to action reflects the fact that virtually every American family has a personal connection with an individual impacted by mental health disorders. If you do not have someone in your immediate household who is battling depression or struggling with alcohol, then you work or go to school with people who are. Our prisons hold 10 times more people with mental illness than our state hospitals. We can no longer afford to look at these as others' problems. They impinge on our happiness, our productivity, and our health, whoever we are, and we all must take responsibility for finding a new approach.

Fifty-two years ago this week, President John Kennedy gave a special address to Congress on mental health, a major step toward removing the stigma that continues to surround brain diseases. Later that year, President Kennedy signed the Community Mental Health Act of 1963, which ended the warehousing of people with mental illness in institutions and enabled many Americans to receive treatment while working and living at home.

Like this column? Get more in your e-mail inbox

Just over 15 years ago, the Surgeon General of the United States issued a comprehensive report that again put mental health on the front burner. The report documented that half of all Americans had mental disorders at some time in their lives, but most of them did not seek treatment. By putting the weight of the federal government behind the issue, just as the Surgeon General's report on smoking once had, barriers to treatment started to come down.

One of the key recommendations of "Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General" was that insurance companies should be required to treat mental illness and addictions like any other disease. In 2008, Congress passed the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act to prohibit discrimination in insurance coverage. The Affordable Care Act went even further and insurance companies are now required to cover treatment for mental health issues and substance abuse.

Today, we have more potential to solve the crisis in mental health, and care for our loved ones struggling with mental illness and addictions, than ever before. Even so, we are still far away from where we ought to be.

That is why we are announcing a partnership between the Kennedy Forum and Morehouse School of Medicine that will fulfill President Kennedy's vision of ensuring the best possible mental well-being for every American. Here is how we will get there:

First, we need greater equality so that everyone has access to the care they need, without bias. The first step will be full implementation of the Parity Act, especially holding payers accountable. Insurance companies must be compelled to disclose how they make coverage decisions. With greater transparency, we will learn whether they are complying with the Parity Law and treating illnesses of the mind, like depression, the same as diseases of the body, like diabetes.

Second, we need to focus on greater innovation to expand research and further our knowledge of the brain. President Obama's $100 million brain research initiative is a step in the right direction, but we lag behind investments made in Europe and China. Of course, some breakthroughs come not because of more funding, but more collaboration. Research organizations such as One Mind have shown that we can accelerate advances in diagnostics, treatments and cures with open science and data-sharing among scientists around the world.

Third, we need to improve access to high quality care to provide the best outcomes for our brothers and sisters seeking recovery from mental illness and substance abuse. More than half our nation's counties do not have a practicing psychiatrist, psychologist or social worker. We must increase the number of mental health professionals across the country, but we must also encourage primary care providers to make mental health part of their charge. Family practitioners are often in the best position to intervene early and improve mental health outcomes before conditions become worse.

Fourth, we need better integration to bring mental health into the mainstream of American medicine. Descartes' concept of a mind-body split in the 17th century has left us with a fragmented health system in the 21st century. With today's technology, we can break down the silos in payment and service delivery systems. The result will be improved outcomes for patients and lower costs for everyone.

In his speech 52 years ago, President Kennedy called for an end to the "tradition of neglect" of people with mental illness. Ending that tradition — once and for all — is the responsibility of the entire American family. Those of us who suffer from mental illness or addictions must seek care. Health care providers must be as concerned about a patient's brain functioning as her blood work. Insurance companies must become partners in helping people get better, rather than focusing solely on profits. Having passed the Parity Act and the Affordable Care Act, policymakers cannot move on, but must make sure the laws are enforced and implemented.

Above all, each of us must do our part to elevate the dignity of individuals impacted by mental health and substance use disorders. Rather than blaming these issues on moral failing, we must take responsible action to ensure that effective treatments are made available to those who need them, ending the tradition of neglect and replacing it with a "whole health" culture of respect.

David Satcher, M.D., Ph.D. is director of The Satcher Health Leadership Institute at the Morehouse School of Medicine in Atlanta and former U.S. surgeon general. Patrick J. Kennedy is founder of the Kennedy Forum and former Democratic U.S. representative from Rhode Island.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the Opinion front page or sign up for the daily Opinion e-mail newsletter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1CYAkro