New Balance running coach Mark Coogan checks out the USA cross country course with his team at Flatirons Golf Course on Wednesday. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Sean Nesbitt is 40, but he wore the sheepish look of a kid making a confession.

He stood chatting with coach Mark Coogan after showing the former Boulder Olympic marathoner and his squad of New Balance professional runners the course for the Feb. 7 USA cross country championships.

"When I was 16, I went to the Adidas Classic track meet in Portland," recalled Nesbitt, co-organizer of the championships. "I wanted to be a steeplechaser and was a fan of the winner, Mark Croghan. I got his autograph" as well as the second-place finisher.

"I looked at the signature, 'Mark Coogan,' and didn't know who he was, but then I went home and looked him up and was like, 'Wow.'"

Nesbitt, who ended up moving to Boulder because Coogan and other elite Americans were here, went on to become a decent runner himself, clocking 29 minutes, 18 seconds for 10,000 meters. These runners often stay in the sport, through race management, as with Nesbitt, or by coaching, as with Coogan and several others.

These include three-time Australian Lee Troop, head of the Boulder Track Club; former marathon world record holder Steve Jones of the Boulder Harriers; 1993 world championship marathon gold medalist Mark Plaatjes; Brad Hudson and his eponymous group; four-time Olympian Colleen De Reuck of Boulder Coaching; and Clint Wells, also with the Boulder Track Club.

Advertisement

These coaches and many of their runners will be racing Saturday in the Winter Classic four miler in south Boulder, followed by the USA championships the next weekend.

"A good athlete-coach bond is the most under-appreciated aspect of an athlete running well," explained Newton Running Elite's Tyler McCandless, part of Jones' Boulder Harriers club. "When the coach and athlete are both on the same page in terms of goals and the training process, amazing things can happen."

Mike Sandrock, On Running

For McCandless, that includes most recently a half marathon time of 1 hour, 3 minutes, 14 seconds, a clocking of 4:49 per mile that qualifies him for the 2016 U.S. Olympic trials marathon.

Another local elite is the Boulder Track Club's Laura Thweatt, who will be racing the Winter Classic as a "rust buster" for the U.S. championships. Troop explained that the "secret for a great athlete-coach bond is trust," which takes time to develop. Thweatt and Sean Quigley, fifth in the 2014 cross country championships, have both been working with Troop for more than three years.

"They believe in the training and trust me on how to execute their races," said Troop, a 2:09:49 marathoner, "and I believe in their ability and trust that they are doing everything 100 percent. The training is a side process to the belief in the journey."

Indeed, belief and confidence in oneself is a recurring theme with runners. Jenny Simpson, the world championships gold and silver medalist, told me recently how her coach, Mark Wetmore of the University of Colorado, helped her overcome some jitters and anxiety when she first moved to the national stage by giving her confidence that she belongs not only in the race, but up front.

That echoes what McCandless said about his coach. " 'Jonesy' is a man of few words, but those few words are meaningful and get you to believe you can achieve your goals and more. When I had a breakthrough race a year and a half ago, Jonesy gave me a short congrats message but a longer message about believing in myself for much better races and results ahead."

A key role for a coach of elite runners is holding the athlete back from doing too much. Runners can only reach a high level with a strong work ethic, which can be an impediment at times. When the coach-athlete relationship comes together and blossoms, it produces a "synergy" where "training becomes fun," said McCandless.

"Races are a celebration of the hard work; and you are consistently riding that line of breathing fire every day to reach your goals."

After Nesbitt and Coogan and his runners left the Flatirons golf course, I was a bit fired up and continued running. It was snowing. Suddenly, the clouds broke and the sun appeared above the Indian Peaks to the west. The mountains were high, majestic, their whiteness glowing in the early-afternoon sun.

As I ran following the runners' footprints in the snow, the words from Ecclesiastes came to mind: "One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh; but the earth abideth forever ... ." As does, it seems, running.