Senator Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.) has a long record as a Big Government, “progressive” Republican, but in Tennessee it still pays for campaigning politicians to pretend to be politically conservative. On The New American’s rating of congressional votes, The Freedom Index, Sen. Alexander has compiled an anemic cumulative score of 53 percent. Political commentator/author Michelle Malkin has dubbed Alexander a “double-talking weasel," especially for his deceptive flimflamming on immigration amnesty and Common Core education standards.

Paul Blumenthal at the liberal-left Huffington Post reported in a piece on January 29 (Groups With Liberal Ties Tapped To Re-Elect The GOP Establishment) on the successful efforts of the phony conservative organization Citizens for Responsible Energy Solutions (CRES) and its allied groups, to support liberal Republican candidates and incumbents — such as Alexander, Sen. Lindsey Graham (S.C.), Sen. Susan Collins (Maine), and Reps. Mike Simpson (Idaho) and Joe Heck (Nevada) — against conservative challengers.

“Sen. Lamar Alexander (R-Tenn.) got a boost in the last election from a little-known nonprofit called Citizens for Responsible Energy Solutions,” Blumentahl wrote. “The group calls itself conservative, but its support for greater federal funding of alternative energy drew the attention of Tennessee tea party groups, who decried what they saw as its liberal agenda.”

“Tea party activists were further agitated by the scant information available about Citizens for Responsible Energy Solutions,” the HuffPo writer noted. “It pushed for increased public and private investment in alternative energy. It ran an issue ad praising Alexander’s ‘bold’ energy plan in 2013. But whose money was funding that message? If the tea party groups had known the full story, they might have gone ballistic.”

According to Blumenthal, a HuffPo examination of CRES financials revealed the organization “was funded with $1 million in seed money from two nonprofits often linked to liberal causes. From June 2012 through June 2013, the group received $500,000 each from the Advocacy Fund and the Trust for Energy Innovation.”

The Advocacy Fund, formerly the Tides Advocacy Fund (a creature of the notorious Soros-backed Tides Foundation), Blumenthal noted, “is a key backer of liberal nonprofits across the country, distributing $11.8 million in grants in 2013. It currently funds groups engaged in promoting immigration reform, increasing worker protections, reforming chemical safety laws and increasing investment in the solar energy industry.”

Unfortunately, it’s worse than that, as the Huffington Post must certainly be aware. As The New American’s Joe Wolverton reported in 2013, Citizens for Responsible Energy Solutions is also closely tied to the militant pro-abortion and radical homosexual lobbies, particularly through the Victory Fund and the Log Cabin Republicans. Regarding James Dozier, the executive director of CRES, the Jackson Press of Tennessee reported: "Mr. Dozier is a veteran of liberal causes, including the Victory Fund, Gill Action Fund and work for pro-abortion Congresswoman Connie Morella."

Joe Wolverton asks: “What is Victory Fund? Their mission, according to their website, is ‘to change the face and voice of America’s politics and achieve equality for LGBT [lesbian, gay, bi-sexual, transgender] Americans by increasing the number of openly LGBT officials at all levels of government.’”

Of course, Citizens for Responsible Energy Solutions is only one of many political action groups flying false flags to fool conservative voters. Karl Rove’s Conservative Victory Project, Crossroads Super PAC, and Crossroads GPS have misspent hundreds of millions of dollars to support liberal Republican candidates masquerading as conservatives, and to defeat genuine conservatives who would challenge the globalist elites that have captured the GOP top leadership ranks.

Related articles:

GOP Bigwigs Used Democrats to Protect Mississippi Incumbent

Karl Rove's Effort to Keep GOP Leaning Left

Group Funding Sen. Alexander's Green Project Tied to Gay and Abortion Lobby