Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, the bill’s author and the chamber's majority whip, decried the Democrats’ opposition, saying Tuesday he feared the Senate was “losing its soul.”

"I would’ve thought that of all the topics where there would be bipartisan consensus, it would be combating the crime of human trafficking," he said after the bill failed to move forward.

Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., promised to filibuster the bill last week over the language, which Democrats say would harm victims who may need an abortion and would amount to an expansion of the Hyde Amendment.

However, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., has said the vote for Loretta Lynch’s nomination for attorney general would be delayed until the Justice for Victims in Trafficking Act moves forward.

"This will have an impact on the timing of considering the new attorney general. Now, I had hoped to turn to her next week, but if we can't finish the trafficking bill, she will be put off again," McConnell said Sunday on CNN.

Democrats insist they were caught off-guard by the abortion language’s inclusion, saying they only noticed it last week and that Republicans did not include it on the list of changes made to the legislation from when it was previously introduced. Republicans have blamed Democrats for not reading the bill closely enough, and also pointed to other recently passed legislation – such as the Affordable Care Act and the National Defense Authorization Act – in which similar language was included.

Anti-trafficking groups that have been working on the bill for months were dismayed to see it derailed by a debate over abortion politics, and on Monday sent lawmakers a letter signed by more than 80 different organizations and urging Congress to “to put partisanship aside in the interest of tackling a difficult and seemingly intractable problem.”

Advocates had hoped the bill would be a springboard for other anti-trafficking legislation being considered in the Senate – including Democratic Sen. Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota's Stop Exploitation Through Trafficking Act, which would incentivize states to treat minors caught in commercial sex as victims rather than criminals – as well as the dozen or so anti-trafficking bills already passed in the House.

“So many of them had connected to the Justice for Victims in Trafficking Act that there is a sense of reliance on moving these bills together,” says Samantha Vardaman, a senior director for anti-trafficking organization Shared Hope International.

The question now is whether lawmakers from both sides of the aisle will come together to iron out a compromise on the abortion language before giving up entirely on the bill.

“Our interest is in fighting the traffickers and not in engaging in partisan politics,” says Melysa Sperber, director of the Alliance to End Slavery and Trafficking. “Our hope is that we can reclaim the consensus forged over two years developing the Justice for Victims in Trafficking Act.”