He's one of the best high school football players in Kansas.

Denzel Goolsby studies his K-State playbook, knowing he'll be playing for Bill Snyder in the Fall. He trains. He goes to class. He trains again.

It's a balancing act which makes Goolsby appear as though he has more than 24 hours in his day, especially when he talks about his work.

"That's my thinking place," he says. "Any time I am mowing... I can shut the world out. And its just me and my thoughts."

Whether after practice, or still bruised the morning after a game, the reigning Kansas Gatorade Player of the Year takes down grass like the competition.

"When he says I'll be by Saturday morning at 10 o'clock, sure enough, he shows up Saturday morning at 10 o'clock. We can depend on him. He's reliable. He does a beautiful job on our yard," says Anita Chartier, one beneficiary of Goolsby's extracurricular efforts.

As he's pushed and pulled through different grounds of greenery, the Bishop Carroll senior has found himself a friend.

He's taken care of Aileen Lange's yard for three years. And as time passed, he's taken care of her as well.

"Its been a blessing for me to have a friend that I can depend on and anytime I've needed something I can call him. He'll manage to make time for me," Lange, 86, says of her friend.

Their story is not about charity or community service. It's not about age, even though they're 67 years apart. Its about true friendship. And inspiration.

"I would go over there and she would have the newspaper saved for me so she could show me the article," Goolsby said of his visits to Lange's home following game days. "So that week, at practice, that's in the back of my head. 'I don't want Aileen to be reading about how we lost.'"

She never had to read that story during Denzel's senior year when his Golden Eagles were undefeated state champions.

"I knew very little about football. But I knew that when he got the ball and he started running down the field that we were in for a touchdown," says Lange.

But after the season, Goolsby's role changed.

"I had a car accident which is what put me in this facility. Denzel was one of the first to come and see me," Lange recalls.

"It was my job then to take some of that pain off of her mind and be a distraction for her and try to bring some joy to her life," says Goolsby.

Helping Lange move to Avita Senior Living Center was not just a favor for a friend. It was for family.

"I never had any children. So my husband and I, we find a nice young man and we try to adopt him. We call (Denzel) our adopted son," says Lange.

"You look at the qualities of a mother. They're caring and compassionate and that's exactly what (Aileen) is. So giving her that title of being like a mother, that's very fitting," Goolsby says. "It doesnt really matter what's going on. You just got to make time for it and I'll always make time for Aileen and she knows that."

"He's just a unique person and I'm blessed to know him. And call him a friend," says Lange.

When Goolsby makes it to K-State, he won't be able to continue mowing lawns. So he says his first order of business will be to find some other kids who can take care of Lange while he's away.