ING U.S. announced that Michael Smith has been promoted to CEO of Insurance Solutions, a post vacated by the retiring Donald “Butch” Britton, 65, who will serve as senior advisor to the chairman and CEO of ING U.S. until June.

ING U.S. will rebrand as Voya Financial later this year.

Smith served as ING U.S. chief risk officer and will retain current responsibilities for the company’s closed block variable annuity (CBVA) segment. He has a 28-year background in the life insurance and annuity industries.

Britton, who joined New York-based ING U.S. in 2004, had a 40-year career in the life insurance and annuity industries. Prior to joining ING U.S., he was president of life insurance for American General Financial Group.

Britton is based in Minneapolis. Smith will continue to be based in West Chester, Pa. ING U.S.’s Insurance Solutions business is based primarily in the Minneapolis and West Chester offices.

ING’s Insurance Solutions includes ING U.S.’s individual life and employee benefits business segments. Britton, who joined ING U.S. in 2004, has enjoyed a 40-year career in the Life Insurance and Annuity industries. Prior to joining ING U.S., he was president, Life Insurance, American General Financial Group.

Immediately prior to becoming chief risk officer, Smith served as CEO of the ING U.S. annuity manufacturing business that included the CBVA segment. In 2009, he joined ING U.S. as chief financial officer and chief insurance risk officer of the annuity business. Prior to joining ING U.S., Smith was with Lincoln Financial Group where he held numerous leadership positions.

Smith will be succeeded as ING U.S. chief risk officer by Chet Ragavan, 59, currently chief risk officer of ING U.S. Investment Management. Ragavan, who has been with ING U.S. since 2008, will become a member of the ING U.S. Executive Committee. He has more than 30 years of risk management and analytical research experience.

Both Smith and Ragavan will report to Rodney O. Martin Jr., chairman and CEO, ING U.S.