Evangelist Franklin Graham has called Christians to look towards God during a pivotal time in American election history. Graham will lead a nationwide prayer-focused tour in 2016 to encourage Christians to vote at the ballot box for candidates with biblical values.

“Our country is in trouble. And to be honest, I don’t see any political solution,” Graham stated. “The only hope for this country is in Almighty God and His Son Jesus Christ.”

The eldest son of evangelical Rev. Billy Graham, Franklin Graham heads the Christian nonprofit Samaritan’s Purse and the Billy Graham Evangelistic Society. He announced the “Decision America Tour” on Tuesday.

“I will be going to the capitals of all 50 states to proclaim the Gospel, rally prayer for our country, and encourage Christians to vote for candidates with biblical values,” Graham wrote in an announcement letter for the tour. “Together, we can mobilize the Church to not only get up and vote, but also to encourage Christians to run for political office at the local, state, and federal levels as well.”

The tour will consist of a prayer rally held in each state, with a kick-off Jan. 5 at the Capitol building in the political campaign heartland of the 2016 presidential elections, Des Moines, Iowa.

“I have heard from people all over America who believe that our nation is in trouble—morally, spiritually, and politically,” Graham posted on his Facebook page. “But as attention turns to an election year, I do not believe that Republicans or Democrats (or any other party) can turn this nation around—only God can.”

The post continued:

God hears the prayers of his people, so I’m calling on people of faith in every state to pray fervently for America and our leaders. I want to challenge Christians across our land to boldly live out and promote biblical principles at home, in public and at the ballot box. The only hope for this country is if the people of God are willing to take a stand for truth and righteousness.

The Decision America Tour website encourages Americans to pray, vote, and engage in their communities.

“Without God, there’s no hope,” Graham, who has devoted his life to proclaiming the Gospel and has led crusades around the world, says in a video announcement of the tour.

Graham will share and preach the “life-changing truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ” in each state. The tour will not endorse candidates or a political party. Current public officials and candidates will not speak at the rallies.

“Join me in praying for our country,” Graham’s announcement letter reads. “It’s time to stand up and have our voice heard.”

After the first prayer rally held in Iowa, the tour will make stops in Florida on Jan. 12, Louisiana on Jan. 13, and New Hampshire on Jan. 19. Dates for the next stops are still to be announced.