The Denver Zoo in City Park is the host to many animals and plant-life, as well as some upcoming fun. Charlotte Greenie, the zoo’s new sloth, was adopted into the zoo in June. She has made some new friends and now calls it home. Next month, the zoo will be hosting a rare treat, a traveling LEGO® exhibit. These exciting new additions make the Denver Zoo a fun and great end-of-summer backpacking excursion.

There are many benefits to attending the zoo this summer. The Denver Zoo is perfect for families to spend time together. Additionally, getting in some exercise, complete with fresh air, is also a plus. It is definitely an ideal time for some undivided attention with family and to strike up bonding conversations. What better place to do this than a majestic zoo filled with interesting and sometimes ancient animals. The new additions and upcoming exhibit are perfect ways to break the ice with children before they head back to school this fall. The zoo setting also offers many opportunities for learning, which will also prepare them for their upcoming studies. This will also help kids with a great back to school conversation about what they did over the summer. The kids will have plenty of things to talk about with the new sloth and activities offered with the exhibit.

Elliott is a 24-year-old sloth who has been the zoo’s sloth bachelor for quite some time and was very anxious to have a new friend. Charlotte Greenie is a 19-year-old Linnaeus’ two-toed sloth, who was brought to the zoo back in June and she seems to have adapted well. In proper sloth-like fashion, she is reported to enjoy sleeping and eating during her stay at the Denver Zoo. On Jul. 13, 2015, her highly anticipated blind date to Elliot had finally arrived. It has been a great friendship so far. The two enjoy hanging in trees in the zoo’s Bird World and even sleeping side-by-side. The zoo keepers hope the two roommates will reproduce and provide an adorable little sloth family. This new addition, though a bit slow and sleepy, has been a fun and fabulous one for the Denver Zoo.

Another exciting agenda item to place on the to-do list is the traveling exhibit, “Nature Connects: Art With LEGO® Bricks.” Starting on Aug. 7, 2015, through Nov. 1, 2015, the brick-built plants and animals will be displayed throughout the zoo. The exhibits will be available for viewing from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. MST each day. The Princess’ Group will provide a live DJ who will spin swinging music for the zoo inhabitants and their patrons each evening. There will also be family-friendly activities, complimentary carousel rides, zookeeper talks with animal demonstrations, as well as Lorikeet Adventure feedings. The zoo buildings and its two restaurants will be open offering food as well as snacks for those hungry, hungry hippos along the journey through the zoo. Wild animals or parents can also enjoy a Block City Beer Garden with the promise of no monkey business.

For those who simply cannot wait to witness the 400 lbs. brick bumblebee, there will be an early preview event on Aug. 6, 2015. Patrons will be able to view the complete collection, which features more than 35 life-size and over-scaled animal as well as plant sculptures. Another big item to hunt for is the hummingbird with an eight-foot wingspan, scattered somewhere in the zoo’s vegetation. It is not an endangered species, so please feel free to capture some great images.

For the brave and adventurous, there will be a Saturday Night Block Party held from 6:30 pm. to 9 p.m. MST. The entrance fee for adults is $15 and for the cubs or children ages 3-11, it is only $10. As a member of the zoo, a $5 discount will be applied as well. All proceeds will support the Denver Zoo Scholarship Fund. Before the little joeys go back to school, hunt down some fun at the brick exhibit and welcome the Denver Zoo’s new sleepy addition.

By Crystle Zamagni

Edited By Leigh Haugh

Sources:

9 News: Charlotte the Sloth Makes Herself at Home at Denver Zoo

The Denver Channel: Denver Zoo Welcomes Sloth Named Charlotte Greenie

9 News: Lego Sculptures Featured at Denver Zoo

Photos Courtesy of Scorpions and Centaurs Flickr Page – Creative Commons License

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr