Most Popular

1 The Democratic Platform Committee Now Has a Progressive Majority. Thanks, Bernie Sanders.

2 The Media Must Decide Whether to Follow Donald Trump Down the Sewer

3 Clinton Needs Sanders Supporters to Win, But Sanders Needs Clinton Supporters to Change the System

4 The Real Reason Neocons Are So Upset About Donald Trump

5 When Donald Trump Says His Foreign Policy Is ‘America First’—What Exactly Does He Mean?

“We feel like black women have been overlooked as part of the electorate,” said Atkinson, whose group is working to contact 30,000 Detroit-area registered black women and let them know about Tuesday’s call. “We know that they’re predictable in their voting and they’re reliable, but they’re so much more than that.” Atkinson, too, sees black women as “influencers.” She says the path to getting black families and communities to show up at the polls is to engage women by talking to them about economic issues that effect them, like the need for paid sick days, a minimum wage increase and access to affordable childcare.

In Milwaukee, efforts to educate voters about the midterms have focused not just on the issues but also on what identification will be required at the polls. The Reproductive Justice Collective has run emergency phone banks and updated its canvassing literature multiple times to make sure its target audience—women of color—has up-to-date information about what they’ll need on Election Day. The Supreme Court blocked implementation of Wisconsin’s voter ID law earlier this month, and the ID requirement has shifted as its been challenged in the courts.

Sarah Noble, who directs the Reproductive Justice Collective, said the key to effectively reaching their audience around elections is staying in touch with them throughout the year. The Reproductive Justice Collective has, for example, reached nearly 19,000 households in an effort to get people signed up for insurance through the Affordable Care Act. The focus on building relationships and maintaining a presence in the community has paid off. Noble said that in the 2013 election her group saw a 30 percent increase in voter turnout among the group of women voters they spoke to, women who live in the ward known for having the lowest voter turnout in the state.

I asked Noble how her group’s voter organizing work connects to advocating on behalf of women’s health and advancing a reproductive justice agenda in Milwaukee.

“Our work is way broader than access to abortion and birth control,” she said. “We look at family-supporting jobs and quality healthcare, access to quality foods, in addition to voting without obstacles. We know that the women that we work with and support have a whole host of things that are happening in their lives that need to be addressed.”

The consistent belief in the political process that black women demonstrate should mean that they have the attention of politicians they help usher into office. Unfortunately, they don’t, says the National Coalition on Black Civil Participation. According to a report from that group’s Black Women’s Roundtable earlier this year:

Such impact should wield influence and demonstrate high indicators of quality of living. However, Black women show low indicators in many areas including health disparities and economic indicators such as unemployment rates and equity of pay.

Which means these groups have their work cut out for them well beyond November 4th, assuming black women turn out in large numbers. Then the question becomes how to best remind Democratic elected officials that they’re accountable to a voting bloc that’s gaining strength.