By Dave Andrusko

Many of our readers followed NRLC online election night as we posted, in real time, victory after victory in the mid-term elections. It was extremely exciting to be able to tell people who stayed up very, very late in the evening that their efforts had paid off.

In subsequent posts, we have been happy to tell you about other wins that were not official on November 4. On Thursday we wrote about National Right to Life-endorsed retired Air Force Col. Martha McSally (R) who defeated pro-abortion Rep. Ron Barber (D) by less than one-thousandth of a percent! Previously we’d updated you on the victory by pro-life Dan Sullivan (R) in Alaska over pro-abortion incumbent Mark Begich (D) and the solid victory by pro-life Rep. Bill Cassidy (R) over pro-abortion Sen. Mary Landrieu (D) in a December 6 runoff in Louisiana.

Besides privately licking their wounds, pro-abortionists have publicly announced what you’d expect: The abortion issue played no role in making possible a net gain of nine Republicans in the Senate or enabling Republicans to have the most GOP members in the House (247) since 1928.

We know better.

For details on all that NRL’s political entities did, let me direct you to nrlc.cc/1z9a90Q; nrlc.cc/1z9a39l; and www.nrlc.org/uploads/NRLNews/NRLNewsDec2014.pdf. Here are just three quick concluding thoughts.

But if you want to see the results portrayed all in one place and easy to read, go to www.nrlc.org/electionhq.

#1. NRL PAC and NRL Victory Fund were, as always, greatly outspent by the likes of EMILY’s Lists and the Planned Parenthood Action Fund. Also, as always, our resources were used wisely, at just the right time in just the right locations to help carry vulnerable office-seekers over the finish line. Credit goes to everyone whose financial contributions helped make this shrewd use of resources possible.

#2. The win by Col. McSally illustrates the manner in which NRL’s political entities went all out. To quote NRL Political Director Karen Cross

Independently, approximately 25,000 identified voter households were contacted, and 275 radio ads were aired on seven stations in Arizona’s second congressional district, exposing the vast difference on life issues between the candidates, including their positions on the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, the use of tax dollars to pay for abortion, and the pro-abortion, pro-rationing Obamacare law.

And, of course, that is independent of the “sweat equity” so many pro-lifers put into helping educate the public about the views of the candidates on the life issues. That input was absolutely essential. And…

#3. You are no doubt familiar with the following numbers, but they should remain firmly in mind. Why? Because in so many contests, they illustrate that once again David—NRL’s political entities—defeated Goliath.

National Right to Life endorsed 287 federal candidates. A whopping 90% won their elections—including Col. McSally’s victory.

We were actively focused on 74 of the most competitive federal races: 18 for seats in the U.S. Senate, and 56 for seats in the U.S. House of Representatives. National Right to Life-supported candidates won 76% of their elections.

What about the abortion lobby? National Right to Life was involved in 26 head-to-head races against the major pro-abortion PAC, EMILY’s List. Of those, 19 (73%) of the NRL-endorsed candidates won their elections, despite a substantial financial disparity.

Finally, the abortion issue did matter! Twenty-three percent of voters across the nation said that the abortion issue affected their vote and voted for candidates who oppose abortion. Just 16% said abortion affected their vote and voted for candidates who favor abortion.

This 7% net gain for pro-life candidates made the difference not just in Col. McSally’s victory but also in many races. As a consequence, as Karen Cross wrote yesterday, “These pro-life successes mean that pro-life leadership will preside over both houses in Congress in 2015, when the 114th Congress convenes.”