Health Care: Remember the hue and cry when it looked like the Supreme Court could deny ObamaCare subsidies to millions of people? Looks like it could happen anyway, thanks to the law’s tax complications.

Fully 40% of taxpayers who received ObamaCare subsidies last year haven’t filed their taxes yet and are at risk of losing their subsidies for next year, according to the American Action Forum.

An update on ObamaCare that the IRS recently sent to Congress said that out of the 4.5 million taxpayers who got ObamaCare’s “advance payment” subsidies last year, only 2.7 million had filed the required tax forms as of the end of this May.

The rest filed for an extension (360,000), haven’t filed at all (710,000) or didn’t submit the new ObamaCare form — Form 8962 — that’s required to make sure they got the right subsidy amount (760,000).

These 1.8 million taxpayers actually represent 2.8 million individuals, according to the IRS, since one taxpayer can file on behalf of his spouse and children.

In a separate document, the IRS notes that if these taxpayers don’t file and if they try to sign up for a plan for 2016, they won’t be eligible for ObamaCare subsidies. And they might have to “pay back some or all of the 2014 advance payments of the premium tax credit.”

This is the latest evidence of just how wildly complex ObamaCare’s subsidy scheme is. When enrollees sign up for coverage, they have to forecast what their income will be next year, because it determines their subsidy amount.

Guessing correctly has proved nearly impossible.

The IRS says that only 10% predicted their income correctly. About 40% made less than they thought they would and so were eligible for an average $600 in additional subsidies. But half made more than they predicted and had to pay some of their ObamaCare subsidies back. The average repayment was $800.

The report also shows that 7.5 million taxpayers ponied up $1.5 billion in mandate penalties because they weren’t insured in 2014, and 12 million taxpayers claimed an exemption from the ObamaCare mandate. About 300,000 low-income taxpayers paid the penalty even though they didn’t owe it.

Brittany La Couture, a health policy expert at the American Action Forum, noted, “The legislative marriage of two of life’s most baffling necessities — taxes and health insurance — has naturally resulted in some confusion.”

That’s a bit of an understatement.