Baxter Regional Medical Center CEO says relief needed from red tape, financial distress created by Affordable Care Act

Buy Photo Ron Peterson, Baxter Regional Medical Center president and CEO, talks Wednesday about his recent visit to Washington D.C., where he met with Arkansas’ congressional delegation to express concerns about some aspects of the Affordable Care Act. While the hospital has experienced an increase in revenue from Arkansans that now have health insurance, it also has experienced a mountain of red tape relating to auditing protocols, which Peterson said is costing the hospital millions. (Photo: Kevin Pieper/The Baxter Bulletin)Buy Photo Story Highlights 2010: Start of the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare

4: Millions of dollars that auditors say BRMC owes in financial penalties

9: Millions of dollars in decreased Medicare payments BRMC has experienced due to ACA

400,00: Thousands of dollars per day to keep BRMC's doors open

"Financially uncharted waters" may be one of the best ways to describe Baxter Regional Medical Center's experience since the federally mandated Affordable Care Act became law in 2010 across the nation.

The phrase by Ron Peterson, president and CEO of Baxter Regional Medical Center, was used while discussing the negative financial impact of the federal health care law during the hospital's annual donor banquet in April.

Last week, Peterson and key executives from 11 other Arkansas hospitals visited Washington D.C. to call on the federal government for "relief, reform and resources" in response to some major cuts the ACA has had on hospitals across the country.

Peterson, during the trip to meet with the American Hospital Association, also held audience with Arkansas' Sen. John Boozman and Sen. Tom Cotton, and the aides of U.S. Rep. Rick Crawford.

"What I asked for basically, or what the AHA asked for in relief, is there are so many complex auditing processes and that we need to streamline those," Peterson explained Wednesday, referring to RAC, also known as "recovery audit contractors."

Peterson: 'Simplify the rules'

Peterson says RAC is contracted with the federal government to "supposedly" stop fraud and abuse. While it sounds good in theory for hospitals like BRMC, he believes that isn't entirely the case.

“On average, $500 per patient is what I'm spending just to be able to say, 'Yes, you can be admitted to the hospital.' ... Tell me, how are you supposed to operate?” Ron Peterson, BRMC president and CEO

"When they have taken it down to the degree that they have taken it to, it's kind of ridiculous," Peterson said. "First of all, you have to realize the auditing contractors get paid a percentage of what they recover, so we're asking for that to be changed, for them to be paid in a different manner than what they are currently being paid."

Peterson also is calling on the federal government to "simplify the rules."

"I don't want to break the law. I don't want to go to jail. I don't want this hospital to have to pay back millions of dollars because we did something wrong," he said. "That's not my intent, so why can't you make it simple enough for somebody who has the intent to follow the law?"

In one example Peterson gave, imagine someone coming into the hospital and a doctor says they need inpatient care. A nurse reviews the chart to confirm that the patient meets criteria. The hospital then uses a software program to run the information and once again confirm that the patient in question meets inpatient criteria.

At that point, Peterson explained "just to double check it," the hospital sends the information to an outside company that has hired physicians to review charts and again confirm the individual meets inpatient criteria.

More than $12 million in chart review penalties has been requested by recovery audit contractors from BRMC, money that the hospital then has to prove it doesn’t owe. (Photo: File)

"On average, $500 per patient is what I'm spending just to be able to say, 'Yes, you can be admitted to the hospital,' " Peterson said. "Six months later, I'm having a RAC auditor come in and say that the patient doesn't meet inpatient criteria, we're taking your money back.

Buy Photo Ron Peterson, left, BRMC president and CEO, talks Wednesday about his recent visit to Washington D.C. with Baxter Regional Hospital Foundation President Barney Larry. (Photo: Kevin Pieper/The Baxter Bulletin)

"Tell me, how are you supposed to operate?"

BRMC hit with penalties

According to Peterson, RAC has requested more than $12 million in chart review penalties from BRMC, which is money the hospital then has had to prove it doesn't owe. After at least two years, BRMC estimates it has worked that $12 million down to $4 million. But it doesn't stop, he says.

"Every 60 days, we're getting a new RAC letter and we're going through the process again," Peterson said. "I'm up there saying we need to change this law, we have to change something, because it's going to put us out of business.

"One of the major threats to this hospital is RAC. Is that what you want?"

Meetings with Congress members

“We can't lose the expansion because it's tied in so much, and I guess I believe that the ACA will be here for at least the next two years.” Ron Peterson

In meetings with Boozman, Cotton and Crawford's aides, Peterson said overall he felt the trip to D.C. was a positive experience. He noted that Boozman and Crawford have previously visited BRMC.

"I heard from all three parties that they believe hospitals have had enough cuts. Hospitals went out on a limb, in my opinion, with the ACA," he said, noting decreases in Medicare payments partially for Medicaid expansion, also known in Arkansas as the "private option."

"We can't lose the expansion because it's tied in so much, and I guess I believe that the ACA will be here for at least the next two years," Peterson said. "That $9 million that I talk about on average that we lose in reimbursement, it's actually $12 million we projected, and $3 million we're going to get from the 'private option' expansion to get us to the $9 million net."

The $9 million represents a decrease in Medicare payments due to ACA.

As reported by The Bulletin in a May 2014 story, BRMC is extremely vulnerable to Medicare reductions. Because of the demographic of the region the hospital serves, Medicare reimbursements represent nearly 70 percent of its income, which is among the highest figures in the country.

Buy Photo Baxter Regional Medical Center President and CEO Ron Peterson says the hospital is in “financially uncharted waters” due to the Affordable Care Act. (Photo: Kevin Pieper/The Baxter Bulletin)

BRMC 'financially stable' — for now

With decreased payments and increased regulation, such as RAC, is the hospital profitable?

It's not an easy question for Peterson to answer, but he says the hospital is "financially stable" — for now. It can't take any more cuts, he said, and the hospital's goals are to remain "comprehensive, independent and community-driven."

"We're trying to maneuver ourselves in this ever-changing environment and yet try to preserve some of the good things that are here, and while we're doing that, I want to make sure the people realize we're not losing focus on patient care," Peterson said. "As a matter of fact, you can come in here and get as good of care as anywhere else in the nation because we're probably setting the bar on at least patient safety with processes and procedures that are in place."

"If I was going to ask for help from the community, I would ask them to do exactly what I did when I went to Washington — that is make sure that our senators and congressman know that enough is enough," Peterson added. "We've had enough cuts to payments, to hospitals. We need to stop the cuts, we need to stop the bleeding and need relief in that bureaucracy."

Read or Share this story: http://www.baxterbulletin.com/story/news/local/2015/05/13/brmc-went-washington/27272865/