The CDC has been hit hard during the last four years of pervasive austerity. Ebola highlights CDC fund crunch

Congress gave the CDC an emergency injection of $30 million to combat Ebola right before it left town last month. Lawmakers will still have to confront what the agency needs to keep fighting this disaster — and to get ready for the next one, and the one after that.

More than many agencies, the CDC has been hit hard during the last four years of pervasive austerity, with hundreds of millions of dollars stripped from its budget. State and local preparedness has also suffered.

Story Continued Below

Washington’s Ebola response so far has been bipartisan, even if the U.S. like much of the world was slow to grasp the extent of the West African tragedy. Calls for a vigorous effort after the first U.S. case of the virus was diagnosed in Dallas this week came swiftly from both sides of the aisle.

Rep. Christopher Smith (R-N.J.), chairman of the House Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights and International Organizations, announced he will introduce a bill supporting the White House’s Ebola response when Congress returns after the elections. A committee aide gave no price tag but said the package would include training and supplying health care personnel; treatment units with laboratories and corpse disposal teams in Africa and collaborating with the private sector to develop vaccines, treatments and diagnostic tools.

( Also on POLITICO: Up to 100 in U.S. monitored for Ebola)

Democratic Reps. Henry Waxman, Frank Pallone and Diana DeGette wrote a letter Wednesday pressing GOP committee leaders for hearings on the Ebola outbreak, including a look at the impact declining public health budgets had on disaster response.

The first U.S. Ebola case “should not be a cause for panic,” they wrote, but should force lawmakers to confront not only the current disaster in West Africa but other emerging public health threats, here or abroad.

Some lawmakers have said Congress should be ready to return to Washington before the election to address immediate funding needs on Ebola.

“If the CDC, or any public health system, needs more resources, Congress should immediately come back to Washington and vote to provide those funds before the November election,” Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-N.Y.), the ranking member of the appropriations subcommittee that funds CDC and NIH, said in a statement.

( Also on POLITICO: Rand Paul stokes Ebola fears)

Public health advocates welcome the initial bipartisan show of interest. But they want to make sure it endures when the lawmakers get down to the specifics of long-term financing for the CDC, an agency that must always be ready for a crisis — and is particularly vulnerable to opprobrium when it falls short.

CDC’s discretionary budget was about $5.8 billion in 2014, down from nearly $6.4 billion in 2010. Some other money including prevention funds in Obamacare filled some of the gap. The CDC’s total budget was $6.9 billion in 2010 and is projected to be $6.6 billion in 2015, according to Senate aides.

Public health advocates say cuts to specific programs have been troubling. Since an infusion of preparedness funding following the Sept. 11, 2001 and anthrax attacks, a program for hospital preparations for infectious disease outbreaks and other disasters has dropped from $515 million in 2003 to $358 million last year, according to Trust For America’s Health. State and local health departments disaster preparation funds were slashed by roughly a third, from about $1 billion to $623 million, in the same period. The Trust estimates that more than one in five state and local health department jobs — more than 50,000 — were lost between 2008 and 2012.

Follow @politico

Authors: