AUSTIN, TX (April 14, 2014) - Looking like the iconic “Everyman,” Gordy Bunch appears wearing a casual jacket and a white shirt. He is surrounded by a mélange of television screens showing other current candidates running for political office in Texas. The sound track is a babble of indistinguishable chatter as Bunch turns, looks directly into the camera, and says “Austin politicians, they’re all the same. We need new leaders to change government. I’m Gordy Bunch and I want to shake things up.”

The opening of Bunch’s first television campaign commercial reflects his positioning as a political outsider who intends to be a more effective leader in the Texas State Senate as he runs for the District 4 seat vacated by Tommy Williams. His 30-second commercial, appropriately titled “Change Austin,” continues with scenes from his U.S. Coast Guard career showing that he has fought drug smugglers and human traffickers. It continues by highlighting his current accomplishments as a director of The Woodlands Township; stating that he has cut taxes, paid down debt, and cut spending. In conclusion, Bunch says, “As a businessman, I know ObamaCare is hurting Texas families and taking away our freedoms” - a scene which features a photo of his own family with his wife, Michelle, and their three boys. Bunch then asks for the viewer’s vote “to bring conservative change to Austin.”

Governor Perry called for a special election in Senate District 4 to fill the current vacancy. Early voting begins April 28 through May 6, with Election Day, on Saturday, May 10. The commercial is also available on You Tube at http://youtu.be/HV_7JOY1ogA. The campaign web site and FaceBook page has already logged thousands of viewers at www.GordyBunchforTexas.com which Bunch says is an indicator of the strong interest in his candidacy. The commercial will launch today on cable TV channels selected by consultants to reach likely voters in Senate District 4 which encompasses all or parts of Montgomery, Chambers, Jefferson, Harris, and Galveston counties. “Change Austin” will continue to run on television and ancillary outlets right up to Election Day, Bunch says.