American nurses matter, but recent political, media, and economic trends could indicate they don’t. Now businesses and residents are becoming more aware of the damages and harm being caused by certain societal changes, litigation and Obamacare.

Nurses matter, despite economic, media, and Obamacare obstacles that have increased their workload and damaged the reputation of the profession. Photo by Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images View all 5 photos Photo by Theo Heimann/Getty Images

A primary, and symbolic example, is the announcements that two major sponsors ABC’s “The View,” Johnson & Johnson and Eggland’s Best, have pulled their advertising from the program. Representative of their liberal leaning ideas, “The View” hosts criticized Miss Colorado Kelley Johnson for appearing in last week’s Miss America Pageant dressed in her scrubs and delivering a touching monologue about nurse care. Responses from thousands of angry viewers underlined the message: Hell has no fury like a nurse scorned. The next day the program attempted to apologize, but the damage was done.

“It’s very comforting to know that there’s someone standing up for nurses,” stated Jean Ross, co-president of National Nurses United. “It’s obvious that ‘The View’ hosts, like so many others, do not clearly understand what we do. We needed to let them know it’s a very serious thing, it’s not just a flippant 28 seconds of conversation, it’s a big deal and it effects how people view our profession.”

Meagan Beavers, a Registered Nurse with a Master’s Degree in Nursing from California, has no doubt the nursing profession is going downhill. A nurse of 12 years, Beavers spent much of her younger adulthood working and backpacking around the world.

“I had a world vision,” Beavers explained to the Examiner Sunday evening, Sept. 20, 2015. “I thought I would be the perfect nurse. I became a nurse to take care of people. To care for those who were unable to care for themselves due to a time of need whether acute, or chronic in nature.”

“Nursing has changed in the last decade. We are now most concerned with patient satisfaction scores, because this is what drives government reimbursement - so if a patient wants a blanket, regardless of the fever, we give them a blanket because God forbid they rate us poorly,” Beaver continued. “We are in a room doing CPR on a patient and the patient in the next room is screaming for ice chips – someone’s gets her ice chips leaving the team trying to save a life.”

Citizens and businesses are taking note as they see the results of Obamacare after five years. Taxpayers and patients see the Affordable Health Plan beginning to collide as more truths reveal the deception behind self-interested policies set by government and the administration. While White House, CDC, hospital, medical and political agendas are being pushed in the media to protect their special interests, the clock is ticking and wearing thin on the patience of most Americans. Evidence is coming forth revealing much of the changing information coming out of Washington is rhetoric.

“Patient satisfaction scores gear absolutely everything,” Beavers added. “What the powers at be forget is, patients who are satisfied with the care they receive are less likely to fill out the form that arrives in their mailbox two months after their visit to their local hospital or doctor’s office. Rather, it is dissatisfied patients who respond. Therefore, results are skewed from the get-go.”

Laura Hicks-Williamson, a nurse with 21-years of experience in Abilene, Texas notices that while hospitals, as a business, sells service, other business may offer products. The services come in the form of medical treatment for diseases or therapy.

“I have noticed in order to reduce costs, the first thing cut out is service,” Williamson stated. “The hospital reduces or completely abolished the education department.”

“Nurses are given more patients to take care of with little additional help,” details Williamson. “Hospitals are no longer hiring LVNs or nurse’s aides, so total care is up to the RN. Many unit secretaries are no longer. I have been floated to medical an surgery unit and had 9 patients! That is too many patients to take care of plus give the additional time needed by the nurse to increase patient satisfaction.”

“Nurses are overloaded,” points out Williamson. “Board of Nurse Examiners say acuity of patients determines nursing load. Assignments should be based on that, but they aren’t. All hospitals concentrate on ‘numbers’ and not how sick any patient is or how much time to allot for additional services needed for the nurse to perform.”

Williamson has strong concerns about the changes in reimbursements from the government, including being paid by Medicare based on patient satisfaction. She is currently in charge of billing for cath lab procedures, which is “extremely complicated” enough.

The system is “so much so that it is impossible to collect legitimate fees for procedures. They make it so difficult and if one “I” isn’t dotted, the hospital collects little to nothing,” Williamson explained. “In 2007, for a heart cath, five things were charged. The left heart cath, coronary angiography, ventriculogram and selection and interpretation for those procedures. Now only one charge which covers all five, but at a substantially reduced price.”

Twila Brase, a Minnesota public health nurse who is the founder and president of Citizens’ Council for Health Freedom (CCHF) said this month that Obamacare is about to ratchet up even more on the costs to citizens. She contends the costs will $8 billion the first year, with scheduled increases to over $14 billion annually by 2018.

“A tax on our insurers is a tax on all of us, since Americans will see their premiums increase significantly, possibly by a double-digit percentage,” Brase continued. “In fact, one actuary estimates that individual premiums may increase $500 this year, while family premiums could be $700 higher.”

These increases are in direct conflict with the promise President Obama made to American families when he said they would be realizing $2,300 deductions in premiums each year. Health plans, including those providing coverage for Medicare, Medicaid and Obamacare, that have more than $25 million dollars of premiums are included in paying for this massive tax. This will result in increases for state Medicaid costs, and Medicare recipients of federal Medicare.

“The Affordable Care Act was described as a law to ease the financial burden on Americans and improve their coverage and care,” Brase noted. “But neither has happened. Our care has been compromised and all of us—even those who didn’t choose Obamacare coverage—are paying the price. This is not affordable health care.”

While our healthcare premiums and taxes will continue to increase severely, the damages to the nursing profession continue to take away from the care of patients.

“Patients wonder why we spend more time typing and on the computer, than at the bedside,” commented Beavers, who blames much of it on lawsuits. “Some of us see 30 patients a day. That’s 150 patients a week or over 10,000 patients a year.”

“And I am supposed to recall one person when I am called into a legal office seven years down the road. So we chart,” explained Beavers. “To ensure that every little thing we did, whether it was a vital sign, call a physician for orders, provided a blanket, provided a meal, gave medications ‘slow IV push’ vs ‘IV push,’ all needs to be charted.”

If not, Beavers, like so many thousands of nurse know they could “potentially lose everything I own. Everything I have worked hard for - all those years of education, those holidays away from family, getting up at 4:30am daily.”

“I could lose it all because I neglected to chart something I did,” she continued noting there is an adage in the profession now: “If it wasn’t charted, it was never done”.

Beavers said there was a time she didn’t worry about having additional insurance on her license. Known by her peers as an intelligent and caring nurse, Beavers recalls that she has “never personally been sued, but I have been called to the legal offices on five different occasions in eight years, and it was my charting that saved me and my coworkers.”

Nurses, physicians and medical staff are about to be bombarded in October with what one doctor termed “one of the biggest Obamacare blunders toward government controlled medicine.” Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, the 14,600 codes used for diagnostic and procedural codes will inflate to about 70,000 overnight.

“No code will be the same, making all staff who enter charges, all medical records personnel, all coders, all admission personnel, and virtually all employees will have to learn to recode any, and every procedure, all medical diagnoses virtually everything,” specified Williamson. “This is making it almost impossible to charge correctly for anything!”

“At one time, the practice of medicine in America was the envy of the world. Unfortunately, it has now been radically segmented,” Dr. John Tedeschi, a New Jersey physician noted. Obama is all about saving money and “where the money IS ultimately spent, is directed to special interest, profit-making organizations.”

Physicians and analysts who have looked at ICD-10 indicate the system is far more complex, extremely detailed and will be burdensome. Various estimates reveal that tax payers will pay $5.5 billion to $13.5 to implement ICD-10 nationwide. Experts revealed the suggested benefits from this bureaucratic monster will only be $.7 billion to $7.7 billion for the next decade.

This new coding mandate, along with Electronic Health Records (EHRs), have changed the medical profession for the worse according to many critics including Brase.

“Doctors, once they know a patient’s possible risk for a variety of diseases, may be reluctant to take on that patient, especially as government-run medicine dictates how doctors are paid,” Brase warned earlier this month. “Increasingly not for the services they provide, but in lump-sum bundled payments regardless of cost or disease complexity.”

The Examiner is hearing from medical professionals across the country on the tragedies of Obamacare.

Texas physician Kris Held, M.D., who has read the law says she will “will not implement, comply with it or let my patients live or die by it” and the medical profession, as far as doctors are concerned, “is on suicide watch.”

“Rate increases will be bigger in 2016 than they have been for years and years and will have a profound effect on consumers here,” said Jesse Ellis O’Brien of the Oregon State Public Interest Research Group. “Some may start wondering if insurance is affordable or if it’s worth the money.”

“When you were in nursing school it was being in the military. You had to have your uniforms washed and pressed. You wore white hose and white polished shoes….You lined up for inspection,” Jane Sheffield-Fore, a San Antonio nurse noted the difference in how nursing education has changed. “You didn't have private nursing schools charge very high tuition and doing your pediatric rotation in a day care or med- surge in a nursing home. We did our rotation in the hospital, mostly the county hospitals along with the medical students. Those schools rob those students. I wonder what their school pass rate is on the nursing boards?”

“We nurses were so proud, when we graduated and got out nursing cap, and pin,” commented Carlene Gladman, a hospital nurse in Steubenville, Ohio. “We proudly wore our white shoes, white hose and white uniform. This showed every patient who we were and our capabilities. Now patients can't tell for sure if you're a nurse, aid, or house-keeping. Wearing the whites was an honor.”

"I'm too the point that I am not certain how much more I can take," wrote Martha Andrews, from North Carolina. "The United States of America should be better than this. We have too much knowledge, goodness and skills to let these crooked politicians and special interests groups destroy the healthcare profession. But I'm afraid they are succeeding."

The most serious tests of the trust between citizens and our political establishments continue to peak as the growing number of Americans experience a perfect storm of bureaucratic schemes, political smokescreens and medical institutional white washing causing national health disasters. Too many voting patients, physicians and nurses are feeling the pain.