Atlantic Health System has agreed to purchase Hackettstown Regional Medical Center, a 111-bed acute care hospital in northwest New Jersey, from Adventist Health Care for $54 million.

Boards of directors from Atlantic and Adventist agreed to the transfer of ownership, which is subject to regulatory review from the state Department of Health and the Attorney General's office.

Executives said in a conference call Wednesday that completion of the deal could take up to a year, during which no changes will occur at Hackettstown.

The Warren County hospital expects to add services after the deal is finalized by tapping into Atlantic's network in northern and central New Jersey. Executives also expect improved efficiency resulting from shared services and geographic proximity. No job cuts are currently planned at Hackettsown, which employs nearly 900.

"As it stands now, there are no plans to reduce or eliminate any programs or services," Atlantic Health System CEO Joseph Trunifio said. "In fact, we hope we will be able to use this year for expansion of programs and services."

HRMC President Jason Coe said the hospital is familiar with Atlantic's system. The deal will provide Hackettstown with access to more specialists and services, including cardiovascular, neonatal, oncology and neuroscience. "This is a just natural fit," he said.

The deal follows a wave of acquisitions and consolidations in the health care industry as providers seek to improve efficiency and comply with mandates under the Affordable Care Act. The Wednesday announcement follows completion of a Jan. 1 merger between Atlantic Health System and Chilton Hospital.

The Hackettstown center had been the only New Jersey facility owned by Adventist, a faith-based health organization based in Gaithersburg, Md., which operates mostly in the Washington, D.C., area. HRMC will remain a nonprofit hospital after the transaction.

Cue said elective abortions are not performed at Hackettstown, partly due to Adventist's religious roots. He said it is too early to speculate as to whether that will change under Atlantic's ownership.

Atlantic Health said the Hackettstown facility will gain the following benefits by becoming part of Atlantic's system:

Expanded outpatient and preventive medicine services available within the region;

Broader patient access to pediatric and other specialty care; clinical trials; and advanced protocols for emergent care, including complex stroke care, the latest cardiac diagnostic and treatment interventions, and advanced neonatal care;

Cost savings through shared services and more efficient use of resources.

Submit a nomination for General Counsel of the Year >