Huron, SD

With the draw of larger cities and online shopping, it can be difficult for business owners in rural communities to convince customers to shop locally.

Huron Chamber & Visitors Bureau tried meeting that challenge with a new promotion this holiday shopping season. It has seen success.

"We had a phenomenal response," Huron Chamber president Peggy Woolridge Besch said. "We had no idea it would be so well received."

Business owners and Chamber workers encouraged people to turn in receipts for products or services purchased within Huron during the holiday season. Submitted receipts of $25 or more earned buyers a chance to have their names placed in a box.

The Chamber drew from that box each week, giving away 100 dollar rewards. There will be a grand prize drawing next week.

Along with the incentives of the drawings, the Chamber also ran an educational campaign showing how local sales tax revenue is spent in the community. People handed in more than $3.5 million in receipts.

Cliff and Julee Hadley say the promotion seemed to make a difference at their Huron clothing store.

"We've been in business 25 years. We just had our third best Christmas ever, Christmas season and I'm a big believer that the Chamber promotion contributed to that," Cliff Hadley said.

Even though it can be a challenge to convince some to shop locally, Hadley says he wants to compete, not complain.

"But boy, those promotions on top of it really help out with that last little sprint," Hadley said.

The Chamber will draw its final name of the promotion on Monday. That person will choose one envelope from a group of 100. Ninety-nine of the envelopes will have a prize worth $1,000. The other will be worth $25,000.

{{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.