Obamacare

One of President Barack Obama’s first orders of business was to give what he promised to the American people: get them cheap health care. Politico.com breaks the law down into why some people love it and others hate it.

Some love it because they get cheap health care when they were originally denied it. Others believe that it is too expensive for people to afford. Over the past few years, the price of Obamacare has skyrocketed, making it less affordable for people but citizens are still required to have it.

I agree with the half that believe that Obamacare has become too expensive for people to afford, yet the government fines people who don’t have it. This is ridiculous.

The law requires people to pay about $100 a month, for 12 months it is $1,200 a year, and this law has been in effect since 2010. Now, the penalty for not having health insurance is about $325 a year for one adult; the total is usually about $975 per household.

If people can’t pay $1,200 for insurance, what makes the government think that people can afford almost the same amount in fines? This is the main reason people hate Obamacare.

If it were more affordable and the penalties for not having it weren’t so expensive, then maybe a lot more people would be for it. It makes no sense to charge people hundreds of dollars because they couldn’t afford to give hundreds of dollars.

Jarrett Shcirmer

Pueblo West

•••

Women in politics

In regards to the article in the April 29 Pueblo Chieftain “Hispanic nominated for federal bench,” the deleterious effects of party politics upon any remaining ethical fabric of our government’s internal process are not simply limited to a Republican regime being uncooperative toward a declining Democratic office.

According to Women & Politics School of Public Affairs, the percentage of offices held by women barely approaches 25 percent at the state level and continues to shrink to approximately 17 percent in Congress. When we pride ourselves on our democracy, and our population is 51 percent women, we display cognitive dissonance on a national level.

If political parties are so predictable in their behaviors, I applaud the Obama administration for using gender and ethnic-based minority nominations to embarrass the Republican Party and further alienate it from those who are more and more comprising the majority of this nation.

Tony Johnson

Pueblo

•••

Education

It is quite evident (and becoming more so) that the U.S. education system has failed, and failed miserably.

This is the only explanation I can come up with while listening to Donald Trump and his supporters. An educated person would never conceive of supporting Trump for president of the United States.

His nonsensical rhetoric and blather is alarming. Smarten up people!

Kelli Megann

Pueblo