A man heads out fishing. He doesn’t bring bait or a pole. When he gets to a known catfish hole, he steps in the water and shoves his hands in trying to grab a fish.

Josh Coleman sat mesmerized as the Iowa State coaching staff relayed the story. The art of noodling hit home with the avid fisherman as a thought popped into his head.

I have to meet the Cyclones that do this. That’s pretty amazing.

It’s in that moment that ISU reeled in Coleman, a 250-pound defensive tackle from Jacksonville, Fla. Sixty-one percent of ISU signees under coach Paul Rhoads are from California, Florida or Texas. The challenge is getting those athletes on campus, shrinking the distance between their homes and the university.

ISU’s central recruiting philosophy is to get a player in town. The coaches will use anything they can — a fishing story, recruiting near locations with cheap flights, identifying specific players that will fit in around Ames — to hear the four words they were after from Coleman.

I want to visit.

“You’ve got to get them here,” defensive backs coach Maurice Linguist said. “That’s the biggest thing. If you took all the logos off of every school and you just saw the facilities for what they are, Iowa State could hold its own with a lot of places. When they see it with their own eyes, that is when they start listening to you.”

• • •

Wanting to recruit in California, Florida or Texas isn’t revolutionary. It’s a staple of programs across the country. Rhoads did it as a Cyclone assistant in the 1990s.

Rhoads believed it was a key part to ISU’s glory years under Dan McCarney. Rhoads believed it would be a key part to his success upon getting hired in December 2008.

But those who grow up in the south hear about the ACC or the SEC. The Big 12, let alone ISU, can be an afterthought. There are similar issues with California and for non-Big 12 teams in Texas.

There are an abundance of schools within driving distance for a player and his family in those areas. It’s common for ISU coaches to run into Florida players who never left the area. A Midwestern state half a country away might as well be a foreign land, even if it may be a short flight away. Parents can hesitate sending their babies so far from home.

Why take the time to visit ISU with so many other options nearby? It’s a question, regardless if it’s asked or not, that must be overcome.

“They have to fly over a lot of schools and a lot of people that are closer to them that can get their hands on them to get them here,” ISU defensive tackles coach Shane Burnham said.

Gerrit Chernoff didn’t know much about the Cyclones before joining Rhoads in Ames. Chernoff, ISU’s director of player personnel, quickly discovered the importance of getting players on campus. Those who made it to town committed in high numbers. Securing official visits in the fall and winter, or unofficial visits over the summer, became a central recruiting priority.

“We are able to get people here and show them something they didn’t expect,” Chernoff said. “That is why we have such a high success rate (of getting commitments) when we get people on campus.”

The campus is beautiful — outside of the winter. The academics are good, especially engineering, agriculture and business. The Bergstrom Football Complex and its 14,242-square foot weight room can get a recruit’s attention.

The gameday experience, with near sellouts and 50,000-fans filling up Jack Trice Stadium over the last six years, can be a sight to see during a period where most programs struggle with attendance figures.

“We have a product to sell if we can get the right people on campus,” Rhoads said.

But those players don’t always know who the Cyclones are or can’t tell you anything more than a few basic facts. Before coaches can start recruiting someone, they need to introduce them to the university.

Burnham can tell them all they’ll need to know. He has the pitch down, but he doesn’t use it. Instead, he asks if the recruit follows him on social media. When they do, he directs them to specific links.

“I can try to picture things in a 1,000 words,” Burnham said, “but videos work better.”

The Cyclones have a video for everything.

Interested in campus? Here’s a video.

What is game day like? Here’s a video.

Want to see the weight room? Here’s a video.

In a matter of minutes, a recruit can know more about some parts of ISU than those who live 10 minutes away.

The more ways they can make ISU appealing the better. The foundation of recruiting isn’t changing. Everything is predicated on relationships. Social media, though, can serve as a digital version of a targeted direct mailer.

Chernoff doesn’t care how many retweets or favorites his posts get. He’s not interested in securing 5,000 followers. All the videos and personal messages are sent out with specific recruits in mind, trying to increase the odds of landing that precious visit.

“It’s not about getting the Iowa State name across Texas,” Chernoff said. “It’s about the Iowa State brand awareness for five kids down there.”

Teenagers are fickle. Getting, and keeping their attention, is hard. It’s an issue for advertisers, not just recruiters.

ISU needs to stand out. It’s why Chernoff hosts a golden ticket day, a camp for elite prospects over the summer. It’s designed to make players feel special, like getting VIP access to a club, while seeing a campus the Cyclones believe isn’t a hard sell.

• • •

On his way from class to class Coleman bumped into a college football coach. It was the first coach Coleman saw in person. The coach said “Hey.”

The moment stuck with the eighth-grader.

“It made me feel like a big shot,” Coleman said.

He never forgot his interaction with an ISU coach. It’s why he always kept one eye on the Cyclones – “Even with the losing record, I always liked them,” he said. – while dreaming of playing college football. It never went much beyond that, though.

Coleman didn’t play much as a junior. He wasn’t on anyone’s recruiting radar until he put together a Class 2A all-state season. He made 21 tackles at University Christian High School.

His name started spreading among local coaches. That’s how Linguist heard about him last December. Early reports were positive. Burnham liked Coleman’s film.

There was one problem. The recruiting season was winding down. There would only be a few weeks to get to know him and try to secure one of the few remaining weekends left for an official visit.

“It was an accelerated pace,” Linguist said. “A lot had to happen fast.”

When Linguist reached out, Tennessee State and Idaho were at the top of Coleman’s list. Missouri, Penn State and Wake Forest would also come calling.

Linguist quickly stood out because the first thing he mentioned was graduation rates and education, not football. It was a priority for Coleman and it allowed them to quickly build a bond.

“I’m interested in academics because I want to take advantage of whatever they have to offer,” Coleman said. “I can use them instead of them using me.”

Coleman was intrigued by the coaches, by the noodling, by the university and by a program with a need at defensive tackle.

He told the Cyclones just what they wanted to hear. He would make an official visit in January.

• • •

Rhoads loves Iowans. He can go into a five-minute speech on why he thinks the values they bring match the Spartan, blue-collar work ethic that’s the foundation of his program.

There’s one problem. A state with a population of 3.1 million isn’t littered with them. ISU averages 3.3 in-state prospects per year over Rhoads seven recruiting classes.

There isn’t enough local talent to fill a roster. The Cyclones must look elsewhere. Surrounding states are good, but ISU can run into a similar problem. Either there isn’t an abundance of players or it can be tough recruiting in a state with one flagship program.

The Cyclones know they’ll need to sign players that aren’t ready made stars. Some will be too small. Others may not be fast enough. A few may change positions. In a state such as Florida, which produces Division I players at a rate Middle Eastern countries can export oil, there are enough prospects for a program 1,000 miles away to find what they’re seeking without always facing in-state competition.

“This is where we can get some diamonds in the rough compared to some other states,” Chernoff said.

The distance causes problems, though.

Recruiting those half a country away costs money.

An Ames Tribune study of Big 12 recruiting budgets over the last six years places ISU third, averaging $524,044 per year. The information was obtained through Freedom of Information Act requests. Baylor and TCU, which are private schools, were not included in the study. The Cyclones spent $644,214 in 2013-14, a 27 percent increase from 2009.

Rhoads cites the cost of flights and hotel rooms, as well as ISU focusing more on newer recruiting areas such as Mississippi and Georgia, as the reasons for the escalation.

“Recruiting budgets need to be in place to allow you to go get the kids, and (ISU athletic director Jamie Pollard) recognizes that,” Rhoads said. “We’ll find the money recruiting-wise to get to where we need to go and do the things we need to do to give us a chance.”

But is it money well and efficiently spent?

Rhoads said yes. He added that coaches are on budgets when traveling, and that he judges how wisely ISU is allocating recruiting resources based on how many official visitors become Cyclones.

“Our percentage of signing kids is pretty high,” Rhoads said. “I think that is a pretty reflective piece of spending the money efficiently.”

The recruiting process, especially for out-of-state prospects, begins with the spring evaluation period. At its conclusion, the coaches review film and put together a list of recruits to target. The list fluctuates as players commit elsewhere and new players are discovered.

The Cyclones are after a player who fits Rhoads’ ideal version of the program and will feel at home in central Iowa. An urban player being recruited by urban schools likely isn’t a fit for ISU.

Those who like fishing and hunting will feel at home in the ISU locker room - and in the local tree stands. Those who grew up around agriculture or are country kids tend to like what the Cyclones offer, Rhoads said.

And, yes, he can find those players in Florida or California.

“There is a lot of stuff away from the skyline with all those states,” Rhoads said.

Identifying the right player, with the right values, isn’t always enough. Recruiting can get harder when a team wins five total games in two years. Rhoads will admit as much.

Five players decommitted in the 2014 class. The Cyclones know other coaches will use the lack of success against them, and it can make recruits hesitant. It’s how college football operates.

The response – until the season starts and wins can serve as a cure-all for most recruiting problems – is to be on the lookout for recruits getting swayed and remind them why they looked at or committed in the first place.

“The No. 1 thing is being aware and having the knowledge early and being able to defend yourself and your program and what you’ve got before it’s too late,” Rhoads said.

Long-distance recruiting can hinge on so many factors, and it’s the unexpected ones that can cause the biggest problems.

Burnham oversees a large swatch of Florida, from the panhandle in the north to Naples in the southwest along the Gulf of Mexico. When he got to ISU in 2009, he focused on the panhandle. It’s where his connections were best. Things were looking up.

Burnmah would convince recruits ISU was in their best interests. Then they’d look at the airfare costs. Up to four-figure plane rides were too expensive. Recruits didn’t have the money to visit for camps. Parents couldn’t afford to accompany their sons on official visits.

Calvin Pryor, a 2015 NFL first-round pick and Class of 2011 prospect, brought the issue up. The cheapest flight available required a lengthy drive across the northern part of the state. Pryor ended up at Louisville.

“It was an objection we came across in the panhandle,” Burnham said.

The answer was Allegiant Air, a discount travel company with cheaper direct flights from Florida to Iowa. In part, because a cheap airplane ticket mattered, Burnham started looking a little more at spots where Allegiant or fellow airlines such as Southwest were more common.

In recent years, the Cyclones started recruiting Atlanta because of Linguist’s connections. It helped that there were cheaper options from there to Iowa.

“Part of the decision making there was it was an affordable flight,” Burnham said.

• • •

It didn’t take Coleman long to see why ISU fights to get players on campus. He connected with the coaching staff and players. The academic options were better than he hoped. The football facility stood out.

“I thought everybody would be mean,” Coleman said. “I think the word is docile, that is a good way to describe them. It was all good. They made me feel pretty good there.”

But it wasn’t enough for a commitment. Coleman made the trip by himself. He didn’t feel right committing without input from his mother or grandfather.

ISU’s fears about recruits being unable to bring family along was playing out. Complicating matters, Coleman planned to visit Missouri the next week.

The Cyclones didn’t want to lose him. So, Rhoads and most of the defensive staff flew to Jacksonville for an in-home visit. Family got to meet the coaches. Grandpa laughed about the noodling stories. Mom liked everyone. It was all Coleman needed.

He never made it to Missouri. He committed shortly after the visit.

“They had great chemistry with my family,” Coleman said.

It turns out a good noodling story can do wonders.