A man walks past a sign with information on signing up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act at the Borinquen Medical Center, Monday, Nov. 17, 2014, in Miami. (AP Photo/Lynne Sladky)

“Actually there’s something that Elizabeth Warren and I do agree with, and that’s eliminating the medical device tax, which has driven jobs overseas and caused medical innovation to stagnate in this country.”

— Sen. John Barrasso (R-Wyo.), interview on FOX News with Neil Cavuto, November 13, 2014

(Editor’s note: Michelle Ye Hee Lee is joining The Fact Checker team. This is her first column.–Glenn Kessler)

In this interview on Fox News, Sen. John Barrasso repeated two key talking points of foes of the 2.3 percent excise tax on medical devices, imposed under the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare. He repeated the same two points on the Senate floor a few days later.

We don’t intend to single out Barrasso, however. Both Republicans and Democrats have echoed similar concerns in the past over the tax and its potential impact on jobs and innovation. Repealing the tax likely will be a priority for the incoming GOP-controlled Congress, which means these claims also are likely to get louder and more repetitive.

Indeed, in March 2013, the Senate approved a bipartisan amendment to the nonbinding 2014 budget blueprint that called for a repeal of the tax. It passed 79-20, with 33 Democrats supporting the repeal. The tax became a bargaining tool during negotiations over the government shutdown in 2013. The House voted to repeal it 248-174, with 17 Democrats joining the majority. In September 2014, the House again voted to repeal the tax as a part of the Jobs for America Act.

Republican Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-Utah), a long-standing critic of the tax, will push for a permanent repeal of the tax through the tax-writing Senate Finance Committee, a spokeswoman said.

But what kind of evidence is there to support the claims of critics of the tax?

The Facts

The tax, which took effect in January 2013, was projected to generate $29 billion over 10 years in net revenues. The medical-device industry has pushed for the tax’s repeal virtually from the moment the health-care law was enacted in 2010.

The tax imposes a levy on a host of products — everything from X-ray equipment and MRI machines to pacemakers and dentures. This does not include consumer items that fall under the retail exemption, such as eyeglasses, contact lenses and hearing aids. The tax applies to items produced and sold in the U.S., including imports, but not to exports or resales intended for export.

There are three key arguments for repeal: the tax has led to massive layoffs, forced companies to reduce their research and development spending (i.e., stifling innovation), and relocated jobs outside of the U.S. or expanded operations overseas rather than domestically. This column will explore the latter two arguments; in the future we will examine the job-loss claims.

The industry paints a doomsday picture. According to a survey of small and large manufacturers by the trade group Advanced Medical Technology Association, or AdvaMed, company representatives found their fears of job cuts, reduced R&D expenditures and increased overseas operations turned out to be true in the first year of the tax. The tax resulted in 33,000 jobs lost in the industry, the survey said.

Mark Leahy, president and chief executive of the Medical Device Manufacturers Association, says that members have cut thousands of jobs and moved operations overseas where it’s cheaper to produce goods, and cut R&D projects.

He pointed to companies like Cyberonics, one of the smaller medical device firms, which opened a facility in Costa Rica after years of being based only in the United States.

“This has been the biggest issue for our members. It’s the acuteness and the impact of this excise that has been in the forefront of … reducing head counts in the U.S.,” Leahy said. “In order to cover the cost of the tax, you have to lower the cost of the manufacturing.”

But a Congressional Research Service report released in November challenges these arguments. Researchers found the tax is relatively small because half of the output is exempt and because of the inelasticity of demand — meaning, the demand will not change proportionally to the levy. The negative impact is negligible for both small and large companies, they said.

Researchers were critical of the tax, in theory. It’s “challenging to justify,” they wrote, because it’s inefficient tax policy. Excise taxes usually have specific objectives, such as discouraging bad behavior through the tobacco tax, or financing related government spending (for example, levying a tax on gasoline to fund highway construction). It is generally more efficient to generate revenues from a broader tax base, CRS said.

Industry officials cite several examples of companies announcing and planning international expansions since 2010. Many of these companies have attributed their move to the medical device tax.

We’re not privy to all of the factors driving each company’s business decision, and can’t prove whether the tax was the sole reason for a company to expand internationally. However, there are other valid reasons for investing overseas. U.S.-based medical device companies have either planned or begun international expansions, especially in China and Brazil, since at least 2008. American firms have faced pricing pressures, decline in reimbursements and increased regulations in recent years. Emerging competition from international markets, coupled with less income tax restrictions and regulation, make it attractive for U.S. companies to branch out.

An industry report by Ernst & Young found Western companies also stand to gain skills by investing in the Chinese market, in particular. Multinational companies can learn from the agility Chinese engineers have had to keep up with changing policies in their country, which “will also add value in their home markets, where health reform and commoditization are now facts of life,” the report said.

There also is not much incentive for companies to make location decisions solely based on the tax, because it applies to all products sold in the country, regardless of the site of manufacturing.

As for the impact on innovation, companies have reported cutting millions of dollars from R&D expenditures. Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.), for instance, has contended this point since 2012, saying that the tax creates barriers to the growth of medical device technology in the U.S. She has called for a repeal of the tax, with an appropriate offset.

Industry officials say the tax especially has hurt small firms that are not as profitable. The medical technology industry already faces regulatory burdens that make it harder for them to create profits on new technology, which can take years to develop, Barrasso’s spokeswoman notes.

“There is more than enough proof that his quote was completely accurate. In fact, I’m sure a tape will probably surface soon with Professor Gruber making the same case,” spokeswoman Emily Schillinger wrote in an e-mail, pointing to news articles announcing companies’ decisions to restructure internationally and cut back on research funding due to the tax. (Jonathan Gruber is an MIT professor who has made controversial remarks about the Affordable Care Act.)

The CRS challenges this claim, based on its analysis that the tax should pass on in price and the decrease in demand will be negligible. (The Fact Checker previously examined the potential impact of the tax on small businesses.)

(AdvaMed called the CRS report “fundamentally flawed” because it assumes that most of the cost of the tax will be passed on to customers, and analyses the elasticity of demand without considering industry-specific purchasing trends.)

There is little proof, however, that the tax has created an innovation catastrophe for the industry, or that R&D spending on medical technology overall has decreased.

The medtech industry and its domestic revenues are holding strong, and investment in R&D has remained constant since 2008, an Ernst & Young annual industry report found. R&D spending has been affected by increased regulations and other trends in the industry. But the total amount spent on medical technology R&D in the U.S. grew 7 percent in 2013.

Venture capital investment in the industry has dwindled, but that reflects general trends among venture capital firms, the report said. The majority of commercial leaders have consistently invested in R&D. Venture capital investments in medical devices continue to fall, but start-ups still saw venture-capital backing; about 40 percent of all venture-capital medtech investment went to early-stage start-ups in 2013-2014, the report found.

Lastly, the actual collection from this tax has been lower than estimated. The Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration found the number of tax filings and the amount of revenue associated with this tax was lower than expected during the first two quarters after the tax took effect. So at least in the first two quarters, the tax did not create the anticipated impact on the industry, calling into question some of the estimates that have been touted.

The Pinocchio Test

The medical-device industry has faced tough headwinds in recent years, such as pricing pressures and declining reimbursements. A new tax on top of that doesn’t help.

Yes, some companies are creating jobs overseas. Some firms are cutting their investments in research and development. But what’s lacking is the direct causation between those decisions and the medical device tax.

One could certainly argue that the tax, or anticipation of its impact,played a role in some business decisions.But there is no direct proof that the tax is the sole cause of their actions, or that it has fragmented the ability of the U.S. medical device industry to come up with innovative technology.

We wavered between Two and Three Pinocchios, but for the moment will lean toward Two. Our analysis is constrained by not having access to company books, but foes of the tax are going to need to come up with more conclusive evidence that the woes of the industry stem directly from the tax.

Two Pinocchios





(About our rating scale)

Send us facts to check by filling out this form

Follow The Fact Checker on Twitter and friend us on Facebook