To Russia With Love: Thursday's federal appellate court ruling that the National Security Agency's wholesale collection of Americans' electronic data is illegal has fans of Edward Snowden – the NSA leaker who brought the allegations to light before bolting to the totally freedom-loving, non-spying arms of Russian President Vladimir Putin – giving one another the highest of fives. NSA foes like Stephen Kohn, executive director of the National Whistleblowers Center, said the ruling is "a vindication for Snowden and the importance of whistleblowing." And Sens. Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat, and Bernie Sanders, a Vermont independent and 2016 Democratic presidential candidate, said the NSA is out of control and should be stopped. And journalist-turned-activist Glenn Greenwald said he'd talked to Ed and he was "thrilled" by the ruling, which means he's not guilty of a crime so Obama should bring him home immediately:

Maybe someone who reveals a secret program that multiple federal judges say is ILLEGAL is a whistleblower who deserves gratitude-not prison? — Glenn Greenwald (@ggreenwald) May 7, 2015

Insecurity: Although the high court's opinion gave Snowden a fist bump for leaking the heck out of the surveillance program and making us all aware that the government knows nearly as much about us as Google or Facebook, Ed shouldn't pack his bags or summon an Uber for the airport any time soon. He leaked a whole lot more stuff than just the NSA spying program, and the White House is still kind of mad at him for all that dirt-dishing he probably did while knocking back a Stoli or two with Vlad during those long Moscow nights. Quoth the National Security Council spokesman: "Mr. Snowden is accused of leaking classified information and faces felony charges here in the United States. He should return to the U.S. as soon as possible, where he will be accorded full due process and protections." For his own good, of course.

[READ: NSA Phone Record Program Illegal, Appeals Court Finds ]

Just Do It: President Barack Obama's going all-out to sell Democrats on the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a sweeping, 12-nation Pacific Rim trade deal that's the centerpiece of his second term agenda. But so far, not many Dems are buying it. Rep. Sander Levin, a Michigan Democrat, told reporters at a Christian Science Monitor-sponsored breakfast that he's not impressed by the deal so far, and that Democrats are holding up their votes on Obama's request to fast-track the deal in hopes of getting some of their questions answered. And Levin isn't impressed by Obama's visit to Nike Headquarters in Beaverton, Oregon, to talk up the deal – a curious choice for the president, since Nike manufactures most of its shoes in Asia instead of the good ol' U.S. of A., raising the specter of more offshored American manufacturing jobs if the deal goes through. "If you lose your job," Levin said, "the fact that you can buy less expensive shoes doesn't help much."

Tweet of the Evening:

I have serious concerns about ISDS in the #TPP trade deal - and @HillaryClinton did too in her book last yr. Read: http://t.co/mEnsyS8TMS — Elizabeth Warren (@elizabethforma) May 7, 2015