Funding for proposed east Loveland school comes from urban renewal tax monies

Editor's note: This is the second of a two-part series looking at a possible school for east Loveland.

The proposed financing structure for the High Plains school won't come from a mill levy or bond on residential property taxes, and taxpayers won't vote on an increase in taxes to fund it.

Instead, the money comes from a fund in the Loveland Urban Renewal Authority designated specifically for the building and maintenance of schools within the URA's boundaries.

The budget for the school design and construction is estimated at $17.15 million.

The school board will vote on approval of financing at 5:30 p.m. Wednesday at 800 S. Taft Ave.

How Did It Start?

In 2004, the city of Loveland and the McWhinney Group created an agreement for the creation of the Centerra Metropolitan District, so the developer could receive assistance by allowing for tax-increment financing (TIF) in revitalizing the "blighted area" through the Loveland URA. The state of Colorado allows for such assistance for infrastructure and development, though some people question whether the Centerra area could in fact be considered a former area of "blight."

The way the Centerra TIF works is that any money collected on property taxes in a designated area will then be given to the Loveland URA for 25 years 25.

Advertisement

Because the school district will lose out on some taxes due to this agreement, the Centerra Metro District and Loveland URA came to another agreement with the Thompson School District. Money that would have gone to the school district as a result of tax initiatives after 2004 — the 2005 bond and the 2006 mill levy override — will be redirected to a fund for the school district to use from the money the URA receives from the TIF. This leaves out initiatives prior to the agreement that are in effect, such as the 1999 mill levy override, the bond redemption fund and the School Finance Act.

Mill levy overrides, put simply, are voter-approved allocations of money to be used for specific services. A mill levy is calculated based on a portion of property taxes that would go to the services divided by the total projected value of properties within a taxing jurisdiction. A mill is a tax of $1 on every $1,000 of the assessed value of a property.

In the case of Thompson School District, mill levy overrides have mostly been used for staffing, according to Chief Financial Officer Steve Towne, representative of the district's budget in which 80 percent is allocated for salaries and benefits and 20 percent for operations and maintenance.

Mills are calculated based on the county's assessed valuation of properties and the district's annual debt service — money the district uses annual for interest and principal on long-term debt.

Bonds on the other hand, typically fund hard expenditures, such as capital and infrastructure, and are like loans to the district from investors to help fund longer-term investments.

The same mills that are applied outside the urban renewal authority are also applied inside it, but because of TIF, that money is then remitted back to the URA.

The School Finance Act millage is 22.36, and even though this money is applied to all property taxes, the school fund doesn't benefit, Towne said.

"The district is losing that money, but the state makes up that shortfall," he said.

The district is not suffering a loss from the 1999 mill levy override being left out of the agreement either, Towne said. However, it does place a heavier burden on property owners outside the URA whose mill levy is 5.72, so the district can receive its $7.5 million. The same can be said for the bond redemption fund at 7.98 mills.

Still, Towne called the agreement a "good faith effort" by the URA to do something for the school district.

"We'd really, really like to see the school built," Kim Perry, vice president of community design at McWhinney, said. "It's been a long time coming, and we already have a lot of residents out here."

Use of School Fund

As of last December, the school fund had about $5 million in it. Since then, more than $200,000 has been taken out for design work, Towne said, which also falls in the boundaries of the URA.

The average amount of money going into the school fund per year over the past years is about $930,000, according to George K. Baum and Co., an investment firm selected by the district as the underwriter for the project.

With board approval, the district could go to market and begin to sell certificates of participation, which according to George K. Baum's presentation, is "a financing mechanism that evolved as an alternative to issuing general obligation bonds." The certificates are "a combination of a real estate transaction and a bond, similar to a mortgage."

So, the district would essentially lease the school to the Thompson Building Authority, which would lease it back to the district. The district will make payments on the building to the trustees who make principal and interest payments to investors until the district pays off the building and takes on ownership.

At the same time as the district is selling bonds for the school, Towne said, because interest rates are so low now the district will also be selling approximately $2.5 million to refinance bonds issued in 2005 on the district's administration building.

Not All Like the Plan

After speaking to community members, board members met with legal groups and attorneys to verify the legality of taking diverted money that would not have been available otherwise. County commissioner candidate Eric Sutherland also filed a complaint to the Division of Property Taxation about the financing, citing violations of TIF and the Taxpayers' Bill of Rights.

And some worried that too much depended on speculation and projections of money that would come into the school fund through property taxes.

Board members delayed the project as they gathered more information. Some are more comfortable than others moving forward, but the decision will be up for a vote Wednesday.

"I think it's a solid financing model in spite of those who would like to criticize it," Superintendent Stan Scheer said.

He calls the move by the Loveland URA to create this fund "insightful" and hopes that moving this project forward will also shed positive light on any future school bond issue to build more schools in the area.

"I'm not sure that everybody understands how many square miles this district extends past I-25. We have a significant presence to the east of I-25 that needs to be serviced," Scheer said.

Board President Bob Kerrigan, however, has reservations in relation to the IRS and how it recognizes developers "who pull public funding out of a taxation process" and what legal ramifications that may create for the district.

Kerrigan said it's not that he believes the district doesn't need the school, but it's the process that's the issue.

"We're using a COP (certificates of participation) mechanism, which is really circumventing TABOR (Taxpayers Bill of Rights) ... That is not what I believe is right and that's not what the voters expected," he said.

And Kerrigan worries about not bringing enough students into the district to fill schools as well as creating a "funding vacuum that will be a shortfall for other schools in the district," especially if the district has to pick up any funding shortfalls for the school through its General Fund.

Wednesday's vote is an important one, and Kerrigan said each board member will have to make a decision.

"Those are the things they'll have to deal with in the future by their voting record," he said.

But board member Carl Langner said he spent a lot of time in the spring researching the legal ramifications and seeking legal counsel, and he's confident in moving forward.

"I see this as a benefit to the community rather than as a loss to the community," he said.

Langner recognizes other board members' concerns but doesn't share them.

"Some of the board members feel that there's still questions about it, and not necessarily that it's illegal or unethical or anything else — just that they're not comfortable with it," he said.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Saja Hindi at 970-669-5050, ext. 521, or hindis@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @SajaHindiRH.