(Left to right): Thorold Barker, Editor, EMEA, The Wall Street Journal; David Page, Senior Economist, AXA Investment Managers; Michael Spencer, Group Chief Executive Officer, ICAP; Huw Van Steenis, Head of Financial Research, Morgan Stanley; Simon Nixon, Chief European Commentator for The Wall Street Journal. Angus Peckham-Cooper/Dow Jones

U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron needs to refocus his election campaign on his government’s economic record ahead of the upcoming vote, said a notable Conservative Party backer and senior figure in London’s financial-services industry.

Michael Spencer, the head of big London brokerage firm ICAP PLC and chairman of the Conservative Foundation, said refocusing the party’s campaign strategy is necessary if the prime minister wants to secure victory.

“I think if they can bring the debate back to the economy…I think the credibility of the Conservatives, their existing track record…I think David and crew can still do it,” said Mr. Spencer, speaking Thursday on a panel hosted by Dow Jones Newswires/The Wall Street Journal.

The intervention comes as Mr. Cameron’s center-right Conservatives are effectively neck and neck in the opinion polls with the opposition center-left Labour Party, in one of the tightest British elections in recent years. Opinion polls suggest neither party is likely to secure a majority when Britain goes to the polls on May 7, meaning one of them would need to form a minority government or a coalition with support from smaller parties.

David Page, senior economist at AXA Investment Managers in London, said he believes that the best outcome for markets would be a minority government or some sort of coalition, as it would bring the main political parties back to the center of the political spectrum. Both parties have been pulled to their extremes by challenges from smaller parties.

“I think it could be a relatively stable mess,” said Mr. Page, also speaking at the Thursday event. “I think it could actually last for a lot longer” than some are expecting, he added.

While opinion polls remain in deadlock, analysts and commentators have noted that there recently has been positive momentum in favor of Labour leader Ed Miiband, whose personal popularity ratings have improved—albeit from a very low base.

Both parties have made the economy a central part of their campaigns, but some businesses say this election presents a difficult choice for corporate Britain.

Support for the center-right Conservatives could usher Britain out of the European Union because Mr. Cameron has pledged—if he wins the election—to hold a referendum on whether the U.K. should exit. While businesses in Britain often complain about regulations that emanate from Brussels, many say they would fear losing unfettered access to the world’s biggest economic grouping if it left the EU.

But backing Labour could lead to a series of market interventions, as its leader has promised to introduce measures such as freezing retail energy prices and forcing banks to sell off branches to encourage more competition.

On Europe, Mr. Spencer said he backs a key pledge by the Conservatives to hold a referendum in 2017 about whether the U.K. should remain as a member of the European Union. He said he would work to persuade the EU that it needs to reform, to focus on an economic growth agenda, but if that’s not possible the U.K. might be better going it alone.

He described some EU proposals as damaging, such as an effort to limit compensation in banking which he said “is positively ridiculous, positively absurd. It’s actually disruptive.”

But he played down fears that the City of London would be a big casualty of an EU exit. ICAP’s business “is so global we can shift the center of gravity of our business, if needed, elsewhere,” he said, but the idea of moving to another European financial center such as Frankfurt or Paris “is simply not a feasible one.”

Huw van Steenis, head of financial research at Morgan Stanley, at the event agreed there wouldn’t be a huge exodus but that some banks from other parts of the world may decamp rather than face the hassle of managing two different regulatory systems.

“We’ll have given an unnecessary leg up to somewhere else, probably Frankfurt,” he said.