The quarter-million New Jersey residents who buy their health insurance through the federal exchange will continue to have a wide selection of plans, as five companies are offering up to 59 different plans for 2016.

Open enrollment for those plans begins Nov. 1 and ends Dec. 15 for coverage that starts at the beginning of the year.

In this, the third open enrollment period under the landmark Affordable Care Act, citizens will face a stiffer penalty for remaining uninsured. When they file their income taxes next spring, they will be assessed a fine of 2.5 percent of their income.

In the New Jersey market, not all plans are offered everywhere. Shoppers for insurance through the exchange - which is where people must go if they want to qualify for a government subsidy of their monthly premium - will find that residents of some counties have more choices than others.

Residents of rural counties such as Salem, Sussex, Warren, and Hunterdon counties have fewer selections, while people in Ocean and Monmouth have the most. No one will have fewer than 40 policies from which to choose, however.

David Oscar, an insurance broker in Fairfield and spokesman for the New Jersey Association of Health Underwriters, called the offerings on the health exchange "an interesting mixed bag." While the federal government announced earlier this week that prices in New Jersey were going up an average of 5 percent, Oscar said he'd noticed increases of 5 to 9 percent.

That means New Jersey consumers avoid some of the hefty hikes seen in other states - as well as in New Jersey in previous years. Oscar said some of his clients feel the ACA has caused annual increases to level out. "They are somewhat steady," he said. "It makes it easier to plan and budget."

All five companies that sold plans through the federal exchange last year will be in the market again in 2016:

Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, which has over half the customers who became insured through the federal online website, unveiled its eagerly-awaited OMNIA plans on the site. Horizon, which insures 3.8 million people, more than any other carrier in the state, announced the OMNIA Alliance last month and drew instant attention over the company's promise to cut rates and offer deeper savings if members use 36 "Tier 1" select hospitals and 24,000 doctors and other medical providers.

The OMNIA premiums offered on the health exchange are 15 percent cheaper than Horizon's other standard plans, Horizon spokesman Tom Vincz said. Consumers will see five OMNIA plans each in the individual market and small business markets, along with four and nine other Horizon products in the individual and small business market, respectively.

The newest entry into the Jersey marketplace, a company called Oscar, said it continues to strive for competitive pricing in its market offerings. CEO Mario Schlosser said the company's minimum monthly premium rates by "metal" level for coverage in 2016 will be $202 for catastrophic coverage, $276 for a Bronze plan, $289 for a Silver plan, and $363 for a Gold plan. Oscar doesn't offer plans in all counties, but in those areas where it participates, it has eight different kinds of policies.

AmeriHealth is offering 20 plans on the federal exchange, including four new plans. Most of AmeriHealth's plans offer up to three varieties of networks, a spokeswoman said. She also indicated that more than half of AmeriHealth's individual customers will see their premiums drop next year.

Health Republic of New Jersey, an insurance co-op, is offering 17 plans, down slightly from the number offered last year.

UnitedHealthcare is expanding its product line from last year, offering seven plans instead of six. Its plans will be available in every county throughout the state. While the company eliminated its Platinum plan, it has added a new "catastrophic" plan for 2016.

There is no "average" monthly premium, because premiums depend on the age, location, income, and family size of the shopper. In addition, insurance that comes with more robust coverage - including lower deductibles and co-pays, for example - costs more. A customer's final cost is also dependent on how much subsidy, if any, he or she receives from the federal government to defray the cost.

"The premium price of course is one of several cost factors which will vary based on how often someone uses their coverage," said Vincz, the Horizon spokesman. "Out-of-pocket costs can move significantly based on deductibles, co-pays and coinsurance, and there are some wide ranges among the carriers."

Oscar said it will be harder for customers who want the freedom to travel out out-of-state hospitals to find a policy that accommodates those wishes. Only AmeriHealth offers that option in one of its plans. "The rest are HMOS," he said. "If I need to go to Sloan-Kettering, I can't get there necessarily."

Open enrollment comes as Trenton continues to debate Horizon's bid to reduce premiums by working closely with some hospital chains but not others. Two state senators have asked the state Attorney General and the Federal Trade Commission to investigate Horizon's OMNIA plan, based in part on concern the hospitals relegated to a "Tier 2" status might be driven out of business by the carrier's omission.

Kathleen O'Brien may be reached at kobrien@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @OBrienLedger. Find NJ.com on Facebook.