Following a statewide search, Bonnie Bochniak has been hired as Oakland University's State Relations Director, according to Rochelle Black, vice president of the Office of Government and Community Relations. Bochniak starts at OU on January 25.

Bochniak, of Okemos, joins Oakland after more than 10 years as vice president of Government Relations for the Michigan Business and Professional Association/Michigan Food and Beverage Association.

In that role, she worked extensively on the Affordable Care Act as well as testified and lobbied on behalf of the organization. She also advised association members on key legislative issues while working with state legislators, state departments, state agencies and other organizations in Lansing.

"We are pleased to have Bonnie join Oakland University as a member of our Government and Community Relations team," Black said of the hiring. "The breadth and depth of her experiences, coupled with her personality and ability to work effectively with state officials and members of their staff, make her ideally suited to serve as our State Relations Director."

Immediately prior to her work with the MBPA, Bochniak served as Legislative Director and Chief of Staff to Representative Fran Amos. She has also served as a legislative consultant for Caucus Services, as a senate aide to the Senate Majority Communications staff and as an event coordinator during Mike Rogers' run for Congress in 2000.

She began her government relations career by working as an executive staff assistant to Governor John Engler in 1999.

Bochniak holds a master's degree in public administration and bachelor's degree in public administration with a minor in management from Western Michigan University.

In her community, Bochniak is a long-time member of the Lansing Humane Society Fundraising Board and served two years as an appointed member of the City of Williamston Downtown Development Authority.

# # #

About OU's Office of Government and Community Relations:

The mission of Oakland University's Office of Government and Community Relations is to advocate for and promote the important role OU plays in the future of our region, state, nation and world. The team enhances awareness among state, county, local and federal government officials as well as corporate and community organizations. The office serves as a liaison to these public entities and constituencies and is in charge of establishing and maintaining mutually beneficial relationships and partnerships with those individuals who have a direct influence over public policy, appropriations and community matters that impact Oakland University.