'We're very sensitive to landowner relations'

Lafayette resident Pam Elder said that when her dog Roxy was younger, a hot air balloon almost landed on their roof. Ever since then, Roxy has hid in fear whenever she senses the mysterious, flying objects pass by.

"Sky dragons, that's the way Roxy thinks of them, breathing fire," Elder said. "Now she wakes up in the morning kind of afraid when she looks out the window."

Many east Boulder County dog owners have had similar experiences, but hot air balloon companies said they are constantly working with locals.

Jeff Meeker, a pilot with Fair Winds Hot Air Balloon Flights, has been flying balloons in Boulder for about 30 years and said companies that fly over east Boulder County neighborhoods try to make it easier on dog owners where they can.

"We're very sensitive to landowner relations, and we address concerns immediately," Meeker said. " Most of the pilots here, they've all been flying a long, long time minus just a few. These are all really good pilots, and a majority have been flying here so long that we know the areas to avoid."

Michael Gianetti, the president of Life Cycle Hot Air Balloon Adventures, which launches in east Boulder County, said companies take note when specific property owners don't like the balloons flying or landing near them and try to accommodate them as best they can.

"The utmost thing is we respect people's property and their rights if they don't want us there," Gianetti said.

Advertisement

Lafayette resident Suzanne Crawford recently called a local hot air balloon company because the balloons were causing her dogs to bark on a daily basis.

"There was a period of time where they were literally flying over seven days a week, and always hit our neighborhood about seven in the morning," Crawford said. "All the dogs in the neighborhood would start going crazy."

But Crawford said she contacted someone with the company directly, and has been impressed with their response.

"He has done what he can try to have the balloons go higher or when the winds are favorable go elsewhere," Crawford said. "They still fly over, but not every day and usually not as low. When they have come over low, they have called and left messages apologizing."

Federal Aviation Administration regulations require that hot air balloons stay at least 1,000 feet above the highest point within 2,000 feet of the balloon in more populated areas. But balloons are allowed to dip below that level when taking off and landing which can make the rule difficult to enforce.

"To some degree, it is true that balloons are always in the act of taking off or landing," said FAA spokesman Lynn Lunsford. "As soon as they become airborne, the pilot is always looking for a place to land."

Lafayette resident Jo Ann Reed — whose dog Saddie has been afraid of the balloons ever since she was a puppy — said several years ago it appeared the balloons were not following that guideline.

"They were definitely less than 1,000 feet up," she said. "They were just skimming right over the houses, barely making it over. We could see them in the basket, clear as day."

Gianetti added that balloons change direction by moving up and down to try and find different wind currents. So if a balloon is descending, it isn't to try and scare anyone.

"You've got to remember, we'll get a wind shift and we'll have to abort that landing," he said. "So when people see balloons going up and down, basically they are steering."

Meeker added that for people on the ground, it can sometimes be hard to judge how high up a balloon really is.

"When they're up there, it's really hard to judge," Meeker said. "It's an illusion, how high 500 feet or 1,000 feet is. The difference is hard for the average person to judge. There are times when — and I've been flying for 30-plus years — its hard for me to judge how high it is."

Ultimately Reed said she does not have anything against the balloon companies as long as they keep in mind that it can be a traumatic experience for dogs like hers.

"She's now 5, and she still freaks out at 7 every morning," Reed said. "It's an issue for us in that sense, because that poor dog is just reduced to a puddle."

For Elder, she is a fan of the balloons even if her dog isn't. So Roxy has just learned to adapt to her personal dragons.

"I think it's part of our little culture here, and I love it," Elder said. "Roxy compensates. If she knows they are up there, she just holds her head way down."

Mitchell Byars: 303-473-1329, byarsm@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/mitchellbyars