Historic hotel looks to upgrade amenities for guests, tourists and locals

The entrance to the Spruce Farm & Fish restaurant, a new restaurant at the Hotel Boulderado. ( David R. Jennings / Broomfield Enterprise )

The Hotel Boulderado on Monday will net a hat trick with the grand opening of Spruce Farm & Fish in place of restaurant Q's — the third such establishment at the historic hotel to be overhauled since the start of the year.

The historic downtown Boulder hotel at 2115 13th St. is undergoing a $1.25 million renovation that includes remodels of the three in-house restaurants and bars, interior touch-ups and the installation of a new roof.

The upgrades to the 105-year-old property come in advance of an expected hotel boom in the city of Boulder. One hotel is under construction at Boulder Junction and at least five more are in the planning stages or nearing development.

The Boulderado's transformations of Q's into Spruce Farm & Fish and the Catacombs into lounge bar License No. 1 and the remodel of the Corner Bar also are occurring as the city's dining scene — especially in downtown — matures, said Clark Davis, the Hotel Boulderado's director of sales and marketing. The intention is to provide upgraded amenities for guests, tourists and locals, he added.

"I think we all agree that the guest expectations are continuing to evolve and they're seeking other experiences," Davis said. "It's important to stay fresh."

Boulder's hotel industry remains healthy, according to information provided by Mary Ann Mahoney, the executive director of the Boulder Convention & Visitors Bureau.

As of the end of June, Boulder hotels averaged a 68.8 percent occupancy rate, up from 66 percent in June of last year and the average room rate increased to $136.54 from $122.28, she said. Year-to-date through June, occupancy rates have increased 4.4 percent, she said.

The renovation of Q's, eight months in planning, started at the beginning of last month. During the following five weeks, the space was treated to new paint and fixtures, the extension of the bar with a walk-up from the lobby, and the construction of an elevated dining area to create a more intimate experience, he said.

The menu that focuses on farm-to-table and fresh, natural and local fare also is anchored to the Boulderado's past.

In the 1940s and 50s, an oyster bar was a fixture in the hotel lobby, Davis said. So officials sought to bring that element back by having an oyster bar at Spruce Farm & Fish.

About 50 percent of the dishes developed by executive chef Shawn Murrell and crew are fish-based and include ingredients farm-raised in Colorado or flown in fresh from the Pacific and Atlantic oceans.

A couple of Q's staples such as the Maine lobster roll and the salmon sandwich remain.

In the coming weeks, Boulderado officials expect work to wrap up on the roof. The project, which resulted in the building being wrapped in scaffolding and the Corner Bar taking a sales hit, included the removal of layers of shingles, some of which dated back 105 years, Davis said.

"We were actually hoping to salvage some of the wood, but (the original shingles) were too far gone," Davis said.

The new roof will retain the iconic green color.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com