Not one week since President Obama called on the nation to “build a better politics,” chastising politicians of all stripes for contributing to a polarized political environment in which we “call each other idiots and fascists,” the Democratic National Committee has released a video casting GOP voters as unintelligent bigots.

The ad portrays Republican and Republican-leaning independents as being little more than willfully ignorant, misogynistic, xenophobic fearmongers.

A parody of the well-known commercials for dating site eHarmony, the video begins with a woman saying, “I’ve had other matches before — Santorum, Huckabee, Christie — and they’ve all left me hanging.”

It then cuts to another woman. “I’m still looking for that perfect match,” she says, “someone who hates Obamacare as much as I do.”

The ad’s light, comedic tone is quickly belied, however, by the sort of ad hominem attacks and partisan nastiness that make up the bulk of the Democrats’ rhetorical arsenal.

"With GOP-Harmony.com, your search is over. Just take our short quiz and GOP-Harmony will match you up with a candidate that is as out of touch with reality as you are — or more," Dr. Love, GOP-Harmony’s founder, tells the audience.

Caricatures of conservatives soon appear, each more outrageous than the next. "I also don’t want to let Mexicans and Muslims in the country," one says.

"I have no idea how the economy works, and that’s OK because neither does anyone on GOP-Harmony," insists another. The DNC must have forgotten that a committed socialist campaigning on roughly $20 trillion in tax increases is a serious challenger for the Democratic nomination.

The fake commercial touts a list of "over a dozen metrics to determine which GOP candidate matches with your views." Included on this list are the words and phrases "misogyny," "fear," "climate denial," xenophobia, "allergic to facts."

"If you’re the kind of person who other people don’t like being around, then GOP-Harmony is perfect. You will find a slew of candidates exactly like you," Dr. Love’s pitch finishes.

Clearly, the DNC sees little point in holding a civil conversation or reasoned debate. After all, why bother having an argument one could risk losing? It’s far easier to just launch insults at one’s opponents.

But the DNC is insulting half the country, and casting millions of good, honest people as effectively evil. In a Gallup Poll released in May 2015, 31 percent of Americans identified as very conservative or conservative on social issues, 33 percent identified as moderate, and another 31 percent identified as very liberal or liberal.

On economic issues, the same survey found that 39 percent of Americans identified as very conservative or conservative, and 37 percent identified as moderate; only 19 percent identified as liberal or very liberal.