WASHINGTON, D.C. - Freshman GOP Rep. David P. Joyce of Russell Township - who built up more than $1 million in campaign funds to prepare for his first re-election campaign, faces a conservative primary challenge from State Rep. Matt Lynch of Bainbridge Township.

Lynch - an attorney who touts his religious faith and conservative values on his campaign website - did not immediately return requests for comment on his bid for Congress after he filed paperwork at Lake County's Board of Elections. The filing deadline for candidates for the May primary was 4 p.m. Wednesday.

Lynch's website says moderate forces were targeting him for defeat in the Statehouse. Sarah LaTourette, the daughter of Joyce's mentor and congressional predecessor, Steve LaTourette, filed paperwork to seek Lynch's seat in Columbus.



"It should be no surprise that I am a target," his website says. "After all, I was one of only 6 Republicans who voted against the Ohio State Budget that raised your taxes and increased spending by 8 billion dollars!! And I was one of only 5 legislators that filed the lawsuit to try to stop Obamacare Medicaid Expansion in Ohio. Even my support of the unborn and the 'Heartbeat Bill' is seen by some as radical."

In an early taste of the upcoming 14th District political brawl, Joyce's campaign released a statement critical of Lynch's voting record and his past history of late tax payments.



"Matt Lynch has a history of repeatedly not paying his own taxes, voting against a $2.7 billion tax cut for Ohioans, and against a balanced budget," said a statement from Joyce campaign manager Kevin Benacci. "We’ll contrast that any day of the week to Dave’s record of getting Washington on a budget for the first time in 4 years, and voting to repeal Obamacare every chance he's had."



Former Cleveland-Cuyahoga County Port Authority Chairman Michael Wager was the only Democrat to file paperwork to run against Joyce. He had $347,664 in his campaign account at the end of 2013. David Macko, a perennial Libertarian candidate from Solon, is also seeking the seat.

Ex-Summit County Council member Pete Crossland, a Copley Township Democrat, filed paperwork to run against Wadsworth Republican Rep. Jim Renacci in the 16th Congressional District, as did Democrat James Donenwirth of Cleveland. Crossland said he was motivated by Renacci’s votes to shut down the government last year.

“There are many other Renacci positions that are just not defensible,” Crossland said in a press release. “We shall be raising them.”

Renacci established himself as a tough campaigner after defeating successive well-financed Democratic incumbents to win his seat – John Boccieri in 2010 and Betty Sutton in 2012.

“Ever since the good people of Ohio’s 16th district sent me to Washington, I have been fighting for their top priorities of promoting job creation, growing our economy, and putting us on the path to fiscal sustainability,” said a statement from Renacci. “It is a privilege and honor to serve the people of Northeast Ohio, and I look forward to continue working on their behalf to put forth commonsense, bipartisan solutions that will rein in excessive spending, pay down our growing $17 trillion debt, and make it easier for our small businesses to succeed.”

Cory Hoffman, a 28-year-old attorney in Huron, filed petitions to mount a primary challenge against Toledo Democratic Rep. Marcy Kaptur in the 9th Congressional District. He describes himself as a "Hubert Humphrey Democrat" who wants to focus on "generating a budget that results in full employment."



Two Republicans will face off for the chance to run against the Democratic winner in the general election: Robert C. Horrocks, Jr., 40, of Lakewood and 53-year-old Richard May, who runs the Cleveland Conservative Network and cites reducing government debt as a major campaign issue. Horrocks, a former mayor of New Carlisle, Ohio, works as a sales representative for an industrial bearing company and says he's committed to supporting U.S. manufacturing. Socialist Susan Purviance, an associate professor of philosophy at the University of Toledo, also filed paperwork to run for the seat.

Warrensville Heights Democratic Rep. Marcia Fudge, who represents the 11th Congressional District, will be face a GOP challenge from Mark Zetzer, a graphic artist and copywriter who previously sought a Shaker Heights City Council seat.

In the 13th Congressional District, incumbent Democratic Rep. Tim Ryan drew a primary challenge from 60-year-old John Stephen Luchansky of Boardman. Luchansky sought the Democratic nomination for Congress in the 6th Congressional district in 2006, but lost his primary contest to Charlie Wilson. No Republicans filed to run for the seat, which was designed to favor Democrats.

Canton Democrat Robert Fisher filed to run against Holmes County Republican Rep. Bob Gibbs in the 7th Congressional District. Neither has primary opposition.

No Democrats or Republicans filed to run against incumbent 4th District GOP Rep. Jim Jordan of Champaign County, who represents one of the state’s most reliably Republican areas.