By PG Veer | Watchdog Arena

The health care industry has undergone major changes over the years, and with National Nurses Week 2015 just behind us, nurses will have to step up their game, according to experts.

Wallet Hub recently analyzed the fifty states and the District of Columbia to see where nurses had the best opportunities and work environment using 15 metrics including salary, job openings per capita, and number of hours worked per week.

The ranking crowned Washington State as the best overall environment for nurses. It ranked fifth on the “opportunity and competition” measure (wages and opportunities) and 13th on the work “work environment” measure (working condition). At the other end of the spectrum, Louisiana respectively ranked 46th and 50th on both measures.

Beyond these measures, the ranking also included several interviews with experts in nursing to inquire about the future of their profession, including the effects of the Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”) on their profession. Some contend that this law will improve their profession, not only because the increased demand for care resulting from patients living longer, but because of the increased enrollees through the ACA.

Professor G. Rumay Alexander of UNC-Chapel Hill says, “The increase in patient populations makes the case for efficiency of scales and using all providers to the fullest scope of practice.” Her colleague from NYU’s College of Nursing Christine Kovner shares the same thoughts, adding that more efficient nurses “will be really important to meet the increase in demand for health care services.” Nurse practitioners, in particular, can act as primary-care physicians at a much lower cost that the classical physician.

Still about cost saving, Dean of the School of Nursing at Johns Hopkins University Patricia Davidson sees opportunities for nurses in home care since the “ACA also aims to keep patients out of hospital and in their communities.”

Associate Professor at Creighton University College Linda Lazure has a similar perception of her profession “if barriers to practice can be surmounted.” And these barriers are still numerous since “states have found ways to still limit practice” for nurses says Lori Lioce of the University of Alabama Huntsville.

If Massachusetts, which passed something similar to the ACA 10 years ago, is any indication, getting actual health care will be difficult since “the law didn’t create an infrastructure,” said Dr. David John, chief of emergency care at Caritas Carney Hospital in Boston. So while there were more patients, there weren’t more doctors – half of the family medicine practices were already full in 2011.

Nurses were affected too. Associate Professor at Boston College Judith Shindul-Rothschild co-authored research showing that, despite a substantial increase in patient admission, nurse hiring did not keep pace. As a result, their work load increased so much that “the Massachusetts Nurses Association was poised to have a ballot question [in] 2014 limiting the number of patients that could be assigned to registered nurses in hospitals.”

She predicts a similar outcome in states where hiring doesn’t keep up to pace with increased patient admission.

The future of nursing is greatly dependent on government policies. While the ACA has the ability to create more opportunities for nurses, they still have to overcome the obstacles of a physician-centered system that doesn’t give them more tasks, and will have to be careful about burning out since patient admission usually increases faster than personnel hiring.

This article was written by a contributor of Watchdog Arena, Franklin Center’s network of writers, bloggers, and citizen journalists.