GREELEY — Jury selection will begin on Monday in the trial of a former Weld County corrections officer accused of shooting and killing his wife in 2012.

Tom Fallis was indicted in 2014 on a charge of second-degree murder in the death of his wife, Ashley. Tom Fallis, now 36 is accused of killing his 28-year-old wife at their Evans home on Jan. 1, 2012. He has pleaded not guilty.

Ashley Fallis’ death was initially ruled a suicide.

The case was reopened in April 2014 after new evidence was discovered. The Weld County Grand Jury indicted Fallis in November 2014.

Ashley Fallis’ family had long advocated for the case to be reopened.

A 115-person jury pool will be called, Weld County District Court Judge Thomas Quammen said during a hearing on Friday. Potential jurors will fill out written questionnaires Monday morning before some will be called back for additional questioning.

Quammen did not know how long jury selection will take.

Weld County prosecutors argue that Tom Fallis shot his wife in the head after a New Year’s Eve party at their home.

But defense attorneys argue she killed herself. Fallis’ attorneys plan to present a suicide note that was written six months before her death.

During a hearing on Friday, Quammen found that prosecutors failed to properly disclose information about a key witness in the case and the information was later improperly destroyed by the detective in the case.

In 2014, Nick Glover, a neighbor of the Fallises’, told investigators that, outside his window, he heard Tom Fallis confess to killing his wife in 2012.

But the statement that defense attorneys say prosecutors “buried” and then destroyed was from a witness who said, days after Ashley Fallis’ death, Glover told him that she had killed herself.

“That is a key piece of information,” Quammen said.

The judge denied defense attorneys’ requests to have the charge dismissed and their request to prohibit the prosecution from presenting testimony from Glover.

But the judge did decided that the jury should be made aware of the prosecutors’ actions. Quammen will write a summary of the incident which will eventually be read to the jury.

The judge previously ruled that Fallises’ children will be allowed to testify during the trial, according to the Greeley Tribune.

The trial is scheduled to last three weeks.

Jordan Steffen: 303-954-1794, jsteffen@denverpost.com or @jsteffendp