Buy Photo Norton Hospital emergency room technician Christy Coviello adjusts an ice pack on Richard Roberts. Roberts received health care coverage via Coventry Care a few months ago. (Photo: Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

With less than a week before Kentuckians can start signing up for Obamacare again, there's little of the public hoopla that surrounded last year's historic launch in a state widely seen as a national model for its smooth rollout.

But after Tuesday's Republican sweep of Congress, there is new uncertainty about the Affordable Care Act's future — with Sen. Mitch McConnell, poised to become majority leader, saying that he wants to target elements of it.

Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear, however, said he's confident the law will ultimately remain mostly intact, partly because it would be "very difficult — not to mention unpopular — for Congress to try to snatch health care away from millions of Americans who finally have it, many for the first time."

In the meantime, key changes are coming during this year's open enrollment, including a bigger penalty for not having insurance, a shorter enrollment period, new insurers and potential changes to premiums and subsidies, including for those who enrolled last year.

The Congressional Budget Office has projected Americans getting coverage through the Affordable Care Act could grow to 13 million in 2015, up from 8 million during the law's first year. So far 80,000 people are enrolled in Qualified Health Plans in Kentucky, all of whom will get renewal notices.

Along with Medicaid expansion, the law helped reduce Kentucky's uninsured rate to less than 12 percent this year from 20 percent in 2013, based on a Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index report.

Indiana, like other surrounding states, relies on the national Healthcare.gov website to sign people up for Obamacare health plans.

MORE ON ACA: Ky's neighbors hope for smoother Obamacare year

MORE ON ACA: Obamacare changes for 2015

MORE ON ACA: How to sign up for insurance through kynect

Costs will vary

Kentucky officials this year are targeting about 100,000 people who still have non-ACA compliant policies that don't come with subsidies. These could include more than 14,000 customers told in early October by their insurers that their plans are being discontinued. Ronda Sloan, spokeswoman for the Kentucky Department of Insurance, said this is a business decision by insurers; the state allows such plans to be used until 2016.

Officials estimate that, in total, around 290,000 Kentuckians are potentially eligible for subsidies with Obamacare plans. Costs will vary widely; officials said there are 70,000 premium rates between all the insurers offering various plans on the exchange, and they are still being certified so they cannot yet be made public.

While some may rise and others fall, PwC, an assurance, tax and consulting firm that collected individual insurance rate filings across the nation, estimated Kentucky's average premium increase on and off the exchange will be 4.6 percent.

While kynect saw few problems compared to Healthcare.gov, the state this year is increasing its call center staff to 300 from 125 to reduce wait times that ran up to three hours, said Carrie Banahan, executive director of the Office of the Kentucky Health Benefit Exchange. It is also working with 2,800 insurance agents, compared to 1,400 last year.

And the state has continued to spend the $11 million in federal funds it got for 2013 and 2014 for advertising and outreach. It will again use nearly 1,200 kynectors, or specialists, who will set up at locations such as the Kentucky State Fair and health centers to aid enrollees. New this year is a mobile app and a "pop-up" store in Lexington.

"We think we're well-prepared," Banahan said.

Political uncertainty

Still, it all comes amid a cloudier future for the law after Tuesday election. McConnell said he plans to make Obamacare one of his first targets as majority leader.

Despite his campaign calls to tear out the law "root and branch," a repeal is highly unlikely given President Barack Obama's veto power. McConnell said it's more likely he will target elements of the law.

"We'll be addressing (the Affordable Care Act) in a variety of ways," McConnell said Wednesday in Louisville during a post-election press conference.

For example, McConnell said he may seek to eliminate a tax on medical devices or the "individual mandate," which requires most Americans to carry insurance and penalizes them if they don't. Obama, however, said this week he would not agree to change the mandate.

Robert Blendon, a Harvard University public health professor who studies the politics of Obamacare, said Republican efforts also could include attempts to cut employer penalties for not providing insurance or reducing the amounts of individual subsidies.

Because many newly elected Republicans took strong stands against the law during their campaigns, he said, McConnell will be under "a lot of pressure" to find ways to scale it back.

But Dewey Clayton, a U of L political science professor, said so many people are benefiting from it, particularly in Kentucky, efforts to scale it back too far could be politically costly.

Meanwhile, the U.S. Supreme Court Friday said it would consider a challenge to giving premium subsidies to people in states relying on the federal Healthcare.gov exchange. A ruling by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 4th Circuit had upheld the subsidies.

Blendon said the political debate could cause confusion that might dampen new sign-ups.

Ultimately, Beshear said he believes the law will survive in a state where about one in 10 residents found health insurance through kynect in the last year.

"Despite the changes in Congress, no action on the ACA can overcome a presidential veto," he said. "I expect Congress will try to work with the administration to find areas of the Affordable Care Act that could be altered, but I doubt we will see any major changes that will take away health care policies."

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share The Courier-Journal and USA Today traveled to Floyd County, Ky. to examine the implications of the Affordable Care Act in one of the country's sickest and poorest regions. (Jessica Ebelhar/The Courier-Journal)

Lessons learned

In the run-up to Obamacare's launch last year, insurance agent Marcus Woodward's Ashland, Ky., office was a flurry of activity as he fielded questions about coverage and cost before helping a couple of hundred Kentuckians sign up for plans.

This year things seem a lot more routine, like the quiet tide of insurance re-enrollment in workplaces.

One reason for the healthcare law's lower profile this year is because people signing up for Medicaid — who became eligible under the state's expansion of the program and made up the majority of kynect's sign-ups last year — can enroll at any time. As a result, far fewer are expected over the next three months. (Indiana did not expand Medicaid as called for in the law, but it is seeking approval for an alternative Medicaid expansion plan.)

"There's not as much talk about it this time," said Prestonsburg, Ky., insurance agent Darrell Patton, though he said confusion about the law still exists. "It came and it passed, and the sun still came up the next morning."

It helped that unlike the glitch-plagued Healthcare.gov, kynect for the most part proved reliable.

"We have not had any problems with our website," Banahan said. "It's been up and running with no problems."

Regan Hunt, executive director of Kentucky Voices for Health, said another reason for Kentucky's smooth rollout is that the state successfully branded kynect.

"Looking at it from a great big, 50,000-foot level, we did amazingly well," said Hunt, who enrolled in insurance through the exchange. "I've been very happy with the plan I received."

Still, Kentucky's rollout wasn't without problems. Banahan acknowledged that the state's call center was overwhelmed and understaffed, frustrating many Kentuckians.

Woodward said he also faced difficulties and delays when people made mistakes in online applications. "Before the ACA, you just tore up the application and started again," he said.

Some customers who enrolled in Obamacare plans faced difficulties such as narrow networks of doctors and hospitals or not being able to get needed services covered. Bernard Woods, a lung and colon cancer patient from Louisville, for example, is struggling to get approval for an expensive chemotherapy infusion pump.

"If they don't approve it," his wife Pamela said, "I'm stuck with the bill."

Kelly McKinley, 28, who cares for mentally disabled adults, last year got a subsidized private health plan through kynect costing $128 a month. Previously, health problems meant the cheapest plan she could find cost $1,400 — leaving her uninsured for years.

Despite struggling for months at first to find a primary care doctor in her network taking new patients, she finally did — and now is relieved to be covered after learning she'll be having a child. She'll soon be sorting through the renewal process, she said.

"I don't know what I would've done if I didn't have insurance," she said.

New on the horizon

Experts at the Kaiser Family Foundation, a health policy research organization closely tracking the law, say a number of important changes are coming this year nationally:

• The individual mandate's penalty for not having coverage in 2015 will rise from $95 per adult, or 1 percent of household income, to $325 per adult or 2 percent of household income.

However, Kaiser researchers said the CBO has estimated that many of the remaining uninsured will qualify for an exemption, including if the cheapest available plan is more than 8 percent of a person's income.

• Individual premiums and subsidies for those who are renewing from last year could change. That's because the factors that make up the formula for calculating them, such as age, income and the cost of a certain plan used as a benchmark, will likely change.

"Subsidies are almost guaranteed to be different — if for no other reason than you got older. So you'll want to go in and recalculate what you're eligible for," said Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow at Kaiser.

• Next year will also be the first in which people will be required to check a box on their tax forms saying that they had insurance or face tax penalties. Those who went without in some cases can claim an exemption on the form or provide additional documentation if one was previously granted.

Kentucky is subject to all of these national changes and some of its own. Two new companies are offering Qualified Health Plans on Kentucky's exchange this year — CareSource and WellCare, both of Ohio — bringing to seven the number of participating insurers.

And for the first time, the state's pre-screening process, in which residents can look at potential plan costs without actually starting applications, will allow them to estimate subsidies as well as premiums. One way they can do this is through the new mobile app, which allows people to see if they qualify for coverage, get information about the type of coverage and monthly cost and get connected to an insurance agent or kynector.

Officials and health advocates said they are working to spread the word about these changes, re-enrollment and the law in general — albeit in a more targeted way than last year.

"Last year, it was like 'all hands on deck,' " said Hunt, of Kentucky Voices for Health. "Everyone was talking about it everywhere, all the time."

This year, she said, her organization is reaching out to certain groups that might not have gotten the message: people coming out of jail or otherwise involved in the justice system; immigrants and refugees; the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community; and veterans.

"I tell people, 'Do your due diligence. Make sure you review things and see what's out there," said Woodward, the Ashland insurance agent. "Don't put your life on autopilot. Make sure you have a plan that fits your needs.' "

Reach Chris Kenning at (502) 582-4697. Reach Laura Ungar, who also covers public health at USA Today, at (502)582-7190 or on Twitter @laura_ungar.

GET KYNECTED

Deadline: Enrollment period starts Nov. 15. Sign-ups and renewals should be made by Dec. 15 to ensure coverage on Jan. 1, but they will be accepted until Feb. 15. Residents who qualify for Medicaid can enroll at any time during the year, and do not need to take any action during kynect open enrollment if they are currently enrolled in Medicaid.

Website: To compare plans and check qualifications, visit https://kynect.ky.gov.

Phone: Kynect customer service, 1-855-4kynect (459-6328)

App: The kynect app, which is free, will be available in the Android and Apple app stores by the time open enrollment begins.

Kynectors: To locate a kynector or insurance agent in your community, use the app or visit kynect.ky.gov.

ACA changes for 2015

• The individual mandate's penalty for not having coverage in 2015 will rise from $95 per adult or 1 percent of household income, to $325 per adult or 2 percent of household income.

• Individual premiums and subsidies for those who are renewing from last year could change. That's because the factors that make up the formula for calculating them, such as age, income and the cost of plans used as a benchmark, will likely change.

• Next year will be the first that companies with 100 or more employees will have to provide insurance or pay a fine of $2,000 per employee. Most such companies already provide insurance. Starting in 2016, however, companies with more than 50 employees — a group far less likely to already provide coverage — will have to do so.

• Next year will mark the first that federal tax forms will require people to check a box saying that they had insurance or face penalties. Those who went without in some cases can claim an exemption or provide additional documentation if one was previously granted.

Source: Kaiser Family Foundation

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1qtj84o