Topics: 2016 Elections, flat tax, Rand Paul, Republican Party, Republican Primary, Republicans, Supply-side economics, Taxes, trickle-down economics, Video, Elections News, Politics News

The 2016 campaign hasn’t been proceeding in accordance with Rand Paul’s expectations. He jumped into the race hoping to be the “different kind of Republican” who would capture the affections of younger and libertarian-leaning voters and soak up press attention as the idiosyncratic candidate in the Republican field. That hasn’t happened. His fundraising has been lackluster, he’s slipping or treading water in both national and state polls, and the army of diehard supporters his father once commanded views Rand skeptically because of his increasingly hawkish views on foreign policy.

Paul’s campaign tried explaining it all away as part of a deliberate strategy – Rand is playing the “long game,” they said, he doesn’t need the attention or even the sky-high fundraising. He has his slow-burn game plan and he’s sticking to it.

Well, that explanation is apparently no longer operative. With Donald Trump dominating all the headlines and the first primary debate just a couple of weeks away, Rand Paul is trying to get people to notice him again. Which means it’s CAMPAIGN GIMMICK TIME!

Here’s the new video out from the Rand Paul anti-Washington machine, which features the senator inflicting three different forms of violence upon a printed-out copy of the tax code.

It’s just Rand Paul hanging out in his… garage, I think? And he’s doing the manly stuff that men do when they just need to bro out and have some guy time: playing with fire, waving chainsaws around, wearing jeans, putting on boots, and tucking in your t-shirt. Speaking of the t-shirt, I’m not entirely certain what the phrase “Detroit Republican” is supposed to mean, but the word “Detroit” evokes romanticized notions of the blue-collar wage earner, and it helps Rand get into character as the “working class man” who uses power tools and solves all his problems with a wood chipper.