SOUTH BEND — Former police communications director Karen DePaepe in March 2011 told then-Police Chief Darryl Boykins she heard conversations that disturbed her when she learned a police officer’s phone line was accidentally recorded, Boykins testified on Tuesday.

But the captain in the South Bend Police Department stopped there, as the content of the tape recordings is off limits in the two-day trial centered on wiretapping practices in the department.

Instead, the proceedings that began Tuesday focused on whether the wiretap of the phone line was legal in the first place, a question that has spawned litigation that has cost the city hundreds of thousands of dollars.

“I didn’t tell her to listen more; I told her to give me what she had,” Boykins told attorneys and a judge.

DePaepe made cassette tapes from recordings of the office phone line of then-South Bend Police Capt. Brian Young when she discovered the line was tapped by mistake while investigating a glitch in the phone recording system. The same system records 911 calls and the front desk lines at the police department.

Rumors have circulated for years about what DePaepe may have heard on those tapes, sparking controversy in the community, particularly regarding claims of racist content DePaepe alleged was on the tapes.

Said to be in conversations captured on the tapes, law enforcement officers Tim Corbett, Dave Wells and Steve Richmond, along with Young and his wife Sandy, sued the city over the wiretap, and snagged a $500,000 settlement.

DePaepe lost her job, and Mayor Pete Buttigieg demoted Boykins to captain early in 2012 in the midst of a federal investigation into the legality of the recording of the phone line.

The U.S. attorney declined to file criminal charges. But the question of whether listening to the tapes violate federal law lingers, along with a public plea for the city to clear the air and release the tapes.

U.S. District Judge Joseph Van Bokkelen presided over testimony on Tuesday, as three parties grilled witnesses about police procedure regarding recorded phone lines.

The issue at hand is whether the wiretap was part of ordinary police procedure, as that is an exception to the Federal Wiretap Act. Police departments record 911 calls, and sometimes other lines as well.

But the city, represented by Edward Sullivan, is arguing that Young’s phone line tap violates the Federal Wiretap Act because it was an accident, and not pursuant to any regular practice at the department.

The group of officers, represented by Dan Pfeiffer, also claims Young’s phone tap violated federal law.

The Common Council though, opposes the city, arguing that the tape recordings fell under the ordinary police procedure exception to the Federal Wiretap Act.

Former Police Chief Thomas Fautz in 2004 established the recording of the phone line that eventually made its way to Young’s office.

At the time, a division chief serving under Fautz agreed to the wiretap in order to document calls and complaints.

“I offered it as a choice to the division chiefs. It was a useful tool,” Fautz said, adding that he would not tap a phone line without the consent of the officer.

After Boykins took over as chief, he did not change which phone lines were recorded. In 2010, a phone line recorded under Fautz with the permission of the division chief at the time was given to Young.

Young did not know his line was recorded, court documents say.

Boykins’ own phone line was also recorded while he was a division chief under Fautz, he testified. Boykins said it was common knowledge that some phone lines are recorded.

“Did you have an expectation of privacy?” Spence Walton, the Common Council’s attorney asked Boykins.

“No. I had a cell phone to make personal calls,” Boykins replied.

But Boykins also testified that Young’s line should not have been recorded without his consent.

“If a line was recorded by accident, and no one knew, could that action fulfill a law enforcement purpose?” Sullivan asked.

The trial will continue today in the United States Courthouse. The case is expected to wrap up in the evening, but the judge likely won’t rule on the matter right away.

MBuckley@SBTinfo.com

574-235-6337

Twitter: @Mabuckley88