Louis Basso, President – Alcott HR

Robert S. Budd, President/CEO – Family Residences and Essential Enterprises

Adam Zeitsiff, President – Jonas Fitness, Inc.



GOLD SPONSOR

Luitpold Pharmaceuticals, Inc., a Daiichi Sankyo Group Company, manufactures and markets a diverse range of products serving the medical, dental and veterinary markets. Its primary products include Injectafer® for iron deficiency anemia, Gem 21S® a bone generation device, Adequan® for equine joint disease and more than 50 sterile injectable pharmaceutical products. The company is committed to a QUALITY culture and its employees actively engage in charitable activities throughout the year. For additional information, visit luitpold.com.

SILVER SPONSORS

Bridgehampton National Bank (BNB) ranks among the Top 3 community banks in New York, according to American Banker. Headquartered in Suffolk County, New York, BNB has been meeting the needs of Long Island businesses and families since 1910. Now more than 100 years later, its commitment to the tenets of community banking remain as strong as ever: The Bank develops long-term relationships with local customers, offering banking knowledge and an understanding of the local marketplace while taking an active role in making the towns and villages it serves better places to live and work. Its professional teams of experienced local bankers offer flexible programs designed to help customers meet their business and personal financial needs. All lending and banking decisions are made right here on Long Island. This local market focus is backed by a full range of products and services, including effective technologies like online banking and bill pay, remote deposit capture and lockbox as well as the traditional menu of deposit and loan products. The Bank also offers title insurance through Bridge Abstract and investment direction through Bridge Investment Services. Whether it’s a business loan or home closing, BNB has an outstanding reputation for personal service, access to decision-makers and community involvement and investment. Visit bridgenb.com for more information.

Founded in 1956, Brookhaven Memorial Hospital Medical Center (BMHMC) is a full-service, 306 bed acute care, voluntary, not-for-profit community hospital and a leader in Emergency Medicine for volume with more than 70,000 ED visits annually, and physician and patient satisfaction, as well as for Trauma, Stroke and Cardiology care. Serving more than 350,000 residents from diverse economic, ethnic, and educational backgrounds, the Hospital continues to expand its medical and technical capabilities, staffing and training programs, physician roster, and community outreach, while restructuring and adapting to policies under the Affordable Care Act, and fulfilling a $60 million capital campaign for the new Knapp Cardiac Care Center. BMHMC is the employer of choice for an experienced staff of more than 2,200, and continues to earn recognitions, including: Stroke Center – AHA/ASA Stroke Gold Plus Achievement Award; Home Health Agency – Home Care Elite Top 500; Emergency Department – 90th percentile patient satisfaction by Press Ganey; Women’s Imagining Services – Breast Center of Excellence by American College of Radiology; Breast Health Services – NAPBC Accredited Breast Cancer Center of Excellence; Bariatric & Wellness – Center of Excellence; Wound Care and Hyperbaric – Center of Excellence & Healogics Center of Distinction; as well as five Diamond Patient Safety Awards; among others. For more information on Brookhaven Memorial Hospital, visit bmhmc.org.

The first provider-owned commercial health plan in New York State, North Shore-LIJCareConnect Insurance Company, Inc., was created by North Shore-LIJ Health System to make it easy for people to get and stay healthy. Its innovative model is designed to provide access to care that’s both excellent and affordable. Founded in 2013 as the first open enrollment season of the Affordable Care Act approached, CareConnect offers a variety of plans for individuals, families and businesses, and access to more than 20,000 provider locations throughout downstate New York. CareConnect’s network includes the 19 hospitals of the North Shore-LIJ Health System, as well as Maimonides Medical Center, Montefiore Health System, Mount Kisco Medical Group, Northern Westchester Hospital, Phelps Memorial Hospital and Wyckoff Heights Medical Center. In addition, MinuteClinic is also part of CareConnect’s network, providing members access to more than 900 walk-in medical clinics in select CVS/pharmacy stores across the country. Wherever and however people encounter CareConnect, they experience a customer-centered approach that helps makes healthcare simple. For additional information on the services CareConnect has to offer, visit nslijcareconnect.com

Hofstra University is a dynamic private institution where students find their edge to succeed in more than 145 undergraduate and 160 graduate programs in liberal arts and sciences, business, communication, education and allied human services, and honors studies, as well as a School of Law. With a student faculty ratio of 14 to 1 and a priority on teaching excellence, Hofstra’s professors teach small classes that emphasize interaction, critical thinking and development of judgment. At Hofstra, faculty and students have all the resources they need – a library with extensive online and print collections; state-of-the-art classrooms, learning and laboratory facilities; and broadband access to the Internet. Hofstra offers the opportunity to live and learn on its beautiful 240-acre campus on Long Island with easy access to the academic, cultural and career opportunities in nearby New York City. For information, visit hofstra.edu.

Long Island University is one of the nation’s largest private universities. Since its founding in 1926, LIU has provided high quality academic programs taught by world-class faculty. Long Island University offers 500 accredited programs to more than 20,000 students and has a network of more than 200,000 alumni that includes leaders in industries across the globe. For additional information on the programs and services that Long Island University has to offer, visit liu.edu.

BRONZE SPONSORS

Define. Design. Deliver. The combined forces of Blu Chip, BluChip Marketing and BluChip SEO are committed to delivering informed, media-savvy public relations, advanced social marketing and internet services based on superior industry knowledge, successful business insight and a real understanding of the issues that affect its clients and their customers. A full-service marketing firm, BluChip Marketing specializes in social media, public relations, SEO and advertising, and acts as a trusted extension of its clients’ marketing departments, producing results that directly and positively impact its clients’ business objectives. TheDailyBlu is a webTV and online broadcasting service focusing on local programming and entertainment featuring hosts from Long Island and the New York Metropolitan area. For additional information, visitbluchipmarketing.net.

CJM is a wealth management firm with more than 30 years of experience serving high net-worth clients and institutional investors. With assets under management exceeding $300,000,000, CJM has a different approach to investing. A strong belief in markets frees CJM to think differently about investing. The firm identifies compelling research and applies it to practical investing. Decades of research and rigorous testing underpin its approach to pursuing higher expected returns. The firm’s goal is to add value over benchmarks and peers through an integrated and robust process and has a long history of managing time-tested investment strategies for clients. For additional information on the services provided by CJM Wealth Management, visit CJMWEALTH.com.

With origins dating back to 1919, CohnReznick LLPis the 10th largest accounting, tax, and advisory firm in the United States, combining the resources and technical expertise of a national firm with the hands-on, entrepreneurial approach that today’s dynamic business environment demands. CohnReznick serves a large number of diverse industries and offers specialized services for Fortune 1000 companies, owner-managed firms, international enterprises, government agencies, not-for-profit organizations, and other key market sectors. Headquartered in New York, CohnReznick serves its clients with more than 280 partners, 2,500 employees, and 26 offices. The Firm is a member of Nexia International, a global network of independent accountancy, tax, and business advisors. For more information, visitcohnreznick.com.

At Grassi & Co., the experiences and credentials of all team members blend to create a wealth of knowledge, intelligence, personality, and a shared mission: to provide clients with the highest service quality; meet clients’ needs and exceed their expectations; be entrepreneurial in style and approach; treat everyone with dignity and respect; and promote a premier work environment that balances professionalism and fun. Though a certified public accounting firm, Grassi & Co. does not approach its clients’ businesses as typical accountants. The firm and its people are entrepreneurial in style and practical in its approach and doesn’t simply provide clients with financial statements and tax services, it delivers consultative business advice that helps clients solve challenges and reach new levels of success. The firm specializes in a range of industries, in which it has an extensive track record and proven experience. While each client is unique, experience has taught Grassi & Co. that the challenges they face are often very similar. For additional information, visit grassicpas.com.

Since its formation in 1978, the Hauppauge Industrial Association has become the recognized voice for business on Long Island and a powerful force and economic engine for regional development. Known today as HIA-LI, the organization’s member companies represent tens of thousands of business professionals. Headquartered in and supporting the Hauppauge Industrial Park, one of the largest industrial parks in the United States, the HIA-LI provides a forum for business leaders to network, problem solve and obtain advice on critical issues facing their businesses. Its programs and events promote strategic partnerships, targeted networking, information sharing and business advocacy. HIA-LI is building and growing the organization for continued success in years to come and has developed a series of initiatives and programs to support future growth of the organization and Long Island businesses, including manufacturing, workforce development, healthcare, clean technology, and many more. Visit the HIA-LI website at hia-li.org to learn more about the organization, its events and programs, and the services it offers.

HUB International is a leading global insurance brokerage firm offering property and casualty, life and health, employee benefits, and risk management products and services. HUB International Northeast operates out of 15 regional locations, including Long Island offices in Woodbury, Hauppauge, and Floral Park. For more information on HUB International and the services that the company provides, please visit hubinternational.com.

Knockout Pest Control, Inc. will solve your pest problems and keep them solved. They are experts in both residential and commercial pest management and has Quality Pro Green certification, known as “the mark of excellence in pest control,” awarded to less than 1% of pest control companies nationwide. Their technicians receive more than 100 hours of classroom instruction and in-the-field training on identifying pests and delivering the proper pest control treatments. Knockout serves Long Island, all five boroughs of New York City, Rockland and Westchester Counties. To learn more about how they can help you with Termite, Bed Bugs, Bees, Mice, Carpenter Ants, Roaches, Wasps, Yellow Jackets and other pests in your building, visitknockoutpest.com. “They don’t have that big red boxing glove in their logo for nothing!”

M&T Bank, established in 1856, serves customers at more than 650 branches in New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, Delaware and the District of Columbia. Trust-related services are provided by M&T’s Wilmington Trust-affiliated companies and by M&T Bank. Further information about the company is available at mtb.com.

PSEG Long Island is a subsidiary of Public Service Enterprise Group Incorporated (PEG), a publicly traded diversified energy company with annual revenues of $11 billion, which also operates the Long Island Power Authority’s transmission and distribution system under a 12-year contract. They company pledges to build a Long Island utility with PSEG’s same record of service, reliability and customer satisfaction. It will take some time to make all the improvements the company is planning, but in the end, they will create a utility of which Long Islanders can be proud. Keeping the lights on isn’t just a job for PSEG: It’s their mission. For more information, visit pseg.com.

P.W. Grosser Consulting, Inc. is a multidisciplinary engineering firm based in Bohemia, NY with offices in New York City, Syracuse, Seattle, WA and Shelton, CT. Founded by Paul Grosser in 1990, PWGC’s growth and success results from creating value through the application of innovative environmental and engineering solutions for its clients. For more than 20 years, PWGC has been providing quality engineering services to the New York Tri-State region establishing a reputation for exceeding client expectation in the public and private sectors. Dedicated to being responsive in the design and application of cost-effective solutions for the myriad of environmental and engineering requirements, PWGC’s areas of expertise include structure vulnerability and resilience, civil/general engineering, sustainable energy solutions, wastewater & water supply, natural resource studies, geographical information system capabilities and expert counseling and client representation. For additional information on the services provided by the company, visit Pwgrosser.com.

Suffolk Federal is a nonprofit cooperative financial institution chartered in 1967 by the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA), and is owned and operated by its members. Unlike most financial institutions, the earnings of a credit union are returned to its members in the form of lower rates on business loans, personal loans, higher rates on savings, and reduced fees, allowing Suffolk Federal to help its more than 53,000 members achieve greater financial stability. The volunteer-directed credit union, with assets in excess of $923 million, has eight branch locations and offers membership to anyone who lives, works, or worships in Suffolk County, New York. In addition to savings and loans, Suffolk Federal offers insurance products, free financial planning, free online banking and bill pay, mobile banking and more. Suffolk Federal is committed to a relationship with its membership based on trust and respect, and promises to deliver Better Banking for Long Island. For additional information, visit suffolkfcu.org.