FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

July 18, 2014

Contact:

AARP Media Relations

202-434-2560

media@aarp.org

Washington Business Journal Names Robert R. Hagans Jr. 2014 CFO of the Year Awards Honoree

Washington, D.C. –Washington Business Journal has selected AARP Executive Vice President & Chief Financial Officer Robert R. Hagans Jr. to be one of its 2014 CFO of the Year Awards Honorees. He is among 11 honorees in the Greater Washington area being recognized for outstanding performance in their roles as corporate financial stewards. Honorees were recognized on July 17 during the 2014 CFO of the Year Awards luncheon at the Ritz-Carlton, Tysons Corner in McLean, Virginia.

Rob Hagans has been with AARP since July of 2001 and proved a valuable member of the team, particularly following the global financial crisis of 2008. Under his leadership, AARP has continued to have a stellar financial record and firm policies that will sustain the organization and its social mission for years to come. As of the end of 2013, AARP had six consecutive years of positive operating results while maintaining financial discipline, improving financial health and developing a robust strategy for funding enterprise initiatives.

“Rob is the first to say that this is an honor not only for him, but for all of AARP,” said AARP CEO A. Barry Rand. “This award is a reflection of the culture of disciplined financial management that has been created here, a culture that gives AARP the flexibility and capability to thrive in the long term.”

Hagans has more than 35 years of work experience in nonprofits and financial management. His career includes a previous position as a Director of Finance for Prince George’s County Maryland, where he also served as trustee for the Prince George’s County Police and Fire Service Pension Plans; chairman of the County’s Risk Management Committee; member of the board of trustees for the Local Government Insurance Trust; and member of the Advisory Board for the Maryland State Local Government Investment Pool. He had previously served as an Assistant Vice President for Asset Management and Treasury Operations at Howard University, as well as Treasurer for the District of Columbia government.

Hagans currently serves on the boards of the Dorothy I. Height Community Academy Public Charter Schools, the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies and the Maryland State Retirement and Pension System. He previously served on the board of Children’s Hospital and the Boys and Girls Clubs of Greater Washington. Hagans is a member of the Executive Leadership Council and has served as a volunteer for the Boy Scouts, the Boys and Girls Clubs and 100 Black Men.

See video of Rob Hagans discussing his work at AARP here.

###

About AARP

AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization, with a membership of nearly 38 million, that helps people turn their goals and dreams into real possibilities, strengthens communities and fights for the issues that matter most to families such as healthcare, employment and income security, retirement planning, affordable utilities and protection from financial abuse. We advocate for individuals in the marketplace by selecting products and services of high quality and value to carry the AARP name as well as help our members obtain discounts on a wide range of products, travel, and services. A trusted source for lifestyle tips, news and educational information, AARP produces AARP The Magazine, the world's largest circulation magazine; AARP Bulletin; www.aarp.org; AARP TV & Radio; AARP Books; and AARP en Español, a Spanish-language website addressing the interests and needs of Hispanics. AARP does not endorse candidates for public office or make contributions to political campaigns or candidates. The AARP Foundation is an affiliated charity that provides security, protection, and empowerment to older persons in need with support from thousands of volunteers, donors, and sponsors. AARP has staffed offices in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Learn more at www.aarp.org.