The Tulsa Police Department sold one of its two helicopters last month, and a new one will be delivered in April.

The new chopper, a Eurocopter AS350 B2, will replace a craft that has been on the job for nearly 10 years, which is when the department prefers to upgrade its helicopters, said Sgt. Nick Cory, who supervises the department's seven-officer air support unit.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

"When you get up to that point, their maintenance starts increasing," he said. "You know, parts wear out more."

In the interim, the Police Department will have the use of only one helicopter, which could be grounded if maintenance issues arise, Officer Leland Ashley said.

"If there is some type of maintenance or required service, ... the one helicopter will be grounded, possibly for days or weeks," he said.

The Eurocopter will be outfitted with a spotlight, an air-conditioning unit, a forward-looking infrared camera system and police radios, bringing the total cost to nearly $2.5 million, officials said.

The sale of the previous aircraft, through a bidding process in September, contributed to funding its successor.

Reselling helicopters after 10 years helps increase the city's return on its investment, Cory said.

"The way we take care of our equipment, it's still worth a pretty good amount of money," he said.

Police helicopters are primarily used to support field units on the ground, Ashley said. The aircraft assist in searching for missing persons and can act as additional patrol units.

"I think the key thing with the helicopter, it gives us that view from the sky to assist in pursuits, things of that nature," he said.

The $919.9 million Improve Our Tulsa capital funding proposal includes $1.5 million to replace the remaining helicopter in 2017.