Marking the 151st anniversary of the Sand Creek Massacre, Gov. John Hickenlooper on Sunday announced a 640-acre land transfer to expand the historical preservation of the deadly site.

“Far too many people have never heard this story,” Hickenlooper said. “I encourage all Coloradans to make the story of Sand Creek a living history sharing the truth about this tragedy with others, especially our children, to instill empathy and understanding, the realization of what cruelty people are capable of. This deepens our resolve to prevent the worst of human nature from manifesting in the perpetuation of violence and injustice against others.”

The 640 acres being expanded are adjacent to the current historic site outside of Eads where about 200 people — mostly women, children and the elderly — were killed when U.S. Army soldiers ambushed the camp of Cheyenne and Arapaho chiefs as they slept.

Alexa Roberts, superintendent of the Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site for the National Park Service, said the land marks the spot where soldiers prepared to attack the camp.

Sunday, tribal chiefs and leaders of the Cheyenne and Arapaho communities gathered at the state Capitol for the 17th annual Spiritual Run and Remembrance event commemorating the massacre.

Chief Navitt Spotted Elk choked back tears at the event as he remembered his grandfather, Charles, an infant survivor of the massacre who became an orphan that day.

“When I was running, I was thinking of them,” Spotted Elk said. “From that baby that survived is where I came from.”

Hickenlooper also announced that Strasburg High School has chosen to collaborate with tribal leaders to change its American Indian mascot. The school will begin to incorporate the history of the massacre into its curriculum.

The governor added that half of the necessary funds have been raised for a Sand Creek memorial at the state Capitol.

Dennis Gallagher, former Denver auditor and annual participant in the anniversary events, said he hopes the increased efforts to preserve history will let people learn from the past.

“Let’s hope next year when we meet,” Gallagher said to the crowd, “the world has learned a little something about not massacring each other.”

Yesenia Robles: 303-954-1372, yrobles@denverpost.com or @yeseniarobles