Parkland Memorial Hospital board members got their first look Wednesday at budget projections for 2015, when a new, larger public facility will open.

The most “optimistic case” calls for a 1-cent tax increase for Dallas County taxpayers and a balanced bottom line. The worst-case scenario would leave the public hospital $190 million in debt next year.

Hospital officials were quick to reassure the board that Parkland was not planning to spend money it didn’t have.

“I don’t want you to think this is inevitable,” said Dr. Fred Cerise, chief executive. “We obviously will bring in a plan and interventions so we don’t go below zero.”

The spending uncertainty relates mainly to the estimated cost of staffing and operating the new 862-bed hospital. Next May, Parkland will move across Harry Hines Boulevard into the 2.5 million-square-foot facility. It is twice the size of the current hospital.

The costliest budget projection was generated by spending requests from hospital department heads. To staff the new facility, they asked for 1,214 full-time positions, in addition to the current staff of 10,446. That budget would total about $1.5 billion, a 21 percent boost over current spending.

“Everybody’s got a lot of wishes, and some of them are necessary,” said Mark Erath, interim chief financial officer.

The Parkland board must decide how many positions the hospital can afford to fill while paying other operational costs required by a larger facility. It is possible that portions of the new building will not be used if they cannot be staffed, Cerise said.

“That is part of the equation we will consider,” he said. “That’s the budget process we’re in right now.”

Parkland also will look for better ways to “leverage” the local taxes that the hospital relies on, Cerise said. Currently, a portion of the county hospital’s taxes is used to match federal Medicaid funds that go to private hospitals in the Dallas area.

The matching process was set up years ago when Parkland had maxed out the amount of Medicaid funding it could claim as a safety-net hospital. Now, hospital officials say, it’s time for Parkland to claim a greater share of the federal funding to cover the cost of indigent care.

Parkland and other Texas public hospitals are anticipating financial troubles because Texas did not expand Medicaid coverage under the Affordable Care Act. State leaders said the expansion, which would have covered many Parkland patients, would end up costing the state too much money.

Cerise noted that Medicaid reimburses Parkland only 57 percent of its actual cost of caring for patients. The hospital can’t make up the difference with private-paying patients because it has relatively few of them.

“We need to get 100 percent of our costs covered,” he told the board. “Eighty percent of our business is Medicaid or the uninsured. We have to get paid our cost.”

County taxpayers contributed about $448 million toward Parkland’s current $1.3 billion budget.

Under the best spending scenario for next year, local taxpayers would contribute about $478 million, including $17 million generated by a 1-cent hike in the tax rate. The rest would be generated by the rising value of the local tax base.

With the 1-cent increase, the Dallas County Hospital District’s tax rate would be 28.6 cents per $100 of appraised value, a 5 percent increase.

The average county homeowner would pay an additional $18 in property taxes next year. The estimated cost is based on last year’s average county home being valued $128,865 for tax purposes, including a homestead exemption. (The county has not yet calculated the average home value for 2014.)

Dallas County commissioners must approve Parkland’s new tax rate in August and its 2015 budget by late September.