CHI Health, formerly Alegent Health, won’t be an in-network provider for Blue Cross Blue Shield policyholders as of midnight.

One hundred thirty days of negotiation couldn’t find a solution to the issue of rates versus care.

Video: BCBS, CHI Health fail to reach agreement before deadline

The cost to continue using a Catholic Health Initiatives provider for those with BCBS will be a lot more, whether it’s in Nebraska or another state.

BCBS said it wanted to bring Nebraska’s largest health network in line with other providers, which sometimes costs 30 percent less than CHI.

“Their difference in rates is adding $60 million a year to the cost of our members,” said Lee Handke, senior vice president of Blue Cross Blue Shield.

CHI CEO Cliff Robertson said in a statement that he disagrees “with the way that Blue Cross intends to maintain and lower costs, with no concern for quality.”

Both companies said they put their best offers out on the table, but with no further meetings scheduled, they’re looking at what it means for patients come midnight.

"They're going to have to decide, ‘Do I continue receiving care or workup with a CHI provider and try to find out what the cost is going to be associated with that, or do I start over somewhere else?’” said Dr. Hank Sakowski, medical director of UniNET.

Some, such as Susan Odom, find themselves in the middle of health care confusion. Odom is pregnant and has been with the same Ob/Gyn for five years. Her current coverage under Blue Cross California requires she either pay out of pocket or go elsewhere.

“There were only two clinics in network that would even consider taking me on at 34 weeks,” Odom said.

Blue Cross of Nebraska covers pregnancy after 16 weeks as continuity of care. Other patients have difficult decisions about their care.

Handke said it’s about cutting costs.

"Anyone in the hospital today will still be treated as in network no matter when they're discharged. After today, they will continue to have in-network benefits. We also have a continuity of care process for people with conditions like cancer, maternity currently pregnant in the second trimester of pregnancy,” Handke said.

CHI said those who live in Nebraska and want to use one of its Iowa facilities, which would still be in the network. There is also no change to the virtual or quick care.

BCBS said it never wanted to push CHI out and will continue to negotiate to see if they can come to an agreement down the road.

Robertson released a statement on the issue.

"UniNet's negotiations with Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Nebraska are nearing the August 31 deadline imposed by Blue Cross,” the statement said. “At that time, your Nebraska-based physicians and hospitals will go out of network when Blue Cross terminates their contract with 15 hospitals and more than 1,000 providers. Since the end of May, UniNet has been negotiating with Blue Cross on a new contract. On August 22, UniNet offered Blue Cross a contract that would offer patients a health plan that works to lower costs by keeping their members healthy and control chronic health conditions. Blue Cross turned down that offer, our fourth full-length proposal, and did not provide a counter offer. They posted UniNet's offer on their website, but only chose to share half of it - they failed to post the portion that included a savings of over $55 million over the next two years. We fundamentally disagree with the way that Blue Cross intends to maintain and lower costs, with no concern for quality. We are absolutely committed to our patients and continue to offer high-quality healthcare to the region. We will work with our patients individually to ensure they can continue seeing their trusted care team, at costs as close to their in-network benefits as possible. If any of our patients have any questions, they can contact us at 888-245-4442."