CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Cuyahoga County Executive Armond Budish's proposed two-year budget includes an approximate 20 percent annual cut to The MetroHealth System and an expansion of pre-kindergarden, job creation and workforce-development programs.

Budish outlined the budget proposal Tuesday for Northeast Ohio Media Group editors and reporters before it was presented to Cuyahoga County Council.

While the county will carry over a $20 million shortfall to 2016 because of issues that occurred during the prior administration of Executive Ed FitzGerald, the 2016 and 2017 budgets are balanced.

The $373.5 million annual budget is subject to approval from County Council, which will hold hearings this month.

"The budget meets three important goals," Budish said. "It solves some very significant financial problems of the past that we inherited, it provides for the urgent need for services today and, perhaps most important, it provides a transformational investment for the future."

See the proposed budget below or click here if on a mobile device.

Budish said the county has too much debt and cannot seek bonds for additional projects.

"At this point our credit card is maxed out," he said. "We cannot responsibly borrow at this point unless we have identified a revenue stream for the borrowing."

He credited a budget task force and department heads for agreeing to justify every budgeted item and the willingness to find funds for programs that benefit the county.

"We have filled the gap by looking under every cushion and every chair," he said. "We cut the fat and are doing more with less."

Every department was asked to submit a budget request that included up to 10 percent in reductions.

"We did not do an across-the-board cut and did not use a meat cleaver," he said.

Following are new allocations:

Job growth and opportunity: $10 million a year in general revenue funds and $7.5 million a year in casino tax funds will be placed in a new Cuyahoga County Job Creation Fund. The fund will be used to provide low-interest loans for projects that can create jobs. The fund is expected to become self-sustainable with money paid on existing loans being used to make new loans.

Pre-kindergarten programs: $10 million investment to expand the availability of high-quality pre-kindergarten education. The county will work with a variety of community groups to create a $75 million fund to ensure all children have a pre-K education.

Workforce programs: $3 million to leverage with local and state workforce programs to help people find their first job and to continue to assist them so they can eventually have a sustainable income and climb out of poverty.

Blighted properties: $26 million - $8 million over each of the next three years, along with $1 million each year for two years from the County Prosecutor's Office, to demolish abandoned and blighted buildings.

Infant mortality: $500,000 in 2016 and $1 million in 2017 to reduce infant mortality. The county will work with existing programs, hospitals and organizations and coordinate efforts with Cleveland Mayor Frank Jackson and Cleveland City Council President Kevin Kelley.

Pay equity: $1 million to provide additional pay to supervisors whose pay has not increased at the level of county employees represented by unions.

Following are proposed reductions.

The MetroHealth System: The hospital, which received a $4 million annual increase from the county the last two years, will see its $40 million subsidy reduced to $32.4 million a year under Budish's proposal.

"We believe they can accept that reduction without causing a reduction in services," he said.

County officials have discussed the budget with CEO Dr. Akram Boutros and hospital officials.

The hospital has reported a budget surplus, Budish said, and the Affordable Care Act has led to less subsidized care.

Alcohol Drug Addiction and Mental Health Services Board: The board, which received a $5 million annual increase the last two years, will see its $39.3 million annual subsidy reduced to $33.1 million.

"The board is not the limit of what we do in mental health and addiction services, which are critically important to this community," Budish said. "We support in other ways with millions and millions of dollars."

The board also benefits from the Affordable Care Act and many services are now covered by Medicaid that had not been covered before, he said.

"We are not anticipating the cuts will affect services,' he said.

Criminal justice reform: The county will work with County Prosecutor Timothy J.McGinty to reduce the time people stay in jail while waiting to post bond or for their cases to move forward. GPS ankle bracelets will be used to monitor people and the prosecutor will shorten the time for grand juries to consider cases. That will save costs.

Reduce government expenses: $1.1 million a year will be allocated for a new partnership with the Cleveland Foundation to create an innovation and performance team. The will find ways to reduce the cost of contracts, insurance, utilities and equipment. The savings found by the team will more than cover the budgeted cost, Budish said.

Align the Department of Child and Family Services and the Department of Job and Family Services: Save $1 million a year by coordinating some operations of the two agencies. The move also is designed to make it easier for those who need services.

Eliminating unfilled positions: Count departments for years have submitted budgets that included salaries for unfilled positions. When those jobs aren't filled, the money is used for other expenses.

Contracts: Funds will only be provided for only what is spent under a contract. In the past, money left unspent by a contract was used for other purposes.

Other issues discussed by Budish:

MetroHealth plan for growth: The hospital is expected to outline its transformational project later this year.

"We are committed to support that," Budish said. He said the county's annual budget subsidy to the hospital could be used to help pay off bonds for the transformation, which calls for rebuilding much of the MetroHealth's West Side campus.

Justice Center: A study is underway to see what it would cost to build a new Justice Center, including a jail, Budish said. The study, which would include funding options, should be completed by the end of the year.

"The Justice Center is sitting on the most, in my view, important piece of property in the city of Cleveland," he said. "That property could be much better utilitized."

It would cost hundreds of millions to repair the current building, he said.

He wasn't sure whether locations would be identified in the study, but he said many areas in the county would be available.

An earlier version of this story incorrectly stated the proposed percentage that would be cut from the county's mental health board.