James Comer (Photo: File)

Terry Stephens, the Southern Kentucky businessman who single-handedly financed a $5 million shadow campaign for former GOP gubernatorial nominee David Williams in 2011, said he has contributed to a PAC supporting James Comer but said he wouldn't give to the same degree.

"Obviously, that was a different situation," he said in an interview Friday. "David was my son-in-law at the time, so there was a different relationship there, so, no, I won't be."

Stephens, the co-owner of Stephens Pipe & Steel in Russell Springs, said that rumors that he has given $500,000 to Kentuckians for Growth, Opportunity and Prosperity, a political action committee that will begin running television ads to help Comer on Monday, are untrue.

Stephens, however, wouldn't say how much he has given at this point.

"I have contributed a couple of time,s but I have not gotten to that level yet," Stephens said.

Stephens said he has known Comer, a former state representative and current agriculture commissioner, for years and believes he would be a bold and aggressive governor.

"Jamie and I have been personal friends for an awful long time," said Stephens. "Of course, he lives here in our neck of the woods, just across the holler there in Tompkinsville."

Stephens said that he wants to help Comer by contributing to the PAC because fundraising in Kentucky state elections is extremely difficult since the contribution limit to candidates is just $1,000 and money from other states rarely flows into Kentucky in those races.

By contributing to a super PAC, Stephens can give as much as he wants. Story continues below the video.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Governor candidate James Comer unveils plans his plan for removing "Obamacare root and branch" Monday during a press conferance at the downtown Mariott Hotel in Louisville. "It's the single worst piece of legislation in modern history," Comer said. Alton Strupp/The Courier-Journal

The pro-Comer PAC is headed by Richard Knock, a Union, Ky., Republican activist. It is preparing to air close to $500,000 in ads over the next three weeks — a significant investment especially since Comer can't compete financially with candidate Hal Heiner, who has invested $4.2 million of his own wealth into his campaign and has been advertising heavily for two months.

Polls have shown those ads have allowed Heiner to pull ahead.

Comer has been on television, mostly with cable TV buys, but has spent about one-sixth as much as Heiner so far.

Louisville businessman Matt Bevin ran his first television ad on Thursday, and the other Republican candidate, former state Supreme Court Justice Will T. Scott, hasn't begun running ads at this point.

Meanwhile, another PAC created by a Denver political consultant with ties to the billionaire Koch brothers, has been formed and intends to help Heiner and will begin airing ads next week, as well.

Citizens for Sound Government has purchased about $640,000 worth of air time on broadcast and cable television over the next two weeks.

Alan Philp, the group's chairman, didn't return a phone call seeking comment.

Stephens said he doesn't believe Comer will need as much money as Williams needed four years ago in part because the key in this race will be getting voters out in a low-turnout Republican primary to the polls. After that, he said he believes Comer will be the frontrunner in the general election against Attorney General Jack Conway.

Williams had a much steeper hill to climb because he was running against Steve Beshear, a popular incumbent, at a time when his own favorability ratings were very low.

A member of Kentuckians for Growth, Opportunity and Prosperity's steering committee, Stephens said he expects the PAC to push a positive message about Comer rather than attacking his opponents.

"I just feel very strongly that we just want to help him get his message out," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1D1A4ID