Brandon, SD

Brandon is under a water restriction after a lift station is down, which is leaving over 100 homes at risk of sewage backup.

City workers in Brandon have been working at a sewer pump lift station non-stop since Saturday night, after receiving a call that a homeowner had raw sewage seeping into their basement.

"They had Roto-Rooter called and said that they had a problem with water coming up in their floor drain, and our guy got the call from Roto-Rooter which is our policy, and they went out to check the manholes and the manhole was full of water. So he kind of knew there was a problem," Director of Brandon Public Works Rollie Hoeke said.

Brandon homeowners living east of Split Rock Boulevard are asked to limit the amount of water used. Hoeke was happy with how the city first responded to the restriction, but today is a different story.

"Ideally if they could hold off taking showers, you know don't do any unnecessary clothes washing. Something that would help minimize the usage, you know everybody, every person's usages count," Hoeke said.

City workers dealt with other issues today, including the fresh snowfall. The lift station made it difficult for the workers to clean the city's roads.

"I had a three man crew here from 5 p.m. yesterday until about I suppose about 10 o'clock I think before we sent the first couple people home, and then we called in three more guys, and it doesn't make it easy when you got a limited crew to plow streets and everything else," Hoeke said.

The city is bringing in a contractor that will install a temporary pump in the lift station, which should help with the water restriction.

"Hopefully with the pump they're bringing, the contractor's bringing, that should ease the tension there. I would still like to encourage everyone to use as little as possible, but I understand life happens," Hoeke said.

Lift stations are typically designed to move wastewater from lower to higher elevation. Hoeke said that it could take up to eight weeks to get the pump that would fully fix the lift station.