North Ottawa Community Health System has launched a fundraising campaign to support the construction of a new $9.7 million emergency department that will also help the organization usher in new care protocols that could help reduce the costs for care.

North Ottawa Community Health System’s plan to implement a new model for emergency care along with development of a $9.7 million facility follows a broader movement in health care to prevent unnecessary and costly ER visits.

Seeking to reduce inappropriate ER use and improve the coordination of care, the Grand Haven health system plans to couple the project with changes in emergency care protocols and partnerships with local human service organizations and behavioral health agencies to better serve patients who need further assistance.

In the long run, that has the potential to drive down costs both for users and for the 81-bed hospital by reducing ER misuse.

As the existing ER that was built more than 20 years ago with a capacity to treat 11,000 people annually became outdated — and as misuse of ER grows locally and nationally — the health system concluded that crafting a different model for emergency care was needed with a new facility.

Doing so required a change in an entrenched mindset and moving away from a care model that for generations has been predicated on dealing with emergency patients “based only on the issue of the moment,” said North Ottawa President and CEO Shelleye Yaklin.

“You can’t just keep perpetuating the same old thing,” Yaklin said. “We didn’t want to just build a building. None of us wanted to just address, ‘How do we take care of more people?’ The challenge is how do we take care of the people who are coming (to the ER) who maybe shouldn’t be coming (and address their needs) in a better or a different way.”

North Ottawa Community Health estimates that about 4,800 or one-quarter of the more than 19,000 visits to its ER in 2014 were unnecessary. The health system expects that number will grow significantly in the next few years as ER visits increase to a projected 24,000 by 2018 as a result of population growth and the expansion of Medicaid in Michigan under the federal Affordable Care Act.

The problem of inappropriate ER use is pervasive at hospitals across the country and is only getting worse, said Sam Watson, senior vice president at the Michigan Health and Hospital Association.

Misuse of ERs drives up the cost to treat someone whose condition is better suited in a lower-cost setting such as an urgent care center or a primary care physician office, Watson said. Many times, those patients lack a primary care doctor, or may have behavioral health issues such as depression or substance abuse that complicate their condition or get in the way of them taking better care of their health.

“It’s an opportunity and it’s an area that’s getting a good amount of attention, and I think we can certainly do more,” Watson said. “That is something that’s on everybody’s mind: How do you reduce the inappropriate use of the emergency department and make sure that patients get their primary care visits and their care in the right place?”

North Ottawa seeks to address the issue by partnering with organizations such as the Greater Ottawa County United Way that can serve patients who need care beyond the medical treatment they receive at the hospital. By partnering with existing organizations, the health system can avoid duplicating services outside agencies now provide and competing with them for funding, Yaklin said.

Once the ER project is complete, North Ottawa plans to add a second floor to an existing hospital wing to house mental health care that it will provide through partnerships.

“For an increasing number of people, the emergency room experience needs to be something more, something different,” Yaklin said. “We treat the medical need, but it’s the other needs that go unaddressed that keep them coming back.”

The new ER care model also will follow new protocols for chronic disease management that were designed with primary care physicians. The idea is to reduce unnecessary tests and medication variations and assure that patients get the care they need after they are discharged from the ER.

North Ottawa expects to break ground on the project in the fall of this year, pending state certificate-of-need approval, and open the new ER in the spring of 2016.

The ER project marks the start of reengineering care provided by the health system to make “the community healthier,” Yaklin said. If it works, the health systems can apply what’s learned in the ER to other clinical services to improve the coordination of care across medical disciplines, she said.

“If we can figure out how to do that well in that setting, we can use the same type of philosophy in (other areas),” Yaklin said. “It’s about how we’re trying to coordinate the service lines.”

North Ottawa has worked with Grand Rapids-based health care architectural firm Enviah PC on the project’s design. The Christman Co. of Lansing is serving as the general contractor and Holland-based Elzinga & Volkers Inc. is the construction manager.

The health system this month launched a public capital campaign that seeks to raise $2.5 million to help finance the project and, as of early this month, surpassed 70 percent of the goal.

Over the last several years, many hospitals have renovated or built new ERs, altered care protocols, and launched efforts to keep up with growing patient volumes, better triage emergency and non-emergency cases, and reduce inappropriate ER use.

Watson of the MHA cites a 2013 pilot program at Spectrum Health, Mercy Health Saint Mary’s and Metro Health in the Grand Rapids area that sought to ease unnecessary ER use by getting human service and behavioral health agencies involved.

One outcome of the pilot was improved communications and a standardized approach to patient clearance so a behavioral health professional who’s called into the case already knows how the patient had been handled, accelerating their own assessment, Watson said.

Spectrum Health in late 2011 formed a medical clinic to divert nearly 1,000 so-called “frequent fliers” who use ERs at Butterworth Hospital and Blodgett Hospital in East Grand Rapids more than 10 times a year.