Richard Lane, left, Patrick Rios, Freddy Guiles and Devin Rafferty weren't happy with events in the game on Sunday. Hundreds of people watched the USA and Portugal play in the World Cup on Sunday at Conor O'Neill's in Boulder. For a video and more photos, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Hundreds of screaming soccer fans cheered on the U.S. team in Sunday's World Cup match against Portugal at an outdoor soccer party set up by Conor O'Neill's Pub in downtown Boulder.

By 3:30 p.m., a half hour before the start of the match held in host country Brazil, the restaurant itself was at capacity with about 350 people. Outside, hundreds more watched on a giant screen inside a gated beer garden, while additional fans spilled out into the street.

"The World Cup is awesome," said Jack Blythe, a longtime soccer fan whose family is from England. "All the people here watching, it shows that soccer is becoming more popular. It's a great game. It's about time that Americans started to appreciate it."

Zeke Brechtel gets emotional watching the World Cup on Sunday at Conor O'Neill's in Boulder. For a video and more photos, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Along with the watch party at Conor O'Neill's, the Boulder Theater also live streamed the game for free — and was at capacity during Sunday's match.

As they watched the hard fought game unfold, fans at Conor O'Neill's said they came for the opportunity to share their excitement with other soccer enthusiasts. While many donned soccer jerseys to show their support, others fashioned capes out of American flags or dressed in dizzying combinations of red, white and blue.

"I love soccer," said Boulder's Megan French Dunbar. "Soccer is the best sport in the world. I love the camaraderie of cheering with other fans."

Longmont's Jake Kotzman added that there's "so much more energy" when watching the games with a crowd.

Advertisement

"I love when the World Cup comes around every four years because everybody gets into soccer," he said.

Wendy Ingram, a manager at Conor O'Neill's, said the restaurant knew the watch party would be popular, but wasn't expecting a crowd that may have been larger than on St. Patrick's Day. She attributed both a growing interest in soccer and the game's late afternoon time — in the previous World Cup four years ago in South Africa, some games started at 8 a.m. because of the time difference.

Trinity Cook, 7, fires up the USA crowd during the World Cup match on Sunday at Conor O'Neill's in Boulder. For a video and more photos, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"We're thrilled with the turnout," she said.

To host the outdoor party, the pub worked with nonprofit youth soccer club FC Boulder to secure a special event and street closure permit, shutting down 13th Street from Pearl to Walnut. FC Boulder hosted some children's activities during the game will receive a portion of the watch party's proceeds.

Also helping with the watch party were members of the American Outlaws fan group, which led the crowd in chanting its "I believe" mantra.

Deafening cheers, accompanied by lots of high-fives, hugging and fist pumps, also erupted after both U.S. goals, though the excitement was tempered as Portugal scored a goal on the last kick of the game to tie the match 2-2.

Watching the U.S. team take on Portugal, the fourth-ranked team in the world, is "something you don't want to miss," said Boulder's James Fardiggo.

"We have to prove ourselves," he said.

The United States now has four points in Group G, the same as Germany. Both Portugal and Ghana have one point. The Americans will face Germany on Thursday in Recife, while Portugal takes on Ghana at the same time in Brasilia.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.