Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Reps. Marlin Stutzman and Todd Young, two Republicans running for the U.S. Senate, rarely crossed party lines since first being elected to Congress in 2010. Here are a few times when one or the other sided with Democrats. (Dwight Adams/IndyStar) Wochit

The race for the Republican Senate nomination has been overshadowed by the spectacle that is the presidential primary. So it’s been easy to miss just how nasty this GOP battle has been.

A new commercial from Rep. Marlin Stutzman accuses his opponent in the Republican Senate primary, Rep. Todd Young, of being a factory-made “sellout.” The two have waged increasingly negative campaigns against each other.

For a race that’s not getting much attention, and one between two guys who agree on so much, it sure has been a bruiser.

Todd Young and Marlin Stutzman, a pair of third-term congressmen, have been battling hard for the Republican Senate nomination for months. It’s been a largely under-the-radar battle, though, one that for some reason seems not to have struck a chord with Hoosiers.

Well, at least with those Hoosiers who do not live and die politics.

Now, with the May 3 primary just two weeks away, an already hard-hitting race is getting rougher. Nasty, even. A pair of conservative Republicans who are darlings of the National Rifle Association and the anti-abortion movement, who almost always vote with their party, and who share a mutual contempt for Obamacare and most other things Obama, have been bashing each other in increasingly personal ways in recent weeks.

“Todd Young does as he is told,” a new Stutzman commercial declares, portraying his opponent as a “sellout politician” and a factory-made product of the D.C. establishment. On Facebook, Stutzman called Young “an establishment puppet seeking to undermine the voice of conservatives.”

Young, meanwhile, has labeled Stutzman “a career politician” who relies on “Obama-style dirty tactics.” He has even created a side-campaign called “Me First Marlin,” which tosses out frequent attack lines and grainy videos and mocks Stutzman as an untrustworthy demagogue who has “made a career of putting himself first.”

We all knew the general election campaign between Democrat Baron Hill and the eventual Republican nominee would be rough. What’s been surprising is just how negative the GOP’s family affair has been. Essentially, the primary has centered on two things: Each candidates’ talking points about how completely conservative they are, and attempts by both to burn down the reputation of the other guy.

“It is a rough race,” agreed state Sen. Jim Merritt, an Indianapolis Republican. “Especially considering Ronald Reagan’s 11th Amendment about not criticizing other Republicans. That’s been pitched overboard.”

Pitched overboard, and buried somewhere deep in the Wabash River.

Merritt, a Young supporter, seemed to accurately identify the cause of the intraparty name-calling. He pointed to widespread uncertainty about the state of the race because of a dearth of polling and a lack of engagement among many voters. Then there is perhaps the biggest X factor of all: How the raucous presidential primary will impact this race.

“There are so many unknowns right now,” Merritt said. “I don’t think either one of them (Young or Stutzman) wants to stand there on election night regretting that they didn’t use everything they had, so they are throwing everything out there.”

Everything has included Young criticizing Stutzman for moving into a pricey house in the D.C. area, and Stutzman shooting back at Young for attending a Florida fundraiser with those dreaded big-money establishment types. The two have attacked each other's character, integrity, conservatism and honesty. And, of course, there was Stutzman’s support for a Democratic legal challenge to Young’s candidacy. More than anything else, that erased any chance that this primary wouldn’t get intensely personal.

The race has been free of much that might inspire a voter. It’s been ridiculous, actually, to watch two solidly conservative House members have their conservative credentials questioned. It’s been comically painful to watch the two try to tie the other to President Barack Obama.

“I would use the word sad,” said Monica Boyer, a prominent conservative activist in Kosciusko County who is volunteering for Stutzman’s campaign. “It’s sad to see how dirty it can get, and I think a lot of people have checked out because of that.”

You can’t blame them.

The bummer is that the race actually offers a compelling storyline, and a clearly defined and critical choice for Republican primary voters. It could have provided a stage for a meaningful debate about the future direction of the Republican Party. Because while both candidates have solid conservative records and views, their methods could hardly be more different.

Stutzman, a former state lawmaker from Northern Indiana, has battled repeatedly with Republican leaders during his time in the House, accusing them of not playing the kind of “shut-it-down” hardball he believes would bring conservatives more victories. He was among a small group that recently opposed the House Republican budget, for instance, saying it did not go far enough in support of conservative principles.

Young, who spent a decade in the Marines before entering politics, has moved up in the House by being less of a bomb-thrower and more of a coalition-builder who argues that moving legislation forward requires accepting political realities. He has won praise for his ability to work within the system, pushing forward legislation, for example, to bring more congressional oversight to federal regulations.

Young has won big endorsements from business groups such as the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and many top GOP leaders. Stutzman has received support from tea party organizations and other like-minded groups. You might say it’s a battle between the Paul Ryan and Ted Cruz wings of the Republican Party.

Indiana’s GOP voters have an important choice on May 3. Do they want a nominee who insists the key to success is dedication to an all-or-nothing strategy? Or do they want one who has been willing to accept the notion that pragmatism is sometimes necessary in politics?

That could have been the basis of a great debate between two skilled politicians. It’s too bad Young and Stutzman have chosen a much easier and sillier campaign path.

Thank you for reading. You can reach me at matthew.tully@indystar.com or on Twitter: @matthewltully.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1NiAUYM