3842572

President Bill Clinton has been telling everyone he is a vegan since 2009, but it turns out Clinton’s a liar.

The former president, who has been enlisted to sell the nation on Obamacare, told reporters that he was joining his daughter, Chelsea, in an all vegan diet after he had had heart trouble. He was even named PETA’s person of the year in 2010.

But in a recent interview with AARP, Clinton said he ate salmon and omelets once a week.

“Once a week or so, [Clinton] will have a helping of organic salmon or an omelet made with omega-3-fortified eggs, to maintain iron, zinc and muscle mass,” wrote Joe Conason in the AARP magazine’s August/September 2013.

Clinton urged Americans to stop eating meat products as well, telling the interviewer that veganism is good for “your own well-being” and “your country.”

“The way we consume food and what we consume” are driving up health care costs to unaffordable levels.

“You have to make a conscious decision to change for your own well-being, and that of your family and your country,” he added.

But while Clinton pushes veganism for the masses, the former president “has been known to stray.” Especially when he is overseas.

“He had the filet mignon last time he was here, four months ago,” Javier Blazquez, the son of the owner of Casa Lucio in Madrid, told The New York Times in 2010. “The doctors tell him not to eat it, but he does anyway.”

When asked by Charlie Rose about her father’s diet in September 2012, Chelsea Clinton confirmed that her father had become a vegan.

WATCH:

“He evangelizes about his vegan diet and being healthy,” the younger Clinton told Rose. “He’s not just trending vegan, he’s vegan,” said Rose.

“He is,” confirmed Chelsea. “He is in the vanguard of trying to make this much more a part of our conversation around health and public health.”

Clinton himself confirmed it in an interview with CNN’s Sanjay Gupta in 2011. Though he admitted, “Once in a while, literally in well over a year now, at Thanksgiving, I had one bite of turkey.”

WATCH:

The Washington Post identified Clinton as a vegan as recently as Aug. 22, 2013.

Clinton will give a pro-ObamaCare speech in Arkansas on Sept. 4.