Robin Williams was battling early stages of Parkinson's disease when he died by suicide in August, his wife said. (Photo: AP)

The week of Sept. 7-13 is National Suicide Prevention Week, and Sept. 10 is World Suicide Prevention Day. It is important to reflect on suicide, its prevalence, risk factors, what to do if concerned about someone, and where to get help.

The latest annual data available (2013) indicate that there were 41,149 completed suicides in the United States; that is 113 per day, or one every 13 minutes. It is also of note that more than 50 percent of the people who died by suicide in 2013 used a firearm.

Suicide has been carried out by people from all walks of life. Virginia Woolf, Ernest Hemingway, Cleopatra, Vincent Van Gogh, Robin Williams, Abbie Hoffman and Kurt Cobain are just a few of the many who have ended their own lives. Many of us know at least one person who has tried or completed. My connection to suicide is both professional and personal. In addition to working with many suicidal individuals, I had a friend who completed suicide many years ago. My friend’s death motivated me to become a psychologist and make suicide the focus of my life’s work.

Suicide remains extremely difficult to predict. However, a number of risk factors are important to recognize. These include a previous suicide attempt, low self-esteem, substance abuse, being depressed, experiencing violence or victimization, feeling hopeless and/or helpless, withdrawing, feeling trapped, having a specific plan for attempting/completing suicide, talking about suicide directly or indirectly, a history of suicide in one’s family, experiencing loss, and being exposed to another’s suicide.

What are some steps we can take to deal with suicide?

First, become informed and try to inform others. Suicide prevention workshops can be presented by a variety of human service professionals in venues such as schools, colleges and universities, and churches — and for a variety of community groups.

Second, reach out if you are concerned about someone potentially being suicidal. In suicidology, there is what many of us call “the question”, which is: “Have you been feeling so badly lately that you’ve thought about harming yourself?” or words to that effect. There is a pervasive myth that by asking this question we will give people the idea to attempt suicide. And while I suppose anything is possible in the very complex field of suicide prevention, it is much more likely that you may prevent a suicide than cause one by having the courage to ask the question if you think someone may be suicidal.

People in pain need our permission and encouragement to talk about their pain. If someone has been feeling so badly they have been thinking of harming themselves, then we also need to try and get them into treatment. Frequently, people will initially resist the idea of going for help. But with continued encouragement, many people will often eventually pursue counseling. Do not give up when encouraging someone to pursue treatment. I have seen people in therapy who had been encouraged for weeks, months, or even years, to come in for help.

What about after a completed suicide? It is very important — through postvention — to offer help to the survivors, those who are close to a person who has completed a suicide. Survivors need to learn about resources, they need a place they can talk about their feelings, and they need an opportunity to process the events. In short, they need support.

Finally, we all need to be aware of resources that can be of help. Three that I think are especially important and valuable are: (1) The National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, phone 800-273-8255; (2) The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention; and (3) The American Association of Suicidology.

With prevention workshops, reaching out to others, and postvention, the suicide rate can potentially be lowered, and we can live in a world where the trauma of suicide will impact far fewer people.

John Westefeld is a suicidologist and a professor in the Counseling Psychology Program, College of Education, the University of Iowa. Contact: john-westefeld@uiowa.edu

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1EPFslf