As Longmont city employee Carmen Ramirez addressed a diverse audience at Silver Creek High School's annual Martin Luther King Jr. Day celebration, she offered a solemn reminder.

"There may have been a time when we wouldn't have been together in this auditorium," Ramirez said. "It's important to pass that history on to our children. It's important for us to come forward."

The fairly diverse audience took in a rendition of "This Little Light of Mine," and heard messages of hope and love that the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. espoused during his short 39 years.

That message was tempered by a short film reminding those in attendance that the United States is only 50 years removed from children being shot with fire hoses and bitten by police dogs in the streets of southern cities.

Audience member Bettie Brown Nunally, of Longmont, sings at the start of the Martin Luther King Jr. Day celebration at Silver Creek High School in Longmont on Monday. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

Civil rights activist Strider "Arkansas" Benston spoke of a brief period following the Civil War when newly emancipated black people had the right to vote and participate in democracy.

"That got taken away chip by chip and then by wholesale," Benston said, referring to Jim Crow laws that enforced segregation.

What followed that brief Renaissance, he said, were decades of systematic discrimination by labor unions, draconian vagrancy laws that could leave a black person working a chain gang at the county jail and unequal wages.

Civil rights activist Glenda Robinson grew up in Tennessee at a time when black students used hand-me-down books, and black children were not allowed at zoos or libraries and had to use the back door at the doctor's office.

Advertisement

"Can you imagine not being able to go to the mall and hang out with your friends in public?" she asked the children in attendance. "It would be a real drag, wouldn't it?"

Robinson also took to the civil rights movement as one of about 40 black students at a college with 40,000 white people, joining the Black Student Association and getting sprayed with tear gas for her efforts.

She said a good tribute to King is to vote, adding that the 2016 election has been called one of the most important ever because of issues such as the Affordable Care Act, which could be in jeopardy.

She added that as many as four Supreme Court justices are expected to retire in the coming years, and a record number of children are living in poverty. Climate change and the crisis in the Middle East also top the list.

"Let your voice be heard," she said. "Vote knowing someone died exercising that right. And remember: We are more alike than we are different, but use that difference to make a difference."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme