Political observers who want to know who’s doing well in the 2016 presidential race have plenty of data to review: national polling, polling in the early nominating states, candidates’ favorability ratings, etc.

But it’s important to remember that the popularity of the current president will have a meaningful effect on which party wins the White House next year, and at this point, President Obama’s improved standing offers Democrats some welcome news.

More than half of Americans in a new ABC News/Washington Post poll approve of Barack Obama’s job performance, a first in nearly two and a half years. That compares with 71 percent disapproval of the Republicans in Congress, with six in 10 calling their struggle to select a new House speaker a sign of dysfunction within the GOP caucus. Likely boosted by improving economic sentiment, Obama’s job approval rating has gained 6 percentage points since July to 51 percent, a level he hasn’t seen since May 2013. That’s up 11 points from his career low a year ago.

All of the usual caveats apply, of course. This is just one poll, and most of the tracking surveys show the president’s support a few points lower – Gallup, for example, put Obama’s approval at 47% in today’s report.

Still, given the broader political conditions, the fact that the president has climbed above 50% in any major, independent poll is heartening news at the White House. It’s also likely a surprise to congressional Republicans, who’ve spent the last few months insisting “the American people” are furious with Obama over the Iran nuclear deal, the Affordable Care Act, Syria, immigration, and a variety of other perceived missteps.

If the Washington Post /ABC News poll is accurate, it would appear GOP assumptions are wildly out of step with mainstream American attitudes.

Indeed, while Democrats in Congress aren’t winning any popularity contests – their approval rating is just 35% nationwide – it’s congressional Republicans that are really unpopular. Today’s results put congressional Republicans approval at a woeful 24%.

In other words, the GOP lawmakers going after the president are less than half as popular as the guy they’re condemning.