— Enjoy the final year of an important era in Lightning hockey because next season just won’t be the same.

Bobby “The Chief’’ Taylor will step away from the broadcast booth after this season and slide into an analyst role for the pregame and postgame shows as well as during intermissions.

For two decades, when it was Hockey Night in Tampa, it has been Chief who has been a big part of those nights as he was invited into the living rooms of so many fans across the Bay area.

A generation of hockey fans have learned so much about the game from listening to Taylor offer a nightly education on the subtleties of a game that was unfamiliar to many when the Lightning started in 1992.

Taylor took over the color commentator role for the 1993-94 season and has been a presence in the booth ever since.

Chief will get back to more of that teaching next season as an analyst, and he intends to get back to using the telestrator.

The role Taylor has played in helping so many learn and understand the game can’t be understated. Personally, he doesn’t see it that way — he was just doing his job. But because he did that job so well, he helped cultivate a fan base.

I have one of them in my household, my 15-year-old son who has become quite a hockey fan and likes to draw me into debates about some of those intricacies such as line combinations and what defensive pairings might work better — and not just with the Lightning.

I’m sure there are plenty of other such stories around town among Lightning fans, and Chief played a big role in that.

“You could almost see it around town, in almost any setting,’’ said Rick Peckham, the play-by-play voice of the Lightning who has worked alongside Taylor since 1995-96. People would say, ‘Hey, Chief,’ and he has certainly earned that with the passion, but also with the hardened hockey fans from the North who grew up with the game when they were young. He can pick apart things that they appreciate, too. It’s not just the passion, or getting on the refs or getting excited when the Lightning are doing well or taking them to task when they are not doing well. He picks up stuff. When I watch a game again, it’s like, ‘How did he pick that up?’ He’s got that nailed down in the context of how that helped the play that followed, or a tiny little thing that happened four or five seconds before a goal was scored.’’

Peckham and Taylor have a special chemistry that has been a big part of hockey becoming a tradition in a non-traditional market, and the chemistry was almost instantaneous.

“We had gotten along great just from opposing teams (Taylor with Philadelphia, Peckham with Hartford),’’ Peckham said. “We knew each other for 11 years, so for the most part the chemistry was pretty instant because of that. We spent a lot of time together, families got together socially right off the bat.’’

I can tell you, that chemistry is evident even away from the broadcast booth as I’ve had the pleasure to get to know both broadcasters through my time covering the team. The passion for the team each displays is genuine and that comes across on TV so well, it’s almost second nature and something fans no doubt look forward to each time they turn on Sun Sports.

It’s been nearly 20 years, and it’s been a treat to watch the two together.

No doubt the Lightning have already had plenty of inquiries regarding the position and will have their pick of some of the top available names to serve the same role next season.

But it won’t be the same, and that seat will be a big one to fill for whoever assumes the position.

Enjoy the broadcasts for however long this season goes because it’s been a fun ride.

eerlendsson@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7835

Twitter: @erlendssonTBO