HealthCare.gov is floundering, but private health exchanges are alive and well and winning converts. And they may bring a major change to benefits in corporate America.

Dozens of companies have joined private exchanges, including Walgreen, Petco, Kinder Morgan and Sears. This year, more than 1 million workers are expected to select health insurance this way. By 2017, the number could reach 20 million, if employers save enough money and workers prefer more choices, one expert predicts.

Private exchanges are driven by the same ideas behind HealthCare.gov, although they appear to be rolling out smoothly. Companies pay a fixed amount, workers pick a plan for their budget, and a roster of insurers usually competes on costs.

That mirrors the design of a 401(k), whose growth swamped pensions in the last 30 years. Indeed, many call these “defined-contribution health plans” because they cap the companies’ obligation.

The 401(k) revolutionized retirement, often to the detriment of individuals and benefit of employers. Similar fears and opportunities are emerging with the private health exchange.

“Some workers will love it, some will hate it, and some will see it as a takeaway, even though it isn’t,” said Paul Fronstin, senior research associate with the Employee Benefit Research Institute in Washington.

EBRI, a nonpartisan research organization, has documented the decline in pension coverage, from nearly 62 percent of private-sector employees in 1979 to 7 percent in 2010. It also reports that more than half of Americans have failed to save at least $25,000, which makes many facing insecure retirements.

But there’s one key difference in the benefits: Mess up a 401(k), and it may be decades before the consequences are clear, Fronstin said. Choose the wrong health plan and you can switch next year.

“People can learn from the experience and make a change,” Fronstin said.

Like high-deductible plans and health savings accounts, private exchanges give workers more “skin in the game.” Put another way, they shift risk from employers to employees. The pitch is that people will lead healthier lifestyles if they bear more financial responsibility.

While employers pay a fixed amount in an exchange, workers can opt for richer coverage with lower co-payments and deductibles. They just have to pay extra.

In fact, most usually select leaner plans, said Akshay Kapur, an expert on health exchanges, and they spend less on doctor visits, too.

“That’s what consumer-driven health care is about,” said Kapur, a principal at consulting firm Booz & Co. “Once people are accountable for more of the cost of care, the hope is they’ll make better choices.”

Contributions become more transparent in an exchange, so prospective hires can compare benefits easily. In good times, companies might ratchet up the incentive to attract talent. But during downturns, they can trim the expense, just as they cut 401(k) matches during the recession.

Private health exchanges are not a new concept. More than 50 years ago, one was created for federal employees. And private Medicare exchanges have been growing for about a decade.

The Affordable Care Act drew more attention to them. In three years, plans on HealthCare.gov can compete for big employers’ business, so benefits companies are eager to show that private exchanges have an edge.

Aon Hewitt, which launched a program last year, said employee enrollment in its exchange will triple. With 18 large companies, including Walgreen, it expects to cover about 600,000.

Aon said the exchange “can minimize cost increases” for employers, and Walgreen said it would spend the same amount on health benefits as last year. That’s a win, given the steady rise in health costs.

Walgreen touted the plans’ flexibility, with premiums on high-deductible plans as low as $5 a month. More than one-third of Walgreen employees are single and under 30 years old.

Mercer said it signed up 33 employers for its private exchange, covering 165,000 workers and dependents. Towers Watson launched a private exchange in January, seven months after buying Extend Health for almost $436 million. Extend operates the largest private Medicare exchange.

United Benefit Advisors, a consulting firm for brokers, recently unveiled two private exchanges. One plan offers insurance for low-paid and contract workers.

Private exchanges haven’t had the enrollment problems of HealthCare.gov. They’re much smaller and contributions are set by the company, so they don’t require government verification.

More than 150 million Americans have coverage through employer-sponsored insurance. Among that group, almost half are offered just one health plan, and a third have a choice of two.

It’s difficult for employers to design common benefits that work for everyone, Kapur said, “so they’re probably leaving a lot of money on the table.”

How long will that go on?