If you’re a father, we hope today that you’re enjoying this newspaper — its print edition or on your favorite tablet or mobile device — in a favorite easy chair, or perhaps on a porch or patio, coffee or beverage of choice in hand and a day of relaxation stretching ahead. May your loved ones be close by with warm wishes and your cares — and any honey-do lists — miles away.

On this Father’s Day, we all owe a debt of thanks to the dads, stepdads, granddads, uncles and other father figures in our lives. The best present is always the one that money can’t buy — a call or a visit and some heartfelt words of thanks.

At turns difficult, messy, exhausting and overwhelming, parenthood is also one of the most joy-filled and rewarding pursuits. It is also a lifetime commitment.

While we laud those fathers who give their all day in and day out, we know that far too many fathers are absent, leaving their children without a crucial role model and source of love and stability.

A clever catchphrase promoting adoption for AdoptUSKids reminds, “You don’t have to be perfect to be a perfect parent.” It’s true for those considering adoption, and it’s true for all parents as well as the many teachers, coaches, pastors, uncles, godparents and others who serve as role models and mentors to our young people.

It doesn’t require perfection to step up and help shape a child into a strong adult; what it takes is simply a steady dose of presence and love. The following qualities don’t hurt, either:

■ Leadership: A good dad sets an example. He has a strong character and follows a moral compass that inspires his children and others.

■ Empathy: While not all dads are effusive in sharing their feelings, his children know through a word (or the occasional lecture), a gesture or maybe even just a look that he cares.

■ Selflessness: He puts his needs behind those of his children. Whether singing lullabies at 3 a.m., changing the umpteenth diaper of the day, forgoing his wants for a child’s new baseball cleats or celebrating an adult child’s professional successes, he’s always there.

■ Patience: We’ve all known our share of hard-headed children — or perhaps been one ourselves — so this quality is key.

■ Love: No matter dad’s personality, the one defining characteristic of a father is that he loves his children and shows it through his actions every day.

Near or far, living or passed, dads deserve our praise and celebration today. So make sure you reflect a little of the love that he gave you back to him or out into the world.