Insurers take on obesity prevention

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, more than one-third of adults and around 17% of children and adolescents in the U.S. are obese. It’s well known preventing obesity can ultimately save the healthcare system millions of dollars, but is there any financial payback for insurers? Dr. David Ludwig, director of the new Balance Foundation Obesity Prevention Center at Children’s Hospital, Boston, thinks not. He told Kaiser Health News that there’s no real incentive for payers to cover better obesity prevention and treatment because the costs are immediate and the benefits are long-term. According to Ludwig “it doesn’t make a lot of sense for individual plans when families change policies every three to five years.”

Even so, under the Affordable Care Act, insurers are now required to cover screening and counseling for obesity. And many are going above and beyond with both local and national obesity prevention efforts. So what, exactly have the major insurers been doing? Here’s a rundown of just a few of their programs.

Blue Cross and Blue Shield

Pediatric Obesity and Diabetes Prevention Kit: an online resource that contains childhood obesity prevention tools to help providers manage pediatric patients during office visits. The kit includes physician guidelines, BMI charts, a brochure about the implications of childhood obesity, posters and take-home materials for patients and parents.

an online resource that contains childhood obesity prevention tools to help providers manage pediatric patients during office visits. The kit includes physician guidelines, BMI charts, a brochure about the implications of childhood obesity, posters and take-home materials for patients and parents. Power1K Kids After School Program: a 24-week comprehensive health and fitness program to teach kids and their parents healthy habits and behaviors.

a 24-week comprehensive health and fitness program to teach kids and their parents healthy habits and behaviors. Girls on the Run: a program that uses interactive games and training for a 5K running event as tools to teach physical fitness.

United HealthCare

Diabetes and Childhood Obesity Program: an online resource that contains tips for preventing and managing diabetes, advice to help address childhood obesity and resources to help support overall health and wellness.

an online resource that contains tips for preventing and managing diabetes, advice to help address childhood obesity and resources to help support overall health and wellness. Join for Me: a year-long family program, which in partnership with the local YMCA, helps kids achieve a healthier weight.

a year-long family program, which in partnership with the local YMCA, helps kids achieve a healthier weight. Food for Thought: Eating Well on a Budget: a bilingual, multimedia educational outreach program that was developed in partnership with Sesame Street. The program is aimed at helping low-income families make food choices that are affordable and nutritional and that set the foundation for lifelong healthy habits.

Aetna