CBO revises Obamacare enrollment estimates

With help from Sarah Karlin and Rachana Pradhan

CBO SEES NEW ENROLLMENT NUMBERS FOR OBAMACARE — There was a lot to chew on for health politicos in the CBO’s budget and economic outlook released Monday, including new estimates that about 13 million Americans will enroll in coverage through the ACA this year — 11 million of whom will receive subsidies. That’s much lower than earlier CBO estimates, but higher than HHS' target of having about 10 million people covered in the exchanges at the end of the year. My colleague Nancy Cook has the full story for Pros.

Story Continued Below

DIGGING INTO HEALTH CARE NUMBERS — Here are three more data points that grabbed me as I read through the report:

— Medicaid projected to grow faster. CBO previously projected that 11.5 million Americans would enroll in Medicaid through the ACA by 2025. Its new projection: 14.5 million.

It's unclear what's behind the new estimate, but it's presumably based on more of the 19 holdout states accepting the ACA's Medicaid expansion. Still, it raises the question: With the number of holdout states steadily dwindling every year, was the CBO too pessimistic in the first place?

— Trust fund exhaustion looms. According to the new outlook, Medicare's hospital insurance trust fund will be exhausted in 2026. That’s four years earlier than the program’s trustees projected last summer.

There will be a fix — there always is — but a decade feels a little too close for comfort for some lawmakers. "I hope the president seizes on today’s grim news as an opportunity to take advantage of Republican and Democratic ideas — such as the reforms included in the Fiscal Sustainability Act — to help rescue seniors facing a bankrupt Medicare program," Senate HELP Chairman Lamar Alexander said in a statement to POLITICO.

— The 'Silver Tsunami' cometh. CBO projected that Medicare enrollment will grow by more than 30 percent in the next decade alone, and the number of seniors will steadily grow from 55 million today to more than 80 million by 2036. I tweeted these numbers out, in chart form — and CMS administrator Andy Slavitt wrote back.

"[That] chart drives our punchlist," Slavitt responded, listing off Medicare's top priorities: coordinating care, paying for new medicines, keeping people at home, support doctors better, and offering "smarter" incentives and rewards.

TRUMP CALLS FOR MEDICARE DRUG NEGOTIATIONS — The biggest health care news from the campaign trail on Monday: Donald Trump said that he would allow Medicare to negotiate drug prices directly with pharmaceutical companies, potentially saving the program billions of dollars.

Republicans have talked somewhat tougher on drug prices in this election, but Trump’s comments are especially eye-opening because he is embracing a position that Democrats have championed for years — and that Republicans have fiercely opposed. Full story here.

FEW SURPRISES AT DEMOCRATIC TOWN HALL — The candidates mostly played to type in Iowa during the CNN town hall last night, especially when arguing for their health care policies. Hillary Clinton pledged to build on the Affordable Care Act. Martin O'Malley riffed — again — on how his global budget plan effectively reduced health costs in Maryland.

The most memorable moment was when Bernie Sanders acknowledged that his "Medicare for All" plan would require a substantial tax hike, after all. “We will raise taxes,” the senator said. “Yes we will.”

WELCOME TO TUESDAY PULSE — Where I'm still struck by how POLITICO's podcast with President Obama shaped Monday's town hall with the Democratic candidates. Time and again, moderator Chris Cuomo and the candidates themselves referenced the president's comments, which came in response to Glenn Thrush's questions. The podcast is a must-listen, and you can find it here.

Tips, news, or reactions to the podcast? Email me at ddiamond@politico.com or find me on Twitter at @ddiamond.

JURY CLEARS PLANNED PARENTHOOD — AND INDICTS ACTIVISTS INSTEAD — A grand jury in Texas on Monday indicted two anti-abortion activists behind the undercover Planned Parenthood videos — and cleared Planned Parenthood of any wrongdoing, Jennifer Haberkorn reports

The surprise indictment came after a district attorney investigated Planned Parenthood's fetal tissue program. The Center for Medical Progress, an anti-abortion group, released graphic videos all summer purportedly showing Planned Parenthood staff seeking to profit off of the sale of fetal tissue — an accusation the group vigorously denied.

David Daleiden, who founded the Center for Medical progress, and Sandra Merritt, a center employee, were indicted on felony charges of tampering with a governmental record. Daleiden was also indicted on a misdemeanor count related to the purchase of human organs. Read thestory.

— Activist says he still exposed Planned Parenthood on 'fetal organ sales.' Daleiden on Monday said that he used the same techniques as investigative journalists and indicated that if he had bought tissue, someone must have sold it. "We respect the processes of the Harris County District Attorney, and note that buying fetal tissue requires a seller as well," he said in a statement. "Planned Parenthood still cannot deny the admissions from their leadership about fetal organ sales captured on video for all the world to see."

DID OBAMA ADMINISTRATION VIOLATE LAW WHEN IMPLEMENTING THE ACA? — Yes and no, according to University of Michigan professor Nicholas Bagley, who reviews the accusations and evidence in a forthcoming paper in the University of Pennsylvania Law Review. On the whole, "the administration's track record is good," he writes. "Over the course of the past five years, the administration has made many thousands of legally unimpeachable decisions in connection with the ACA."

However, Bagley concludes that the White House has occasionally "strayed beyond legal limits" when implementing the health law. He cites two examples: the administrative delays to provisions like the employer mandate and the decision to finance cost-sharing subsidies — the latter is the subject of the House GOP’s pending lawsuit against the administration.

"In both cases, Republican recalcitrance threatened to undermine the president’s signal achievement," Bagley writes. "And in both cases, the president appears to have broken the law."

** A message from PhRMA: Coverage does not necessarily mean access to care. More medicines are being excluded from coverage, deductibles and copays are going up and insurance companies are increasingly imposing other barriers to access. Know the 5 reasons you may not get the medicine you need. Learn more at AccessBetterCoverage.org - http://onphr.ma/23fm1LW **

NEJM RAISES SPECTER OF 'RESEARCH PARASITES' — Last week, the vaunted medical journal published a controversial editorial that raised the specter of "research parasites" who steal from other researchers' work. The editorial was widely perceived as anti-transparency, and on Monday, editor Jeffrey Drazen tried to explain NEJM's stance.

"We want to clarify, given recent concern about our policy, that the Journal is committed to data sharing in the setting of clinical trials," Drazen wrote.

— What's going on at NEJM? I asked Fred Trotter, who oversees the DocGraph data project and is a proponent of transparency. "Obviously I disagree with it," Trotter said about the editorial that sparked the controversy. "It basically says that research pursuits should serve the agenda of the original researcher. Which is not how science works.”

"I am sure some uses of data are in fact parasitic," Trotter added. "But they presume that the original researchers can tell the difference between a parasite and someone legitimately pursing an alternative hypothesis — without providing any evidence. Just assertion."

CLINTON SLAMS DRUG FORMULARY EXCLUSIONS — Hillary Clinton, an outspoken critic of the high cost of prescription meds, also isn't thrilled with a popular tactic increasingly used by some payers and pharmacy benefit managers to control costs, Pro's Sarah Karlin reports. The presidential candidate says she's concerned about the practice of excluding brand name drugs from formularies — often done when payers are able to get a competitor to provide a particularly hefty discount on a similar treatment. "There is no excuse for letting greed get in the way of people's health. Companies like these should be ashamed," Clinton wrote on Twitter.

TAVENNER TALKS: AHIP's MEMBERS 'APPEAR TO BE VERY SATISFIED' — AHIP CEO Marilyn Tavenner tells Modern Healthcare's Bob Herman that she's not expecting any further defections from her association, after UnitedHealth and Aetna left in the past year. She also listed AHIP's top five priorities for 2016: Growing Medicare Advantage, improving Medicaid managed care, addressing pharma pricing, implementing delivery-system reform, and ensuring consumer-focused health care.

THERANOS SPOX: WSJ GOT IT WRONG — On Monday, the Wall Street Journal reported that CMS inspectors found "serious deficiencies" at Theranos, which could put the lab-testing company at risk of suspension from the Medicare program. But a Theranos spokesperson tells PULSE that the Journal's allegations are off base.

"We haven’t received the report and CMS has been quoted that the report hasn’t been finalized and hasn’t been sent to the company," the spokesperson said. "And the [Journal's] blind sources are wrong."

MEDICAID RULE FORESHADOWS CMS GUIDANCE ON VALUE-BASED DRUG PURCHASING — CMS may soon address an issue that has befuddled drug companies and payers: Medicaid best price calculations. Drug companies are required to offer Medicaid the best price paid on the private market, but as Pro's Sarah Karlin reported last year, some firms worry that some proposals that tie outcomes to prices could mean they’d have to give away their drug to Medicaid patients.

In its final rule on Medicaid outpatient drugs released last week, CMS said it's looking at how to provide more specific guidance on value-based pricing, including how these arrangements would affect a manufacturer’s best price. CMS also expressed continued interest in figuring out how these types of drug purchasing ideas could work in Medicaid. The final rule: http://bit.ly/1nceht9

COLORADO GOVERNOR NOT SO JAZZED ABOUT SINGLE-PAYER — Gov. John Hickenlooper was caught on tape expressing reservations about a single-payer measure that will appear on the November ballot, Pro's Rachana Pradhan reports. In a closed meeting with the influential Colorado Forum earlier this month, Hickenlooper said the single-payer plan's costs would be "huge" and suggested it could hurt the state's business climate. Colorado conservative groups circulated the recordings on Monday to boost their argument that the plan would be bad for the state. The Pro story.

— Hickenlooper clarifies opposition. Following the dissemination of the recordings, Hickenlooper issued the following statement to POLITICO: “Over the last several years, Colorado has made great strides in expanding access to affordable, quality health care, while driving innovation and cost savings for taxpayers. Our reforms are just beginning to bear fruit and it would be premature to dramatically remake our health care system at this time. While we do not support this proposal we respect the motives of those behind it and the conversation about health care access it inspires.”

WHAT WE'RE READING by Jennifer Haberkorn

The nation is getting older and the number of doctors who treat the elderly is shrinking, The New York Times reports. http://nyti.ms/1PyQK2q

The FDA needs to do more to allow compounded-drug makers to bring their cheaper medicines to market, writes Mark L. Baum, CEO of Imprimis Pharmaceuticals, a compounded-drug maker, in the WSJ. http://on.wsj.com/1nLYySb

Aetna’s purchase of Humana could increase costs for customers, according to a Center for American Progress report written up in the Hartford Courant in Connecticut, a state that has to review the acquisition. http://cour.at/23pNAlJ Aetna said that the report was deeply flawed.http://bit.ly/1SHHMQR

The Atlantic reviews the struggles Louisiana could face as it attempts to expand Medicaid. http://theatln.tc/20pZvh5

** A message from PhRMA: The medicine you need may not be covered by your health insurance plan or plans may require very high cost sharing. Insurers are increasingly making it hard to get the treatments you need to live a longer, healthier life by increasing deductibles and copays and creating other barriers to access. Here are 5 ways insurers may prevent you from accessing the medicine you need: (1) Prior authorization (2) Step therapy (3) Non-medical switching (4) High out-of-pocket costs (5) Not covered at all. When you’re choosing coverage be sure to look carefully at how — and if — the medicines you and your family need are covered. Learn more about these terms at AccessBetterCoverage.org -http://onphr.ma/23fm1LW **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **