By

Sue McCullough believes she has always been destined for sales, starting as a hair stylist and manager of her own salon. “I've always been good working with people. I got tired of doing that after a while and went into the printing industry, selling printing for commercial printers for about 6 years. As people were moving to digital printing, I started thinking about several family members who were in real estate as well as the investing my husband and I had done in commercial buildings. I toyed with the idea of becoming an agent and in 2004 and I finally did it,” McCullough said. She discusses her approach to selling real estate in this edited interview.

How do you consider yourself to be different than other agents?

I really try to connect with them on a personal level, almost as if they were a member of my family. It’s not just another transaction; it’s growing my relationships with people. If I do an outstanding job, then they’ll go home and tell their friends and family. My business grows from their referrals.

What do you enjoy about selling real estate?

I've always enjoyed working with people and developing relationships. I like to help people search for their dream home and I find pleasure in that. It’s about working with all different types of people.

What role do you believe a realtor should play for a client?

Buyers and sellers need to work with someone they trust who will look out for their best interests and educate them on the market, so they know what to expect and feel comfortable about the process. Keeping them informed along the way is also important and just making them feel at ease. Just being an advocate for them.

What changes have you seen in real estate over the years?

On the lending side, there can be a lot more hurdles for buyers to overcome and just getting financing together can be tougher. If clients let me help them through the process, then that makes it go a lot smoother. If they arrange financing before they start looking, the process goes more smoothly. Sellers have to realize that buyers are looking for that perfect home that doesn't need any work. The home they’re selling has to outshine the competition.

What qualities make for a good realtor?

Being knowledgeable about the real estate market as well as strong negotiation and communication skills. Being persistent is also critical. Listening and understanding the clients’ needs is near the top of the list.

Have you learned anything from your clients?

I've met so many great people and their families. I've learned to have fun in the process, enjoy it along the way and relax.

Have you had any mentors?

There are a lot of folks I've come across over the years who have helped me when I've had questions. My manager, Kathy Turtenwald with RE/MAX Realty 100 has always been there for me. That’s huge since I’m the type of person who wants the answer right now and she’s a great shoulder to lean on and has helped me learn. The agents I work with have been so giving that it’s just been great.



What’s the best advice you’ve been given?

Be patient and don’t give up. It will all turn out in the end and let it take its course. I just want the best for my clients and in the end for everyone to be happy.

What’s the most important advice you give to clients?

They too need to be patient and the right property will come along. To trust me after I’ve earned it and once that’s done, they’ll know that I will look out for their best interests, whether they’re buying or selling. I always put my best foot forward for my clients. I always like to know what their goals are ahead of time so I can plan and work toward achieving them.

How have you developed as an agent?

Building relationships with clients and then building relationships with their friends and family. I always treat my clients as though they were family. I stay in touch with past clients as well.

What do you do for recreation or to relax?

I like to bake, but I also like to eat the goods I bake, so I don’t do that as much. I like watching movies with my family. We live on a lake so I enjoy the water. I really like playing games that challenge my brain like scrabble and word search games.

What professional organizations are you involved with?

RE/MAX is very involved with a blood drive, but personally, I’m involved with the Children’s Miracle Network. I've also done things with the Milwaukee Youth Group and the Susan G. Komen Race for the Cure. I also do work for the Hunger Task Force.