SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Before ObamaCare came along, I was paying $170 a month for a single-person catastrophic health care plan. My deductible was $10,000 a year. At the time, I was healthy, around 40 years-old, didn’t smoke, didn’t drink, didn’t use illegal drugs, and had my weight under control. After repeatedly promising to lower my health care costs by more than $2,000 a year, under his “Affordable” Care Act, my premiums have nearly tripled.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Today, I am 49 year-old non-smoker, non-drinker living at a healthy weight, and during this current enrollment period, the cheapest ObamaCare premium I could find costs a whopping $450 a month, with a $6600 annual deductible.

That is $450 a month right out of my pocket. Barring an unforeseen catastrophe for a guy who never leaves his house, there is no realistic scenario where I will even come close to hitting that deductible.

For the last 3 years, I have been paying 100% of my medical expenses out-of-pocket. I’m no hypochondriac but I do take my health seriously. I don’t skimp on check-ups, or tests, or anything. Even so, my annual medical expenses run around $3000.

In other words, if I buy this crummy plan, on top of that $3000, for no valid or responsible reason, I’ll be paying an addition $5400 a year for an ObamaCare plan I will never ever use. That is $5400 right out of my pocket. Lost money that could go into my retirement or towards my mortgage or to turn my Amazon wishlist into reality (well, part of it).

After spending four years lying to us (with the help of his DC Media) about how he will decrease our health care expenses, if I want to be compliant with the law, my health care costs have jumped from $3000 a year to $8400.

Or, to be as fair as possible, if you include my old catastrophic plan (which I was happy to pay), my annual costs have increased from $5040 to $8400.

And this is just me. My wife is covered. I’m just one guy, not a family, not a couple; and this lying loser of a president with the help of his lying media, has hit me with a $3000 tax disguised as “affordable” health care.

I have paid for my own health care since I was 19 years-old. Every penny. When I was living in a dump in the core of Milwaukee and money was so tight I had to choose between a Snickers Bar and bus fare, I paid for my own health care. And now, after 30 years of playing by the rules, paying my taxes, being a productive citizen, and doing my share, Barack Obama wants to force me to pay for someone else’s health care… Not the mentally or physically handicapped, who I am more than happy to help support; not those in temporary need of a safety net, who I am more than happy to support — those folks are covered by disability and Medicaid.

Nope, what I’m paying for are subsidies for the able-bodied who refuse to work two jobs like my wife and I have, I’m paying to keep insurance companies wealthy, and I’m paying to keep people dependent on government and therefore Democrats.

I won’t do it.

Ever.

For the good of America and Americans, this monstrosity has to death spiral, and the only way that happens is if the healthy refuse to pay into a corrupt system that funds able-bodied deadbeats who refuse to get a second job because people like me who have worked two jobs are forced to subsidize them.

I found an alternative.

That liar Obama gets nothing from me.

I don’t mind chipping in, but I cannot and will not abide a liar.

Follow John Nolte on Twitter @NolteNC