A soon-to-be released Community Health Needs Assessment could mean improvements in health care for the Athens area, particularly for high-need groups.

St. Mary’s Hospital and Health Care System and Athens Regional Medical System are competitors, but joined together to commission the federally-required assessment, said Fenwick Broyard, executive director of Community Connection, which conducted the study for Athens Regional and St. Mary’s.

Under the federal Affordable Care Act, nonprofit hospitals are required to conduct Community Health Needs Assessments, designed to improve public health by identifying areas where nonprofit hospitals might best target the “community benefits” they are required by law to provide in order to maintain their nonprofit tax status with the IRS.

Broyard spoke Tuesday at the University of Georgia College of Public Health’s annual State of Public Health Conference at the Georgia Center for Continuing Education.

He didn’t talk about the contents of the lengthy document. turned over to St. Mary’s and ARMC five weeks ago. Federal law requires that Community Health Needs Assessments are made public, but St. Mary’s and ARMC boards of directors must study the lengthy document — more than 200 pages — and sign off on it before its contents are made public, Broyard said.

The Affordable Care Act also calls for hospitals to develop action plans based on the assessments, and that’s where the data Community Connection gathered can make a real difference, Broyard said.

The data can also help other community agencies and nonprofits see where they could best focus their efforts to make a difference, he said.

“It’s community planning,” he said. “Our ultimate goal is to objectively prioritize community needs. We want to marry the findings with the funding in our community.”

The study covers a 17-county area, the service area for the two hospitals, but it includes a special focus on Clarke County, where most of the two health care organizations’ clientele live.

Community Connection collected more than 2000 surveys in Clarke County, asking people health-related questions as well as other kinds of questions seeking information such as educational level, age and the area of the county people live in.

Data from the surveys will help match health needs and health disparities to particular parts of the community, said Emily Hui, information manager at Community Connection, who was also at Tuesday’s State of Public Health conference.

The information from those surveys can help guide not only hospitals but other community agencies and non-profits, Broyard said.

“We’ve got about two years’ worth of data analysis ahead of us,” he said.

Follow education reporter Lee Shearer at www.facebook.com/LeeShearerABH or https://twitter.com/LeeShearer.