Topics: From the Wires, News

SPANISH TOWN, Jamaica (AP) — Corpses, the suspected victims of violent deaths, are wrapped in plastic bags or covered loosely in stained sheets. There is no air conditioning and the room quickly becomes sweltering as the tropical sun beats down on the metal roof. A black fly buzzes around the room amid the smell of decay.

A Jamaican forensic pathologist and his sweating assistants can merely shrug at the primitive conditions in the facility, which doesn’t even have an x-ray machine to find bullet fragments.

“What can I say? The lack of resources is definitely a challenge,” Dr. S.N. Prasad Kadiyala said as he waited for police officers to show up so he could start autopsies on a recent morning inside a hospital complex in gritty Spanish Town, on the edge of the Jamaican capital.

Jamaica has had one of the highest homicide rates in the world for years, but its capacity to deal with the wave of killings has not kept pace. While the Caribbean country has made some gains in the gathering and processing of evidence, one of its biggest challenges is simply finding adequate places to store and study the dead.

The island has not had a national morgue since the 1970s despite widespread agreement that autopsies are often performed in facilities so inadequate that investigations are placed in jeopardy, said Hayden Baldwin, who has worked as a forensic consultant to Jamaica’s police force.

“I have never seen such deplorable conditions and lack of support from a government to resolve these issues,” said Baldwin, a retired Illinois state police officer and director of Forensic Enterprises, Inc. of Orland Park, Illinois.

In a report on global homicides released earlier this year, the U.N. Office on Drugs and Crime listed Jamaica as having the world’s sixth highest homicide rate. About a decade ago, it had the highest. The island of 2.7 million people has seen 1,000-plus killings every year since 2004, mostly in slums far from the beach resorts.

Relatively few murders are solved. The conviction rate for homicides is 5 percent, according to a 2013 U.S. State Department report.

Political leaders have vowed over the years to construct a modern public morgue, especially after the botched 2007 death investigation of Pakistan cricket coach Bob Woolmer, who died unexpectedly while the island hosted the sport’s World Cup. That year, Peter Phillips, then national security minister, said the Woolmer case “brought into focus the need for the most up-to-date forensic capabilities possible, including most importantly the construction of a new public morgue.”