People Moves of the Week: Objective, Oppenheimer, Littlejohn

Objective hires David Crean; Oppenheimer expands industrial technology group; Littlejohn names business development head

Kirkland & Ellis LLP- Mario Mancuso has joined the law firm where will be in charge of the firm's national security and committe on foreign investment in the United States (CFIUS) practice. He will be based in both the New York and Washington, D.C. offices. Before joining Kirkland & Ellis, Mancusco was the head of the international trade and investment, aerospace & defense and Israel practices for Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson LLP.

Littlejohn & Co.- The Greenwich, Connecticut-based middle-market private equity firm hired Jordan Tongalson as principal and head of business development where he will be focusing on the firm’s deal sourcing efforts. Before joining Littlejohn, Tongalson was an executive director in Morgan Stanley’s (NYSE: MS) global industrials group and also served as a vice president at the Blackstone Group (NYSE: BX).

O’Melveny & Myers LLP- Sevda Staykova has joined the law firm’s London office as a counsel. Staykova works strategic buyers and private equity firms on M&A, join ventures and other corporate finance opportunities. She comes over from White & Case.

Oppenheimer & Co.- The investment bank hired John Book as head of its industrial technology group. Book was previously with Pacific Crest Securities where he was co-head of the firm’s energy and industrial technology groups. In addition, Oppenheimer (NYSE: OPY) named Eric Helenek as head of alternative capital finance. Helenek comes over from Cowen and Co. where he was a managing director in equity capital markets.

Objective Capital Partners- The middle-market investment bank hired David Crean (pictured) as a managing director to lead the firm’s life sciences group. Crean held corporate strategy positions, including M&A efforts, at Allergan plc (NYSE: AGN) and Aqua Pharmaceuticals.

Perella Weinberg Partners- James Dunham joined Perella Weinberg as a managing director in its asset management group where he will help the firm grow into the financial institutions and sub-advisory markets. Dunham was previously with Goldman Sachs (NYSE: GS) where he was in charge of partnering the firm with hedge funds and other funds of funds.

Squire Patton Boggs- The law firm hired Dale Huxford as a counsel in its corporate finance group in London. Huxford concentrates on venture capital and M&A in the technology sector. He was previously with consulting firm BroadTech Global.

TeamCo Advisers LLC- John Shearman has joined TeamCo as a managing director where he will work on maintaining the firm’s client relationships, including their investment opportunities. San Francisco-based TeamCo manages portfolio of hedge funds and other asset management firms. Shearman comes over from wealth advisory firm IV Lions.

Veritiv Corp.- Veritiv (NYSE: VRTV) named Adam Taylor chief strategy officer and Dave Hudson as chief information officer. Taylor, who will be based in Atlanta, will be in charge of the company's new business development, including M&A efforts. He was most recently the head of corporate development at Office Depot (NASDAQ: ODP). Hudson will be responsible for Veritiv's information technology. He was previously the chief business strategy officer for Amtrak.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: