Fort Smith’s University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences West again set the bar for the six regional family medical and area health education centers in the state under the UAMS banner.

State Rep. Justin Boyd, R-Fort Smith, presented a congratulatory citation to UAMS West Director Don Heard on Tuesday morning in recognition of the “team effort” that has allowed the center to garner the title of “best regional center” in the UAMS system for four of the past six years. The center has 110 health-care professionals and is located at 612 S. 12th St.

“You can put this system anywhere and it would be a shining star,” said Boyd, who is also a pharmacist. “They continue to improve on health care and the delivery model.”

The citation also commends UAMS-West for achieving Level 3, the highest possible level as a Patient Centered Medical Home from the National Committee for Quality Assurance. Using a 55-point performance test, UAMS has named its UAMS West the best of its regional programs in 2009, 2012, 2013 and now 2014.

“UAMS West provides this excellence through the hard work and commitment of faculty and staff and their combined teamwork, communication and leadership in achieving the center’s mission of exceptional training and patient care,” the citation states.

State Reps. Charlotte Vining Douglas, R-Fort Smith, and George B. McGill, D-Fort Smith, co-sponsored the citation.

In July, UAMS received $900,000 in federal funding to allow it to increase the number of resident physicians at its regional center in Fort Smith. The money was provided under the Teaching Health Care Center Program, a part of the federal Affordable Care Act.

With the two new residents, UAMS West has a total of 30 residents in its training program. It is the most residents seen at the Area Health Education Center since being formed in 1974. Residents are trained in family medicine, internal medicine, pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecology, psychiatry, geriatrics and general dentistry.

The $900,000 award was part of $83.4 million in funding to 60 teaching health centers like UAMS West across the nation to help train more than 550 residents during the 2014-15 academic year.

According to a UAMS West fact sheet, about 300 babies are born at UAMS West annually and clinic visits number 35,000 annually. The center has graduated 210 family practitioners, with 88 graduates currently practicing in western Arkansas and 139 having stayed to practice medicine in Arkansas.