Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee met with members of the Riverside community and the Texas Department of Health to work out an agreement that would restore the Barbara Jordan Recovery Center and to improve the Riverside General Hospital.

The Barbara Jordan Recovery Center will be temporarily closed for maintenance and major repairs.

However the state of Texas has agreed to work with Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee and the Riverside community to look to restore the Barbara Jordan Recovery Center’s existing programs and/or create the possibility of new opportunities for the Center and its employees.

However, the Riverside General Hospital will continue to be open to serve its existing clientele in the substance abuse area. More changes and improvements will need to be done at the Riverside General Hospital to secure further compliance with state and federal health care agencies.

It is well documented that increasing access to health care through the passage of the Affordable Health Care Act created more need for health care facilities in the Harris County community and the need for health care facilities is even greater in the inner city neighborhoods.

Riverside General Hospital — being committed to serving the ever growing population, purchased the Houston Recovery Campus (re-named the Barbara Jordan Healthcare Facility) and the Edith Irby Jones Healthcare Center.

These purchases made substance abuse treatment available in three strategic locations throughout Harris County which continuously serves the medically underserved areas and populations.

For over 100 years Riverside has been in a unique position of possessing the history, the infrastructure and talent to serve individual and families in environments which are socially and economically depressed.

Their position in the community has earned them a place of trust and respect among the people. Their longevity in the community has made their presence known and they are accessible to the people. Riverside’s proud history of service, dedication to quality, and commitment has positioned them to continue to be a major entity providing services to the community, particularly ethnic minorities and the medically underserved.

It has been a place for health care through segregation in Houston. These are facilities worth saving and the jobs must be restored and the services must continue.

“The facilities under the Riverside General Hospital system are in our neighborhoods and serve the difficult health needs of our community. We must continue to rally around the re-opening of the Barbara Jordan Recovery Center and the longevity of the Riverside General Hospital. My office is strategically involved in fighting for the restoration of federal and state government support working with the various health agencies. This issue involves important health care for our community and important health care jobs. We will continue to work to ensure good health care and my call upon our community to continue to rally around the Riverside General Hospital system and its employees to ensure the recreation of these important jobs and access to excellent health care for all.”