Rocky Allen worked at John C. Lincoln for less than two months, from July 28, 2014 to Sept. 26, 2014. (Source: KPHO/KTVK)

The call center will be open from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., Monday Friday, and 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., Saturday and Sunday. (Source: MGN Online)

A surgical technician who is at the center of a case that led to communicable disease testing for nearly 3,000 patients of a Colorado hospital has been identified as a former employee of John C. Lincoln Medical Center.

Rocky Allen worked at John C. Lincoln for less than two months, from July 28, 2014 to Sept. 26, 2014, according to a hospital statement. He was fired for violating workplace policy after he tested positive for use of a controlled substance.

The 28-year-old Allen is accused of stealing a powerful narcotic drug at Swedish Medical Center in Colorado and switching syringes. Hospital officials in that state have launched a massive testing program over concern that syringes tainted with bloodborne viruses like HIV and hepatitis could have been used on patients. Allen has since left Colorado, according to reports.

John C. Lincoln Medical Center officials said they have not identified any harm to patients.

To be on the safe side, though, John C. Lincoln is offering free hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV testing to any patient who had a surgery in which Allen served as a surgical technician. The medical center said it has identified 97 patients who were in a surgery during which Allen served as a technician.

“Although the likelihood that patients were exposed is extremely low, we will be contacting patients directly by phone and certified mail with instructions about testing,” according to Jeff Holeman, network director of communications for HonorHealth marketing & communications.

“At this point we have no evidence of any patient exposure, but in the interest of patient safety, we're taking a position of extreme caution,” he said.

Any patient who had surgery from July 28, 2014 to Sept. 26, 2014 can contact John C. Lincoln at 623-580-5800, starting Sunday, Feb. 14, at 8 a.m. The call center will be open from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., Monday-Friday, and 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., Saturday and Sunday.

“As soon as we found out about the Colorado incident and became aware that Allen was our former employee, we immediately began looking into the matter,” Holeman said.

He said John C. Lincoln is working in close collaboration with the Maricopa County Department of Public Health and the Arizona Department of Health Services.

“Because of the situation in Colorado, we are taking action to ensure the well-being of our patients,” Holeman said. “Providing complimentary testing is the right thing to do.”

He said the situation that happened in Phoenix “is an isolated, unfortunate situation.”

“There is no evidence at this time that what happened in Colorado happened here,” he stressed.

“To ensure patient safety, we are conducting a comprehensive review of our policies and procedures related to controlled substances,” Holeman added.

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.