Sixteen years ago, my mother was diagnosed with metastatic colon cancer and, after a brave fight, passed away nine months later. After this devastating event, I decided to devote my life to raising awareness about colorectal cancer and increasing the care options available to those affected by this horrible disease.

Fortunately, for many patients today, cancer treatments have improved significantly since my mother’s diagnosis. There are currently more than 800 medicines in the pipeline to treat various forms of cancer, including more than 25 for colorectal cancer. Additionally, innovative medicines like biologics – complex medicines that are manufactured from living organisms -- are now offering greater hope for patients and their families. Due to the progress made in the development of these treatments, patients with colon cancer are now living nearly three times longer with death rates decreasing by 50 percent.

ADVERTISEMENT

However, the journey to this point and beyond is not an easy one. On average, it takes 10–15 years and more than $2.6 billion to bring a medicine through the discovery and clinical trial phases to patients.

Furthermore, our country’s top biopharmaceutical inventors are only able to enter into this process because of the strong intellectual property (IP) protections currently granted to them under U.S. law. These allow innovators to maintain their advantage and provide the incentive needed to start or continue their lifesaving work.

Trade leaders and the Obama administration have a unique opportunity to solidify the economic contribution of biopharmaceutical innovators and promote investment in global health by advocating for strong IP rights in the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a trade deal that currently involves 12 nations in the Pacific Rim region that comprise 40 percent of global GDP. By most accounts, participating nations are working to finalize an agreement this year.

First, some background on the data protection issue: The 12 years of data protection that biologics receive in the U.S. has allowed their development to flourish. Established under the bipartisan Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act of 2010, the 12-year limit strikes an appropriate balance between promoting competition and providing adequate incentives to support continued innovation of new treatments and cures. Considering we are the world leader in biopharmaceutical innovation, the U.S. has the results to demonstrate how effective strong protections can be.

In addition to providing better treatments and cures for patients, strong IP protections are also vitally important to the U.S. economy. According to the U.S. Commerce Department, IP-intensive industries employ, directly and indirectly, more than 30 percent of the U.S. workforce, or 40 million workers across the country. In 2013, the biopharmaceutical industry invested approximately $63 billion nationwide through companies that provided services and supplies in support of its mission to bring new medical treatments to patients.

However, since 95 percent of the world’s consumers live outside the U.S., this cycle of innovation will become increasingly difficult to maintain as the U.S. becomes even further integrated into the global economy. As the global leader in the research and development of new medical treatments, the U.S. must play an integral role in setting the new standards for product development.

By including strong IP rights in the final TPP agreement – 12 years of data protection of biologic medicines – the TPP can set new standards for IP across the globe. In short, every innovative country stands to benefit by this move. For the U.S., this will help ensure that our nation remains a leading innovator of biopharmaceutical products for the world’s patients, while also increasing exports and expanding valuable employment opportunities for U.S. workers.

Fortunately U.S. leaders have received broad, bipartisan support for strong IP protections in the TPP. My organization, the Global Colon Cancer Association, was proud to join the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation and 106 other advocacy groups in sending a letter to the Administration and the U.S. Trade Representative urging strong support of IP policies. Our declaration demands that 12 years of data protection for biologic medicines be included in the final version of the TPP.

As TPP negotiations continue in Hawaii next week, it is essential that our leaders work to maintain the regulatory environment that helps foster the discovery and development processes. U.S. officials must do their part to protect American innovation and jobs, while at the same time bringing hope of innovative medical treatments to patients worldwide.

Spiegel is the executive director of the Global Colon Cancer Association, a non-profit organization.