Thomas Stemberg, left, the founder of Staples, with David Fuentes, announcing a 1996 merger with Office Depot. That deal was blocked, but the companies’ latest attempt to merge is being reviewed by federal regulators. (Ed Bailey/AP)

Thomas Stemberg, whose inability to buy a printer ribbon on a holiday weekend led to the conception of Staples, the office-supply­ superstore he co-founded in 1985, died Oct. 23 at his home in Chestnut Hill, Mass. He was 66.

The cause was gastric cancer, said a son, Will Stemberg.

Mr. Stemberg was a recently dismissed supermarket-chain executive in New England when he conceived the idea for Staples. “On the Fourth of July weekend in 1985, my printer ribbon ran out, and I couldn’t find a single place to buy a replacement,” he later wrote in an essay for the New York Times. “I envisioned a Toys ‘R’ Us or Home Depot for office supplies. That’s how Staples was born.”

He wrote the business plan for Staples. With backing from a former rival in the supermarket business, Leo Kahn, he opened the first store in 1986 in Brighton, Mass.

He described his business plan as simple: equalizing how much small and large stores paid for the same supplies.

“Back then, if you were a small business, you went to a small stationary store and paid $3.68 for a dozen ballpoint pens,” Mr. Stemberg told the Fairfield County Business Journal. “But big businesses were paying less than $1 for the same pens.”

The chain today is the largest U.S. office-supply retailer and has more than 1,600 stores in North America. It had revenue of $22.5 billion in its latest fiscal year, according to data compiled by Bloomberg News.

Staples, based in Framingham, Mass., also spawned competitors, such as Office Max and Office Depot. Staples’s plan to acquire Office Depot, a deal valued at $6.3 billion, is under review by the Federal Trade Commission.

Mr. Stemberg served as chief executive until 2002 and chairman until 2005. That year, he joined Highland Consumer Partners, a Wellesley, Mass.-based venture capital firm, where he was managing general partner. The firm focuses on the consumer industry.

He also was a founder of Olly Shoes, a children’s footwear retailer, and Zoots, a dry cleaner.

Thomas George Stemberg, the son of Austrian immigrants, was born in Newark on Jan. 18, 1949. His father was Jewish and his mother was Catholic, and they had fled the Nazis in the late 1930s.

He was 11 when his father died, and Thomas moved with his mother to her native Vienna, where he attended an American school and became a basketball standout.

1 of 83 Full Screen Autoplay Close Skip Ad × Notable deaths of 2015 View Photos A look at those who have died this year. Caption A look at those who have died. From left, Swedish actress Anita Ekberg known for her role in “La Dolce Vita”; Star Trek icon Leonard Nimoy; Bobbi Kristina Brown, the only child of Whitney Houston and Bobby Brown; legendary blues guitarist B.B. King; and football player and “Monday Night Football” sportscaster Frank Gifford. From left: Mario Torrisi/AP, CBS via Getty Images, Jordan Strauss/Invision/AP, Astrid Stawiarz/Getty Images, Kathy Willens/AP Buy Photo Wait 1 second to continue.

Mr. Stemberg returned to the United States to attend Harvard University, earning a bachelor’s degree in 1971. “I was an organic chemistry major and managed a C+ average,” he wrote in the Times. “I realized that I wanted to do something I could be good at.” Two years later, he received an MBA from Harvard Business School.

He then went to in Chicago to work for the Jewel supermarket chain, where he said “teamwork” was stressed among corporate management trainees. “I spent a decade at Jewel, and my mother was incredibly offended that her son was trimming lettuce while learning how to help run the operation,” he wrote in the Times. “She hadn’t spent all that money sending me to Harvard so that I’d end up in the produce section.”

He became vice president of sales and merchandising before joining First National Supermarkets in 1980 and rising to president of its Edwards-Finast division, which operated stories in the Northeast. The company then began talks to spin off his division.

“They were selling the division out from under me, and I got into an argument and was fired,” Mr. Stemberg told the Fairfield County Business Journal. He then went into business with Kahn to start Staples.

One of the company’s major early backers was Bain Capital, an investment firm co-founded by Mitt Romney. Mr. Stemberg, in turn, became a significant backer of Romney, the former Massachusetts governor who was the Republican presidential nominee in 2012.

Romney often mentioned Staples on the campaign trail as an example of an American success story. Romney also credited Mr. Stemberg with pushing the then-governor to advocate for universal health care in Massachusetts. The law became a model for the federal Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare.

Mr. Stemberg’s marriages to Maureen Sullivan and Dola Hamilton ended in divorce. Survivors include his third wife, Katherine Chapman; six sons; three stepdaughters; and three grandchildren, according to the Boston Globe.