Airport workers flew into a rage Thursday as the Port Authority moved forward with a plan to renovate LaGuardia Airport while a promised benefits package remains grounded.

“How can they modernize the airport while maintaining outdated working conditions?” Newark Airport cabin cleaner Gertrudes Contreras, 60, fumed to Port Authority board members.

HECTOR FIGUERIA: LAGUARDIA AIRPORT'S OTHER SHAME

The area’s roughly 20,000 porters, cleaners and guards are now making $10.10 an hour — after a pay raise fueled by the Daily News’ Fight for Fair Pay campaign.

But eight months after its own deadline, the Port Authority still hasn’t unveiled its plan laying out future pay raises and expanded medical benefits.

“In the 21st century, we still have 19th-century wages," Kennedy Airport cleaner Luis Sanchez, 57, told board members.

Sanchez spoke before the Port Authority formally selected a team to rebuild LaGuardia Airport’s decrepit central terminal.

The airport — which Vice President Biden famously likened to a Third World country — is set to undergo a $3.6 billion renovation.

The project to expand and modernize the facility known as Terminal B will be carried out by a group led by the Skanska construction firm and the Vantage Airport Group, with the backing of Morgan Stanley and Citigroup.

The airport — which Vice President Biden famously likened to a Third World country — is set to undergo a $3.6 billion renovation. (Richard Harbus/for New York daily news)

The newfangled terminal will be nearly twice as large and boast far more restaurants and retail shops than the old space. Passengers are going to “have an experience like they have in a 21st-century airport anyplace around the country or around the world,” Port Authority Executive Director Patrick Foye said.

Foye was less effusive on the subject of the airport workers.

He suggested the benefits package is delayed in part because of Obamacare. Asked to elaborate during a press conference, Foye dodged the question.

“It’s a matter of great importance to the Port Authority and the board, and we will keep you posted on that going forward,” he said.

The delays have infuriated the long-suffering contract workers.

Dozens of them, joined by Sen. Chuck Schumer, rallied Thursday outside the board meeting at 4 World Trade Center.

“Today, the Port Authority is talking about modernizing the airport . . . That’s a good thing,” Schumer (D-N.Y.) said. “But that’s only half the picture. What about modernizing the working conditions — the wages, the benefits — for all the people that work there at the same time?”