European Pressphoto Agency

Senior bankers who will face members of the U.K. Parliament over the privatization of Royal Mail were named on Thursday ahead of a hearing due next week.

The House of Commons Business Select Committee named representatives from the two lead banks that worked on the initial public offering of the 497-year-old postal operator in a £3.3 billion deal last month.

James Robertson, a UK coverage banker at UBS, and Richard Cormack, co-head of equity capital markets at Goldman Sachs, will answer MPs questions at 9.30 a.m. GMT on Wednesday November 20.

The Business Select Committee also named four representatives from investment banks that suggested higher valuations for Royal Mail could be achieved.

John Mayne, a managing director in U.K. client coverage at J.P. Morgan; Ben Story, head of U.K. investment banking and broking at Citi; and James Agnew, chairman of U.K. corporate broking at Deutsche Bank, will appear at the same 9.30am meeting.

These banks all pitched higher valuations for Royal Mail than was ultimately achieved at its IPO, according to Adrian Bailey, chairman of the Business Select Committee.

Gert Zonneveld, co-head of research, Panmure Gordon, which published a research note in the week prior to Royal Mail’s flotation suggesting a higher valuation than was ultimately achieved, will also appear at the 9.30am meeting.

Financial News first reported last month that representatives from these institutions would be called by MPs to answer questions on the Royal Mail IPO.

The Business Select Committee session will provide a rare insight into the pitching tactics used by investment banks looking for work on IPOs. The usually-private process will be questioned by MPs on the committee, with bankers from each institution involved appearing at the same time in public.

The committee will also hear from business secretary Vince Cable and business minister Michael Fallon at a hearing on Wednesday November 27 at 10.30am.

A representative of the Shareholder Executive, which manages the U.K. government’s publicly-owned businesses and previously housed the Royal Mail, and a representative of Lazard, the government’s financial adviser on the postal operator’s privatization, will also appear at this hearing. Representatives from each organization are yet to be confirmed, the committee said. A person familiar with the situation said Lazard would be sending William Rucker, chief executive of Lazard in London.

JP Morgan, Deutsche Bank, Citi and Panmure Gordon declined to comment. Goldman Sachs and UBS could not be reached for comment in time for publication.