Thoroughbred Farms residents are asking the county why they have not gotten more disaster assistance.

The county is working to free up funds and is waiting for a presidential disaster declaration to be issued.

The county will also investigate why the flooding was so severe along Dry Creek.

In 22 years living on the banks of Dry Creek in southeastern Travis County, Edward Hernandez had never seen a flood like the one that swept through on Oct. 30, killing his son and severely damaging his house. The floodwaters, he said, “destroyed our neighborhood and destroyed my son’s life.”

Hernandez and his neighbors told the county commissioners Tuesday that they are having difficulty getting access to recovery resources like money for temporary housing because a slew of factors have aligned against them. Many of the hardest-hit residents live just outside of Austin and cannot access city resources; Gov. Greg Abbott has not issued a disaster declaration, which could lead to President Barack Obama doing the same and freeing up money from the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and many homeowners in the area do not have flood insurance.

Commissioner Margaret Gómez, who represents the area, said the county has limited resources but is working to help the residents, many of whom live in an area called Thoroughbred Farms. The county, she said, is exploring whether it can use federal Community Development Block Grants, which are typically used for anti-poverty projects, to help low-income residents affected by the flood, which killed four in Central Texas.

“We have a shortage of resources, and we have to wait for a declaration from the president,” she said. “We just don’t have a sizable budget.”

Abbott spokesman John Wittman said the governor’s office is conducting damage estimates in 35 jurisdictions to see if the flooding caused enough havoc to qualify for state or federal disaster aid.

+ Ralph Barrera John Gonzalez holds onto his dog Pepito as he tries to find answers about how he will rebuild his home with ... read more Ralph Barrera ×

The commissioners on Tuesday directed staff to investigate why the flooding was so severe in Thoroughbred Farms and why some properties there were removed from the FEMA-designated flood plain in recent years, eliminating a requirement that they get flood insurance if they have a federally backed mortgage. They also voted to waive construction permit fees for residents who need to rebuild and are at or below 200 percent of the federal poverty line.

Stacey Scheffel, Travis County’s flood plain administrator, said some, but not all, of those properties were removed in a revision to the flood plain maps in 2008. Residents may have learned about that change more recently through their mortgage companies, possibly explaining why some told the commissioners Tuesday that the change happened this year. Most of the neighborhood is expected to be added to the flood plain in January after FEMA releases new maps based on data from a study commissioned by the city of Austin.

Hernandez also told the commissioners Tuesday that the neighbors believe the severity of the flooding was a result of a drainage project associated with the recent widening of FM 973, which crosses Dry Creek just upstream of the neighborhood.

Scheffel said she believes the county should investigate what happened but doesn’t know whether the road project is to blame. She will ask the commissioners for approval to hire an engineering firm to study the flooding in that area.

“It is a very common thing after a flood for someone to point to the upstream development and make a correlation, but that is not causation,” she said. “Something strange was happening on Dry Creek. I don’t know what it was.”

For now, Hernandez and his neighbors are still waiting for answers and for help. He said he is disappointed the government is taking so long to provide assistance. In the meantime, he is getting help with housing and food from a local church and from his deceased son’s former employer, the nearby Circuit of the Americas racetrack. His other two children also work there.