New rules for U.S. money-market funds could have an uneven impact on corporations because investment strategies vary widely, according to a new report from Fitch Ratings Inc.

The Securities and Exchange Commission approved rules in July that will require “prime” money-market funds to abandon their $1 share price and float in value like other mutual funds. To remain invested in the funds, some corporate treasurers will likely have to change their investment policies, or switch to government money-market funds, which are allowed to maintain their $1 share price, Fitch said.

“Everybody is still quite frankly trying to sort this out,” said Roger Merritt, managing director at Fitch.“Historically, the attractiveness of money-market funds has been the fact that you could put your money in at $1, have same-day liquidity, and take it back out at $1.”

Some companies rely more on these funds than others, Fitch said. Apple Inc., for example, holds about $1.3 billion in money funds, and manages much of its cash itself, while Amazon.com holds about $2.5 billion in the funds, despite its smaller overall cash position.

“If a lot of the cash isn’t really needed for operating and is more strategic, they may put it somewhere else, or manage cash in-house rather than make a deposit in a money-market fund,” Mr. Merritt said.

Some companies, including supermarkets, need the speedy liquidity of the funds to manage sudden influxes of cash.

Nonfinancial companies held about $497 billion in money-market funds at the end of the first quarter of 2014, according to the Federal Reserve, representing 31% of nonfinancial corporate cash holdings. They are only eclipsed by timed deposits at banks, which represented 41% of corporate cash holding.

However, it is unclear if banks will want more corporate cash because they would need thicker capital cushions to meet regulatory requirements, Mr. Merritt said.

Corporations, for their part, have also been turning away from the funds. Companies have less invested in money-market funds today than they did in 2008 and 2009, despite swollen coffers.

“It seems almost counterintuitive,” Mr. Merritt said. “It may be that yields have been so low, and because some of that earlier cash was more strategic and not used for operating expenses, they moved it into higher yielding products.”