Give Kids a Smile: Dental volunteers bring smiles to underserved children

RAND MIDDLETON | TRIBUNE Dr. Jim Zenk of Montevideo examines a young patient on Friday at the Rice Regional Dental Clinic observed by Destiny Hoffman, a Willmar dental hygienist. Both professionals are volunteering their services at the sixth annual Give Kids a Smile.

Sompos Nhul, a University of Minnesota Dental Hygienist student, left, polishes the teeth of Tucker Bonnema, 3, of Prinsburg, as his mom, Melissa, and brother, Teddy, 6, offer support. Hailey Schmitz, a Ridgewater College nursing student, assists. RAND MIDDLETON | TRIBUNE

WILLMAR — As a nursing student finishing her bachelor’s degree at Southwest Minnesota State University in Marshall, Amanda Jensen knew about the importance of oral health and the consequences of forgoing dental care.

But an afternoon at the Rice Regional Dental Clinic drove the lesson home.

“It’s really eye-opening,” Jensen said during a break between patients.

She was one of 31 volunteers helping Friday with Give Kids a Smile, held by the dental clinic in Willmar every year to provide free basic dental care to underserved children.

During a busy afternoon, the volunteers gave dental exams and cleanings to 50 children, most of whom had no other access to dental care because they lacked insurance.

Organizers hope it will help lay the foundation for a healthy mouth as these children get older.

Health providers increasingly recognize that oral health is inextricably linked to overall health, said Renee Johnson, a dental hygiene instructor at the Rice Regional Dental Clinic and coordinator of Give Kids a Smile.

“If we can keep their mouth healthy, we’re much more likely to keep the total body healthy,” she said.

For Jensen and the other nursing students at Give Kids a Smile, it was a chance to see this connection firsthand as well as learn what it’s like to work alongside dental professionals.

“They can see firsthand the dental education we provide to the children and parents,” Johnson said. “They can see for themselves why it’s so important at an early age.”

This is the sixth year the Rice Regional Dental Clinic has participated in Give Kids a Smile and the first time nursing students have joined the volunteer team. Volunteers Friday also included three local dentists, dental hygienists and assistants, Spanish-speaking translators, a handful of Rice Hospital employees, and dentistry and dental hygiene students participating in rural clinical training at the Rice Regional Dental Clinic, which is operated in partnership between Rice Memorial Hospital and the University of Minnesota.

“This is a fabulous experience,” said Dr. James Zenk, a Montevideo dentist and adjunct faculty volunteer for the University of Minnesota School of Dentistry.

The nursing students are learning about the role of dentists and dental hygienists and how to collaborate in promoting oral health, he said.

“As nurses they can do some of the preventive education. They can talk to parents about nutrition,” he said.

He added, “And I think they’re having a lot of fun today.”

The event also underscores the troubling issue of access to dental care. The Affordable Care Act helped make dental insurance more available to low-income Americans through Medicaid, but finding dentists willing to accept the low reimbursement remains a problem. Others who don’t qualify for the program might not be able to afford private coverage or the out-of-pocket cost of care.

“We still do have that population falling through the cracks,” said Dr. Linda Jackson, director of the Rice Regional Dental Clinic.

For some of the children who came Friday, it was the first time they had ever seen a dentist, organizers said.

Reaching underserved youngsters and getting them started with good oral health habits is an important goal of the Rice Regional Dental Clinic, which is currently in the midst of a project aimed at the very youngest patients.

At one time the standard was a dental exam starting at age 3, Jackson said. “The new thought is they need to be seen by age 1,” she said. “The biggest part of that is prevention. We want to teach that child and the parents good habits and prevent the development of caries. Once caries has set in, it’s much harder to turn that around.”

Events such as Give Kids a Smile, a national outreach program supported by the American Dental Association, are one way to fill the gap. Nationally, more than 285,000 children were expected to receive free basic care Friday and Saturday at 1,252 sites, according to the American Dental Association Foundation.

The Rice Regional Dental Clinic illustrates a more long-term approach. As a rural training site for future dental professionals studying at the University of Minnesota, it provides clinical experience and exposure to rural practice for students before entering the workforce. It also offers a source of dental care for low-income patients who would not otherwise have access.

The clinic is believed to be the only hospital-based clinical training site in the U.S. for dental professionals.

A measure of the need is the distance that some patients drive to receive care. “We have patients that drive two hours to see us,” Jackson said. “But there still are people out there who don’t know about us.”

Phone calls in response to the clinic’s Give Kids a Smile outreach resulted in appointments for 100 more children in addition to the 50 who were seen Friday, organizers said.

“We’re just so happy to be able to provide this for our community,” Jackson said.