You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

Message: * A friend wanted you to see this item from WRAL.com: http://wral.com/15571176

— Young people are notorious for having a low voter turnout rate, but this year’s presidential campaign is bringing millions of millennials to the polls. While some students are "feeling the Bern" with Democrat Bernie Sanders, others want Republican Donald Trump to "make America great again.

Dielle McMillan, a junior at Meredith College, is among those who believes that millennials should take advantage of their right to vote.

"We are the ones who are going to be those taxpayers," she said. "We are going to be living out those laws, and we want to have a say in who creates them. If you don’t like how things are in your city, your state, your country, this is your chance. This is your only chance.”

Others say that there is no chance because our system is broken.

Judith Maron, a sophomore at Meredith College, beleives politics is more focused on providing entertainment than solving the country’s issues.

Disenchantment with the system is not the only obstacle young people face. North Carolina’s new Voter ID Law is restricting out-of-state students from voting.

"I think it’s a blatant attack on certain demographics in our state,” said Ann Cox, a student at Meredith College.

While a staggering number of college students made it out to the polls this past Tuesday, many were denied the right to vote because the new Voter ID Law requires a valid North Carolina driver’s license.

Students at North Carolina colleges who hail from out of state must either vote by absentee ballot in their home state or apply for a North Carolina identification card through the licensing office of the Division of Motor Vehicles. After providing a Social Security number and filling out some paper work, that student will be eligible to vote in North Carolina.

A student at Suffolk University, Shawna Newcomb is refining the storytelling gene that runs in her Native American blood. "It is my own personal duty to uphold this tradition and bring honor to the Wampanoag Tribe," she says.