Topics: GOP, Republican Party, War on women, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet . It has been corrected since it first published.

On Wednesday, a group of GOP lawmakers led by Representative Cathy McMorris Rodgers (R-Washington) unveiled a package of bills directed at improving the economic circumstances of American women. The intended goal of the legislation—which includes tax credits for childcare and a bill that prevents retaliation against employees who ask about equal pay—is to demonstrate that the Republican Party does in fact care about women’s rights. As Representative Mike Coffman (R-Colorado) said at the press conference announcing the bill package, he’s proud to stand by his colleagues in a “war for women.” Unfortunately for Coffman and the rest of the House GOP leadership, their legislation is actually just a laughably belated, transparent, last-ditch effort to attract female voters before the midterm elections in November.

Republicans certainly need to improve their messaging towards women; as the Washington Post pointed out, Mitt Romney lost the female vote to President Obama by 11 percentage points in 2012 and polls consistently show that respondents trust Democrats over Republicans to handle issues that directly affect women. But this package of bills is too little, too late from a party that has worked to systematically dismantle women’s rights to health care, reproductive choices and fair pay. There are too many examples to count, but here are four of the most egregious Republican attacks on women—and reasons that no one could take their newfound interest in gender equality seriously.

1. Blocking Access to Contraception

GOP leaders have puzzling ideas about why women choose to use contraception. Instead of seeing birth control as a medication that helps women avoid pregnancies they don’t want and can’t afford, and make their own long-term life decisions, Republicans view contraception as a license to have crazy amounts of sex and abuse federal finances to kill unborn children. (Because God forbid that anyone would want to have sex without the explicit purpose of having a kid.)

Former Arkansas Governor Mike Huckabee caused a mini-firestorm back in January when he first tried to flip the GOP “war on women” rhetoric on its head. At the Republican National Committee’s winter meeting, he told the audience, “If Democrats want to insult the women of America by making them believe that they are helpless without Uncle Sugar coming in and providing for them a prescription each month for birth control, because they cannot control their libido or their reproductive system without the help of the government, so be it.”

Huckabee is hardly the first conservative to imply that women who use contraception are somehow morally depraved (Rush Limbaugh memorably called health activist Sandra Fluke a “slut” for advocating for contraception coverage). But this misguided, profoundly misogynistic thinking about birth control has real consequences. The most recent example is the Supreme Court’s devastating ruling in the Hobby Lobby case, which struck down the contraceptive mandate of the Affordable Care Act, allowing employers to claim religious exemptions for providing certain contraceptives for their female employees. Earlier this month, Senate Republicans blocked a bill aimed at restoring free contraception for women who get their health insurance from companies with religious objections. Because in a perfect GOP world, employers should be able to regulate female sexuality and access to healthcare according to their own moral grounds.

2. Demolishing Women’s Right to Choose

If Republicans hate contraception, don’t even get them started on abortion. But really—don’t. Conservatives (particularly middle-aged male ones) have made more sexist, anti-scientific and plain offensive statements on this topic than any other. There was the outrageous comment by Missouri Republican senate candidate Todd Akin about how victims of “legitimate rape” very rarely get pregnant and Maine representative Lawrence Lockman’s repugnant suggestion that if abortion is legal, rape should be too. The president of the Susan B. Anthony List, an anti-abortion group that hosts boot camps on how politicians should discuss abortion, recently advised Republican leaders to keep their public remarks on the subject as brief as possible. As she told officials at the spring RNC meeting, “Two sentences is really the goal. Then stop talking.”