Lake is one of the healthiest counties in Illinois, according to a recently released report, but the work to improve residents' health is far from over, Lake County Health Department officials said.

"It's great that we rank as one of the healthiest counties in Illinois year after year, but it doesn't mean we're satisfied," said Mark Pfister, the department's director of population health services.

Though the county has made strides in reducing the number of adults who smoke, adult obesity continues to rise, according to the 2015 national County Health Ratings and Road Maps report.

"We have targeted pockets of disparity," Pfister said, referring to the communities of North Chicago, Waukegan, Zion and Round Lake where more adults smoke and have lower access to healthcare and healthy foods compared with the rest of the county.

Report findings

Produced annually by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the report ranked Lake County as the 15th highest in Illinois for health factors and sixth in the state for health outcomes, among 102 counties.

Health outcomes include length and quality of life. Health factors include behaviors such as smoking, obesity and physical activity; access to clinical care; social and economic issues such as employment and education; and physical environment such as air pollution. DuPage County ranks higher overall than Lake. McHenry County is on par with Lake and Cook County ranks lower, about 70th overall in the state.

Sheryl Devore, Lake County News-Sun Lake County residents Sabine Vosters and Cordula Poggensee walk together three times a week at a forest preserve to keep healthy and to chat. Nearly 20 percent of Lake County adults are not physically active, according to recent national health report. Lake County residents Sabine Vosters and Cordula Poggensee walk together three times a week at a forest preserve to keep healthy and to chat. Nearly 20 percent of Lake County adults are not physically active, according to recent national health report. (Sheryl Devore, Lake County News-Sun)

"One thing that allows us to be healthier is the access to forest preserves," where residents can be physically active, said Tony Beltran, executive director for the Lake County Health Department and Community Health Center.

"Also, we're one of the more educated counties. We're not trying to convince people about the importance of a lower salt diet or exercise," he added.

Smoking cessation

The Robert Wood Johnson report shows 14 percent of Lake County's adults smoke, a reduction from 18 percent in 2010.

"We want to reduce the amount of smoking even more," Pfister said. "It's one of the biggest risk factors for early mortality."

Pfister and Beltran went to Springfield last week to address the loss of funding for the Illinois Tobacco Quit Line, which provides smokers with local resources to help them kick the habit.

To reduce smoking in targeted areas such as Waukegan and North Chicago, the health department has placed television ads about the quit line through Comcast, Pfister said. The ads work, he said, which is why he's worried about funding cuts. In 2014, when the ads began appearing, "we had 3,212 calls from Lake County residents to the quit line," which is a nearly tenfold increase from 2010 when there weren't any ads, he said.

The health department and Lake County residents have worked to address the smoking issue for 10 years, achieving smoke-free environments indoors and at parks and forest preserves, Pfister said. Youth this year are campaigning for police officers to spend more time making sure stores don't sell cigarettes to underage people, he said.

Statistics show if teenagers don't start smoking, they generally don't start later in life, he said.

Healthy eating

Tackling the obesity issue has been more challenging, Beltran said. Nineteen percent of the county's residents are inactive, according to the report, and 26 percent of adults are obese compared with 24 percent in 2010.

Not all residents have access to fresh fruits and vegetables, Beltran said, and not all residents have access to safe walking trails near their homes, Pfister said.

One health department program helps deliver boxes of fresh produce to North Chicago residents, Beltran said.

The department also sponsors a garden in North Chicago where fresh fruits and vegetables are grown, said Leslie Piotrowski, communications manager. Nutritionists are giving residents recipes for using the food from the garden, she said.

"North Chicago is considered a food desert when it comes to fresh produce," Piotrowski said.

More exercise

The health department is collaborating with the Lake County Forest Preserves and NorthShore University HealthSystem on a new program called RX for health. Physicians are writing prescriptions for exercise for their patients, Beltran said, and residents can attend one of many free guided one- to two-mile walks at forest preserves to learn about nature while getting exercise. For more information, visit http://www.lcfpd.org/rx-for-health.

"Instead of preaching you need 30 minutes of exercise almost every day, we're trying to show how easy it is to go outside and walk in your neighborhood or at a local forest preserve," Pfister said.

The health department is also working with the county's department of transportation to improve and connect trails in certain communities such as North Chicago, so residents can take longer walks or bike rides without encountering busy traffic crossings, Pfister said.

Safety net

Beltran said the health department works "to build a safety net for those who are under-insured or uninsured," through Enroll Lake County, established after the passage of the Affordable Care Act. "To date, we have registered 26,700 individuals for health insurance coverage. I think that will have a long-term benefit to the health of our communities," Beltran said.

The department also recently established the Round Lake High School Health & Wellness Center. "One of the reasons we did that was to address the health needs in that community," Beltran said.

"Our goal," as a health department, added Pfister, "is to put ourselves out of business."

For more information on the county's health ratings, visit http://www.countyhealthrankings.org.

Sheryl DeVore is a freelancer for the News-Sun