Delmont, SD

The tornado displaced more than 40 families from their homes.

But what happens when your family of nearly 100 loses the only home its known for more than a century? That's the challenge now facing the congregation of Zion Lutheran church in Delmont.

Emmaus Lutheran in Tripp sees a bigger attendance than usual this Sunday, one week after a tornado destroyed its sister church, Zion Lutheran, in Delmont.

Brian Bucklew is pastor to both congregations and was out of town when the tornado struck.

"I was speechless at first," Pastor Bucklew said.

With the normal scripture, service, songs, and roof over their head, it's something of a return to normal; But some things can never be the same.

"My wife and I had just left the church, and we faced the tornado. It was coming to town," Zion Lutheran Church member Jim Kaufman said.

Tad and Jim Kaufman are fourth-generation members with a direct line to the church's founding. Their grandfather was among the church's first members and helped to lay the cornerstone. This week, they helped to remove that same stone.

It may find a new home...

Jim Kaufman: "The cornerstone is at my farm right now. It'll be waiting for a new building"

Tad Kaufman: "We'll incorporate it somehow."

Jim Kaufman: "We'll put it someplace to remember the old church."

...but the rest of the church will be burned.

Synod officials will officially decommission the building during a short service Monday morning. Then, with the help of the Delmont Fire Department, the ruins of Zion Lutheran will go up in flames.

"We sign a hymn, 'We Give Thee But Thine Own,' so I guess that's a way to give it back," Pastor Bucklew said.

Zion Lutheran's life as a church is over, but the congregation survives by their faith.

"These things are hard to accept - losing the building and what not - but they also strengthen our faith as we look to those things not seen, to those things unseen," Pastor Bucklew said.

It's not hard to see the strength these people have.

Pastor Bucklew says Emmaus Lutheran in Tripp will continue to host the congregation of Zion Lutheran for up to six weeks, while they hold meetings to discuss their next move.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.