Cody McLeod nearly cold-cocked official Jean Hebert behind the net Sunday. McLeod’s mucker’s goal in the second period brought the Avalanche back to even against the Columbus Blue Jackets.

And McLeod pumped his fist and whipped around, nearly accidentally decking the ref. McLeod was so excited — not for his goal, perhaps, but any goal.

The Avs finally surpassed 100 goals this season — the last team in the Central Division to get to triple digits. But they couldn’t hold on because of a tally that really mattered.

Columbus got an atoning goal from David Savard with 1:01 left in the game, a slap shot from the blue line, for a 4-3 victory over Colorado.

“Obviously we should be disappointed — I am disappointed,” Colorado coach Patrick Roy said. “Because, one minute left until overtime, this is when you should get to overtime. And this has happened too many times this year.”

The Avs — who struggled to shoot, let alone score, for large parts against the Blue Jackets — lost just a third game in regulation in their past 11. They are 6-3-2 over that stretch.

But at 15-16-8, the Avs remain in last place in the Central Division.

“We were one minute away from getting an important point and giving ourselves a chance where we have been confident and pretty successful, in OT,” Avs forward Jarome Iginla said. “But unfortunately, we didn’t get that done.”

Savard’s goal deflected in off Avs rookie Borna Rendulic.

PHOTOS: Colorado Avalanche vs. Columbus Blue Jackets, Jan. 4, 2015

So the Blue Jackets scored the winner late, while the Avs got on the board very early.

Iginla’s goal just 30 seconds in got the Avs off to their quickest start of the season. Savard, a Columbus defenseman, threw a lazy break-out pass in his own zone and Iginla intercepted it, then wristed one of the easiest goals of his career.

And it wasn’t the final, ignominious word from Savard. The Avs picked on him all night. Gabe Landeskog ran over Savard on the left boards after a Tyson Barrie pass was fumbled by the Columbus defenseman. Landeskog stole the puck, cut across, then triple-deked Jackets goalie Curtis McElhinney for a goal that tied the game at 2 early in the second period.

McLeod’s goal also came at the expense of Savard. McLeod scrapped out the puck behind the net, then wrapped around a goal off Savard’s skate.

But the Avs were, for awhile, back to their worst habits.

Halfway through the game, no Avs player had managed multiple shots. And Columbus had an 18-6 shot advantage and a 3-2 lead after two Brandon Dubinsky goals and a Ryan Johansen hustle goal.

Landeskog broke a 15-game goalless streak, scoring his first since Nov. 29. But his fellow slumping forwards continued to struggle. Matt Duchene, who earned an assist on Landeskog’s goal, managed just two shots and extended his goals slump to 10 games. Nathan MacKinnon, who got two shots, now has just one goal in his past 21 games.

“Even if we didn’t have our best start, my problem wasn’t with the number of shots,” Roy said. “It was the way we compete.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke