Alice Anglero of Orange was among the first few customers ready to shop when Hobby Lobby finished its grand opening ceremony in Milford Monday. Pamela McLoughlin — New Haven Register

MILFORD >> With a cut of a ribbon and a prayer to “Heavenly Father,” Hobby Lobby held its grand opening ceremony Monday at 1777 Boston Post Road, as customers waited for the doors to open.

The store, founded by David Green, who still runs the chain today “in a manner consistent with biblical principle,” according to its website, opened Friday to customers, but the grand opening bargains began Monday.

The store carries fabric, crafting products, home decor items and holiday decorations. The store is located in the former Sports Authority building near the Orange line.

Hobby Lobby is open from 9 a.m. to 8 p.m., Monday through Saturday and closed Sundays — as the sign on the door says, “To allow employees time for family and worship.”

Advertisement

The Milford store is the third in Connecticut, with others located in East Haven and, more recently, Manchester.

Even though there’s another Hobby Lobby right in East Haven, many excited customers said they felt it was too long a drive, so this was their first visit.

Shopper Tara Kaufman of Milford was one of the first few customers ready to step in the door at 9 a.m. — her second trip already.

“It’s like an amazing mixture of Jo‑Ann’s (fabric and crafts), Michael’s and Christmas Tree Shops,” Kaufman said.

Alice Anglero of Orange was so excited she was literally bouncing and couldn’t decide which to do first, shop or apply for a job.

“It’s so much more than a craft store,” she said, holding up a decorative sign for sale that reads: “Even Superheroes Brush Their Teeth.”

Milford Chamber of Commerce President Kathy Alagno said the store will create 35 to 50 full- and part-time jobs at $15 per hour.

Hobby Lobby has more than 600 stores across the nation and was started by Green on a much smaller scale in 1972.

“The jobs are great — not just for Milford, but on a regional basis,” Alagno said. She said any time a business opens, everyone benefits because jobs are created and there is more put on the local, state and federal tax rolls.

Before cutting the ribbon, store manager Willie Gray said Hobby Lobby is “thrilled” to be in Milford and he thanked employees for working so hard in recent weeks to get the store ready.

District manager Troy Moore thanked everybody and offered words of prayer, thanking God for the community, the store and wrapped it up with, “In Jesus’ name we pray.”

Hobby Lobby has stirred controversy in Connecticut and the nation by winning the right through a U.S. Supreme Court decision in July to limit the birth control coverage it offers its employees.

The decision has been cheered by conservatives and opponents of the 2009 federal health care overhaul, but set off a wave of protests at Hobby Lobby stores at the time, including the East Haven store.

But there were no protesters at the Milford opening and customers said they were not fazed by the company’s position on the Affordable Care Act, although they support the store being closed on Sundays.

Bert Belden of Shelton said she loves Hobby Lobby’s fabrics and other merchandise so much she visits the stores wherever she travels, including in Indiana, Georgia and Florida. She’s also been to the East Haven store.

Her friend, Arlene Sambrook, also of Shelton, said the fabrics are great and there is more of a selection than at similar stores.

“All the different things they have are exciting,” said Sambrook, also bobbing with anticipation. “The things they have are the things you don’t need, but you want.”