Topics: don't shoot, Ferguson, Ferguson police shooting, hands up, michael brown, protesters, News, Politics News

Tensions in Ferguson, Missouri, gave way to scattered violence early Sunday morning, on the first night of a state-imposed midnight to 5:00 a.m. curfew. One person was shot, according to the Huffington Post’s Ryan J. Reilly, who has been reporting and tweeting from Ferguson. It was also reported that seven people were arrested, and that several canisters of tear gas were deployed against protesters.

The protests are in response to the shooting of Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager, by Darren Wilson, a white police officer on Saturday, Aug. 9. Details of the shooting have yet to be released, including how many times Brown was shot.

The shape of the protests has changed each night: variations of peaceful protesting, looting, heavy militarized police response, violence and calm. After Friday night’s looting, Gov. Jay Nixon imposed an emergency curfew from midnight to 5:00 a.m.

According to reports, community leaders and rain helped enforce the curfew, and the crowds mostly dispersed. However, there was a “hardcore” contingent as Alderman Antonio French described them to the Los Angeles Times, who remained in the streets.

There were reports of gunfire, and according to Capt. Ronald Johnson, a Ferguson native and member of the state’s highway patrol put in charge of the police efforts by Gov. Nixon, a police car was shot at.

“I can tell you that I was disappointed in the actions of tonight,” Johnson told reporters on the scene. However, he said they were successful in protecting previously looted businesses.

“It was effective,” he stated. “We sustained the health of those businesses, and we also sustained the safety of the protesters that were out [and] around tonight.”

Capt. Johnson also confirmed that tear gas was deployed, but insisted it was in order to reach the unidentified male who had been shot. The man was driven to the hospital in a civilian car, and Capt. Johnson stated he was in critical condition and “may lose their life.”