The honors keep rolling in for the Broncos.

The Associated Press all-pro team was announced Friday and four Denver players made the cut: quarterback Peyton Manning, guard Louis Vasquez, place-kicker Matt Prater and wide receiver Demaryius Thomas.

Manning and Vasquez were named to the first team, Prater and Thomas to the second team. Manning was a unanimous selection; all 50 media voters chose him. It’s the seventh time Manning has been named to the all-pro first team, tying him with Otto Graham for most by a quarterback in history.

“They’re all very deserving,” said coach John Fox. “I think any time you have team success, you get some individual accolades and vice versa. To have team success, you have to have some individuals play well and all those guys are very deserving.”

Vasquez made the all-pro team for the first time.

“It’s a humbling deal,” Vasquez said. “I have a great support cast with the rest of the O-line, our offense and our team in general. Having great players around me helps everyone else look that good. A guy like Peyton just makes me want to elevate my game.”

Prater is the Broncos’ first all-pro kicker since Jason Elam was a first-team selection in 2001.

Injury report. Defensive lineman Derek Wolfe, who’s getting the week off to rest, and safety Rahim Moore were the only players missing from Denver’s practice Friday. Moore is eligible to return to practice but has yet to do so.

Gase update. First-year offensive coordinator Adam Gase has become a hot commodity for some of the head coaching jobs available in the NFL. He was contacted by the Vikings and the Browns, and told both to hold off until after the Broncos’ season ends.

“I told both teams that were interested in me that I appreciated it and I was going to wait until after our season had concluded,” Gase said. “They were great about it. They said they appreciated me being up front and honest about it, and I thought that was the best decision for what we are trying to accomplish with our team.”

Gase is only 35 years old — he’s two years younger than Manning — and is in his third role with the Broncos. He was their wide receivers coach from 2009-10 and their quarterbacks coach from 2011-12.

“If it comes down to it … I wouldn’t interview (for a head coaching job) if I didn’t think I was ready for that role,” Gase said. “But right now I have to focus on what we’re doing for the playoffs.

“It’s a one-game elimination tournament and I have to make sure my role is prepared for.”