A Connecticut animal-rights group has stepped up its efforts to stop the Dallas Zoo from adding to its elephant herd.

Friends of Animals on Friday filed a request for preliminary injunction asking a federal judge to halt the import of 18 elephants to three zoos.

The nonprofit filed a lawsuit on Feb. 9 against the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service challenging the agency’s decision to issue a permit last month that would allow the Dallas Zoo, Sedgwick County Zoo in Wichita and Omaha’s Henry Doorly Zoo and Aquarium to bring the animals from drought-stricken Swaziland.

The lawsuit seeks to prove the wildlife agency improperly issued the permit.

The group filed the request for preliminary injunction in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia last week. A hearing has been scheduled for March 17. If the preliminary injunction is granted, the court could halt the import of the elephants until the lawsuit is resolved.

Six of the elephants are expected to join the four currently living in Dallas’ Giants of the Savanna habitat.

The Dallas Zoo had hoped to welcome the new elephants by the end of the year.

Dallas Zoo spokeswoman Laurie Holloway said the zoos could not comment on the case.

“But we are hopeful for a quick resolution that enables the relocation of the animals,” she said. “As drought conditions throughout Swaziland worsen and food sources become scarcer, the zoos are eager to relocate these animals to provide them a healthy life in a safe home.”

The elephants, which are between 6 and 20 years old, have been living in drought conditions and competing for resources with a population of critically endangered black rhinos, the zoos said. The Swazi government decided it needed to either relocate or cull the heard in order to maintain biodiversity in the parks.

About 21 elephants will remain in the two parks where the animals were living.

The three zoos also agreed to contribute hundreds of thousands of dollars over several years for black rhino conservation.

“Any actions that would further delay this move also jeopardize the elephants’ well-being,” said Dennis Pate, CEO and executive director at the Omaha zoo. “They are currently living in temporary bomas that are not designed for long-term care, and the region is experiencing extreme drought that threatens food supply.”

During the permit approval process, the wildlife agency had to determine that importing the animals is not detrimental to the species’ survival, that the zoos are suitably equipped to house and care for the animals and that the animals would not be used primarily for commercial purposes.

The animal-rights group’s suit claims that though the wildlife agency published notice that no significant impact was found under the National Environmental Policy Act, it did not disclose or analyze the social, behavioral and physical impacts on the elephants.

Tim Van Norman, chief of the Branch of Permits for the fish and wildlife agency, told National Geographic that Congress has not required his agency to weigh the ethics of the import. He said his group considers whether the import is humane and determines whether it is detrimental to the species, not individual animals.

The suit specifically mentions the Dallas Zoo, stating that a Friends of Animals member who previously worked at the zoo observed the elephants during her employment and visits “but has had a difficult time doing so after learning about the problems caused by keeping elephants in zoos.”

The group says the member, and others, would like to continue visiting the zoos, but would be unable to do so or will “no longer be able to enjoy their visits to the zoos because of the confinement of elephants taken from the wild in Swaziland.”

The Dallas Zoo has said it’s unaware of any other lawsuits, though the Friends of Animals suit isn’t the first attempt to stall plans to importing the elephants. An open letter signed by a group of conservationists, scientists and animal welfare advocates pushed for the elephants to remain in Swaziland and claimed the zoos were capturing and importing the elephants to “restock a dwindling zoo elephant inventory,” not for conservation.

Judge John D. Bates, the judge with whom the case has been assigned, heard a separate Friends of Animals case last year. In July, Bates ruled in favor of the Department of the Interior’s motion to dismiss the case for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.

In 2003, animal rights groups sued the fish and wildlife service alleging the Lowry Park Zoo in Tampa and the Wild Animal Park in San Diego provided false information on permit applications to bring 11 elephants from Swaziland. The court ultimately denied the group’s request and the lawsuit was dismissed.