Striking out wasn't an option for the City of Lynn Haven Saturday, as thousands gathered at the Lynn Haven Sports Complex for the opening day of little league baseball.

"Today we have our grand opening for our baseball we're going to have celebrations and fun stuff for all the kids in the community," Maria Stout-Tate, Director of Leisure Services for the City of Lynn Haven said.

"This is an opportunity where all the families get to come together with their kids," said Antonius Barnes, a Lynn Haven Commissioner. "We get to showcase this park that we put so much money into so it just pulls everybody together."

Fifty-four little league teams ranging from ages three to 14 took to the diamond Saturday to start their four-month long baseball and softball season.

"It's the best sport, said Gabriel McFatter, a baseball player. "Yeah, it's fun," agreed his teammate Caleb Williams.

City officials said this year they've got a full count, more than 400 kids have registered for the 2016 season.

"We've had a lot of people that got there start right here in Lynn Haven," said Barnes. "And moved up the ladder."

Those who've already hit one out of the park are taking another lap around the field.

Joey Alexander, the Coach of the Giants Freshman Team said, "I played baseball a lot and my father coached, I just think its correct t get out here teach these kids how to play and how to have fun."

So what exactly makes baseball and softball fun?

"Getting people out," said 6-year-old baseball player, Brayden Taylor.

"Some of my friends were playing it and I felt like I wanted to play it," said softball player Gracie Williams. "So that's why."

"To win every game," said McFatter. "To win."

Officials said life long lessons are taught on and off of the field, but like baseball and in life, all things extraordinary happen at home.

"Baseball is America's past time," said Alexander. "It's one of the best sports there is and the fact that there's 54 teams out here in Lynn Haven says a lot for the ball park itself."