Lake Fong/Pittsburgh Post Gazette Jeannette South-Paul (left) shares a laugh with Myrtis Henderson, 47, during a regular checkup at the Matilda Theiss Health Center in Pittsburgh in May. South-Paul, a professor of family medicine and advocate for providing care to the poor, founded the clinic in 2002.

Pittsburgh — A finger on Myrtis Henderson's left hand is stuck in a bent position, a cyst on the tendon freezing any motion.

Henderson is a longtime patient of Jeannette South-Paul's at the Matilda Theiss Family Health Center in Pittsburgh's Hill District. South-Paul has helped her keep control of her diabetes, but the finger is another matter.

Poor Health An occasional series



Special Section These stories are part of a series produced by the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and Milwaukee Journal Sentinel in connection with the O'Brien Fellowship in Public Service Journalism at Marquette University.

"The only thing that is going to help that is a surgical procedure," South-Paul told Henderson, an unemployed preschool teacher, at a recent appointment. "And until you have insurance, I can't help you."

Henderson, who is in her 40s, is one of many patients who fall into a yawning gap in the nation's health safety net. They need care from a specialist but are unable to get it because they don't have insurance or have inadequate coverage. They either can't get a specialist to accept them as a patient or can't afford to pay up front for the visit.

The gap exists because many clinics for low-income patients have only primary care doctors and nurses on staffand often have no direct connection with specialists, who are typically affiliated with hospitals or large practices. Even when they do have connections, they can't always arrange timely, affordable specialty care.

And many specialists aren't eager to take low-income patients because they aren't likely to be reimbursed well for the care. While the Affordable Care Act opens up coverage to patients who didn't have it before, some plans carry deductibles that are so high patients still can't afford to see specialists.

So the patients, as well as the clinics and doctors who treat them, struggle with the cycle of sporadic, incomplete care.

Back at the Theiss clinic, South-Paul tries to work the patchwork system to get care for the patients. She is chair of the department of family medicine at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine as well as a physician at the clinic, which is affiliated with the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.

"There is one orthopedic surgical place I know that does free procedures once a month," she told Henderson. "But they only do hips. But I'll do my best and see if we can find someone."

"It just bothers me all the time," Henderson said of the cyst on her finger.

"I wish I could just make it go away. But I can't," South-Paul replied. "I could get a (cost) estimate."

But she cautioned it wouldn't be a free or inexpensive visit.

"I'll wait to see if I can get in the (Medicaid) system first," Henderson answered.

But two months later, Henderson still had not had the surgery because she had not yet qualified for Medicaid and could not afford to pay for it out-of-pocket.

Lake Fong/Pittsburgh Post Gazette Chloe Bibbens, 3, covers her face while Erica Nakajima, a fourth-year medical student from the University of Pittsburgh, tries to talk to her during a visit with her mom Darryl Hines (right), 47, at the Matilda Theiss Health Center in Pittsburgh.

Widespread problems

Cases like Henderson's are not an aberration. In Milwaukee, patients face the same struggles. Everywhere, medical directors, doctors, nurses and patients say failure to get access to specialty or diagnostic care happens all too often for the uninsured and underinsured.

"They fall through the cracks," said Diane Nieder, the nursing director for Primary Care Health Services in Pittsburgh, Allegheny County's largest network of federally funded community health centers.

Specialty care can range from orthopedic surgeons to cardiologists, from oncologists treating cancer to neurologists examining nerve-related conditions.

Without the specialty care, Nieder said, "The patient lives with it, ends up in an emergency room, or they come back here and we try to Band-Aid it the best we can and deal with it."

In one major paper in 2007 from researchers at Harvard Medical School, surveys from 439 community health centers around the country found that such a lack of access was true for all patients not covered by Medicare or private insurance.

"Our findings suggest that lack of access to specialty services is a more important problem for CHCs than previously thought," the authors wrote. "Referrals to off-site specialty services are frequently needed, yet medical directors reported major problems obtaining access to specialized medical and mental health services for uninsured patients and those covered by Medicaid. Particularly for the uninsured, these reported problems are pervasive and affect sizable numbers of patients."

There is no data about how many patients lack access to specialty care. But there are roughly 35 million uninsured Americans and millions more who are underinsured or on Medicaid.

There also is no national data that shows the cost to health systems when poor patients do not go to see a specialist when they need to. What is known is that inpatient care and emergency room treatment are more expensive than outpatient office visits with specialists.

Many specialists charge at least $350, and office visits that involve procedures can cost more. But the average cost of a visit to the emergency department in the United States was $2,168, according to a 2013 National Institutes of Health study.

LeRoi Hicks, now vice chair of the department of medicine at Christiana Care Health System in Delaware and author of the Harvard study, said the main problem is systemic.

Interactive Map Explore where hospitals have opened and closed, how many people live in poverty or with disabilities, and federally-designated primary care shortage areas.

"Even now, with all the changes we're going through with health care, we still operate under a system where specialists are operating under a fee-for-service model and not a plan for the patient's overall health," he said. Because of that, "we shouldn't be surprised that doctors who don't get reimbursed for a service don't provide care to people without insurance."

That's also why hospitals are not likely to provide more such care, said Ken Bream, a University of Pennsylvania physician who has long worked with underserved populations in Philadelphia.

"If the University of Pennsylvania was to announce it was going to start taking uninsured patients in for specialty physicians, our competitors, Jefferson (Hospital) and Temple (Hospital), would start referring their patients here in droves," he said. "They can't open the door a crack because people would rush in."

Medical staffers respond

Specialists and hospitals often say they are not aware of patients facing barriers to specialty care and that they readily accept such patients.

"That is not my reality," said Karen Shaffer-Platt, who oversees UPMC's Patient Financial Services Center, which helps patients apply for insurance coverage or charity or discounted care for the region's largest medical provider.

"There is no (financial) gate-keeping done for any request for an appointment" at UPMC, she said. "We are convinced we have a way to see every patient who wants to be seen."

That stance is not surprising to Cheri Rinehart, executive director of the Pennsylvania Association of Community Health Centers, who spent 17 years working for the Hospital and Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania.

"I was part of these conversations where (hospital officials) truly believe they were doing everything they could and that there were not these big holes in the safety net," she said. "They just don't understand what patients go through after they leave the hospital or the doctor's office."

Safety-net patients and medical staffers say the problem isn't well recognized because of what often happens after the initial referral.

Patients sometimes do schedule the specialist or diagnostic appointment. But once they're told they need $350 up front to see the doctor because they don't have insurance, they're underinsured or — more recently — because their new Affordable Care Act bronze plan insurance has a $3,000 deductible, they simply never go, or they cancel without an explanation.

And no one is counting that person as one who needed but did not get specialty care.

"I've seen that happen with my patients," said Diane Emes, a family practice physician in California, Pa., who works part time with a federally funded health center in Monessen. "Try getting a referral (with an uninsured patient). It just doesn't happen."

After she realizes a patient won't go to a specialist because of the out-of-pocket costs, or the specialist won't see a patient without insurance, Emes said she stops trying to refer the patient.

Then, she said, "sometimes you try to do what you can with stuff you can't really handle as a family practice physician."

If the patient's situation is more critical, she starts making what she called the "Hey buddy!" calls herself, cajoling other doctors to take the patient.

Multiple specialists said they get such calls and take on uninsured patients.

"I've taken care of a lot of people for nothing over the years," said Ronald Pellegrini, a longtime cardiothoracic surgeon in the Pittsburgh area.

That may be how it's often done, said Wilford Payne, who has served as the executive director of Primary Care Health Services for the past 37 years. But not everyone has that kind of access to specialists. "And that's no way to run a health system."

Local efforts

There are programs around the country that bring together the health centers that serve the poor and the health systems that control the specialists.

In Milwaukee County, under a project started two years ago, each of the four health systems that treat adults in Milwaukee County now accepts referrals of uninsured patients from the community health centers, the AIDS Resource Center of Wisconsin and several free clinics.

"We now have pretty good access to specialty care," said Tom Jackson, a volunteer doctor at the Bread of Healing Clinic, which operates several free clinics. "That's been a major change."

The project was put in place by the Milwaukee Health Care Partnership, a coalition that includes the chief executives of the health care systems in Milwaukee County.

One result of the project is doctors are better identifying who truly needs specialty care.

"It is a model in many ways," Jackson said.

In Cleveland, the Cuyahoga Health Access Partnership grew out of an effort that began in 2008 when all the major medical systems, federally funded health centers and free clinics there came together to talk about access.

"We had all the players gathered around the table and said, 'We've got some of the highest quality health care available in the country here, we need to find a way to get uninsured people access,'" said Sarah Hackenbracht, the program's executive director since 2011.

The result was that nearly all the major hospital systems agreed to make their specialists and diagnostic services available to patients who were qualified for charity or discounted care through the program.

The program takes any uninsured adult, 19 to 64 years old, who made 200% or less of the federal poverty guidelines. By the end of 2012, 3,088 residents had been qualified through CHAP, and the program had made 4,035 specialty care referrals for them.

The program continues to grow, despite Ohio having adopted Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act, meaning that fewer patients are without insurance coverage.

And now, Hackenbracht said, the program's board is talking about a new challenge: underinsured patients who got high-deductible or high copay insurance through the Affordable Care Act marketplace.

"I think we're going to have to move in that direction" she said.

Guy Boulton of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.