New law requires N.Y. hospitals to train caregivers when patients leave State's new CARE act ensures education for designated help









Photo: Lori Van Buren Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Image 1 of 3 Buy photo Registration associate Amanda Shader helps a patient at the admissions desk at St. Peter's Hospital on Friday, April 22, 2016 in Albany, N.Y. (Lori Van Buren / Times Union) Registration associate Amanda Shader helps a patient at the admissions desk at St. Peter's Hospital on Friday, April 22, 2016 in Albany, N.Y. (Lori Van Buren / Times Union) Photo: Lori Van Buren Buy this photo Image 2 of 3 Buy photo Registration associate Amanda Shader helps a patient at the admissions desk at St. Peter's Hospital on Friday, April 22, 2016 in Albany, N.Y. (Lori Van Buren / Times Union) Registration associate Amanda Shader helps a patient at the admissions desk at St. Peter's Hospital on Friday, April 22, 2016 in Albany, N.Y. (Lori Van Buren / Times Union) Photo: Lori Van Buren Buy this photo Image 3 of 3 Buy photo Registration associate Amanda Shader helps a patient at the admissions desk at St. Peter's Hospital on Friday, April 22, 2016 in Albany, N.Y. (Lori Van Buren / Times Union) Registration associate Amanda Shader helps a patient at the admissions desk at St. Peter's Hospital on Friday, April 22, 2016 in Albany, N.Y. (Lori Van Buren / Times Union) Photo: Lori Van Buren Buy this photo New law requires N.Y. hospitals to train caregivers when patients leave 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

"Would you like to designate a caregiver?"

Since Saturday, hospital patients in New York must be asked that question or something like it, in keeping with a new law intended to improve their care after they get home.

Choosing a caregiver prompts hospital staff to teach the designee how to tend to the patient once he or she gets home, as required by the state's new CARE Act, signed into law last year.

Menands resident Geneva Conway, 84, is among those cheering the act's implementation. She recalled caring for her parents after hospital visits about 15 years ago, when she was nearly 70 and they were in their 90s.

"I was overwhelmed, and I didn't know where to go to get what I needed," Conway said.

An estimated 4.1 million New Yorkers provide unpaid care to adults with conditions that limit their daily activities, according to AARP. The lobby for older Americans pushed for passage of the CARE Act (which stands for Caregiver Advise, Record, Enable). New York is now one of 24 states to have such a law on the books.

"The majority of all long-term care in New York is done by family caregivers, and this further acknowledges the important role they play in our health system," said Bill Ferris, state legislative representative for AARP New York. Designating a caregiver is different from naming a health proxy, who can make decisions for a patient unable to do so. Proxies need not be involved in a patient's care to make the decisions about what medical professionals do.

The designated caregiver, on the other hand, needs to be both involved and on site, said Erin LaBarge, performance improvement specialist at St. Peter's Health Partners, which includes four hospitals in Albany and Troy.

Once named, caregivers at St. Peter's health system will be included in discussions about patients' conditions during their hospital stays, LaBarge said. Caregivers might be asked to watch a video or sit through instructions from a hospital staffer.

Patients' needs will determine which professional provides the training, LaBarge said. If a patient is going home with an oxygen tank, a respiratory therapist may demonstrate how to use it. If a patient with limited mobility will need assistance, a physical therapist might show the caregiver safe methods of support.

Instructions will be reinforced when the patient leaves the hospital, LaBarge said. New to the hospitals' discharge routines will be the distribution of task lists to each caregiver. Also new are documentation rules that require hospitals to keep track of all training provided.

Hospital representatives say the law codifies processes already in place.

"It's similar to what we've done before, but more formalized and structured," LaBarge said.

Many caregivers nonetheless feel uncertain about the tasks they perform. An AARP study found two-thirds of caregivers who took care of a patient's wounds found it hard to do. Half of those who needed to operate a mechanical apparatus — ventilators, feeding tubes or home dialysis equipment, for instance — found it difficult. Nearly one- fourth who managed patients' medicines felt training would be helpful.

"Caregiving is exhausting," said Danielle Valenti, a 31-year-old Troy woman who cared for a mother with Huntington's disease two years ago. "It's probably one of the scariest things you can experience."

She called the law a "great first step" to recognizing the support that caregivers need.

chughes@timesunion.com • 518-454-5417 • @hughesclaire