A quarantine sign similar to this one was placed at Ann Patterson's home when she became ill with scarlet fever. ( Library of Congress / Courtesy photo )

In 1910, Dr. Lucy Wood, the city of Boulder's Health Officer, quarantined three families in their homes for smallpox. Said a Camera reporter, "The announcement comes as a great surprise, as it was generally believed that the progress of that disease had been checked."

Communicable diseases elicit fear in the general population, especially when the contagion is not understood and there is no known cure. This became apparent during the current Ebola outbreak, but protection of the public's health, resulting in isolation and quarantine, have been part of our lives for a long time.

Scarlet fever was so prevalent in Boulder in 1913 that schools were closed for three weeks. In October 1918, at the height of the influenza epidemic, the city again shut down its schools, as well as churches and movie theaters.

At the time, Washington, Mapleton and Whittier schools were fumigated. Students finally returned after five weeks, but they had to skip their upcoming Christmas and Easter vacations. By March 1919, the illness had killed 64 Boulder residents.

Typhoid hit Boulder's general population in 1922, diphtheria in 1923, scarlet fever again in 1927 and measles in 1930 and 1934. Each home with an ill family member was placed under quarantine.

Ann Patterson, a student at Boulder's Whittier Elementary School, contracted scarlet fever in the mid-1940s. Like their predecessors, Patterson and her family were quarantined at home, after contracting this now-treatable bacterial infection. After the girl's younger brother fell ill, the whole family was confined again for three more weeks.

"A big sign was put up in the window that said we were quarantined," Patterson (now Ann Ray) said a few years ago in an oral history preserved at Boulder's Carnegie Branch Library for Local History. She added, "We felt like we were in prison."

No one but doctors and nurses were allowed to enter or leave the family's home, while groceries were delivered to their door. Patterson (and her brother) survived, but she missed so many weeks of school that she had to repeat a year.

Quarantines were enforceable by fines and/or jail time. But if Boulder residents violated state and local laws, no records have been found. In Denver, however, a physician noted in a statewide publication that some patients gave their doctors "financial consideration" to keep the them from reporting cases of contagious diseases cases to authorities.

During a Camera interview with a Boulder public health nurse in the 1940s on the topic of communicable disease control, the nurse told the reporter she urged persuasion rather than force to keep families from violating their quarantines. Legal measures, the nurse said, should be instituted only when other methods have failed.

Newspapers reported in 1950 that Boulder quarantined families that year for small pox, scarlet fever, measles and diphtheria. In 1952, the city's Health Department merged with the Boulder County Public Health Association, evolving into what is now the Boulder County Health Department. Vaccines and treatments have since eliminated the threats from most of the often-deadly diseases.

In the past, quarantines served their purpose, and they still are enforceable under the Colorado Revised Statutes. During her 1940 interview, the public health nurse summarized the issue when she said, "The welfare of many must not be endangered to suit the convenience of a few."

Silvia Pettem and Carol Taylor write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net, Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com or write to the Daily Camera, 5450 Western Ave., Boulder 80301.