What’s it take to see a doctor in December?

The week after Thanksgiving, I came down with flulike symptoms and called my doctor’s clinic at 8 a.m. The answering service said to call back in 10 minutes, when the staff would be settled in.

At 8:09, I was told every appointment was taken until noon the next day. I went to an urgent care center, as advised, but it had no flu tests and the X-ray machine was down. The next urgent center had a three-hour wait, and the receptionist said to go home and wait for them to text me.

Eventually, I found a physician’s assistant at a different clinic and got the right antibiotics and steroids. The next week, as my cough persisted, I had to wait another day and a half to see my longtime PA.

It all worked out, but the experience drove home a phenomenon in health care: the year-end rush.

Access to care is a huge issue in Texas, because almost 1 in 3 working age adults has no health insurance. But people with coverage and their own doctors can face obstacles, too.

Medical offices are often jammed these days, and patients and providers can feel the stress. Some spike in business is unavoidable, because flu season arrived early and more now have health coverage, thanks to Obamacare. There’s also a doctor shortage.

But much of the surge stems from the way we design insurance and incentivize treatment. Deductibles, co-payments and pretax spending accounts encourage people to delay elective care in the first half of the year and then rack it up in the last quarter.

Higher deductibles

Annual deductibles are more common and growing larger. This year, the average deductible for single coverage was $1,217, almost 50 percent higher than five years ago, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation survey.

The share of workers paying big annual deductibles has nearly doubled since 2009. Once they pay that nut, people are eager to catch up on their care before the meter resets on Jan. 1.

“We’re seeing a utilization spike across the board,” said Dr. Christopher Crow, president of Village Health Partners, a family care practice in Plano. “They’re trying to get mammograms, colonoscopies, knee surgeries, even extra visits for a chronic condition. When flu season hits about the same time, you have a double whammy.”

Last winter, flu didn’t hit hard until the first week of January, when North Texas providers were overwhelmed with patients. This time, flu cases increased sharply around Thanksgiving.

Still, some of the year-end rush is unnecessary. Under the Affordable Care Act, preventive treatments, such as physicals and mammograms, are covered completely, with no deductible required. They cost the same in January as in December — nothing out of pocket.

That’s an opportunity to shift customers to early next year, with a big caveat: Roughly 1 in 4 insured workers is still in a plan that doesn’t comply with the ACA, according to Kaiser.

Their coverage provisions are grandfathered in. Most employers’ insurance pays for annual physicals, Crow said, but many haven’t added colonoscopies. So patients who want that exam may have a real reason to act before the year ends.

Many people also have health spending accounts funded with pretax dollars. In flexible spending accounts, rollovers are limited beyond the calendar year. But HSAs, which are part of high-deductible plans, allow all unspent money to carry over.

HSAs were used by 20 percent of employees this year, up from 4 percent in 2006, Kaiser said. While they eliminate one timing factor, more patients focus on taking advantage of deductibles they already paid.

‘Artificial deadline’

“We’re creating an artificial deadline,” said Sara Collins, vice president of health care coverage and access at the Commonwealth Fund in New York. “We should be encouraging people to get care when they need it, not when the calendar’s about to turn.”

High deductibles have slowed health spending, so they’re likely to keep growing. But other developments could reduce the seasonal squeeze.

More providers are focused on the retail experience, expanding hours and taking appointments online. One website, zocdoc.com, connects patients with in-network doctors to see them the same day. Village Health, whose brand is built around access, will open a Sunday clinic next month so it can offer appointments all week. Others have online consultations and technology to monitor patients at home.

“Providers are being paid on quality, not just volume,” said Phil Miller of Merritt Hawkins, a physician search firm in Irving and a division of AMN Healthcare.

Volume remains the No. 1 factor in physician pay plans, he said. But quality measures, including customer service, account for a growing share. That’s why patients are often surveyed after procedures.

At Village Health, employees answer the phones before the clinic opens and for an hour after it closes.

“You can’t staff for the once-a-year spike,” Crow said. “But you need a plan to react if you want happy customers.”

Follow Mitchell Schnurman on Twitter at @mitchschnurman.