Peter Reitzfeld Blackstone Group’s Joseph Baratta, global head of private equity, at the Dow Jones Private Equity Analyst Conference in September.

Easy monetary policy has powered a boom in financing activity among buyout firms in recent years. But as the Federal Reserve starts to pull in the reins, few can predict exactly how the story will end.

Joseph Baratta, global head of private equity at the Blackstone Group, told a group of attendees at the Harvard Business School’s private equity and venture capital conference on Sunday that the global capital markets have entered “uncharted territory” when it comes to government and central banking involvement.

“Never in the history of humanity has there been this much intervention in capital markets globally,” Mr. Baratta said. “No one in this room or anywhere is smart enough to know how this is going to evolve.”

The Federal Reserve plans to reduce its monthly bond buying program, prompting some to bet that financial institutions will ultimately begin to tighten their lending requirements. Although pricing on deals may not have reached the lofty heights it hit during the peak of the buyout bubble in 2006 and 2007, Mr. Baratta cautioned that loose lending standards have pushed some firms to rely too heavily on cheap debt for returns.

“The artificially low interest rates are inducing people to do things that may not be sensible at this point in time,” Mr. Baratta said. “Our true north in every decision is the yield we’re making on an unlevered basis. If it doesn’t work on an unlevered basis, it doesn’t make sense as an investment.”

He added that for its part Blackstone is particularly bullish on deals in the energy space these days. The firm is expected to hit the market with its second energy focused fund later this year, LBO Wire reported in December.

In 2012, the buyout firm invested in the construction of a liquefied natural gas facility in Louisiana alongside Houston-based Cheniere Energy.

“Right now we see energy as one of the few global sectors with enormous demand for capital that is not easily met by the public debt and equity markets,” Mr. Baratta said.

Write to Laura Kreutzer at laura.kreutzer@wsj.com Follow her on Twitter @laurakreutzer