What it asks: "Shall the town of Jamestown taxes be increased $15,250 in 2016 and then annually by whatever additional amounts are raised thereafter by the imposition of an additional mill levy not to exceed five (5) mills upon taxable real property within the town, commencing january 1, 2016, such revenues to be collected, retained, and spent for any lawful municipal purpose; and shall the Town be permitted to collect, retain and expend all revenues derived from such tax increase and any earning thereon as a voter approved revenue change and an exception to limits which would otherwise apply under Article X, Section 20 of the Colorado Constitution or any other law?"

What it means: Jamestown voters are being asked to approve a permanent ongoing 5-mill property tax increase that town trustees have said would avoid continuing to annually dip into budget reserves when Jamestown's government revenues don't cover municipal operating expenses.

What supporters say: Without a tax increase, the town's general fund will be depleted within the next four or five years. The 5-mill increase is necessary to ensure Jamestown's survival as an incorporated statutory town. The town has been the beneficiary of millions of dollars in state and federal grants to help it rebuild since the flood. But grants cannot pay for everything, especially administrative costs associated with managing all that money. Up until 2013, the town's general fund got along on just 5.5 mills from taxpayers. This is the first time in decades that an increase to the general fund has been proposed. A homeowner with a property valued at $300,000 would pay only about $10 per month if the ballot issue is approved.

Advertisement

What opponents say: Most residents have suffered some form of economic setbacks as a result of the flood and some have had savings wiped out. This tax increase is an additional burden on the community and particularly hard on seniors and others on fixed incomes. Residents have spoken clearly in favor of attracting young families and making it possible for elders to age in place. Increased taxes and the water surcharge don't support these goals. Failure to pass this tax increase will not decrease road maintenance, which is funded by gasoline tax. The town still has reserves as well as the Rebuild Jamestown fund. The Town Board has not specified how this additional revenue should be allocated and, according to the ballot wording, the money could be spent for "any lawful municipal purpose." A tax increase is unwarranted and premature.