RELEASE: Former U.S. Rep. Allyson Schwartz to Join Center for American Progress as Senior Fellow

Contact: Tom Caiazza

Phone: 202.481.7141

Email: tcaiazza@americanprogress.org

Washington, D.C. — The Center for American Progress welcomes former U.S. Rep. Allyson Y. Schwartz (D-PA) as a Senior Fellow. Health care reform is one of the primary issues that Rep. Schwartz will work on as a Senior Fellow. Schwartz is a health care expert with deep knowledge of health policy and a track record of moving important policies through Congress.

“Rep. Schwartz has been a pioneer in reforming how health care is paid for and delivered,” said Carmel Martin, CAP’s Executive Vice President for Policy. “Throughout her decades of service to the state of Pennsylvania, she has been integral in creating health policies that have improved the health and well-being of all Americans. Her expertise and her dedication to smart policy targeted at improving the lives of Americans will make her an indispensable asset to CAP. We look forward to working with her on progressive policies, including improving access to quality, affordable health care for all Americans.”

“Given the dynamic environment in health care today, it is a particularly important time to advance the best ideas for meeting the goal of access to quality health care for all Americans,” said Rep. Schwartz. “I welcome the opportunity to work with the great team at CAP to develop and advocate for public policy that brings smart, pragmatic ideas to the public’s attention and to decision makers for action.”

While in the House of Representatives, she helped to secure provisions in the Affordable Care Act that prevented discrimination based on pre-existing conditions and improved access to primary care doctors. While a Pennsylvania state senator, she led the effort to pass the Children’s Health Insurance Program, or CHIP, which became a model for a similar national program. Prior to holding elected office, Rep. Schwartz was the commissioner of the Philadelphia Department of Human Services and the founder and executive director of the Elizabeth Blackwell Health Center.

For more information on this topic, contact Tom Caiazza at 202.481.7141 or tcaiazza@americanprogress.org.

###