Buy Photo Gov. John Bel Edwards spoke in Lafayette last week. (Photo: Ken Stickney, The Daily Advertiser)Buy Photo

Gov. John Bel Edwards’ decision to expand Medicaid in Louisiana is no surprise, nor should it draw an outcry. There is imminent good sense in accepting federal dollars for a program that benefits the working poor, as long as it stays afloat.

It fulfills an Edwards’ campaign pledge and, in his mind, makes good sense for state finances and for Louisiana’s working poor. Elected officials should be expected to try to deliver on their promises, right?

READ MORE: Obama approves

Former Gov. Bobby Jindal vehemently opposed Louisiana’s participation in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which provides for Medicaid expansion for states, but his every move, it seems, was fueled by political motivation. Other Republican governors joined him in especially large numbers in the Southeast.

Some of Jindal's pointed criticisms held merit, but turning down federal money, especially nowadays, does not.

Reasons for expanding Medicaid under President Barack Obama’s plan include some of those cited by Edwards in promoting it: The federal government picks up most of the tab; it provides care for the working poor who cannot otherwise afford it; the infusion of federal cash benefits Louisiana’s economy.

READ MORE: We can care for poor

Those who oppose it, too, have plausible points: The federal government is already mired in debt; states, which must balance their budgets, must find new money to match federal funds; and there is no guaranty the program is sustainable.

Even this week, UnitedHealth announced it will back out of most of its participation in the state exchanges; the company lost a billion dollars over the last two years.

Nonetheless, Louisiana will likely see the benefits Edwards promised, at least in the short term. The feds will pick up most of the cost of the program for the decade, pumping new dollars into Louisiana. Those dollars will do additional good when multiplier effects play out in the state’s economy. The state’s safety net hospitals will likely benefit from the guaranteed payments for working poor who show up at their doors.

Most importantly, families with incomes of 138 percent of the poverty level — about $16,000 for individuals, $33,000 for families of four — will get some medical attention they’ve previously been denied.

Christine Berry, director of Insurance Studies at the University of Louisiana at Monroe, said there is little downside to Edwards' decision. Some 300,000 people may be insured, the state will save big money and the poor had to be treated somehow, somewhere. The concern, she said, was that the 10 percent match would be a huge state expense, but the working poor would wind up in safety net emergency rooms anyway, costing Louisiana plenty. Why not take the federal money?

Is Obamacare the final or best answer? Probably not. But it's what's available. Use it, and look for better answers.

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/opinion/2016/04/23/editorial-now-expansion-sensible/83306588/