Cape Breton Highlands National Park, Nova Scotia, Canada. (Photo: C. SAPPA, De Agostini, Getty Images)

MONTREAL — The prospect of a Donald Trump presidency has sparked a flood of interest in a Nova Scotia island where a local booster is beckoning American Trump haters to live if the Donald is elected.

Since "Cape Breton if Donald Trump Wins" went up on Feb. 16, the website has attracted 650,000 unique visitors and floods of emails asking for more information on job opportunities, how to apply for work visas and even the law about bringing a horse across the border.

The website's creator, Rob Calabrese, who hosts a local radio show, said he first thought of setting up the site years ago after seeing tweets by Americans who had threatened to move to Canada if Barack Obama was elected president. Now that many Americans — Democrats and Republicans — are decrying Trump's candidacy, he decided to launch it at his wife's urging.

“I showed it to a couple of people who had a chuckle," Calabrese told USA TODAY. "I wasn't going to do anything and then my wife said, 'Hey that Donald Trump website, you should launch that.'”

The site touts Cape Breton's beauty and other lifestyle attractions. Like the rest of Canada, however, its social policies may appeal more to Democrats than to Republicans who oppose Obamacare and gun control: Canada has socialized medicine and stringent gun control.

“I don't think Republicans fully understood what happens here,” he said. Even so, "we just thought, 'Hey, we have a severe population problem. Let's get out in front and say if you're going to move to Canada, look at this beautiful little option.'”

Calabrese initially responded to emails personally, but the demand for information has been so overwhelming that he has posted helpful links to various government agency websites.



“I was having fun responding to them because their questions were genuine,” he said. “I thought this is great, this is such a blast. Then they started coming in every few seconds, I wasn't able to keep up.

The deluge was so great that the Destination Cape Breton Association, a non-governmental tourism board, partnered with Calabrese and assembled a team to respond to a backlog of requests for information.

“I think that because he presented it as a beautiful destination, there’s no question there’s an interest piqued,” said the board's CEO, Mary Tulle.

Tulle said the group's website has gotten 380,000 unique visitors of its own since the site went viral, up from 12,000 over the same period last year. “We (had) three of our summer season team come in ... so I had five staff dedicated to handling online requests.”

Those requests were mostly about immigration, employment and housing, suggesting people are serious about relocating and not just asking about Cape Breton out of idle curiosity.

The interest could not come at a better time for an island that has seen its coal mining and steel industries shrink. The full-time population is just under 150,000, about 30,000 fewer than 50 years ago. Many have left to seek jobs in the oil fields of western Canada.



“Our population decline is so severe right now, the graduating class in our school system is double the size of the kindergarten class,” he said.



The island's decline has upset Calabrese, a native Cape Bretoner who takes pride in promoting his home as one of the most scenic spots in Canada. “When you look at travel magazines, Cape Breton is always ranking in the top of the world for beautiful islands,” he said. “The people have an international reputation for friendliness and hospitality.”

Calabrese said the island's Gaelic , French and Native Canadian influences, its folk music traditions and peacefulness make it an appealing destination to Trump haters.



“What I think of Donald Trump is irrelevant,” he said. “The fact is, he is the most famous in the universe and the things that he says on the campaign trail, that way of thinking is pretty much the opposite of here.”

Copyright 2016 WFAA