STEAMBOAT SPRINGS — There’s a well-traveled adage among the telemark skiing tribe: Half the binding, twice the skill.

The reference generally applies to the sport’s signature free-heeled technique, employing bindings that attach boot to ski only at the toes like traditional nordic skis, then pointing them down a mountain. But the true essence of the expression was displayed at the Steamboat Ski Area’s Vagabond run Friday with a test that contends for the title of the world’s most difficult form of ski racing.

With considerably less fanfare than its alpine racing counterpart at Vail and Beaver Creek in February, the 2015 FIS Telemark World Championships ski races came to a close here with Friday’s “classic” event. The race doubles down on skill by combining the techniques of alpine gate-bashing with the uphill nimbleness of nordic. Throw in a 100-foot jump, a 360-degree banked turn and mandatory knee-dropping lunges throughout, and you have the makings of a total package unique to the telemark niche.

“It really does require a nordic-alpine hybrid athlete,” said world championships race director Ken Gay of Steamboat. “You have alpine athletes that come into it, and they do really well in the race line and the speed portion. Every once in a while you get a nordic athlete that comes into it, and you can see the skill in their skating and that nordic style landing the jumps. So you get both disciplines.

“I don’t know which is better; they both have their strengths. But the one that gets to the center from wherever they come from, if they can learn that other side of it, they are the ones that are successful.”

Gay’s hypothesis was confirmed for the third time in three races when Tobias Mueller, a former cross country racer and member of Germany’s alpine racing development team, established himself as the world’s fastest telemark skier with a gold medal in the classic. Mueller also won Tuesday’s sprint classic and Thursday’s parallel sprint classic at Howelsen Hill and was crowned overall world champion alongside women’s sprint and classic winner Amelie Reymond of Switzerland.

“The cool thing is in telemark is you have to be very multilateral,” Mueller said. “You have to be a good jumper, a good skier and a good skater. And if you mix it all together then you can win a telemark race. That’s the interesting and good thing.”

Long renowned for its eclectic array of winter sports interests, Steamboat and its well-established Steamboat Springs Winter Sports Club (SSWSC) have recently emerged as the epicenter of telemark ski racing in America. Seven of the nearly 100 competitors representing 11 nations at the second-ever FIS-sanctioned world championship event in the U.S. were SSWSC members, all of them qualifying as juniors (ages 16 to 20).

A junior world championship bronze medalist in 2014, Tanner Visnick, 18, of Steamboat, posted the fastest raw time among junior men in Friday’s one-run classic but was bumped from the podium after a three-second penalty for landing short on the midcourse jump. Three-time U.S. national champion Madi McKinstry, 20, from Steamboat, settled for sixth in her division.

Both skiers will have an opportunity to improve their racing résumés when the 2015 U.S. telemark national championships come to Sunlight Mountain Resort in Glenwood Springs on March 13-15.

Hopes are high that momentum from the 2015 world championships and the nearby U.S. national championships will translate to increased enthusiasm for telemark racing in Steamboat and beyond.

“If we were able to get it into the Olympics, that would give us much more support for the developing athletes,” Visnick said. “Our issue is in numbers. Countries like Norway and France, they have a decent number of athletes and support. Here in the U.S., there’s just not that many people that race.”

Scott Willoughby: swilloughby@denverpost.com or twitter.com/swilloughby