Getty Images

NEW YORK (MarketWatch) -- HealthSouth Corp. has agreed to buy privately held EHHI Holdings Inc., the owner of Encompass Home Health and Hospice, for about $750 million.

The deal has been approved by both boards and is expected to close before the end of the year, HealthSouth said in a statement.

Dallas-based Encompass is the fifth biggest provider of Medicare-focused home health services in the United States, with 140 locations across 13 states. The company was owned by private investment firm Cressey & Company LP, which had put it on the block last month.

HealthSouth HLS, +0.27% , the biggest operator of inpatient rehabilitation hospitals in the U.S., said the deal will allow it to expand into the home-care market.

“We knew this was the opportunity we had been waiting for,” HealthSouth CEO Jay Grinney said on a conference call with investors.

Encompass will operate as a subsidiary and keep its name and management, he said. HealthSouth operates rehabilitation hospitals, while Encompass provides home health care. The acquisition will allow patients who are being discharged from HealthSouth hospitals to continue their rehabilitation at home, under the care of Encompass. Many of these older patients currently enter skilled nursing facilities to rehabilitate from injuries, strokes or other health episodes.

The deal will allow the company to compete in the new health-care landscape shaped by the Affordable Care Act. Increasingly, insurers are paying health-care providers so-called bundled payments according to care outcomes or the numbers of patients served, instead of the traditional payment-per-treatment model.

Medicare, the government insurance for those 65 and over and younger people with certain disabilities, pays for most of Encompass’ services. In recent years, Medicare has encouraged the use of Accountable Care Organizations, which are groups of doctors and hospitals that coordinate patient care and often receive bundled payments that reward the quality, as opposed to the quantity, of care.

The deal is the latest in the health and home care sector, and comes a month after Kindred Healthcare KND, +2.02% acquired Gentiva Health Services Inc. for about $720 million in cash and stock. The combined company is the largest provider of long-term, acute-care hospitals, inpatient rehabilitation facilities and hospice and home-health services in the United States, The Wall Street Journal reported.

Kindred made a follow-up acquisition in November of privately held Centerre Healthcare Corp, an operator of inpatient rehabilitation hospitals, for about $195 million in cash.

HealthSouth's acquisition will be funded by cash on hand and incremental debt, said Grinney. J.P. Morgan Securities LLC acted as financial advisor, while Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP was legal advisor on the deal.

HealthSouth shares closed up 5.2%, and are up about 21% in the year so far, while the S&P 500 has gained 12%.

More from MarketWatch