When faux Oscars were facetiously handed out at the legislature this year, state Sen. Ellen Roberts won “best actress in a leading role.”

“So deeply immersed in character she’s barely recognizable,” was the description of the Durango Republican.

The award from Democratic Sen. Pat Steadman, who does an annual Oscars list, was a sly reference to what people under the Gold Dome had been talking about for a couple of years.

Roberts’ reputation was as a moderate when she was first elected to the legislature in 2006, but Capitol regulars saw what they thought was a shift to the right. When Republicans took control of the state Senate after last November’s election, her conservative caucus elected her Senate president pro tem. That escalated the conversation.

“People were saying, ‘Hey, you took on a leadership role. You sold out and you became a right-wing wacko,’ ” Roberts said in an interview earlier this year when asked about her Oscar.

“Definitely, my views have changed over the years. I actually thought Republicans were the mean ones. Then I found out that folks on the other side of the aisle, could be really, really mean, whether it’s at the Capitol or at home.”

Where Roberts stands on the issues has become increasingly more important in recent weeks as she mulls whether to challenge Democrat Michael Bennet in next year’s U.S. Senate race.

Colorado has never elected a woman to the U.S. Senate — or as governor — and a number of people believe it’s time. Democrats admitted that’s one of the reasons they initially were worried about Roberts’ candidacy, but they have gleefully watched Roberts stumble in recent weeks as she explains her views on reproductive rights.

She admitted in a recent interview it hasn’t been smooth.

“I’m pretty unscripted. I pride myself on being a real person. It’s what I’ve received the most positive feedback on from my constituents,” she said. “Perhaps my downfall is in not trying to change that on what is a much more intense stage, even though I’m just thinking about running for the Senate.”

Only three Colorado women have ever received a major party’s nomination for the U.S. Senate, and only one came close to winning: Secretary of State Mary Estill Buchanan, a Republican. She lost in 1980 to Democratic U.S. Sen. Gary Hart, 50.3 percent to 48.7 percent, as President Jimmy Carter’s unpopularity soared.

Laura Hoeppner is co-producing and writing the film “Strong Sisters,” about women in Colorado politics. Barriers to women running for higher office, she said, include raising money, wanting to avoid the toxic atmosphere that politics has become and avoiding negative impact on their children, particularly if the women have to commute between Colorado and Washington.

Roberts, who has two grown children, was first elected to the legislature in 2006. Knowing that her pro-choice views turned off conservatives in her House district, a Democratic group paid for fliers that landed the Friday before the election saying she supported abortion on demand. Roberts nonetheless prevailed in what was a banner year for Democrats.

Forest health, water, health care reform, public lands and judicial matters were the issues that interested Roberts, an attorney whose husband, Rick, works in construction. At the end of her first session, Capitol regulars picked Roberts as one of the year’s best freshmen.

She ran for the state Senate in 2010 in a race that again attracted unusual Democratic spending. A Tea Party candidate had surprised Roberts, nearly keeping her off the primary ballot. Democrats mailed fliers to Republican voters intended to bolster the Tea Party challenger because he was deemed easier to defeat in November than Roberts.

She won the primary and the general.

“I think I fit the state,” said Roberts, whose daily outfit often includes a string of pearls from her late father and a pair of cowboy boots.

Roberts was appointed in February to serve as chairwoman of a committee overseeing Colorado’s troubled health care exchange, where her performance has drawn praise from both sides of the aisle.

After the session ended in May, Roberts told her hometown paper she was looking at a Senate run. “I recognize it would be a longshot,” the 55-year-old said.

The Durango Herald noted Roberts would have to survive a partisan primary, which typically supports the more conservative candidate, and pointed out that Roberts supports gay rights and is pro-choice.

That’s when things got interesting.

When it comes to reproductive rights, Roberts said abortion-rights advocates are upset that she supports parental notification, while abortion foes are mad because she believes it should be legal.

After Roberts said she was looking at the Senate race, Planned Parenthood Votes Colorado told the Herald it no longer considered Roberts a moderate or an ally on women’s health issues.

The group pointed to Roberts’ recent votes, including her support for a measure in the 2015 session that would have created a fetal homicide law in Colorado. The bill failed after Democrats opposed the measure, saying it was in essence “personhood,” which defines a fetus as a person and makes it easier to outlaw abortion.

Democrats also pointed to Roberts’ interview with The Nation. She was asked about a state program that has reduced teen pregnancies by 40 percent by providing long-acting contraceptives. A bill to extend the program died in a Senate Republican committee this session.

Some critics questioned the need for funding such a program, as no-cost birth control was already provided by the Affordable Care Act.

“Republican Sen. Ellen Roberts told me she might have supported the bill if she’d had a good answer for that,” columnist Katha Pollit wrote. “Luckily, thanks to my access to the Internet and a telephone, I was able to help her out.”

In some cases, insurance companies are refusing to cover the more expensive, more effective contraceptives.

Roberts said she should have been aware she was talking to a liberal columnist, and explained more clearly that she already had told GOP leaders if the bill made it to the Senate floor, she would support it.

Roberts told conservative talk radio host Dan Caplis on June 3, “I’ve never called myself pro-choice as a politician.” The very next day, the liberal group ProgressNow Colorado posted of a video clip of Roberts talking on the Senate floor in 2011 on a religious liberties measure, where she identified herself in a debate as a “pro-choice Republican.”

The headline of the blog post: “Seven seconds that could end Ellen Roberts’ political career.”

Republicans groaned, imagining the attack ad. The question now is whether the self-inflicted wounds will cause permanent damage.

Yes, said Andrew Zucker, spokesman for the Colorado Democratic Party.

“If the bar for Republicans was low before Ellen Roberts said she might be running,” he said, “somehow she’s managed to trip over it by inexplicably changing her position on issues, refusing to answer questions and making clear to voters that she can’t be trusted.”

No, said Dick Wadhams, former chairman of the Colorado Republican Party.

“Ellen is too substantive and credible of a candidate,” he said.

Wadhams also pointed to the 2014 Senate race, where Republican Congressman Cory Gardner defeated Democrat Sen. Mark Udall in a race where Udall was accused of focusing too much on women’s issues.

Roberts isn’t the only one being talked about for the Senate race. After Congressman Mike Coffman of Aurora announced earlier this month he wouldn’t take on Bennet next year, other names surfaced.

They include Senate President Bill Cadman of Colorado Springs, state Treasurer Walker Stapleton, Attorney General Cynthia Coffman, Arapahoe County District Attorney George Brauchler, former Senate Minority Leader Mike Kopp of Jefferson County, U.S. Rep. Scott Tipton of Cortez, businessman Robert Blaha of Colorado Springs, former Solicitor General Dan Domenico and state Sen. Owen Hill of Colorado Springs.

El Paso County Commissioner Darryl Glenn announced in January he was running for the Republican nomination for the U.S. Senate.

Roberts said her stances did change after she got elected to the Senate, in part because she no longer represented just the liberal-based Durango, but also conservative constituents in Cortez, Montrose and elsewhere in the eight counties she represents.

She said Democrats changed, too, particularly after their victories in 2012. She pointed to 2013 measures expanding gun-control laws and increasing tougher renewable-energy standards — bills that led to the first ever recall of state lawmakers and a tough re-election bid for Gov. John Hickenlooper.

But Roberts sided with Senate Democrats on some issues, including measures to allow gay couples to form civil unions. Roberts voted for all three civil union bills: the 2011 bill died in committee; the 2012 bill died a dramatic death on the House floor; and the 2013 bill was signed into law. Steadman, who is gay, sponsored the bills.

When Steadman called out Roberts in February with his Oscar, she replied on Twitter: “top honors, no less- how kind! But, perhaps, I am more complicated than you thought … :)”

Lynn Bartels: 303-954-5327, lbartels@denverpost.com or twitter.com/lynn_bartels

Colorado women running for the u.s. senate

2014: Former state House Majority Leader Amy Stephens dropped out of the GOP primary after U.S. Rep. Cory Gardner jumped in, believing he had the best shot of unseating Democrat U.S. Sen. Mark Udall. Gardner won the general election.

2010: Former Lt. Gov. Jane Norton lost the GOP primary to Weld County District Attorney Ken Buck, who lost to Democrat Sen. Michael Bennet.

2009: Some Coloradans pushed Democrat Gov. Bill Ritter to select a woman to fill a vacancy created when Sen. Ken Salazar resigned to become the interior secretary for incoming President Barack Obama. State Treasurer Cary Kennedy said she wasn’t interested because her children were at a young age. Ritter tapped Bennet, Denver’s school superintendent.

1998: Former first lady Dottie Lamm, a Democrat, lost to U.S. Sen. Ben Nighthorse Campbell, who had switched his party affiliation from Democrat to Republican.

1996: Attorney General Gale Norton was expected to win the GOP primary but lost in an upset to Congressman Wayne Allard, who went on to defeat Democrat Tom Strickland.C

1990: Boulder County Commissioner Josie Heath won the Democratic nomination but lost to Republican Congressman Hank Brown.

1980: Secretary of State Mary Estill Buchanan initially didn’t make the ballot for the GOP primary but won her court battle to be on the ballot. She won the primary but lost to Democratic Sen. Gary Hart.

Sources: Secretary of state, newspaper archives