Opinion

An open letter to Bernie supporters

By Charles Dunst ’18

February 25, 2016

Let me open by stating that I strongly support Bernie Sanders for the Presidency. He is the most consistent and strongest candidate on the issues of mass incarceration, civil rights, health care, the wealth gap, Citizens United and abortion, among others. I, for these reasons, am one of the Co-Presidents of the Hamilton College for Bernie Sanders group. Bernie represents the future of the Democratic party, embodying true progressive leftism that has been missing from the party for years. His platform is a form of leftism that even Barack Obama has failed to fully embrace. In response to Bernie’s appeal of progressiveness, former Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, has been forced to drift further to the left. Clinton, like Sanders, who opposes nearly every trade deal, recently came out against the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), even though she wrote a large amount of the deal during her time as Secretary of State. Following Bernie’s push for single-payer health care, Hillary was quick to state that she’ll “defend the Affordable Care Act, build on its successes and go even further to reduce costs.” Despite Bernie’s massive grassroots support, Hillary, the “establishment candidate,” is still the likely nominee. She has a dominant superdelegate advantage, more name recognition among minority communities and represents a form of moderate liberalism that is appealing to older Democrats. She is still a liberal, and one who will continue to push the left wing policies of the Obama administration. It is for this reason that I am urging Sanders’ supporters not to rebuff her in the general election if she wins the primary.

Unlike many Sanders supporters, I do not hate Hillary Clinton. In fact, I am, in general, a fan of hers and I believe she would make a great president. If Bernie had not emerged from the forgotten shadows of Vermont, I would be more than content voting for her in the primary. However, right now, I just like Bernie better. I feel no animosity towards Clinton or her supporters, and I would urge fellow Bernie supporters to adopt this position.

I have heard Sanders supporters criticize Hillary with comments like “I’ll never vote for her, only Sanders,” “it’s Sanders or bust,” “she wasn’t always in favor of gay marriage; she’s a panderer,” as well as “she’s basically a Republican!” These comments are troubling, as they reveal a disturbing amount of naiveté among Sanders’ supporters. I understand that Hillary is not your candidate. Believe me, I get it. But refusing to vote for Hillary Clinton in the general election is, simply put, childish and foolish.

Yes, Hillary’s views, most notably on gay marriage, have changed. So have Joe Biden’s and Barack Obama’s. Don’t forget, the seemingly evil Dick Cheney supported gay marriage before Barack Obama. We chalked up Obama and Biden’s shift to an ideological evolution, yet we skewer Hillary for the same shift. While I certainly prefer Sanders’ authenticity and consistency, I refuse to be “Bernie or bust.” Both Bernie and Hillary are solid, liberal candidates who are committed to a progressive American future.

Let me conclude with a simple request. Dear Bernie supporters: I know you don’t love Hillary Clinton, but if and when she obtains the Democratic nomination, you must show up and vote for her in the general election. I don’t care what you think about her personally, whether she flip flops or if she isn’t progressive enough. If you want to secure a progressive America, you must vote for her if only for the likely four Supreme Court nominations. Yes, I agree with you that Bernie is the better candidate. He is a true progressive, he is consistent and he is not tied up in any scandals. But, when compared to the GOP field, Hillary Clinton is certainly a liberal. Not only is she a liberal, but she is more experienced than any of the GOP candidates and would make an infinitely better president. Please, Bernie supporters, if you still want a progressive America, when November comes, you must vote for the Mrs. Clinton. She may not be your dream candidate, but she needs your support in order to secure the White House and keep a Republican out of it. As Mrs. Clinton explains, she knows that “a lot of young people are supporting my opponent and I want them to know that I support you and I will work for you.” You and I may #FeelTheBern now, but when November comes, #ImWithHer and any logical Bernie supporters should be too.

All Opinion