With all the attention being paid to the battle for control of the U.S. Senate, it’s easy to forget that there are thirty-six gubernatorial elections being held this November, a number of which are hotly contested races of national significance. Over the past few years, since the Presidency fell into the hands of the Democrats and Congress became deadlocked, Republican strategists and donors have put a lot of time and money into promoting conservative candidates and causes at the state level. And they’ve had quite a bit of success. But at least three Republican governors who helped spearhead this rightward push are now experiencing some backlash. Sam Brownback in Kansas, Rick Scott in Florida, and Scott Walker in Wisconsin are all locked in tight reëlection contests, with their opponents portraying them as extremists whose policies have done great damage to their states.

All politics is local, of course, and each of these races has its own idiosyncrasies. But they share some common characteristics. Brownback, Scott, and Walker courted the right of the Republican Party, and, on reaching office, they pursued political agendas favored by conservative activists and big donors. Brownback slashed income-tax rates, declared that life begins at conception, and cut state spending on education and social services. Scott cut business taxes, weakened environmental regulations, and signed a law eliminating state funding for abortions. Walker reduced taxes on the rich and blocked collective-bargaining rights for most public-sector workers, a move that sparked a failed 2012 attempt to recall him.

For Democrats facing the prospect of losing the Senate and seeing President Barack Obama become a lame duck, the sight of three prominent G.O.P. governors struggling to get reëlected is encouraging. Cutting taxes on the rich, restricting the activities of unions, and taking a reactionary line on social issues plays to the G.O.P.’s wealthy donors and conservative base, but it appears not to go over as well with the mass of voters. A couple of years ago, Brownback, Scott, and Walker were all being talked about as possible candidates for national office. Today, they are fighting for political survival.

Arguably, Brownback has fallen furthest. Elected to office in 2010, following a failed bid for the Presidency, he has alienated voters, split his own party, and undermined its chances of holding on to a key seat in the Senate—where he represented Kansas from 1996 until 2010. Above all, Brownback is associated with a May, 2012, tax cut that slashed the top rate by a quarter. Drawing on old and discredited Reaganite themes, he argued that the tax cut would spur job growth and end up raising tax revenues. “My focus is to create a red-state model that allows the Republican ticket to say, ‘See, we’ve got a different way, and it works,’ “ he told the Wall Street Journal last February. There was some talk of him emerging in 2016 as a Jack Kemp-style candidate for the G.O.P. nomination. But his policies in Kansas didn’t work. Job growth failed to increase, revenues came in woefully short of his projections, and the state found itself facing a serious budget shortfall.

Seizing on this record, Paul Davis, a Democratic lawyer who has been a state representative since 2003, has drawn virtually level with Brownback in recent polls. (According to the RealClearPolitics polling average, Brownback leads by just 0.6 percentage points.) During a televised debate on Monday, Davis assailed the governor’s “failed experiment” in supply-side economics, and accused him of betraying Kansas schoolchildren by cutting the education budget. In a state that remains solidly red, Brownback may still squeak home. But even some of his fellow-Republicans have disowned him and endorsed Davis.

The Florida race has drawn national attention primarily because of the bizarre beginning to a televised debate last week, in which Rick Scott refused to take the stage because his Democratic rival, Charlie Crist (Florida’s former Republican governor), had a fan blowing at his feet to keep him cool. Behind the theatrics, though, there’s a deadly serious effort to evict a governor who spent about seventy-five million dollars of his own money to get elected as part of the G.O.P. wave in 2010. In office, Scott enraged some conservatives by approving a Medicaid expansion that was part of the Affordable Care Act, but in practically every other area he has followed the conservative script, sometimes adding twists of his own, like the idea of drug-testing state workers and welfare applicants.

The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit upheld a lower court’s ruling that the proposal to test state workers at random was unconstitutional, and earlier this year the Supreme Court refused Scott’s request that it review the case. In other areas, though, such as taxation, education, and the environment, the governor has succeeded in making the changes he wanted—much to the disgust of liberals and good-government groups. In an editorial earlier this year, the Tampa Bay Times described Scott as a “tin man” who “has done more harm than any modern governor, from voting rights to privacy rights, public schools to higher education, environmental protection to health care.”

Scott’s opponent, Crist, is seen as a slippery character; since switching parties, he has altered his positions on issues such as Obamacare and gay marriage. If he were to defeat Scott, it would be a big blow to the Republicans in a state that will be of pivotal importance in 2016. And, with less than two weeks to go, it’s a very tight contest. Four of the five most recent polls have shown the two candidates tied. (Crist was narrowly ahead in the other survey.) On Wednesday, during the final television debate, which was held in Jacksonville, each candidate tried to portray the other as an out-of-touch rich guy. “I didn’t grow up with money. You did. You grew up with plenty of money, Charlie,” said Scott. To which Crist replied, “You don’t know me and you can’t tell my story. And I’m not going to tell yours. But I know you are worth about a hundred or two hundred million dollars today, and God bless you for that wealth, Rick, but the way you got it was pretty unsavory.”

And so to Scott Walker, the poster boy for efforts to roll back labor-union rights. “I think a lot of states should be looking at Governor Walker and the assembly in Madison in terms of looking at how you can make that change and how you can curtail the growth of whether it’s the unions or any other faction that is stemming growth and competition,” Lisa B. Nelson, the new head of the conservative American Legislative Exchange Council, said earlier this year.

Many observers believe that Walker still harbors hopes of running for President in 2016. But as the Times pointed out in a big takeout a few days ago, Walker now “has his back to the wall.” His Democratic rival, Mary Burke, who was hitherto little known, has emerged as a serious contender, portraying herself as a non-ideological problem solver and relentlessly attacking Walker for his failure to live up to his promises on job creation. In the latest polls, the race appears to be virtually even. Encouraged by Burke’s progress, a number of Democratic heavy hitters, including Michelle Obama and Bill Clinton, are flying into Wisconsin to help her out.

Walker, always a polarizing figure, seems to be losing votes to Burke among moderates and women in particular. Democrats would dearly love to see him defeated, and, appearing on MSNBC on Tuesday, Richard Trumka, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., predicted that it’s going to happen. That call may be premature. For all Walker’s troubles, which include an investigation into possible campaign-finance violations by some of his associates (Walker has said that the allegations are false), he is still an energetic campaigner, and he has the capacity to raise a lot of money for a last-minute ad blitz. But, for liberals and progressives, in what is shaping up to be a painful year, the mere thought of Walker being taken down is a source of cheer.

Read more analysis and commentary at our 2014 midterms hub.