WASHINGTON, May 24, 2014 — And so the collapse begins.

In 1986, Ronald Reagan signed the first Amnesty law. It promised that the Southern border with Mexico would be secured.

Twenty eight years later, that border is more than simply unsecured. It is a porous sieve. It is little more than a line on a map with about that level of significance.

For years, conservatives have demanded the border be secured. Presidents from George H.W. Bush to Bill Clinton to George W. Bush and now Barack Obama have ignored this. They have wanted to play to various constituencies that want influence in Washington from far left Latino groups to the Chamber of Commerce.

Conservatives have argued that if the border were not secured, eventually the cartels would move north, into the United States. Liberal politicians and those in the pocket of the Chamber of Commerce mocked and ridiculed such suggestions.

No more.

In El Paso, Texas, there have been two frightening incidents. In both of these incidents, billboards were defaced and mannequins were hung by the neck from the billboards.

Written on the billboards were the words, ‘Plata o Plombo.’

That is a Spanish expression that means sliver or lead. It is a warning to the police in Mexico to either take cartel bribes or be shot. Cartel hit squads frequently hang their victims from bridges in Mexico.

It is beyond dispute that Mexican cartels are already operating in America. They provide security for drug smugglers coming across the border. In some southwestern cities, specific crimes such as kidnapping, are being committed by gang and cartel members.

What is the response of the Obama Regime?Ameri

They have all but ended border enforcement.

But this gets worse. In the southwest, certain areas have been designated national monuments. Because of environmental laws, this designation restrict the ability of the border patrol to patrol inside them. Of course this designation means nothing to drug smugglers.

Now Obama wants to designate another national monument. This proposed monument is 600,000 acres in southern New Mexico.

Republicans in the House of Representatives have blasted this move, not only as a land grab but also blast the move as creating a new superhighway for drug smugglers.

The Cartels are just like any other organization. They will push the limits and they learn. The United States has been sending a message for some time. That message is we do not respect our own border and we will not enforce the laws.

When we will not enforce our own laws, we invite lawlessness and anarchy.

South of the border, Mexico is a failed state. The drug cartels are in open warfare with the police and other cartels. Police officers, witnesses, prosecutors and sometimes innocent bystanders are killed by their violence.

A now imaginary line in the sand, which America does not respect is not going to stop cartel violence.

Even if the Republicans capture the Senate in the elections this fall, it will not change the situation. Too many Republicans are simply pandering to those who want Amnesty.

For America, in 2016, electing a President who will seal the border is not simply a good idea. It is imperative.

If America fails to elect a President committed to first sealing the border and enforcing our border security, or if another liberal Democrat is elected in 2016, we will see the violence that has racked parts of Mexico spilling over into the American southwest.

We will see parts of America descend into chaos if that border is not sealed.