Andy Morgan, KOB Sports

Updated: 11/29/2015 10:56 PM

Created: 11/29/2015 9:42 PM

For decades, the city of Albuquerque and even the state of New Mexico has produced world champion fighters. KOB may have just found the next one.

Fighter Mathew "Diamond" Griego has had quite the amateur career, now he's taking the next step and announcing he's going pro.

Griego has been boxing since he was 5-years old and he says it's all he knows.

"After my first fight I was overwhelmed with excitement…a win," Griego said. "Whenever you get your hand raised up in the ring, it's a big deal-It makes you feel so good- It's the happiest you could be."

Griego's first win led to another-and-another. As a New Mexico amateur boxer, Griego compiled 108 wins and just 4 losses.

Sunday, he made the decision to turn pro.

"That's been my dream since I was a little kid," he said.

With the decision to turn pro comes a lot of responsibility and danger for Griego and his camp.

"When you go to the pros, you don't wear head gear, and you wear 8-ounce gloves," Griego said.

"The amateurs and pros are two difference stories. Amateurs you go in there and you just try and out punch your opponent. Pros it's a game of hurt," said Griego's coach, Fidel Maldonado.

Despite the dangers that come with the sport, Griego's decision to follow his dreams was celebrated Sunday with friends and family.

Danny Ortega, Griego's dad, said his sons accomplishments are his accomplishments.

"I have a lot of confidence in him. I really think he's going to be the next world champion. In my eyes he's already a world champ," Ortega said.

Griego said his family has given him the confidence he needed to make his decision to go pro.

"It's cool to see my family happy. My mom, sometimes she cries tears because I'm actually doing what my dreams are," he said. "A lot of people don't have that chance. A lot of people don't get to do what they've wanted to do since they were 5-years-old."

Griego doesn't officially become a pro until he steps into the ring at Buffalo Thunder on Jan. 30th.