SHARE Book cover of "A More Perfect Union" by Ben Carson, MD. (Submitted photo) Ben Carson. (Submitted photo)

By Jenna Buzzacco-Foerster of the Naples Daily News

Ben Carson planned to retire when he turned 61; he planned to relax and read all the books he never got around to while he was working.

At 64 years old, he is doing the exact opposite. In May, the retired pediatric neurosurgeon announced he was seeking the Republican nomination for president. He's surged in the polls in recent weeks, with national polling data placing him in second behind Donald Trump.

Carson said he got into politics at the urging of the voters, and said his rise in the polls is a sign that Americans want someone who isn't a career politician in office.

"I think the American populous is a lot smarter than people give them credit for and I think they know how much trouble we're in," he said Monday. "I think what is much more important than whether you've held elected office is whether you know how to solve problems. That's what we need right now."

Carson, an author of eight books, will be in Southwest Florida on Wednesday as part of a book tour to promote his book "A More Perfect Union: What We the People Can Do to Reclaim Our Constitutional Liberties."

Carson is expected to spend this week in Florida as part of his tour, with stops in Tampa, Sarasota and Miami. While Carson said he didn't know he would be in the middle of a campaign when he agreed to do the promotional tour, it has taken him through several early voting states, including Iowa and South Carolina. Florida's presidential preference primary is March 15.

Carson retired as the director of pediatric neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital after about 30 years. He said he was planning to live a quiet life. But in 2013, he shot on to the political stage after a speech at the National Prayer Breakfast, where he criticized the Affordable Care Act. President Barack Obama was sitting nearby.

In the months that followed, Carson said people were reaching out to him urging him to run. He thought it was silly and that the requests would die down. They didn't, and Carson said he was moved to get in the race.

"What I've been talking about are things that resonate with average Americans," he said.

Carson has been an outspoken critic of the Affordable Care Act, once saying the president's signature health care law was the worst thing since slavery.

"It's no secret I'm not a fan of the Affordable Care Act," he said. "Not so much because it's not affordable and it doesn't really work, but because it fundamentally changes the relationship between the government and the people."

Under his proposal, Carson said he would advocate for the use of health savings accounts, which can be paid for the using the same dollars used to pay for traditional health care plans. Those accounts would give families more flexibility and help drive down health care costs.

"I don't believe in forcing anyone into anything, but I do believe in creating a situation that is so attractive that most people would be happy to be part of it," said Carson.

Carson has visited Southwest Florida in the past, including in April when he was the keynote speaker at a fundraiser for Mason Classical Academy. Kelly Lichter, the school's president, said she was drawn to him after reading one of his books. Carson is one of Lichter's top picks for president.

"He's very soft-spoken, kind and intelligent," she said. "He is who he says he is, he means what he says."



IF YOU GO

When: 3:30 p.m., Wednesday

Where: Books-A-Million , 9360 Dynasty Drive , Fort Myers

When: 6:30 p.m., Wednesday

Where: Costco, 6275 Naples Boulevard , Naples