Scott Walker is trying to excite grass roots conservatives without alienating the party’s more pragmatic wing. John Kasich is trying to capture independents and centrist Republicans without alienating the conservative base. Credit: Journal Sentinel files

The Wisconsin Voter The Journal Sentinel's Craig Gilbert explores political trends in a purple state and beyond. SHARE

By of the

Ashland, New Hampshire — Scott Walker and Ohio’s John Kasich are conservative, Midwestern, swing-state governors who got elected in 2010, fought with organized labor, got reelected in 2014, and are running for president in 2016.

You might think it would be hard to tell their campaigns apart.

It isn’t.

In fact, all those similarities just make their differences more compelling. And they make Kasich a handy reference point when taking stock of Walker’s presidential bid, which is struggling right now.

The two Great Lakes governors are running for president with different messages, different rhetoric, different stories about their time in office and different strategies.

Walker is trying to excite grass roots conservatives without alienating the party’s more pragmatic wing.

Kasich is trying to capture independents and centrist Republicans without alienating the conservative base.

Walker is running as a winner and warrior, Kasich as a fixer and uniter.

Walker says the party can win without compromise. Kasich says nothing big gets done without Republicans and Democrats finding some common ground.

Walker has an Iowa-first strategy in the primaries and caucuses. Kasich has a New Hampshire-first strategy.

Walker burst out of the gate in January but lost momentum this summer and has hit the doldrums in August.

Kasich started so late he was dismissed as a long shot but gained traction this month after the first GOP debate.

Walker combines a lightning-rod record and hard-line rhetoric with a personality so low-key he jokes that his wife thinks he’s boring.

Kasich’s rhetoric is more conciliatory, but his style is more impassioned as well as more abrasive.

It’s not that there’s a vast political gulf between the two. Both consider themselves conservatives and have conservative political histories. But Walker has shaded to the right in this campaign, Kasich to the center. Their policy differences include immigration and Common Core. Kasich expanded Medicaid in Ohio under Obamacare, while Walker refused the added federal money to do so in Wisconsin.

But their differences go beyond issues to style, strategy, the language they use and the signals they send.

Walker’s political message to conservatives is that they can have it all -- they can win elections and govern on their own terms. They don’t have to choose between values and electability, and they don’t have to cut deals when they’re in power.

“If that’s what you want out of the next president, someone who’s not just going to fight, but someone who can fight and win ...and actually get results without compromising ... that’s the candidate I am,” Walker told a crowd of 200 at the American Legion Hall in Ashland, New Hampshire Thursday night.

Kasich’s message to his party about governing is very different.

“We can’t do it by just Republicans jamming their stuff through because that becomes like Obamacare,” he said at a town hall meeting in Salem, New Hampshire, Wednesday.

If someone is promising to make all your conservative dreams come true, Kasich told his audience, don’t believe it.

“We can pound our fists and say, ‘We’re going to do this, this and this!’” said Kasich.

“Ever wonder why people when they run for president, they don’t keep their promises? Because they make promises that can’t be kept. I’m a conservative with conservative principles, but you just can’t do it alone.”

They have different stories to tell about their own records. Walker’s story is that he fought and won as governor “for hardworking taxpayers.” Kasich’s story is that he didn’t leave anyone behind. “We can’t turn our backs on poor people. I don’t do that in my state,” he said in Salem.

Kasich brags about the breadth of his 2014 re-election victory (against a weak Democratic opponent). He won 69% of independents in Ohio, 59% of moderates, 53% of union households, 26% of the black vote and 25% of Democrats, according to exit polls.

“The state is unified,” he declared at the Aug. 6 GOP debate.

Walker brags about winning almost universal support in his own party (96% of the GOP vote in Wisconsin in 2014). And while he also brags about winning independents by double-digits, he says he did it without moderating his views. Independents don’t want someone with middle-of-the-road positions, he tells his audiences, they want someone who won’t waver.

Walker’s re-election victory in Wisconsin was far more polarizing than Kasich’s in Ohio. He won 46% of moderates, 34% of union households and just 6% of Democrats. And Walker’s home-state approval rating is lower than Kasich’s (39% in the Marquette University Law school poll released Thursday). But for GOP primary voters, Walker has a longer and purer checklist of conservative policies to brag about.

How are these differences playing out for each candidate?

Kasich appears to have momentum in New Hampshire and could be a serious contender if he can begin to consolidate independents and moderate GOP voters.

His style – more unscripted and emotional than Walker’s – served him well in the first debate. But it can be prickly and confrontational, too, and hasn’t always been an asset in the past.

The biggest question he may face is whether party conservatives in the end would find him to be an acceptable nominee on their issues.

Walker’s demeanor (a campaign adviser calls it ‘Midwestern nice’) was supposed to be a reassuring asset. But he has come across as either scripted or bland to many Republicans, and tried last week in New Hampshire to show more passion and engage more with voters.

Walker’s determination to capture conservative hearts and minds makes political sense, since it plays to his strengths and it’s where the energy in the party is. But it has also gotten him into trouble, creating confusion over his rightward shifts on immigration and raising doubts among some establishment Republicans.

The latest example: Walker made supportive comments last Monday about ending birthright citizenship, a controversial, hard-line immigration stand that Donald Trump has taken and a few other Republicans in the field have echoed.

But his position remained murky for days, and Friday Walker told CNBC interviewer John Harwood that he had no stand on the issue.

"I'm not taking a position on it one way or the other," said Walker, who said Sunday on ABC’s “This Week” he was not seeking to change the Constitution to end birthright citizenship.

Kasich and Walker are both living right now in Trump’s shadow, as is the rest of the GOP field.

But as both a staunch conservative and a career politician, Walker faces a particular political risk: Will he be squeezed out by candidates who are either more moderate (Kasich), more right-wing (Ted Cruz), more “inside” (Jeb Bush), more “outside,” (Ben Carson, Carly Fiorina), or more flamboyant (Trump)?

Follow Craig Gilbert on Twitter @WisVoter