Hayti, SD

The Hamlin County Sheriff says it started as a birthday party, but it ended with dozens of teenagers drinking, and 37 citations handed out by law enforcement.

This home located in Hayti hosted the party, but police say the people there shouldn't have been drinking this weekend. In all, 37 teenagers between the ages of 14 to 18 were consuming alcohol when the Hamlin County Sheriff's Office, Hayti Police Department, and other law enforcement arrived. It was a party Terry Wilen isn't happy to see in his quiet community.

"I don't really like the thought of having parties here in this small town, and I hate to see underage drinking around in this small town," Wilen said.

One of the minors was sent to the hospital with alcohol-related problems. The Sheriff's office says off the 37 teens cited for underage consumption, only one was from Hamlin County; most were from Watertown.

One person at the home didn't want to be on camera, but says she didn't supply the alcohol to the teenagers. She says a family member lied about what was going to happen at the birthday party.

The Sheriff's Department says the owner of the house, a 32-year-old man and a 19-year-old woman were arrested for contributing to a delinquency of a minor and other charges.

Wilen says he lost a family member to an alcohol-related car crash. He hopes that people, especially teenagers, think before drinking.

"I just say don't do it, it's not worth wrecking your life with that," Wilen said.

He's says he's happy that the party stopped before anything serious happened in the tight-knit community.

Sheriff Chad Schlotterbeck says the teenagers cooperated with authorities at the party.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.