This article is a collaboration between MedPage Today® and:

Action Points This randomized study evaluated an approach to patients admitted to inpatient cardiac units for acute coronary syndrome, arrhythmia, or heart failure and found to have clinical depression, generalized anxiety disorder, or panic disorder.

A 24-week trial found that a telephone-based, low-intensity model to concurrently manage cardiac patients with depression and/or anxiety disorders was effective for improving mental health–related quality of life.

Mental health assessment and care coordination by a social worker eased anxiety and depression after hospitalization for heart disease, the MOSAIC trial showed.

Mental health-related quality of life improvements were twice those achieved with usual care in patients with depression, anxiety, or panic after a hospitalization for acute coronary syndrome, heart failure, or arrhythmia (11.21 versus 5.68 points on the SF-12 Mental Component Score at 24 weeks, P=0.002).

Overall health-related quality of life improved as well with the low-intensity collaborative care intervention (P=0.03 versus usual care), Jeff Huffman, MD, of Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, and colleagues found.

"Given the relatively low-burden and low-resource nature of this intervention -- with telephone delivery of all post-discharge interventions and use of a single social worker as the care manager for three psychiatric illnesses -- such a program may be easily implemented and effective in real-world settings," the group concluded online in JAMA Internal Medicine.

An accompanying editorial called the effect size large and agreed on ease of dissemination, although the trial's approach "lumping" together anxiety and depression and different cardiac disease states was unusual, Karina W. Davidson, PhD, of Columbia University's Center for Behavioral Cardiovascular Health in New York City, and colleagues noted.

"Are you bothered by the indiscriminant lumping of important distinctions that occurred in the design of this trial," they asked. "Or, are you impressed by the disruptive thinking imbued in the logic of the trial's design, and do you believe that this innovative approach to science may open up new avenues for how we combine symptoms, patient groups, treatments, and outcomes, to more holistically treat patients?"

Either way, this kind of approach is likely to be seen more often due to the Affordable Care Act, they suggested.

"Lumping together co-occurring risk factors, conditions, patient groups, and management strategies, particularly when one treatment may be an appropriate solution for many problems, may mark a new wave of science that emerges from our changing medical care reimbursement landscape," the editorialists concluded.

The trial included 183 patients hospitalized for acute coronary syndrome, heart failure, or arrhythmia and with symptoms of depression, generalized anxiety, or panic based on initial screening and follow-up questionnaires by the social worker while in one of three cardiac units at a single center.

They were randomized single-blind to the intervention or to usual care augmented by informing the inpatient team of the patients' mental health diagnoses and primary care providers about ongoing symptoms.

For the intervention, most patients opted during the hospitalization for initiation or adjustment of psychiatric medication (78%), while 12% chose cognitive behavioral therapy by the social worker (first session in the hospital, the rest by telephone) and 10% declined either treatment.

The social worker care manager also followed up all patients after discharge with periodic phone calls to assess ongoing symptoms and monitor adherence.

The intervention dramatically raised the likelihood of being under adequate treatment for at least one psychiatric disorder by discharge (75% versus 7% under usual care, P<0.001).

It was associated with modestly greater improvement in depression score over 24 weeks, with a 2.05-point estimated mean difference between groups on the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9 effect size 0.45, P=0.045).

Anxiety scores on the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale–Anxiety Subscale didn't improve more than with usual care (P=0.55). Response rates for depression and anxiety didn't improve with the intervention either.

But the mental health-related quality of life gains from the intervention were as big for women as men and across those with depression, anxiety or panic disorders, or both.

"These improvements occurred despite the low intensity of the intervention, the potential for spontaneous remission after discharge, and high rates of treatment in the usual care condition," Huffman's group pointed out.

General functioning improved more with the collaborative care intervention as well. The estimated mean difference on the Duke Activity Status Index was 5.59 (effect size 0.34, P=0.005).

Overall self-reported medication adherence scores didn't differ between groups. Cardiac readmission rates didn't differ either, although readmissions that did happen occurred an average of 30 days later in the intervention group (P=0.02).

The editorialists noted the lack of cost effectiveness data, but the researchers pointed out that social workers are usually already present on cardiac units and "typically come at a substantially lower cost than nurses."

Also, the social worker care manager averaged only three contacts with participants, compared with a median of 10 to 21 in other collaborative care trials in heart disease, Huffman and colleagues noted.

They agreed with the editorialists that use of a single social worker meant the results could have been primarily due to that clinician's proficiency.

"Adequately powered and randomized trials remain necessary to determine whether refinements to this model (such as adding slightly more post-discharge contact or using a blended care model) can lead to even greater improvements in mental health and function," they noted.