Gov. Chris Christie hosts a town hall meeting at Shooters Sports Pub in Exeter, N.H. on Friday, April 17. Tyson Trish/The Record of Bergen County/Associated Press

Gov. Chris Christie will travel to Missouri for a fundraiser held by financiers, speak before a Washington D.C. summit of dignitaries on foreign policy and host a benefit for the New Jersey GOP this week.

The events contrast where the potential 2016 presidential candidate ended his week last Friday: at a Shooters Sports Pub in New Hampshire.

As part of his foray into the first-in-the-nation primary state last week, Mr. Christie brought one of his signature town hall meetings to a local bar in Exeter, N.H. The roughly 100 attendees—some who sat at tables with shots and beers—shouted questions and comments at Mr. Christie as he stood in the middle of a circle of chairs crammed between a pool table and a wooden bar.

“I’m going to call them out. That’s what they are here for,” said George Zeiter, a 62-year-old local resident at Shooters, who birddogged Mr. Christie with his opinions during the 70-minute forum and plans to do the same with other 2016 contenders.

Mr. Christie is balancing business back home in New Jersey with a growing amount of national travel to support a potential presidential bid.

On Monday, he attends a meet-and-greet lunch in Springfield, Mo., co-hosted by St. Louis financier Jeff Fox, GOP donor Rex Sinquefield and August Busch, the former chairman of Anheuser-Busch and a lifelong Republican, according to a copy of the invitation.

On Tuesday, Mr. Christie will address the 45th annual Conference on the Americas in Washington in his capacity as governor. Honduras President Juan Orlando Hernández and senior Obama administration officials—including Secretary of State John Kerry—will also speak at the event.

Later Tuesday, Mr. Christie will appear at a private fundraiser for the New Jersey State Republican Committee. Jerry Langer, a trucking magnate who is finance committee member for Mr. Christie’s political-action committee, is holding the fundraiser which is expected to raise more than $200,000 for the state party.

“The response has been tremendous,” said Mr. Langer, adding he had expanded the guest list slots at his home given the response. Fillet mignon and fish will be served.

The menu at Shooters featured pepperoni pizza, barbecue-flavored chips and beer. During the town hall meeting, attendees asked Mr. Christie about his plan to means-test Social Security benefits, welfare spending and immigration policy.

Mr. Christie’s views against gay marriage got rounds of applause, and attendees said they generally liked his style.

Eric McGlashing, a local business owner, said he liked Mr. Christie’s straight talk, but wanted him to provide more detail in response to a question his wife posed on tax policy toward small business owners. He also wondered why Mr. Christie hadn’t declared he was running yet.

“The non-committal element is a big question for me,” said Mr. McGlashing, of Brentwood, N.H.

While Mr. Christie set rules for his New Jersey town halls and typically doesn’t tolerate outbursts, he allowed for several back and forth exchanges Friday.

“Social Security is not an entitlement governor,” Mr. Zeiter shouted out in response to Mr. Christie’s policy to raise the retirement age and reduce entitlement benefits for wealthy seniors.

“It is an entitlement sir,” Mr. Christie responded.

“No it is not. We’ve paid for that,” Mr. Zeiter shouted back.

Mr. Christie was feisty but never lost his temper throughout the evening.

“It’s not that I need a better answer, you just want me to have your answer,” he said in response to one attendee who criticized his earlier comments on climate change. “I’m happy to listen to you.”

Mr. Christie fielded two questions on climate change, a sticky issue for Republicans. The governor said he believes in climate change, but doesn’t support taxing carbon emissions. Alternative energy and negotiations with other countries to reduce pollutants should be encouraged instead, Mr. Christie said.

“I believe climate change is real. The question is how you address it,” he said.

At the night’s end, Mr. Christie said he enjoyed the “spirited interaction with folks.”

“So a town hall at a pub worked out generally OK,” Mr. Christie said. “Nobody walked out. Nobody threw a beer at me.”