Monster Music and Movies has long championed the concept that one’s man trash is another’s treasure. And not just with its business of buying and selling used records and DVDs.

As one of the last record shops still standing in the Lowcountry, Monster Music has shown over the past decade that there’s plenty to be salvaged from the wreckage of music retailing.

The store itself was launched in the space formerly operated by Manifest Discs & Tapes, which closed and consolidated into two other locations in Charlotte and Columbia in the mid-2000s. And ever since, the shop on Orleans Road has sustained itself by acquiring equipment and inventory from other music shops around town as they went out of business.

“That seems to be our M.O. We adapt, we survive,” said Galen Hudson, owner of Monster Music. “We kind of roll with the punches and adapt to the times, and acquire the good things we can from people that are going under or cashing it in.”

Recently, the store purchased AbundaTrade, an online tool used for buying and selling music and movies, from Millennium Music after the business had to cease its operations last month. The acquisition marked one of Monster’s largest acquisitions yet that could potentially be its bridge to the realm of e-commerce.

“At one point in time, AbundaTrade did a lot of business and we felt like, if we were successful in bringing it back to the levels they were once at, we’d be able to hopefully streamline it. Alongside that, it’s a whole new avenue for us to acquire inventory,” Hudson said.

Right now, Monster Music relies solely on sellers in the Lowcountry to provide its stock of used vinyl, CDs and DVDs, so Abundatrade will help the store expand its selection by extending its reach to sellers nationwide, Hudson said.

It also could help Monster Music build a presence on online retailers, such as Amazon and eBay, but those aspects of the business will come later once the local staff is familiar with using the online tool.

“It’s a whole different business model, with very web-based aspects of it like coding and it requires doing a lot of things that we’re not accustomed to in a normal day’s work,” Hudson said, adding that they’re all open to the challenge. “It doesn’t matter how far outside our wheelhouse it is, if it’s music, we’re interested.”

Reach Abigail Darlington at 937-5906 and follow her on Twitter @A_Big_Gail