Education & Academia

The Obamas just keep trying to muscle in on our family gatherings and politicize the hell out of them. If they’re not instructing the faithful to spew ObamaCare talking points over the Thanksgiving turkey, they’re telling kids to crack down their families for thoughtcrimes. Such was Mrs. Obama’s command to high-school students in Topeka, Kansas last weekend, as reported by The Blaze:

Obama said students need to police family and friends because federal laws can only go so far in stopping racism. “[O]ur laws may no longer separate us based on our skin color, but nothing in the Constitution says we have to eat together in the lunchroom, or live together in the same neighborhoods,” she said. “There’s no court case against believing in stereotypes or thinking that certain kinds of hateful jokes or comments are funny.” To address these limitations in the law, Obama asked students to take steps to “drag my generation and your grandparents’ generation along with you” in the fight against racism. “Maybe that starts simply in your own family, when grandpa tells that off-colored joke at Thanksgiving, or you’ve got an aunt [that] talks about ‘those people,’” she said. “Well, you can politely inform them that they’re talking about your friends. “Or maybe it’s when you go off to college and you decide to join a sorority or fraternity, and you ask the question, how can we get more diversity in our next pledge class?” she added. “Or maybe it’s years from now, when you’re on the job and you’re the one who asks, do we really have all the voices and viewpoints we need at this table? “But no matter what you do, the point is to never be afraid to talk about these issues, particularly the issue of race,” she said.

I’m old enough to remember when the Obamas were touted as the harbingers of a post-racial, unified America. In reality, it’s become all-racism, all-the-time, in every tiny corner of our lives – not to mention the remorseless equation of political dissent with racism by Obama surrogates, and the Democrats’ scorched-earth campaign to hang on to the Senate in 2014 by throwing gasoline on every racial fire they can find.

There’s so much creepy and wrong with Mrs. Obama’s speech – all of which we’re supposed to ignore, because the scourge of racism is so terrible that any means are justified to ending it – that it’s hard to know where to start. But maybe we should start there, because nothing good ever comes of these “by any means necessary” crusades. There are far worse social crises to deal with than Grandpa’s off-color jokes, or the latest uncomfortable turn of phrase from Auntie Those People. I can’t shake the feeling that a truly post-racial America will be considerably less paranoid and uptight than what Mrs. Obama envisions here.

That’s a lovely backhanded insult to older people she delivered, by talking about how the kids need to “drag” their benighted elders into the enlightened future. The moral vanity of the young audience must have been greatly flattered.

But then we segue into the stuff about enforced “diversity” in pledge classes and places of employment, and once again we have a liberal encouraging Americans to view themselves as criminals, presumed guilty of racism whenever bean-counting produces an insufficiently diverse mix of colors at the lunch table, sorority bake sale, or business meeting. Notice how the First Lady also assumes diverse “voices and viewpoints” – a phrase no one associated with our rigidly doctrinaire liberal President should be allowed to use without getting laughed off the stage – equate automatically to skin color.

Mrs. Obama then built upon her lament about how we’re not legally obligated to eat at racially integrated lunch tables by warning about the return of “segregation”:

While Obama praised the student body for being racially diverse, she said segregation is happening again in some parts of the country, as some people are moving away and leaving city schools. She said that is leading to segregation that is as bad as it was decades ago. “So today, by some measures, our schools are as segregated as they were back when Dr. King gave his final speech,” she said.

“Segregation” is not the right word for people voluntarily choosing to move into, or out of, certain areas. Not a single school in the United States of America is “segregated” at all. It’s a powerful term with a very specific meaning. It refers to a historical injustice, which the American people deserve better than to be accused of in 2014. This business of pretending we’re one tiny misstep away from tumbling back to 1964, or maybe even 1854, is getting ridiculous, not to mention insulting.

The “remedy” for what Mrs. Obama describes as “segregation” would be… what? Forcing us to relocate at gunpoint, until every community has the officially prescribed mixture of ethnic backgrounds? Would black people who chose to live in certain neighborhoods be forced to relocate into predominantly white neighborhoods as well? Or are we supposed to abandon thoughts of “fixing” the problem and just feel guilty and inferior?

We can prevent officially-sanctioned discriminatory behavior, and we have done so. It’s quite different to demand the modification of people’s thoughts, under the threat of vigilante justice at the dinner table. It’s very unlikely that racist thoughts can be completely expunged from the minds of fallen humanity, but we can set high standards for brotherhood and encourage men and woman of every background to meet them. Racialist obsessions are not the high road to meeting that goal, nor are blanket insults casually dropped on broad segments of the population.

As for encouraging diverse voices and viewpoints… well, many sitting in Mrs. Obama’s high-school audience were presumably bound for college, where they’ve been having a lot of problems with encouraging a broad spectrum of viewpoints, but very little of it has anything to do with racism.