Scottsdale, Ariz. — The Jose Reyes watch continues.

Rockies manager Walt Weiss said Friday that he has not been told when the shortstop might join the team. Most of Colorado’s position players have already reported to spring training, although the first full-squad workout isn’t scheduled until Thursday.

The Rockies also continue to say that don’t know anything about a possible suspension under Major League Baseball’s new domestic violence policy.

However, a resolution appears to be getting closer.

Commissioner Rob Manfred told reporters Friday in Florida that he expects to have a decision within a few days on two of the first three cases covered by the sport’s new policy. MLB has been investigating cases involving New York Yankees closer Aroldis Chapman and Los Angeles Dodgers outfielder Yasiel Puig, as well as Reyes. Manfred did not specify which cases he hopes to decide soon.

Reyes — part of the trade last July that sent Troy Tulowitzki to Toronto — is alleged to have assaulted his wife on Halloween in a Hawaii hotel. He is scheduled to go on trial April 4, the same day of the Rockies’ regular-season opener. That fact the Reyes still faces a criminal trial could play a part in Manfred’s decision. Reyes, slated to earn $22 million this season, is the Rockies’ highest-paid player.

However, the new policy states that the commissioner can hand out discipline for “just cause,” so Reyes’ appearance in criminal court is not necessarily the deciding factor. In addition, Reyes could appeal any suspension to baseball’s arbitrator.

“The standards of proof in a labor arbitration and a criminal case are very different,” Manfred told reporters during his first spring-training media availability.

“My strong preference would have been to have them decided by this point in the calendar,” Manfred continued. “More important than the calendar, however, is making sure that we know all the facts before I make a decision. The worst thing that can happen from our perspective is to make a decision and then find out that we decided without knowing everything that happened.”

Chapman was acquired by the Yankees from the Cincinnati Reds in a December trade. Chapman is under investigation for an incident at his house in Florida in October involving his girlfriend. Chapman is alleged to have fired a gun during the incident.

Prosecutors declined to file charges and Chapman has said he would appeal any MLB suspension.

Puig was involved in an argument with his sister at a Miami bar on Nov. 25. According to the Miami Police Department, Puig and a bouncer at the bar were involved in a fight after Puig was asked to leave following the argument with his sister.

Manfred said there are reasons why his decisions are taking so long.

“The timing of gathering those facts is not completely within our control,” Manfred said. “Obviously, in large measure we’re dependent on law enforcement and the activities surrounding the three incidents. I expect that we will have some action on at least two of the three in the next few days.”

Under MLB’s domestic violence policy, discipline is not contingent on a criminal conviction.

“There’s lots of reasons for non-prosecution,” Manfred said. “Not all of them relate to the underlying facts. It may be unavailability or unwillingness of witnesses to participate, whatever. That makes the cases difficult.

“Secondly, the policy is pretty explicit. The fact that law enforcement decides that it either is not going to — or cannot, because of a lack of proof — proceed doesn’t mean that discipline is not appropriate. The policy is very explicit about that.”