“This whole experience has converted a lifelong Democrat into a foot soldier for the Republican Party”

posted at 11:21 am on November 5, 2013 by Guy Benson

Hey look, a not terrible unintended consequence of Obamacare:

Bill Fullner has reached his breaking point. It started with the letter from his health-insurance company informing him it was canceling his plan and offering him a new one that’s nearly twice as expensive. Then the 60-year-old retiree from Mount Vernon heard about more people like himself with canceled plans and soaring premiums. Finally, he spent hours on the phone and computer trying — and failing — to find a new option that he likes. “This whole experience has converted a lifelong Democrat into a foot soldier for the Republican Party,” Fullner said. He’s not alone in his frustration. In Washington, most of the 290,000 people covered by insurance plans they purchased on the individual market received letters this fall telling them that their plans are going away…That’s left Fuller and many others feeling blindsided. They — and Republican leaders opposed to the Affordable Care Act — are now calling a pledge made by President Obama as he lobbied for the law a betrayal. “Obama stated that if we were happy with an insurance plan that we currently had, we would be able to keep it,” Fullner said in an email. “I feel that the president, who I greatly admired and supported, has lied to the public.”

And he’s not done lying, either:

Obama adds a clause to “you can keep it” – “What we said was you can keep it if it hasn’t changed since the law passed.” — Reid J. Epstein (@reidepstein) November 4, 2013

Flat. Out. Lie. Although galvanizing new Republican converts clearly was not one of the White House’s goals in foisting Obamacare upon the country, dropped coverage and rising costs for many actually were. Team O couldn’t say that out loud, of course, but without those intended consequences in full swing, the law collapses. That’s reality. Meanwhile, back in Fantasy Land…

“The bottom line is we are making the insurance market better for everybody,” says Pres. Obama. — Mark Knoller (@markknoller) November 4, 2013

Again, demonstrably false, on both an empirical and anecdotal level — with more pain on the way for a lot more people. By all means, keep talkin’, champ.

UPDATE – See? Everyone’s better off!

Expecting parents being forced into new health plan now have a deductible 3Xs the amt of old, $10,000 #mycancellation pic.twitter.com/rlzoIptz1H — My Cancellation (@MyCancellation) November 4, 2013

Recently in the Green Room: