"Here's John Boehner, the former Speaker of the House, who had to work with Nancy Pelosi and Harry Reid and Barack Obama, and he says that Ted Cruz was the worst he ever had to work with? Isn't that a little bizarre?"

"If you want to know whether or not Trump's speech yesterday was a hit with the voters that he has energized, all you have to know is Trump said the following: 'We will no longer surrender this country or its people to the false song of globalism.' That's it. Everything before and after is irrelevant. That line, as far as Trump supporters are concerned, was all they needed to hear."

“Bobby Knight, one of the biggest people in Indiana. One of the most beloved, respected, and, by the way, a fighter. If Bobby Knight didn't agree with the refs, he'd throw a chair at 'em all across the court if he had to.”

"The primary reason Ted Cruz is disliked is precisely that he is conservative. That is exactly why the Republican establishment doesn't like him. It's why they didn't like Reagan. It's why they didn't like Goldwater. It's why they don't want any conservative triumphing and running, heading the party, being elected president. It is all about conservatism."

"There isn't a conservative out there that the GOP establishment would get behind and help win the party nomination. It's just that simple."

“We're not going broke chasing the American dream. If anybody's going broke, it's because the government is shrinking the United States economy. The government's giving more and more money away to people that are not working. They're giving more and more money away to people that don't have any dream. They're giving more and more money away to attract people here to come register as Democrats to vote.”

"When commodities and products and services are priced with no concern for the ability of the consumer to pay it, you have lost control. There is no market and nothing in it is fair or will ever make sense. And the people benefiting from it are few, and all at the top."

"I have found conclusive proof that Obamacare is a scam designed to fail. I could prove it very easily."

"The primary reason Ted Cruz is disliked is precisely that he is conservative. That is exactly why the Republican establishment doesn't like him. It's why they didn't like Reagan. It's why they didn't like Goldwater. It's why they don't want any conservative triumphing and running, heading the party, being elected president. It is all about conservatism."

"Liberalism, Democrat Party politics corrupts practically everything it seeks to dominate and control, because, by definition, the Democrat Party and liberalism is not a hands-off affair. They don't trust you to do anything. They want to control virtually everything you do for one reason: their own power and securing votes."

"What Trump symbolizes is a big, fat ‘screw you’ from the country to the people running the country. And that alone is garnering him support that the establishment cannot understand. They still do not understand the depth to which people feel this."

“If you want transnationals, major American corporations to stay here, you're gonna have to end cronyism. You're gonna have to end the ability of some corporations to have exclusive deals with whatever president and party is in power and basically, get rid of liberalism.”

“We really ought to have a moderately serious discussion on what it would really require to keep American businesses in America, manufacturing plants in America. I don't know if you learn everything you're gonna still support it.”

“The Democrat Party has successfully, to their benefit, created this relationship where your average American Democrat voter thinks that everything in the commercial marketplace is his enemy.”

“Karl Rove said Trump's negatives are higher than anybody's negatives in the history of political polling. Nobody's had negatives this high. Well, one thing he didn't say is that Hillary Clinton is so close to him in negatives that you can barely spot the difference. But nobody talks about her negatives being high.”

“If Trump hits Hillary and criticizes her like the Clintons haven't been, you're gonna have people on that basis alone vote for the guy, in my opinion, 'cause I don't think people understand how pent up the frustration and the opposition to the Clintons at what they have seemingly gotten away with all of these years.”

“The fact that Trump's negatives are being touted here by the establishment, I think it is significant, and even though they are that high, he's doing amazingly well and is popular at the same time.”

“Every time you open the paper, you crack the Web or do whatever and you find problems in Obamacare, your reaction should be, ‘Mission accomplished.’ It is designed not to work. It's designed to implode on itself.”

“Rush Limbaugh, right here at the Limbaugh Institute for Advanced Conservative Studies. I am America's Real Anchorman, the Doctor of Democracy and America's Truth Detector all combined here in one harmless little fuzzball bundle.”