TRENTON — Three health care groups, from Newark, Trenton, and Camden, have been selected by the state to study why some Medicaid patients cost so much money to treat, and how to improve their health by preventing disease and avoiding hospital stays.

Each of these "accountable care organizations," made up made up of doctors, hospitals, and mental health and social service agencies, will also get a chance to earn additional payments from the managed care companies that provide Medicaid coverage if they bring down costs and show patients are measurably healthier, said Jeff Brown, the executive director of the QI Collaborative, an offshoot of the NJ Health Care Quality Institute.

Those who are frequently in hospitals, known as "superusers," comprise about 1 percent of the inpatient population and about 30 percent of hospital billings. According to the Camden Coalition, of the 79,000 residents in the city, 386 patients accounted for the top 1 percent of emergency department visitors in 2011.

The Nicholson Foundation awarded $10 million to enable the organizations to develop the plans and implement them, according to Joan Randell, the chief operating officer. The foundation will make more money available to allow the organizations to grow, she said.

Randell congratulated the Trenton Health Team, the Healthy Greater Newark ACO, and the Camden Coalition of Healthcare Providers for being selected on "what surely will be a complicated journey to improve health care access and quality."

"They will learn what works, modify what doesn't, and spread" the successful strategies with each other and across the state, she added.

The organizations selected by the state Department of Human Services for the three-year study already use strategies that examine the socio-economic impact on city residents' health. Jeffrey Brenner, the founder of the Camden Coalition, which is regarded as a national model for cost-effective treatment of low-income patients, said his team has "gotten knee-deep in housing policy."

"We have built the most expensive homeless shelters when we put (these patients) in hospital beds in the country," Brenner said. "We are spending money in the wrong places. We medicalize social problems in America and we see that every day in Camden."

The pilot program, created by state law and advanced by the Affordable Care Act, began Wednesday. The state Medicaid program will collect data based on patient visits, and the Rutgers Center for State Health Policy will use it to evaluate how each of the organizations are preventing illness by providing greater access to preventive health screenings and childhood immunizations, said Linda Schwimmer, vice president of the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute.

The law was needed to avoid anti-trust regulations and allow hospitals, doctors, mental health agencies to share information and reimbursement, officials said.

"We need to move beyond competitive motivations, and have the difficult