Showing off a cake marking the merger of Ryland and Standard Pacific are combined entity CalAtlantic’s Charleston/Myrtle Beach Division President Don McDonough, (from left), Vice President of Finance Kelli Snyder and Vice President of Sales and Marketing Gayle Jinks. Provided

Employees in the Charleston and Myrtle Beach division of The Ryland Group Inc. celebrated the company’s merger with Standard Pacific Corp. to form the nation’s fourth largest home building company.

An October luncheon marked the combination of the two builders into CalAtlantic Group. Ryland continues to do business under its existing name.

The merged company intends to operate in 41 markets across 17 states “with new home offerings spanning entry level through luxury,” CalAtlantic says.

The new-home neighborhoods include 11 communities in the Charleston region and four in the Myrtle Beach area.

Irvine, Calif.-based CalAtlantic Group Inc. owns or controls about 76,000 home sites and between its two merged companies raised 12,786 homes in 12 months ending in June.

“Combining two industry leaders with nearly 100 years of home building experience puts us in a strong position to benefit from the continued housing market recovery,” CalAtlantic Group Inc. Executive Chairman Scott D. Stowell says. “With this merger we gain both geographic and product diversification, expanding our reach and enhancing our growth prospects in the entry level, move-up and luxury market segments.”

President and Chief Executive Officer Larry T. Nicholson says the merger represents “a significant milestone (for the industry) as two of its best operators combine forces in the belief that our combined future is brighter.

“With similar cultures and long histories of designing and building quality homes and providing exceptional customer service, Standard Pacific and Ryland are each proud of where we’ve been and are confident in our future together as CalAtlantic Homes,” he says.

The company anticipates that production, purchasing and other overlapping ventures combined under the merger will create annual cost savings of between $50 and $70 million. CalAtlantic expects to realize a significant portion of the estimated cost savings by late 2016, it says.

Reach Jim Parker at 843-937-5542 or jparker@postandcourier.com.