JOHN KASICH'S POSITIONS ON ISSUES:

John Kasich says unauthorized immigrants should be allowed to stay in the United States if they pay a fine, but that they should not automatically be granted citizenship.

He says the U.S.-Mexican border should be sealed with fencing, technology, drones and sensors. But "the 12 million that are here, if they violated the law, they go out or they go to jail. But if they're hardworking, God-fearing, family people, they go to church, they work with us, let them stay," Kasich told NBC's Chuck Todd on July 26. "They're going to have a pay a fine... they're going to have to pay a fine and pay a penalty for the fact that they violated the law. But, you know, if they're part of our culture now and society, and they're doing fine, they're hardworking, they're just like all of us, then I think they can stay."

Kasich supports the Common Core education standards and has called opposition to them "hysteria."

In January, he told Fox News Sunday, "I've asked the Republican governors that have complained about this to tell me where I'm wrong. And guess what? Silence. You know, part of the problem is today politicians are running to try to get votes. You know what we try to do out here? We went out here trying to solve problems. ... It's local schools, it's local school boards and high standards. I don't know how anybody can disagree with that unless you're running for something."

Kasich has criticized the Affordable Care Act and his administration refused to set up an Ohio-specific insurance market, or "exchange." But he expanded Ohio's Medicaid program using funds from the act, sidestepping the state legislature, and has said the Affordable Care Act's repeal is "not gonna happen."

He opposes abortion rights and supports gun rights. He said in 2013 that while he voted for the assault weapons ban when in Congress, "my feeling is it wasn't effective."

As for gay marriage, the "people of the state, including me, voted years ago on a constitutional amendment to say that marriage is between a man and a woman," the Ohio governor said in 2014.

His has not said "yes" or "no" when asked about supporting the Trans-Pacific Partnership and fast-track trade authority. "My feeling about it is I'm pretty much for open (trade), but I think the American workers have been shafted," he told CNN.

JOHN KASICH'S POLL STANDINGS:

National average, 1.8 percent; Iowa average, 1.6 percent; New Hampshire average, 9.7 percent; South Carolina, 1.3 percent.

Figures are current averages of polls, tracked by RealClearPolitics.com, that compare the potential candidates in Republican primaries and caucuses.