Gila Regional Medical Center has their eye on a better year in fiscal year 2017, according to a report on their draft budget approved at the hospital’s board of trustees meeting Friday. While the draft itself wasn’t provided to the public, hospital CFO Mike Metts presented a future with an improved bottom line, if lower reserves.

The hospital has faced financial impacts in the last year from recent investment in major projects, like the Meditech 6 overhaul of their medical records network. This, along with cuts from state government, left the hospital $1.5 million to $2 million in the red, according to hospital CEO Brian Cunningham.

In the coming year, Metts expects that hit to be alleviated somewhat. The proposed draft budget projects a net revenue of $77 million for fiscal year 2017, which Metts said is a $2.2 million improvement over the current fiscal year. After expenses, he said that should leave the hospital with a bottom line of around $37,000.

While that is good news, it came alongside a surprising bite out of the hospital’s cash-in-hand reserves.

Gila Regional’s daily cash reserve has been a point of pride for the hospital for years now. As of the end of April, for instance, the hospital had enough cash in the reserve to cover operations for 132 days — with days of operation being the way hospitals measure their reserves. That April number is on track with the hospital’s recent yearly average.

In 2017, Metts said that reserve number would likely decrease to an average of 106 days, based on two large projected expenditures.

At the board’s March 25 meeting, Metts reported that following the implementation of the federal Affordable Care Act, the hospital has lost payments from the uncompensated safety net care pool, adding up to a $200,000 monthly loss. He said that in 2017, the hospital plans to spend $2.6 million for that pool, which takes away 14 days’ worth of funding from their cash reserves.

The cash for another 10 days is projected to go to capital expenditures.

Metts also announced projected growth in both inpatient and outpatient care by 2 percent each. For inpatient care, that 2 percent would equal about 47 admissions per year. Broken down, that means the daily expected population will increase by one, to a total of 25.

The Gila Regional board of trustees voiced their confidence in the proposed budget, if not joy in its diagnoses.

“We knew it was going to be a tight year, a tight budget,” said board member Jeremiah Garcia.

Still, board Chair Charles Kelly said the budget represents the best effort to be as fiscally responsible as possible.

“It appears to be a conservative budget,” Kelly said. “I personally think it’s ready to go to state, but we do have until July 1 to change anything.”

Kelly explained that the budget will now be sent to the New Mexico Department of Finance and Administration for review. “If they find a large flaw they’ll contact you, but if not it is usually approved,” he said.

Cunningham said the DFA will also review the end-of-year financials. “That’s kind of the check in the system.”

Metts said the slight financial improvement fits the hospital’s overall mission.

“We’re still wanting to see year-over-year improvement, and will continue to focus on controlling our costs,” he said. “From a conservative standpoint, we’re in line to be able to manage our operations and projects.”

—BENJAMIN FISHER