Topics: From the Wires, News

GRIGNY, France (AP) — The housing project that was home to Amedy Coulibaly is a concrete labyrinth so scary that doctors refuse to make house calls and mail workers won’t deliver parcels. Drug dealers and teenage thugs hold sway over the blighted neighborhood.

Even the police venture only with caution into the Grande Borne, especially after dark. The project’s maze of serpentine, run-down buildings housing 11,000 people gives gangs plenty of cover to mount ambushes against officers with pump-action shotguns and gasoline bombs.

It would be simplistic to argue that Coulibaly — a partner of the Charlie Hebdo attackers, killer of a policewoman and four hostages at a kosher store — became a terrorist because he grew up in this enclave of high unemployment and crime where the authority of the French state is weak. Many others from the Grande Borne and his generation turned out just fine. One of Coulibaly’s sisters is making her name as a dancer. A former classmate is a financial comptroller, another helps manage the career of 2005 hurdles world champion Ladji Doucoure.

“Our towns are not terrorist factories,” Philippe Rio, the mayor who also grew up in the Grande Borne, insisted in an interview with The Associated Press.

But it was here in what the mayor calls one of France’s “abandoned, difficult territories” that Coulibaly started to veer off the rails as a teenager, graduating from petty crime to armed robberies that set him on a trajectory of multiple spells in prison. Behind bars, he met Cherif Kouachi, one of the Charlie Hebdo assassins, and others with whom he became radicalized.

Built in the 1960s as affordable working-class housing, the Grande Borne now looks like a giant social and architectural mistake. Its lack of roads were intended to make it child-friendly but ended up making it difficult to police. The three, four and five-story blocks with fetid stairwells and dead-ends also make perfect crime hideouts and stashes for drugs.

Poorly served by public transport and cut off by a motorway — as well as its turbulent reputation — the estate was one of the hotspots in a nationwide wave of riots in 2005 that exposed the deep wells of anger in France’s depressed “banlieues,” the suburbs where France built grim projects to house workers from former colonies who provided muscle for France’s postwar growth miracle.

Their children and grandchildren now languish there — with, some say, few ways out.

Monique Vareillaud, Coulibaly’s primary school teacher when he was 8, remembers a kid “just like all the others” but also “the little king” of his large family — the only boy among nine sisters. In a school photo from the following year, Coulibaly is the only pupil leaning forward on his chair, chin resting pensively on the back of his hand, like Auguste Rodin’s sculpture “The Thinker.”

In his teens, the authority of school and parents began to lose grip on Coulibaly, and crime sank in its claws. His Islamic faith also “was starting to take shape,” said Grande Borne social worker De-Charles Claude Aka. Coulibaly became more dedicated than other neighborhood kids in attending daily prayers and, on a trip to Disneyland, kept himself apart from the girls, Aka recalled in an AP interview.

Aka lost sight of Coulibaly in 1999. Then suddenly last year, his former charge reappeared in his office, seemingly with something important to say. Whatever it was, Aka failed to tease it out of him. He is now haunted by the idea that Coulibaly may already have been plotting last week’s killing spree, and perhaps could have been reasoned with. Instead, they made small talk.

“To be honest, I kicked myself,” Aka said. “I started to run the film in my head of his visit. He had bulked up so much, become a big boy.”

By then, Coulibaly had done long spells of prison time, with six separate convictions for robbery, armed robbery and drug trafficking and another on terrorism-related charges.