As our nation's healthcare leaders evaluate their strategic plans for 2015 and beyond, many are assessing how they can reshape their business model to improve care coordination, facilitate data-sharing across care teams and take more financial responsibility for care delivery. The conversations taking place in hospital boardrooms across the country are representative of where healthcare is heading—and hospitals and health systems must get on board if they want to survive.



In light of this fundamental shift, Valence Health recently invited CEOs, chief medical officers, chief information officers and other executive leaders representing insurers, integrated delivery networks, children's hospitals and academic medical centers from around the country to have an honest conversation about the future of healthcare and how providers can improve consumer access to high-quality, cost-effective care.



More than 150 healthcare leaders came together in Chicago to discuss their strategic plans and visions for the future, resulting in these five foundational insights:

As providers improve quality and outcomes, they must intensify efforts to retain patients. Providers investing in care redesign, quality and outcomes should ensure they reap the benefits of these resources by keeping patients with them for many years. C-suite leaders see a need for new and innovative member/patient-retention programs and rewards. The good news: as consumerism becomes the norm in health insurance decisionmaking, providers are more in control of their relationship with consumers than ever.



As more consumers use the insurance exchanges, providers should prepare for multiple scenarios. The insurance market is changing quickly because of consolidation, employer demands and the expansion of narrow provider networks. Approximately 47% of the health plans offered on Affordable Care Act insurance exchanges in the 2013-14 season were narrow- or ultra-narrow network plans. Providers must be prepared to articulate their value to multiple audiences; consider jumping to direct employer contracting; offer innovative, market-specific, risk-sharing models; or set up their own health plans.



In a value-based world, care delivery will occur outside hospital walls. In the not-so-distant future, people will not care how many beds hospitals have. Rather, they will want to know how provider-led organizations are creatively using outpatient resources, nontraditional scheduling and technology to appropriately direct care. We foresee that providers will be rewarded for redeploying existing physical assets in new and innovative ways that meet community needs.



Providers need to continuously prepare for Care Redesign 3.0. Care model redesign is not a one-time effort. Rather, it embodies all the principles of continuous quality improvement. Advanced value-based-care practitioners will not be afraid to construct or deconstruct care models based on populations served, outcomes achieved and contract changes. We have noticed that the cycle times for care model change—big and small—are speeding up as organizations optimize their performance.



Providers may need to retool the executive suite to address value-based care. As providers accept greater financial risk for patients and populations, they will need front-line leaders with both insurance and clinical experience. We are noticing an increasing demand within provider organizations for these dual skills, as well as actuarial, contracting and clinical integration expertise. In 2015, this will be even more critical as the healthcare market continues to undergo enormous change with ongoing provider and system consolidation, expanded ACA exchange participation, increased cost pressure and the steady drive to improve outcomes.

Provider organizations that are successfully leading the volume-to-value transition regularly engage their critical stakeholders in robust and productive debates. When the collective stakeholder community pauses to jointly consider how fundamental market dynamics may affect their businesses and care delivery models, they are better-prepared to offer viable and creative solutions.



While the transformation to new models of care, including risk-based arrangements, is not easy or fast, healthcare organizations that demonstrate a commitment to change will be able to better navigate a turbulent market environment, hiccups in federal payment experiments and rising consumer scrutiny.



Philip Kamp co-founded Chicago-based Valence Health in 1996 and leads the company's efforts in creating patient-focused, data-driven solutions that can be implemented across a healthcare organization. He has more than 30 years of managed-care experience focusing on integration strategies for health systems.