Virtual consultations, or telemedicine is becoming increasingly popular. Could it save us money and change the doctor-patient relationship?

How telemedicine works

Telemedicine is the practice of patients and doctors having an appointment via the phone or computer – Skype, for instance. Many believe that it has the potential of expanding access to health care while providing cheaper services to patients.

Cost-effective and in line with technological change

If you struggle with transportation or access to healthcare, having the possibility of consulting your doctor virtually is a game-changer. Experts argue that virtual care also cuts emergency room costs for health providers while allowing doctors to see more patients. Furthermore, home care and monitoring of those in need of long-term assistance could be easily accomplished remotely.

Remote healthcare in emergency situations

Dr. Lawrence R. Wechsler, chairman of the Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh Schools of the Health Sciences, and vice president of telemedicine services, believes that in the treatment of stroke, for instance, “telemedicine can offer a huge advantage”. An expert doctor hundreds of miles away from a local hospital can treat patients within minutes.

Timely interventions can significantly reduce stroke-related disabilities.

In terms of economic savings, using telemedicine could cut insurance costs. Human resources consultancy Towers Watson estimates the savings at $6 billion a year for companies that buy coverage for employees.

Is telemedicine sustainable?

In order to make telemedicine a sustainable model, experts have urged U.S. states to recognise it as a reimbursable service.

“A lot of (our services) have been held back a little bit by the lack of reimbursement,” said Matt Levi, director of virtual health services at CHI Franciscan.

In CHI Franciscan, the service has been around for a few year.

According to the New York Times, if some health systems and insurers are rushing to offer video consultations for routine ailments, telemedicine is also facing “pushback from some more traditional corners of the medical world”.

More and more health providers, however, are stepping up to provide telemedicine services to a broader population – in urban and rural areas alike.

The technology is out there

As telemedicine service connects patients with health-care providers, the system also brings technology into peoples’ homes.

“We sent tablet technology into the homes of patients who are at end-of-life and they connected weekly with their physicians for their appointments,” said Thunder Bay Regional Health Sciences Centre manager of telemedicine and palliative care Trina Diner.

“The technology is out there,” she said. “It’s a lot less expensive than it used to be and a lot of people are a lot more comfortable with technology so all the conditions are right for us to move into that environment”.

Would you ever use telemedicine services?

For more technology-related news, check out Clapway Trends:

Comments

comments