"Of all the forms of inequality, injustice in health care is the most shocking and inhuman."

The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. spoke those words at the 1966 convention of the Medical Committee for Human Rights, which was organized in 1964 to support civil-rights activists during Mississippi's Freedom Summer.

As we approach the annual celebration of the Martin Luther King Jr. Day of Service, we can also celebrate a significant step in the fulfillment of King’s dream.

King held a mirror up to our nation to reveal an aspiration for freedom that was rooted in a history of slavery with a legacy of poverty and inequality.

When the Affordable Care Act (ACA) was passed in 2010, health care in America involved health-insurance premium increases that far exceeded inflation and wage growth; a decreasing number of employers offering job-based health coverage; and those that did, passed an increasing share of health costs to workers. The number of uninsured Americans ballooned to nearly 50 million, including 1.2 million residents in Ohio.

The financial wreckage of inadequate health coverage littered the economic landscape with medical debt becoming a leading cause of bankruptcy, home foreclosure and poor credit scores, which impaired access not only to credit, but also to employment, housing and insurance. Medical debt drove people into poverty and kept them there.

African-Americans, who are 55 percent more likely to be uninsured than white Americans, disproportionately bear the burden of the lack of access to health coverage. Not surprisingly, African-Americans experience poorer health outcomes with higher rates of illnesses such as cancer, high blood pressure, diabetes and infant mortality, when compared to the general population.

While the first few weeks of the open-enrollment period for the Health Insurance Marketplace felt more like a nightmare than a dream, now, more than three months later, 2.1 million Americans have enrolled in private insurance and 3.9 million Americans have enrolled in Medicaid. As of Jan. 1, more than 6 million Americans now have a health and financial security that they may have never had before.

Despite the website problems which are now largely resolved, a survey released by Enroll America last week reveals that the ACA rollout “glitches” have not been a major barrier for the vast majority of uninsured in the country. Most have not yet tried to visit their online marketplace.

Instead, lack of awareness about financial help and subsidies may be the biggest enrollment challenge. The main reason most uninsured adults lack coverage is their belief that “I can’t afford it.” And most do not know that affordable options – through subsidies – are waiting for them on the marketplaces.

Get Covered America is working to inform Greater Cleveland about the tax credits that will make quality private health insurance affordable for most of the uninsured and expanded Medicaid available to those working Ohioans who cannot afford any premiums. Get Covered America is working to connect our uninsured neighbors to enrollment assistance if they need help navigating healthcare.gov.

Those who have not yet enrolled still have until March 31 to do so. But as we celebrate the dream of Martin Luther King, now is the perfect time for you, if you are uninsured, or if you have an uninsured relative or friend to visit GetCoveredAmerica.org and learn about the new health care options so we can secure the safety and dignity of every resident in Greater Cleveland.

Trey Daly is the Ohio state director of Enroll America, a private, nonprofit, nonpartisan organization dedicated to maximizing coverage through the Affordable Care Act. Daly is a Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Community Health Leader recipient.