TRENTON — How does U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, who became the first Republican candidate to officially declare his candidacy for the president on Monday, compare with Gov. Chris Christie, who has launched a PAC and a Super PAC aimed at a White House run?

Both men are conservatives, but on just about every measure Cruz wins huge points with the party's right wing. He rates a perfect "100" in the American Conservative Union's legislative rankings in 2013. The ACU doesn't rank governors, but that same year, Christie was assessed as the least conservative of 30 GOP governors by in a study by renowned electoral statistician, Nate Silver.

Here's where the two men stand — and sometimes differ — on several big issues.





GUNS

Cruz: He has often publicly defined gun control as "hitting what you aim at." In April 2013, he voted against the Safe Communities, Safe Schools Act, which would have banned the sale of 157 different semi-automatic weapons, along with high capacity magazines.

Christie: Last December, Christie, who governs the state with the second-tightest gun control laws in the nation, said that "Gun laws in New Jersey might be a little too strict."

In July 2014, Christie also vetoed a gun control bill that would have reduced the permitted size of ammunition magazines, calling it the 10 bullet limit "entirely arbitrary" saying that it defied logic to think "a ten-round capacity might spare an eleventh victim."

He did, however, suggest changes to the state's mental health system, signing into law 11 pieces of gun violence and firearm-related mental health legislation, like one requiring the submission of certain mental health records to National Instant Criminal Background Check System and another creating new standards for involuntary commitment based on a history of lack of compliance with treatment.

EDUCATION

Cruz: The junior senator from Texas doesn't just oppose Common Core, he's the co-sponsor of the Local Control of Education bill, introduced by Sen. David Vitter (R - Louisiana). It seeks to "prohibit the Federal Government from mandating, incentivizing, or coercing States to adopt the Common Core State Standards or any other specific academic standards, instructional content, curricula, assessments, or programs of instruction."

Christie: Initially, Christie rallied to the defense of the Common Core standard, in August 2013, he called it "one of those areas where I have agreed more with the President than not" and decried Republican opposition to it "a knee-jerk reaction" based on partisan politics rather than on its merits, saying that "if the president likes something the Republicans in Congress don't."

But in recent months, Christie has voiced opposition to the Common Core standard, not so much because of any ideological shift to its educational precepts, but because of what termed "the way the Obama administration has tried to implement it through tying federal funding to these things. And that changes the entire nature of it, from what was initially supposed to be voluntary-type system and states could decide on their own to now having federal money tied to it..."

In the meantime, Christie says he has "grave concerns" about the program, and has appointed a blue-ribbon panel to assess whether it is right for New Jersey. The panel is expected to issue its findings by July.

SAME-SEX MARRIAGE

Cruz: He has been activist in his efforts to block gay marriage with legislation. In February he introduced a bill that would federally mandate that same sex marriage should be left up to the states, a clear move to cut off the U.S. Supreme Court before it is expected to rule on the issue later this summer. Cruz's so-called State Marriage Defense Act would allow states to adopt their own definitions of marriage and to prevent the federal government from applying its own definition of marriage onto states. That could allow states like North Dakota and Georgia not only to ban gay marriage, as they currently do, but give any state the right to decline to recognize the marriages of couples in states that allow them.

Christie: His position on same-sex marriage has not changed since he campaigned for office. He vetoed two gay marriage bills as governor, and he remains opposed to it today. However, on gay marriage, he's willing to go along with the law of the land.

He's said such "historic" societal change should come not from the governor's office, the legislature or even the courts, but from a direct referendum by New Jersey's voters. He called for it to be placed on the November 2013 ballot. Democrats who control the Legislature refused to put it on the ballot.

The New Jersey State Supreme Court intervened in October 2013, refusing to put a temporary hold on gay marriages after a state Superior Court judge had ruled the state's five year-old civil unions law violated the "due process" clause of the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

Christie initially sought to appeal the decision, but abandoned the effort when the state Supreme Court refused to put a stay on gay marriages until the case was heard, and gave strong signals as to how it would rule by declaring: "Same-sex couples who cannot marry are not treated equally under the law today."

CAPITAL PUNISHMENT

Cruz: He is pro-death penalty, and as the Solicitor General of Texas, Cruz defended the State of Texas' right to execute 51 Mexican nationals, all of whom were convicted of murder in the United States and on death row, but who had not been given the opportunity to receive legal aid from the Mexican consulate, as dictated by international law. The Texas Supreme Court sided with Cruz's argument.

Christie: New Jersey's death penalty was repealed in 2007 under former Gov. Jon Corzine, but Christie, a former federal prosecutor, supports the death penalty. He's said he would sign a capital punishment bill if it ever made it to his desk, but a Democratically controlled legistlature means that's unlikely.

DRUGS

Cruz: Many Tea Party darlings, including GOP U.S. Sens. Mike Lee of Utah and Rand Paul of Kentucky, have proposed repeals of mandatory minimum sentences born of the Nixon Administration's "war on drugs." Cruz has stayed mostly silent on both topics, but has said that "we can have an intelligent conversation about drug policy, and the degree to which it may or may not be achieving the ends we hope it would achieve."

Christie: Drug abuse is a topic long dear to Christie. In April 2014, a former classmate at Seton Hall University School of Law and a close friend succumbed to prescription pill and alcohol abuse. By September, Christie publicly declared making drug and alcohol treatment "more available for everybody" was "part of government's job," and assailed mandatory sentencing guidelines for drug offenders. And in October, Christie expanded the state's voluntary prescription monitoring program to share New Jersey physician's prescribing records with doctors and pharmacists in Delaware and New York to prevent people from "doctor shopping" in surrounding states.

"With 23 million folks addicted, it's not working," Christie said of the nation's current drug interdiction policy. "There's gotta be a separation between the criminal act (of using illegal drugs) and the disease."

But while he's worked to make de-stigmatization of addiction and drug sentencing reform central to his legacy, pushing mandatory treatment over jail, he's hardly a libertarian on the topic of drug interdiction law. Legalization of marijuana will "never" happen on his watch as governor, and Christie has called medical marijuana "a front for legalization."

IMMIGRATION AND BORDER SECURITY

Cruz: He has been one of the staunchest opponents of immigration reform, and one of the toughest proponents for increased border security. In 2013, he pushed his GOP Senate colleagues to remove a pathway to citizenship proposal from any reform package aimed at the 11 million unauthorized immigrants.

He's also called for the federal government to obtain "100 percent operational control" of the U.S. Border with Mexico by completing a double-layered border fence, tripling the size of the border patrol and quadrupling the number of security cameras and surveillance helicopters on the border.

Christie: For years, Christie has deemed the issue as a federal topic he wouldn't comment upon unless and until he becomes a candidate for president. However, earlier this month, Christie broke his own rule, saying that "We should have a clear, legal, reliable guest worker program that folks in agriculture, and others, can rely upon, and that makes sense." However, he also cautioned that it would be just "once piece of an overall approach to try to fix an immigration system that clearly does not work any longer."

He has, however, demonstrated pragmatism on the topic of what's to be done with immigrants who are already here, particularly the children of unauthorized immigrants. Christie supported the Dream Act, which allows the children of immigrants who came to the U.S. illegally to pay in-state tuition prices at New Jersey colleges. His argument was logical, rather than legal, stressing that the vast sums spent by the state on elementary and secondary education would be wasted if college wasn't an option. "An investment made should be an investment maximized," Christie said in November 2013.

ABORTION

As Texas' Solicitor General, Cruz successfully defended the state's so-called Rider 8, which prohibits state funds for groups that provide abortions. He's also vigorously supported bans on third trimester abortions, and backed a since-ruled-unconstitutional Texas law mandating that doctors at abortion clinics also have admitting privileges at local hospitals, which effectively closed many rural clinics and limited staffing at larger ones. However, on the subject of the U.S. Supreme Court ruling Roe Vs. Wade, Cruz has not said if he would seek to overturn it.

Christie: He vetoed Planned Parenthood funding five times as governor, but always maintained it was due to budgetary reasons or because the services could be found elsewhere in the community. That changed last month, when he held up the vetos as proof positive of his anti-abortion credentials.

OBAMACARE

Cruz: In his announcement of his 2016 candidacy, Cruz called for listeners to "imagine: repealing Obamacare," which echoed his 2012 campaign for the Senate, in which Cruz promised the voters of Texas that the first bill he would file as a U.S. Senator would be "to repeal every last word of Obamacare." Cruz kept his promise, even though the Senate bill failed.



Christie: The governor has called Obamacare "a failed federal program" and a "train wreck" but then pivoted and accepted the expanded Medicaid portion of the Affordable Care Act for New Jersey, calling it "the smart thing to do for our fiscal and public health."

In February 2013, Christie argued there was no contradiction in his positions.

"Let me be clear. I am no fan of the Affordable Care Act. I think it is wrong for New Jersey and for America. I fought against it and believe, in the long run, it will not achieve what it promises," Christie said, "However, it is now the law of the land. I will make all my judgments as governor based on what I believe is best for New Jersey."

Claude Brodesser-Akner may be reached at cbrodesser@njadvancemedia.com