A woman displays the Kingston bracelet from Wisewear's Socialite Collection, a new line of connected bracelets from the tech startup, at The Luxury Technology Show, produced by RAND Luxury in Hollywood, California on Sept. 30, 2015.

A woman displays the Kingston bracelet from Wisewear's Socialite Collection, a new line of connected bracelets from the tech startup, at The Luxury Technology Show, produced by RAND Luxury in Hollywood, California on Sept. 30, 2015. FREDERIC J. BROWN/AFP/Getty Images

Fashion icon Iris Apfel wants you to monitor your health in style.

The 94-year-old style maven unveiled her own collection of wearable technology at the international Consumer Electronics Show (CES) held in Las Vegas this week. She teamed up with WiseWear to launch the line of smart bracelets that are both functional and fashionable. Wearable tech has come a long way in terms of attractiveness, but it still has a ways to go.

A UK study released last year found more than a third of people would feel embarrassed or self-conscious sporting wearable tech, and Apfel hopes her bracelets will fix that.

"There is a definite need for this because there are a lot of people who won’t run around doing business looking like they are going to the gym," she told Mashable. "If a technology is going to strive to save my life; then at least take the next step to make me look good while doing it."

Her collection is made up of three distinct pieces of jewelry, each dubbed "The Calder,” "The Duchess" and "The Kingston," respectively." Bracelets come "plated in your choice of 18-carat gold or palladium," according to The Verge; and with a simple tap, the bracelets send a distress signal to the user’s emergency contacts in seconds.

The smart jewelry also includes standard features that help users track texts, emails, and send calendar reminders for events and appointments. If that weren't enough, bracelets can track hydration levels and calories burned too, InStyle reported.

"I think it's a brilliant idea. I forget often to drink enough water, so I dehydrate and I have had the experience of getting very woozy. I know people who have fallen and have had disastrous results, ranging from a bang in the knee to death," Apfel told InStyle. "It lets you know that and makes you aware of it so you can stop and tank up."

Although delving into the tech space is not something the "geriatric starlet" expected to do, the admittedly "un-techy" fashion connoisseur got the bug and was completely taken with the idea of creating jewelry "that help women stay healthy in an attractive way," Mashable reported.

"They're very simple and they can be worn with everything and can be used in conjunction with other jewelry, which is good," she told InStyle. "What we're going to do in the future is make some more statement pieces — stay tuned."

The collection is "on the conservative side," but Apfel hopes to create bigger and bolder pieces more in tune with her personal style.

The pieces, which are priced at $300 apiece, can be purchased at WiseWear.com.