McCarthy is still popular in his district despite his opposition. | John Shinkle/POLITICO Loving Obamacare – and McCarthy

BAKERSFIELD, Calif. — Nearly 70,000 people in the Central Valley’s Kern County have gotten health care coverage this year because of Obamacare. But their congressman, new House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, faces no danger of those newly insured kicking him out of office for voting dozens of times to repeal the law.

It’s a sharp disconnect, one that is taking place not just in McCarthy’s deep-red Bakersfield district but in many other Republican districts throughout the country ahead of the 2014 midterm elections: Constituents benefiting from Obamacare coverage aren’t turning against the politicians who want to repeal it.

Story Continued Below

And even as Obamacare beneficiaries grow into the millions, there doesn’t appear to be a tipping point in the near future when Republicans’ opposition to the health care law could actually hurt them politically.

William McKenzie is one of McCarthy’s constituents who says he loves the law. The 31-year-old unemployed oil refinery worker hadn’t had insurance coverage for at least a decade when he was diagnosed as HIV positive in December. A few weeks later, on Jan. 1, Medicaid became available to him under the Obamacare expansion.

( QUIZ: How well do you know Kevin McCarthy?)

“Without this plan, I would probably be in the ground,” McKenzie said after a recent appointment at a community health center in Bakersfield. Medicaid pays for his $113 tests to measure his viral levels and the $1,200 monthly cost of antiretroviral medications.

“It’s real. It doesn’t get more real than that,” he said. “Without these meds, I don’t know how my health would be.”

An estimated 68,000 people got Obamacare coverage here in Kern County, which makes up a portion of McCarthy’s expansive district in the southern part of the valley. As of April, 18,000 of those people had gotten private coverage, many with federal subsidies. Nearly 50,000 enrolled in Medicaid, a number that is still rising.

Yet here in Bakersfield, McCarthy is popular. Everyone from the local health clinic director and coffee shop barista to the Kern County Museum staffer refer to him simply as “Kevin” and mention the last time they saw him in town. He faced no threat of an Eric Cantor-style primary loss in June; he didn’t even have a challenger on the ballot. In November, he’s virtually guaranteed to win his fifth term in this district, which includes more than a dozen oil refineries and generates billions of dollars in crops such as grapes, pistachios and citrus.

( Also on POLITICO: Full health care policy coverage)

Drew Altman of the Kaiser Family Foundation, which does monthly polling on the health law, said Obamacare is unlikely to directly play a positive or negative role for any House candidates this year.

“The only effect it really could have is on turnout because the electorate is already completely locked up in a partisan divide on the ACA,” he said.

In Washington, McCarthy as majority leader will play a key role in the Obamacare dilemma confronting House Republicans: whether and when to put forward an alternative policy. The party has been promising as much for several years but hasn’t been able to coalesce around one plan.

McCarthy’s office refused to comment or make him available for an interview for this story. In a separate POLITICO interview in late July about his leadership goals, he didn’t commit to a GOP replacement vote. “We have a lot of health care bills out there,” he said then. “You also have to look to the committee process, what’s been through, what’s not. It’s all part of the discussion.”

Republicans are split on how to proceed. Former Majority Leader Cantor promised earlier this year to hold a vote, and new Republican Whip Steve Scalise has strongly backed a vote on the Republican Study Committee plan. But others have now all but ruled that out for 2014, according to Rep. Phil Roe (R-Tenn.), one of the chief proponents of the conservative alternative. House Speaker John Boehner told reporters shortly before the House recessed earlier this month that the GOP is “not there yet” on a plan.