SCOTTDALE, Ariz. — Carlos Gonzalez admitted he was scared for a moment Friday night when he felt pain surge in his surgically repaired left knee. But the Rockies’ right fielder woke up Saturday morning feeling fine, and feeling confident that the knee will not be a major problem this season.

“I was just feeling a little bit of fatigue in my knee,” CarGo said. “I talked to Doogie (trainer Keith Dugger) and he said it’s normal. Some days I’m going to feel like that. But it’s nothing serious and I feel really good today.”

Gonzalez, who had surgery to repair the patella tendon in his left knee on Aug. 19 and played in just 70 games last season, aggravated the knee after a catch-and-throw off a Will Middlebrooks fly ball in the bottom of the third inning Friday night against the Padres. CarGo finished the inning before being removed from the game.

Rockies Mailbag: Pose a question for Patrick Saunders

“It scared me at the moment, because the first thing that comes to your mind is, ‘What’s going on?’ ” Gonzalez said. “Now, I woke up today stronger and I’m ready to go.”

Manager Walt Weiss was not overly concerned Friday night, but he was still glad to hear that Gonzalez checked out OK.

“It’s good news,” Weiss said Saturday morning. “I said last night that he has had a good spring physically — both he and Tulo (Troy Tulowitzki). We are going to take every measure to keep it that way.”

Weiss said it will be his job to pick and choose when he will play the Rockies’ two stars during the regular season, “to make sure we don’t overload those two guys.”

Gonzalez said if he wants to thrive on the field, he will have to monitor his knee and make sure he’s in prime shape for the rest of his career.

“Doogie was telling me that I will to have stay on top of my workouts with my legs and stuff,” CarGo said. “Sometimes they are going to feel fatigue. They say it’s like having Tommy John (surgery) in your knees. You have to do the things right to keep your body feeling good.”

To that end, Gonzalez has kept himself fit by incorporating a rigorous stretching routine and adhering to a streak diet. He no longer eats beef, sweets or Cheetos (his favorite junk food), and he weighs 210 pound — down from the 235 he carried last season.

De La Rosa update. Lefty starter Jorge De La Rosa, who was originally scheduled to start the Rockies’ home-opener against the Cubs on April 10, is progressing slowly as he returns from a strained left groin.

He played long toss on Friday and hopes to throw a bullpen session next week. De La Rosa said he’ll begin building up arm strength as soon as his groin is pain free.

He figures he needs to pitch in two or three games before he could be ready to rejoin the Rockies. He could pitch in games in extended spring and possibly make a rehab start for Triple-A Albuquerque or another minor-league team.

“I really frustrated, but all I can do is stay calm and deal with it,” he said.

Roster moves. The Rockies made several moves Saturday. They optioned infielder Cristhian Adames, right-handed reliever Jairo Diaz and outfielder/first baseman Kyle Parker to Triple-A. They reassigned lefty reliever Kenny Roberts and catchers Dustin Garneau and Ryan Casteel to the minor-league camp.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp