General Motors Co. Thursday reported a $945 million first-quarter net profit, but its operating performance fell short of analyst expectations as the impact of currency exchange, weakness in South America and higher-than-expected taxes weighed on earnings.

The earnings report caps three-months during which General Motors Chief Executive Mary Barra sparred with activist investors and shuttered most of the company's Russian operation.

The Detroit auto maker in the first-quarter earned 56 cents per share, compared with 6 cents per share in the same period a year ago. Adjusted to exclude charges, GM said it earned 86 cents per share, worse than the 97 cents per share expected by analysts polled by Thomson Reuters.

Net income was affected by nearly a half-billion dollars in charges related to its Russian business during the period. The company also took a $150 million charge related to its compensation for victims in the ignition switch safety program, bringing the total estimated cost of that program to $550 million.

Revenue was $35.7 billion, a 4.5% decrease over the year-ago period. GM said currency headwinds in South America, Europe and Russia negatively impacted revenue by $1.8 billion.

GM in March said it would launch a $5 billion share buyback to be carried out through 2016, and 19.4 million shares have thus far been repurchased. The buyback commitment persuaded a group of investors to drop a push for representation on GM's board and an $8 billion buyback.

GM continued its margin growth in North America, where U.S. demand for profitable trucks and SUVs is leading to the company's best regional performance since it emerged from bankruptcy. It earned $2.18 billion during the quarter in North America, posting an 8.8% operating margin -- its seventh consecutive quarter of year-over-year margin expansion in its core market.

GM posted losses in European operations and South America. Its GM Financial lending arm and International Operations posted operating profits. The auto maker reiterated its 2015 guidance of operating results in all regional operations.

Write to John D. Stoll at john.stoll@wsj.com

Access Investor Kit for General Motors Co.

Visit http://www.companyspotlight.com/partner?cp_code=P479&isin=US37045V1008

Subscribe to WSJ: http://online.wsj.com?mod=djnwires

More from MarketWatch