A bill aims to bring more legitimacy and funding in Illinois for community health workers, a key part of keeping people healthy under Obamacare.

The proposal from state Rep. Robyn Gabel, D-Evanston, calls for establishing an 11-member advisory board that would create a training and certification process.

The workers, who often live in the communities they serve, are particularly important in poor and underserved areas, where experts say patients are more likely to listen to the liaisons than a primary care physician when it comes to taking their medication on time and getting preventive care.

Community health workers are increasingly viewed as a key part of teams of physicians, nurses, social workers and others who must better coordinate care to reduce medical expenses under the Affordable Care Act, the landmark federal health care law. In Illinois, 50 percent of the state's 2.9 million Medicaid recipients must be in a coordinated care program come 2015, and the state doesn't have enough health care workers to take care of everyone.

“As we shift toward . . . keeping people healthy in their community . . . we need some foot soldiers in the community that are embraced, that are understood, that are familiar and can translate the jargon into real, actionable items,” said Dr. LaMar Hasbrouck, director of the Illinois Department of Public Health.

Illinois' efforts mirror a national trend. Many states are investigating the impact community health workers have on improving patient outcomes and therefore reducing health care costs, while others are establishing laws requiring community health workers to have basic skills.

“I think it's just a recognition that a lot of the care and primary care and preventative care really could and should be provided by not only physicians but largely non-physician providers,” said Ken Thorpe, a health policy professor at Emory University in Atlanta.

Community health workers have been providing various services for decades, from educating new mothers about breastfeeding to making sure neighbors show up for doctor's appointments.

At Sinai Health System on the West Side, which treats a large uninsured and poor population, Denise Bockwoldt, director of diabetes and endocrinology services, called one community health worker “liquid gold.” The worker, who lives in the same neighborhood as some of her patients, tailors care plans for them, such as eating certain healthy meals, and gives the system credibility.

“She knows from a patient standpoint exactly where they live, if gangs are in their neighborhood, where the closest rec center for exercise is,” Ms. Bockwoldt said. “She knows where to go for a dentist. . . .We just need her so much.”

But there's no standard training or formal recognition of the roles community health workers play, and that's raised concern among potential funders, such as foundations, hospitals and insurers, said Leticia Boughton, network coordinator at Chicago CHW Local Network, a nonprofit advocacy and training organization that supports the proposed legislation.

Now, hospitals, clinics and other providers often pay for community health workers with grants, an unstable source of funding. Creating a formal certification process would help providers understand the resources they're getting, Dr. Hasbrouck said. More providers might decide to fund the workers from their own operating revenue, as insurers and government payers provide financial incentives to better coordinate care.

Developing training and certification for community health workers was one of nearly two dozen recommendations in a January state workforce report that addressed the state's existing and projected workforce shortages in the health care industry.

DEFINING THE ROLE

The proposed legislation defines the role of community health workers and the scope of their duties, such as outreach methods and culturally based communication skills. It calls for Dr. Hasbrouck to appoint members to the advisory board, which besides creating a certification process would investigate different avenues of reimbursement.

The proposal is meant to be a companion to recommendations in the workforce report, which was developed by representatives of various state agencies and nonprofits. Dr. Hasbrouck led the group.

Rep. Gabel said she worked with the state public health department, among others, when crafting the bill. She said it aims to create a career path for community health workers, who could potentially seek multiple levels of certification, and a more stable way for them to get paid.

Ms. Boughton, of the local community health worker group, acknowledged that some workers are concerned that professionalizing their jobs would take away from the essence of their community roles. The recommendations in the state report call for “grandfathering” in existing workers depending on their skill level.