Detroit wide receiver Lance Moore beats Casey Hayward on a 4-yard touchdown pass from Matt Stafford during the fourth quarter on Sunday at Lambeau Field. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Green Bay — Green Bay's home-field domination of Detroit for 24 games was the longest by one team over another in National Football League history.

Now it is over.

Just when it was least expected, the lowly Lions overcame two weeks of firings in the coaching and front-office ranks to floor the Packers, 18-16, Sunday at Lambeau Field.

"It's a special thing for our fans, special for the Ford family and our organization," coach Jim Caldwell said. "I can certainly sense how eager everybody was to come here and get a victory."

In their 24-game streak (one was a playoff game), the Packers outscored the Lions, 677-378. Their scoring differential of plus-12.5 included just five games with a margin of less than a touchdown.

Three games were played at Milwaukee County Stadium, 21 at Lambeau Field. The last Lions' victory came on a frigid afternoon in December 1991, when the Packers were playing out the dying days of the Lindy Infante regime and about 16,000 ticketholders didn't bother even to show up.

"I was born in 1991 – it's pretty cool," said Lions guard Larry Warford, a three-year veteran.

"Obviously, they have a great organization. That's the kind of fan base you want. You want to have that swag about you that they have. They know they're a great team.

"To come in here with all the distraction and all the noise and their fan base and beat 'em here after not beating them in so long, it's just fantastic."

Tim O'Neill, the Lions' equipment manager, started his NFL career as an assistant with the Packers in 1994. He experienced 14 of the defeats since taking the job in Detroit.

"Well, in view of what happened this year, it really means a lot," said O'Neill. "It's a big milestone. This was a big mountain to climb.

"Knowing the Packers would be scratching and clawing after two losses. It's a rarity for them to even have two straight losses. Kudos to the guys because they had to battle."

O'Neill remembered some of the Lions' more heartbreaking moments during the streak.

From the Green Bay 1-foot line in the fourth quarter of the 2005 game, Packers running back Samkon Gado flipped the ball forward to avert a safety as he was being tackled by middle linebacker Earl Holmes.

After a lengthy replay review, it was ruled an incomplete pass because Gado was outside the tackle box. Ryan Longwell's field goal in overtime kept the streak alive.

O'Neill brought up the finale in 2008 when coach Rod Marinelli's Lions, competing hard to avoid becoming the first 0-16 team in history, trailed by just three points with 7 1/2 minutes left. Then Donald Driver's 71-yard touchdown catch made the difference.

On New Year's Day 2012, the Lions were motivated to gain the No. 5 playoff seeding rather than No. 6 and avoid a wild-card game in New Orleans. Matt Flynn, with a passer rating of 136.4, found Jermichael Finley with a 4-yard TD pass in the final minute to win it, 45-41.

"The Matt Flynn game was a real dagger," said O'Neill.

Last year, the Lions and Packers entered the finale with 11-4 records and the NFC North title at stake. Both teams were in the playoffs, but the Lions hadn't won the division since 1993.

"Getting a home playoff game would have been unbelievable," O'Neill said. The Lions haven't had one since '91.

Tight end Eric Ebron, a rookie last year, never forgot what happened.

"Absolutely," said Ebron. "We've been talking about this since last year when they absolutely embarrassed us. We were 14 down, and then it was (tied at) 14 and Aaron Rodgers came out of that locker room on all cylinders and destroyed us."

Rodgers left late in the second quarter with a calf injury. When he returned in the third quarter, it was 14-14.

With fans chanting, "MVP! MVP!," Rodgers threw for a touchdown and ran for another in the 30-20 triumph.

"Green Bay is Green Bay," said Ebron, the 10th pick in the 2014 draft. "Look. Since I've been around the draft most people call them the 'Golden Boys' of the NFL. I don't see them as the 'Golden Boys.' I just see them as a tough opponent every year, and when you're good every year that's what happens.

"You've just got to respect it and play 'em with everything you've got. Because every time you play 'em they're going to give you everything they've got."

Mark Graham, the Lions' longtime ticket manager, said just five or six members of the team's traveling party Sunday were on hand for the game in '91.

Linebacker Tahir Whitehead, a four-year veteran, called this the most satisfying victory of his career.

He said the team was inspired by owner Marsha Firestone Ford, who addressed players and coaches Monday after their return from a bye week.

"She told us she had faith in us," said Whitehead. "Just to go out there and play hard. That's ultimately what it was."

Ford appointed Sheldon White, the team's vice president of player personnel, as interim GM after firing Martin Mayhew. White was a defensive back for the Lions in the '91 game before joining their personnel department in 1997.

White, like so many in the Detroit locker room, found it hard to conceal his delight in ending a streak that had lasted a generation.

"More than anything," White said, "I just wanted every person to keep fighting."

WISCONSIN STREAK ENDS

The Detroit Lions had not defeated the Packers in Wisconsin since before Brett Favre was quarterback. Here's a look at the 24 straight Packers victories, a streak that ended Sunday.

* Game played at Milwaukee County Stadium

** NFC wild-card playoff game