Inside Papua New Guinea, one of the world's most violent places

KAY was stabbed and beaten for eight hours straight before escaping and hiding under a bush.

As she lay bleeding from her wounds, her only thought was of her daughter who unknown to her was being thrown onto the cement ground by her own father.

Not far away, another baby was in hospital recovering from injuries sustained to her gentials. She had been sexually abused. She was just three months old.

Welcome to Papua New Guinea, one of the most dangerous countries in the world for women and children.

This is a place where women are raped, killed and maimed on a shocking scale.

This brutality is so severe women are stabbed with bush knives, injured with axes, burnt, speared and even bitten.

Rape and sexual assault are common and violence is estimated to hit two in three households, compared to one in three globally.

And according to figures from children's charity Child Fund victims under 16 make up half the people who seek medical help after being raped.

More alarmingly, one in four is younger than 12 and one in 10 is under eight.

Out of the 148 countries listed on the UNDP's 2012 Gender Inequality Index, PNG ranks at 134, placing it in the bottom 10 per cent of countries worldwide.

In a recent survey by the Economist of the least livable cities in the world, its capital, Port Moresby, ranked third-worst.

But while the figures make for some depressing reading, ChildFund's Stop Violence Against Women and Children in Papua New Guinea report shows there is positive change happening from within.

According to the charity, women and men in PNG are standing up against the violence and new laws (such as the Family Protection Bill passed in September) making domestic violence a criminal offence in PNG, are helping.

Women like Kay are also speaking up and telling their stories in the hope that further action and progress will be made.

ChildFund's Marketing Director Di Mason said all this was taking place was just 8km from our shores.

Ms Mason said a lack of access to medical help, lack of education and lack of enforcement all remained massive issues in the country.

"If a woman is hurt and she wants to report abuse, she must pay $10 for a medical certificate," she said.

"This is a place where 37 per cent of the population live in poverty, that's a meal for their families."

She added many women needed the medical certificate in court and often chose food and self healing over treatment.

But Ms Mason was quick to add that as sad as the situation was for some people things were starting to change with education and through people such as Kay who were beginning to speak out against violence.

"She's an incredibly brave, loving mum who was beaten repeatedly by her husband," she said.

"Her own daughter was also beaten and was severely injured after having her face smashed, but she escaped and got help."

Kay and her children sought shelter at Port Moresby's Haus Ruth, a safe haven for survivors of abuse.

"Change is possible for PNG, it's a wonderful country and we're really starting to see it come though already," she said.

"It's heroic people are telling their stories in order to change the dialogue in their country, and more people are starting to act and support this movement."

* ChildFund is currently raising funds to provide critical medical care and support services for women and children affected by violence, It's also working with men and young people through community education and training programs to change existing attitudes and behaviours. To help women such as Kay, click here.

Continue the conversation via Twitter @newscomauHQ | @DebKillalea | @ChildFundAU

###