Roslyn and Norman Levy, like lots of Americans, are shocked and upset by the number of grown-ups and kids who are overweight and out of shape. But what can they do about it?

In Florida, where they live, obesity is the No. 1 health problem. It can’t be the great weather, so what’s happening? Is it a sedentary lifestyle? Is it the toxic nature of processed foods? Is it their genes, their environment, their unconquerable lust for sour cream and onion potato chips?

It’s probably a mix of all these and more that makes obesity a national epidemic of massive proportions — a big, complex health care problem.

But not too big for Roz and Norm Levy. Like grass-roots organizers everywhere, they know the power of starting where you are, taking it step by step, exercising patience and positive thinking, and refusing to be discouraged. That’s how you make a difference.

And making a difference in your neighborhood, your town, is an essential part of living a healthier lifestyle. When you’re grateful for what you have, you reach out to people in need.

At this point I need to tell you that Roz and Norm are close friends of my Gainesville, Florida, family, which is how I discovered them. Norm’s an M.D., Ph.D. and president of the Alachua County Medical Society. Roz is a real estate broker and social activist who also heads up the Alachua County Medical Alliance. One day last year they went to hear the U.S. surgeon general give a talk. They were astonished to learn that 30 percent of every health care dollar goes toward treating obesity-related diseases, including heart disease, diabetes and stokes. Thirty percent!

That was the tipping point, Roz says. That’s when they decided to launch a small grass-roots health campaign in Gainesville called COACH — Combatting Obesity for Alachua County’s Health (which wins my brand new Best Acronym prize).

“You have to start some place,” she says, and for COACH, that place was the Santa Fe College track. The Alachua County Medical Society and Medical Alliance teamed up with public agencies, private businesses and volunteers to produce 10 Weekly Wellness Walks starting in January of 2014.

“We want people to realize that walking is one of the best ways to put some exercise into their lives,” says Roz. “All they need are their own two feet, a decent pair of shoes, a safe location and a bottle of water.”

The weekly walks were organized for every Saturday morning, from 8 a.m. to 10 a.m. They were free, fun and social. They kicked off with a 15-minute warm-up and some fitness tips from local coaches, trainers and physicians. There were water and fresh fruit to keep you fed, and sparkling cheerleaders to keep you motivated (such a Roz touch).

After the 10 weeks, a survey was conducted. The results were released recently, and while only 25 percent of the nearly 300 participants took the survey, there was plenty of good news to report.

Of the responders, 74 percent did 9-10 walks, 71 percent did 6-8 walks, and 50 percent went to the COACH website (www.walkgainesville.com) for more tips and ways to connect to other walks and walkers. Sixty percent got a free logbook (three walks required), and 80 percent went home with free pedometers (two walks). Participants reported they benefited from an improved self-image, help with weight control and making new friends.

“The most valuable result is that 90 percent of the respondents are still walking,” says Norm.

Another sign of success? The Wellness Walks will continue, this time two nights a week, with the Alachua County Health Department involved.

And now the Levys and their respective organizations and partners will turn their anti-obesity attention to food. The Farm to School initiative they’re pushing is all about getting healthy, local, sustainably produced foods into the Alachua County schools, along with farm tours, school gardens and cooking classes.

See why they’re my heroes? And I’m not alone. Roz and Norm received the HAP (Health Awareness Promotion) Award for best community service project from the American Medical Association Alliance.

“We’re encouraged,” says Roz. “We kept it simple so it could be easily replicated in another community, and we are happy to share particulars with others.”

Of course they are. Because that’s how change happens, community by community, step by step.

Marilynn Preston is a fitness expert, personal trainer and speaker on healthy lifestyle issues. She has a website, marilynnpreston.com, and welcomes reader questions, which can be sent to MyEnergyExpress@aol.com.