Student Health’s model includes referrals to FIU health & use of health fee

When it comes to health decisions it’s good to get a second opinion, especially before a major operation.

An operation such as the University’s merger of the clinical components of Student Health Services with FIU Health. If successful, SHS’ new model could produce healthier students while simultaneously reducing the uninsured rate among them.

However, it could require using student-health dollars and referring students who need ongoing care to FIU Health or off-campus providers to get it done.

Primary care will remain

Health economists from the University’s Collaborative for Health Economics and Strategic Solutions created a model and its first piece includes treatment of minor conditions and referrals for more serious conditions, these are the first and second part, respectively. SHS managed these two in the course of its normal operations.

According to Oscar Loynaz, director of SHS, the Board of Trustees have approved the model and integration began on July 1.

Vice President of Student Affairs Larry Lunsford said as of July 1 that FIU Health manages the clinical aspects of SHS.

But students can still visit SHS to receive basic services – vaccinations, screenings, or physical examinations – and for treatment of minor conditions, illnesses and injuries.

“Even though changes are occurring as integration moves forward, right now nothing specifically has changed and those with chronic conditions can still visit and will be seen,” Loynaz said.

For conditions that require ongoing care of more than 30 days, healthcare navigators will refer students to providers in the community, and FIU Health is an option.

A healthcare navigator – one at the Modesto Maidique Campus and one at the Biscayne Bay Campus – is a new position the University created for the integration. They will connect students who visit SHS and lack health insurance to healthcare providers in the community.

“They would be treated regardless but the navigators will connect them to the appropriate level of healthcare,” Metula said.

Amy Metula, former director of quality management for FIU Health, assured students in an interview with Student Media that the people who will vaccinate or test them for a minor illness will still be there even as the University merges its on-campus health providers

“It will be the same people with the same uniforms providing care,” Metula said.

Metula resigned from the University for unspecified reasons; Student Media interviewed her prior to her resignation and before receiving the reports associated with the integration plan.

However, her comments give context to the information the reports provide in lieu of an interview with Eneida Roldan, interim chief executive officer of FIU Health. Roldan was not available as of press time.

The University’s clinical faculty from its health-related colleges provide medical services to the community and will, under the plan, see students as well.

“Student Health will share efficiencies and resources and work with FIU Health,” Metula said.

Insurance enrollment and population health

The model separates student health into one piece for individuals and another for the population.

Promoting health insurance enrollment and managing student health on a large scale are a part of the population aspect.

In the model, CHESS proposed SHS will have an active role in getting students health insurance.

“SHS should set explicit targets for insurance coverage” and “evaluate, after one year of operations, options for subsidized coverage for students not qualified for Medicaid or other health care insurance.”

CHESS proposed using the student health fee to reduce the cost of healthcare coverage, “subsidies should be self-funded by student health fee dollars.”

The health fee is one of several mandatory fees charged to all students as part of their tuition each semester.

Every student pays $93.69 as part of the health fee regardless of the number of credits taken.

An aspect of the integration plan is to divvy up the money generated from the health fee, so that a portion remains with Student Affairs to pay for other areas concerning student health, and another chunk of it will go to FIU Health, according to Loynaz.

Unlike the athletic and activity and service fees which are based on per-credit hour, the health fee is by headcount.

In their model, CHESS projected reducing the uninsurance rate among students to 19 percent by 2019-2020 from the 25 percent in 2013-2014, based on data from the HBC report.

The 2020 goal is still far above the national average of 6 percent uninsured students.

The goals of the population aspect are to make sure students understand their own healthcare options reducing the risk factors and conditions that affect students’ performance in class and job opportunities.

Population health is a survey done of a community and determine what factors contribute to different diseases and what students have certain conditions, according to Loynaz.

An educational component then follows the survey to help the community remain healthy.

Whether students’ health needs come from ongoing conditions or risky behaviors, population health look at ways to meet their needs.

“Rather than improve the health of one person at a time, population health does so for a group of individuals, in this case it’s the student community,” Metula said.

ACA influence on integration

The healthcare industry has changed since the passing of President Barack Obama’s healthcare law, the Affordable Care Act.

According to Metula, the Board of Trustees asked the University to have FIU Health and SHS work together because of the new “healthcare landscape” the ACA has created.

“It really is affecting the student population,” Metula said said to Student Media.

An aspect of the law, passed in 2009, is that young adults can stay on their parents’ health insurance until they reach 26.

The 18-24 year old demographic now has health insurance whereas prior to the passing of the ACA they did not.

There is also a mandate from the federal government to have health insurance. Those without it are subject to tax penalties, or fees.

“Recognizing that more and more students can or will get insurance,” Metula said. “We needed to make sure we were providing the best out of that dollar and get it back to the students.”

To get those dollars to students and make sure their health needs do not negatively impact their academic success, University administrators decided to merge the clinical operations of SHS with FIU Health.

“The goal is to make sure students are successful with their academics,” Metula said. “That’s always been the goal.”

FIU Health will consider student feedback on an ongoing basis as part of their evaluation of services, Metula said.

“We are still here for the same goal, which is protecting students’ academic performance,” and “We will collaborate to continue to do so.”

Before integration there was consultation

Between 2012 and 2014 University administrators sought the advice of two collegiate health consultants and took one of those reports to its own health economists, who then crafted a model for how student health at FIU will operate if FIU Health officials set the plan in motion without suggesting any changes to the Board of Trustees.

CHESS provided the health economists and they proposed a “service model for an integrated FIU Health-SHS” based on a site visit done by Hodgkins-Beckley Consulting | Stephen L. Beckley and Associates.

The model, its accompanying report, the HBC report and one from the American College Health Association were obtained through a records request by Student Media.

In December 2012 two reviewers from ACHA surveyed FIU’s health services – SHS and the FIU HealthCare Network – and gave University administrators two options: leave both as they were, or integrate them.

HBC left administrators with seven options of how to change SHS’ model for providing care.

The options were to maintain operations as they were, request bids from healthcare providers for services to the FIU community, slowly work with FIU Health over time, SHS could contract with the HCN for primary care, establish a secondary payer for primary care, discontinue primary care

all together, or adopt an insurance requirement.

Administrators chose to integrate, according to interviews with the director of SHS, the vice president of Student Affairs and the former director of quality management for FIU Health.

The model CHESS proposed includes a mix of the choices the consultants gave University administrators.