Durango-based sculptor Keith Martin uses a power tool to carve his ice sculpture called "Sparky the Dragon" on Saturday during the Loveland Fire & Ice Festival in downtown Loveland. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Loveland artist Robin Dodge alternates on Saturday morning using a horse brush to pull off sections of snow from the body of a polar bear and a kitchen scrubber to smooth the surfaces.

The stylized polar bear stands in the middle of two others with fat limbs and a long body crafted out of handmade snow for the Loveland Fire & Ice Festival in a closed-off section of Fourth Street in downtown Loveland. The three bears in "Three's a Party" didn't yet have features, something that had to wait toward the end of the day for the judging of the fifth annual snow and ice sculpture competition — a sanctioned event and Colorado qualifier for the U.S. Snow Sculpting Nationals.

"You have to think of the weather, of course, when the sun hits the block, and the timing to get enough done each day to pace yourself," said Dodge, who competed for the third year in a row. "We can't do too much detail. We have to wait until the end for the details and to pretty it up."

Dodge and her teammate, Jody Johannsen, of the Northern Stars and the other snow sculpting teams began working on their sculptures Thursday and had until 5 p.m. Saturday to turn 6-foot by 6-foot blocks of snow 8 feet tall into three-dimensional art forms.

Working in Snow or Ice

The sculpting teams worked in snow or ice, serving as the main attraction of the two-day event of live music, booths, light shows and fireworks. The lights were on four light towers provided by Blazen Illuminations, and the fireworks came from Angel Light Pyrotechnics.

Advertisement

Eight thousand people attended the event Friday, and just as many were expected on Saturday, said Nate Webb, event producer of Blazen Illuminations.

"We amped up the event to make it much more of an attraction down here," Webb said about the turnout, which was 2,500 over two days at last year's event. "The warm weather and the challenge of the snow added to that."

Because of the weather, event organizers brought in ice as a second medium for competitors to use, which five of the 11 teams agreed to try. The ice came in 30-inch by 18-inch by 10-inch blocks, weighing 275 pounds.

Aurora resident Rick Ciminelli takes pictures of a snow sculpture during the Loveland Fire & Ice Festival on Saturday in downtown Loveland. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The ice sculpting teams could use up to 10 of the blocks, which they could fuse together and sculpt using power tools, chain saws and propane torches, tools not allowed for the snow teams. The ice teams got started a little later on Friday morning to minimize melting.

Steve Mercia of Loveland used a snow machine to make the snow, and the ice came from Ted Struckman with Struckman Sculpture Ice of Loveland.

The snow and ice teams made designs, people and animals with lots of hearts, either as the main subject or added in, while crowds watched, asked questions and toured the sculptures lined up on the south side of the street.

The Judging

Five judges, led by Darrell Anderson of the Denver area, judged their work according to national standards to identify the top three teams and determine who qualified for nationals. The judges were tasked with awarding first place to a snow sculpting team and second and third places to teams working in snow or ice.

Justin Bashor of Milliken, who ended up working as a team of one for Two Bee Dice Eye Did, chose to work in ice to create a dragon, something he's not done before after four years in the competition. He found that ice sculpting is reductive, because, unlike snow, it's difficult to add back once something is removed from the sculpture, he said.

"When you take a piece off, you can't add it on," Bashor said, adding that ice's advantage is how it holds its form better than snow, especially in the warmer weather.

Mercia and his son, Steve Mercia, of Team Merc worked in snow, creating intertwined hearts they called "Mon cour," or "My love" in French.

"It's Valentine's," said Mercia, who's competed in the event since the beginning. "Through the years, a lot of artists try to incorporate hearts to go with the theme of Loveland."

Mercia had to wait toward the end of the day Saturday to cut out the centers of the hearts due to the warm weather, he said.

"We're using Mother Nature and trying to make it stand until 5 p.m. today," Mercia said.

The Weather

Garett Dreiling and his brother, Matt, both of Loveland, decided to stick with snow for their sculpture of a "Great Ball of Fire." They called themselves Two Guys and a Block.

"I don't do ice. I will only do snow," said Dreiling, who has placed in past Loveland snow sculpting competitions and competed nationally and internationally. "This one we designed to withstand the elements."

Dreiling finds sculpting in snow to be an emotional rollercoaster, not knowing if what he helps create will hold up in the weather conditions — the weather is the fourth team member, he said — and if he and his team will finish by deadline.

"Then it comes together at the end," Dreiling said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm