Delinquent tax notices help Baden's missing money probe

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Delinquent tax notices are helping Baden officials figure out who paid their taxes while an investigation into missing money from the borough tax office continues, municipal officials said.

The IRS and FBI are involved in the investigation of the office, once held by Cynthia Kristek, borough Secretary Elaine Rakovan said. In February, Kristek stepped down once allegations surfaced that $1.4 million was unaccounted for in the 2013-2014 fiscal year budget.

With the office carrying only a $35,000 bond to protect against losses but collecting more than $2 million a year in taxes, municipal and school officials said they don't know what the economic fallout could be.

“This is going to be tough,” Baden council President Judith Montell said, referring to concerns that a tax rate increase would be required to make up for losses. “Most retirees own their own homes. It's going to hit everybody hard, especially people on limited incomes. It throws you for a loop.”

In February, Keith Kristek told the Tribune-Review that any discrepancies in tax monies were his responsibility because he alone had been collecting the taxes for the past 10 years, serving as deputy tax collector for his wife. Solicitor Rick Start previously said that Keith Kristek admitted misappropriating school district taxes.

Keith Kristek referred questions to his attorney, Chad Bowers of Ambridge, who said Friday that he's awaiting the results of investigations by Baden and the school district.

The FBI and IRS did not comment Friday.

The Ambridge Area school board is scheduled Wednesday to approve its 2015-16 budget of nearly $42 million. Business Manager Minnie Baker said that budget would not be affected by the tax office investigation. Baker said she budgeted to receive about $2.3 million from Baden residents for 2014-2015, and is behind about $600,000. She said the district might have to dip into reserves.

Rakovan said the borough, which has an annual budget of about $1.1 million, could lose between $20,000 and $40,000.

More than 140 people recently received notices that they hadn't paid their 2014 borough taxes, valued at about $61,000, Rakovan said. An additional $331,000 in delinquent school taxes was listed for 276 tax parcels, she added, because there is no proof of payment in municipal records.

More than 100 taxpayers have proven that they paid, Rakovan said, producing canceled checks and other forms of evidence. Their names have been removed from delinquent lists.

Baden resident Tom Turney, who declined comment Saturday, has been appointed as tax collector for the borough. According to paperwork in the Beaver County Clerk of Courts office, his office is bonded for $3 million.

Rakovan said that from paperwork the Kristeks showed borough officials, it “was assumed” that they were bonded for the full amount of taxes collected.

Baker said she'd been business manager only since last year and did not know why the Kristek bond was so low. She said after questions were raised, she checked with other tax collectors within the Ambridge School District, and the four had bonds that would cover the amount of taxes collected.

Beaver County District Attorney Anthony Berosh wouldn't comment on the investigation.

In October, then-Gov. Tom Corbett signed legislation that said tax collectors must undergo continuing education through the state Department of Economic Development, beginning in October.

This month, legislation that “cleaned up” that act moved from the House Committee on Appropriations to the state Senate, said the sponsor, Rep. Keith Greiner, a Lancaster County Republican.

Some of the changes include exempting tax collectors who have served eight consecutive terms; delaying mandatory education until January 2017; and prohibiting the hiring of an immediate family member of the tax collector as a deputy tax collector.

“Municipalities want to make sure they have someone competent in that position,” Greiner said.

Bill Vidonic is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-380-5621 or bvidonic@tribweb.com.