Officials have not released the name of either the victim or the suspect in the incident

Two Larimer County Sheriff's deputies talk at the scene Saturday after a man was killed near 57th Street and Thomas Court. ( Trevor Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Larimer County Sheriff's Office investigators have arrested one man following a shooting Saturday afternoon just outside city limits, northeast of Loveland, that left a man dead.

However, the shooting is not linked to three random shootings in Northern Colorado in the past weeks, including a shooting death Wednesday night in downtown Loveland, according to Lt. Andy Josey.

The shooting was reported at 5:15 p.m. in the 5600 block of Thomas Court, just south of 57th Street.

Police at the scene said there was no further threat to the public in this incident, which forced the closure of roads in and out of the neighborhood, just east of the Lago Vista Mobile Home Park.

They have not released the names or ages of the two men involved in the incident.

A Larimer County Sheriff's deputy stands guard Saturday at a crime scene after a man was killed at 57th and Thomas Court. (Not Provided / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Officers from various agencies swarmed the scene, including the Sheriff's Office, Larimer County SWAT, Loveland Police Department and tactical officers, Thompson Valley Emergency Medical Services, Colorado Parks and Wildlife and Loveland Fire Rescue Authority.

Neighbors reported hearing what they thought were the sound of fireworks, and then realized it was a gunshot, as the scene unfolded.

Anna Boyle said she was having a children's birthday party at her house when a parent called and told her about a shooting nearby. She went outside to find out more information and see if she should send the children home but found the area barricaded.

Nearby resident Alysha Salyer said she lives less than a mile away from the incident and she and her husband heard a loud sound. They didn't think much of it until they heard a second 10 minutes later.

Their kids were playing outside.

"It gave me goosebumps," Salyer said.

The shooting, she said, worried her because it was so close by and because of the other shootings in the area recently.

Resident Scott Remus said he didn't see anything, but he heard a couple of "pops." But, he just assumed it was another transformer going out, as one had last week across from his home.

Then, he saw the officers.

"You could tell there was no messing around," Remus said.

Neighbor Kari Clark said she was on her way home when she saw the police presence.

"It scared me because of the recent shooting (on First Street and St. Louis)," she said. "And it's two blocks from my granddaughter."

Clark said she hoped it was the same person that police were looking for in connection with the other shootings, so he's caught.

But Josey said it's a “neighborhood issue,” unrelated to the other recent shootings because of the incident's circumstances.

No motive or relationship between the two men has been determined, according to Josey.

The radio traffic Josey said he had been listening to didn't indicate any resistance to arrest from the suspect.

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050 ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.