State Rep. Joe Carr (Photo: Erik Schelzig / AP)

Two years ago, Joe Carr came within 9 percentage points of pulling off a monumental Republican primary upset against U.S. Sen. Lamar Alexander of Tennessee.

Now, the tea party aligned Republican has decided to take on a different Tennessee Republican incumbent in Washington — U.S. Rep. Diane Black.

Carr, who The Tennessean reported earlier this week had picked up a petition to run as a Republican for Black’s 6th Congressional District in Tennessee, confirmed Friday he's submitted paperwork and will run against Black for the Republican nomination.

Black, a former state senator from Sumner County whose conservatism has rarely been questioned, was first elected to the seat in 2010.

Framing himself as an anti-establishment outsider, Carr accused Black of being “more interested in securing her place within the status quo” of the Republican Party and not taking on issues such as fighting Planned Parenthood, lowering the deficit and defunding the Affordable Care Act.

He singled out those issues even though Black has been a vocal critic of Obamacare and Planned Parenthood, including last year introducing the Defund Planned Parenthood Act.

“Since she’s been in Congress, Barack Obama’s agenda has basically gone unchecked,” Carr said. “She’s been vocal sometimes, but she’s never stood up to the establishment in the Republican Party and the establishment in Washington.

"She's never pushed the agenda that she promised she would fight for."

In a statement, Black campaign spokesman Matt Coker pushed back against Carr's arguments, characterizing him as a politician constantly looking to run for higher office. Besides elected office, Carr's bid in 2014 to be Tennessee Republican Party chairman also fell short.

"Carr is only able to call himself an outsider because he lost most all of the races he has sought," Coker said in an emailed statement. "By our count, this is the fifth different office he has sought in the last eight years.

"While Congressman Black has pushed leadership in Congress for votes on important issues like defunding Planned Parenthood, freezing the refugee program, and budgets that balance, Carr has been looking for his next opportunity to get another taxpayer funded job."

Carr's decision to run comes even though his Rutherford County home address is not in the 6th Congressional District, nor is any part of Rutherford County in that district.

Instead, Carr, a former Tennessee state representative, lives four miles away from the 6th District in Congressional District 4, which is held by Republican Rep. Scott DesJarlais. Carr briefly mounted a challenge against DesJarlais two years ago before pulling out.

Carr said Tennessee law requires only residency in the state — not the actual congressional district — to run for Congress.

He countered potential criticism about his residency by noting that his Lascassas home address was in the 6th Congressional District for years before new district lines were drawn in 2010. In fact, he claims he’s lived in the 6th Congressional District longer than Black has lived in Tennessee.

In challenging Black, Carr will look to unseat a Tennessee Republican who probably will hold a huge financial advantage in the race and is on a short list of possible Republican gubernatorial candidates in 2018.

As to the reasons why he thinks he can win, Carr pointed to his performance in the 2014 Republican Senate primary against Alexander in which Carr won 12 of 19 Middle Tennessee counties that include portions of Congressional District 6. He lost the overall race against Alexander by a margin of 49.7 percent to 40.5 percent.

Congressional District 6 also includes counties where presidential candidate Donald Trump — adversary No. 1 of the GOP establishment — performed his best in Tennessee in the March 1 GOP primary.

“This is an anti-incumbent establishment year,” Carr said. “The timing is right. The environment is perfect, and the need for constitutional conservative leadership is right now.”

Other Republicans who have qualified to run for Tennessee's 6th Congressional District are Tommy Hay and Donald Strong.

Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236 and on Twitter @joeygarrison.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1MZUSaD