ORANGE PARK, Fla. - A patient at Orange Park Medical Center, who was present when a vicious patient-on-patient attack occurred Thursday, told News4Jax on Friday about what she heard.

She said the screams coming from a nearby room will be practically impossible to forget.

After spending three days in the behavioral health wing of OPMC, the woman asked not to be identified, but she said she is shaken after what she heard early Thursday morning.

"I would never forget that sound. It was blood curdling," she said. "I just keep thinking about her. Since there was so much blood, I can't even begin to imagine what kind of injuries she's … I'm sorry."

The hospital has said nothing about what happened inside its doors on the second floor Thursday, citing patient privacy laws.

Clay County Sheriff's Office investigators said the alleged attacker, 21-year-old Isaac Crowder (pictured), who was a patient in the same area as the victim, went into another patient's room and brutally attacked her.

"I thought somebody was dying or having a very, very severe mental breakdown and hurting themselves," the witness said. "I had no idea that could've happened in a hospital."

She said she simply couldn't believe it happened, because she said she talked to Crowder and the victim the night before and no one seemed to have any problems then.

"I had no reason to think anyone would want to hurt her," the woman said. "I had no reason to think he would want to hurt anyone, didn't seem belligerent or violent or that unstable."

The witness is now home in the care of her family. Her father is outraged that his daughter was so close to the violence that erupted, and he questioned how good the hospital security in Orange Park really is.

"Given the circumstances, it brought up security issues with us, and we posed those questions last night," the woman's father said. "A guy took us to a corner and was soft spoken and said the individual who did this gave them no indication that he was capable of doing this."

News4Jax attempted to contact the family of the victim. The victim's fiance sent News4Jax a message that the family does not wish to comment.

The last information on the victim's condition was that she was in intensive care. Neither the hospital nor the Sheriff's Office would provide an update on her condition.

Copyright 2014 by News4Jax.com. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.