Detectives searching for the body of a missing 19-year-old Pueblo woman are hoping to find evidence in vehicles connected to the suspect that will lead them to her remains, authorities say.

Additional search warrants were sought late Friday after evidence identifying other vehicles tied to suspect Christopher Adam Waide, 23, was found in his apartment, Westminster police spokeswoman Cheri Spottke said Saturday.

Waide is being held in the Adams County Jail for investigation of first-degree murder in the death of Lea Chali Porter.

Waide signed a statement and is helping police find Porter’s body.

“We want to make sure we are not being led in the wrong direction,” Spottke said.

Waide’s car, which had been in the parking lot of his home in the Park Place at 92nd Apartments, had already been impounded and searched. Detectives searching his second floor home Friday found other evidence indicating Waide had access to other vehicles, Spottke said.

Despite Waide’s help, Porter’s body has not yet been found. Waide and Porter attended the same high school and they recently reconnected on Facebook. Porter lived in Pueblo and she was last known to be visiting friends in Westminster.

One location that Westminster police may search is the Allied Waste Services Tower Road Landfill at Tower Road and 88th Avenue in Commerce City, Spottke said.

Even before Waide’s arrest, police contacted the landfill and asked authorities to cordon off an area where trash from the apartments where Waide lives would have been dumped following her disappearance.

“There’s a science to it,” Spottke said. “We do not want trash added to that area.”

Before initiating a resource intensive and expensive search of the landfill, officers want to search all other possible locations where Porter’s body might be found. More than 20 police officers are working on the homicide investigation, Spottke said.

“I know that the family is very distraught and our ultimate goal is to bring Lea home to them,” she said.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, kmitchell@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kirkmitchell