As President Obama stumbles and fumbles his way through his second term, his mistakes are impossible to overlook. From his handling of the turmoil in the Middle East to his failed economic policies to the disastrous rollout of Obamacare, it has been a year of train wrecks for the President.

Opponents of President Obama have plenty of ammunition to use as they criticize his second term agenda. Almost all of these critics have focused their attention on Obama’s policies, not his race. Despite the facts, the President’s defenders continually use the race card to invalidate criticism from his opponents.

The latest example of this tactic comes from liberal media icon Oprah Winfrey. She is among a horde of celebrities who have defended President Obama against “racists.”

Currently, Oprah is on a worldwide tour to promote her movie, “The Butler.” During a recent BBC interview, Winfrey blasted U.S. Congressman Joe Wilson (R-SC) who called the President a “liar.” She also said that “There’s a level of disrespect for the office that occurs and that occurs in some cases and maybe even many cases because he’s African American.”



(Quote begins at 3:18)

Obviously, these comments are pure hogwash. Regarding Obama, race is often at the forefront of the discussion, usually from his supporters, not his adversaries. His fans are always claiming that he is the victim of racism, when the evidence shows just the contrary. The President has received preferential treatment from the media because of his race and liberal policies.

It is hard to dispute that recent Republican presidents have been subjected to immense ridicule from liberal activists, reporters and the Hollywood left. For example, the effigy of Ronald Reagan was regularly burned by left wing crazies. Liberals subjected George W. Bush to unrelenting criticism and regularly referred to him as a fool and an idiot. There was even a movie about the assassination of George W. Bush.

In the case of Obama, he is continually defended by Hollywood stars who claim he is some sort of a victim. In reality, he has been given the type of positive media treatment that Reagan and Bush never received.

There is no question that President Obama has received an abundance of criticism, but it is based on his disastrous policies, not his skin color.

It is very disingenuous for Obama lovers to attempt to invalidate his critics by labeling them “racists.” This is pure demagoguery as polls consistently show that Americans are upset with President Obama not because of his race but because of his poor performance in office.

Based on new poll data the President’s approval rating hovers between 37-41%. This negative rating is the worst of his presidency and is due to the nightmarish launch of Obamacare, his signature program. In his news conference yesterday, the President even admitted that he “fumbled” the rollout of Obamacare. Clearly, he did not fumble because of racism in the country; it was due to his administration’s utter incompetence, and the waste, fraud and abuse that characterize Obamacare and every government program.

Of course, it is the right of every American to be upset when their leaders lie or misuse tax dollars. If this type of disaster had occurred in the previous administration, the media would be in an uproar. Today, Obama is getting kid glove treatment from the media that exposes true racism which is unfair to the President and all African Americans. Obama should be held to the same standard as every other President, treated no better or worse.

Oprah is living in a dream world if she believes that Obama is a victim of racism. If anything, he has not been harmed by his race; instead, he has benefited big time.