When anti-drug educator Tim Ryan talks to students, he often asks them what they know about marijuana.

“It’s a plant,” is a common response.

But more recently, the answer has changed. Now they reply, “It’s legal in Colorado.”

These can be confusing times for middle- and high-school students, who for most of their young lives have been lectured about the perils of marijuana. Now it seems that some of the adults in their lives have done an about-face.

Recreational marijuana is legal in Colorado and Washington state, and many other states have approved it for medical use. Lawmakers, the media and even parents are debating the merits of full-scale legalization.

“They are growing up in a generation where marijuana used to be bad, and maybe now it’s not bad,” said Ryan, a senior prevention specialist with FCD Educational Services, an anti-drug group that works with students in the classroom. “Their parents are telling them not to do it, but they may be supporting legalization of it at the same time.”

Anti-drug advocates say their goal is not to vilify marijuana or take a stand on legalization; instead, they say their role is to convince young people and their parents that the use of drugs is not just a moral or legal issue, but a significant health issue.

“The health risks are real,” said Steve Pasierb, chief executive of the Partnership for Drug-Free Kids. “Every passing year, science unearths more health risks about why any form of substance use is unhealthy for young people.”

Nearly half of teenagers — 44 percent — have tried marijuana at least once, according to data from the partnership. Regular use is less common.

In the states where marijuana is legal, it remains, like alcohol, off-limits to anyone younger than 21.

“Making it legal makes it much more accessible, more available,” said Dr. Nora Volkow, director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse. “This is the reality, so what we need to do is to prevent the damage or at least minimize it as much as possible.”

Drug prevention experts say the “Just Say No” approach of the 1980s does not work. The goal of parents should not be to prevent their kids from ever trying marijuana. Instead, the focus should be on practical reasons to delay use of any mind-altering substance, including alcohol, until they are older.

The reason is that young brains continue to develop until the early 20s, and young people who start using alcohol or marijuana in their teens are far more vulnerable to long-term substance-abuse problems.

The brain is still wiring itself during adolescence, and any drug use during this period essentially trains the reward system to embrace a mind-altering chemical.

“We know that 90 percent of adults who are addicted began use in teenage years,” Pasierb said. “They programmed the reward and drive center of their teenage brain that this is one of those things that rewards and drives me like food does, like sex does.”

“You have to focus on brain maturation,” he said. “This generation of kids wants good brains; they want to get into better schools. Talk to a junior or senior about whether marijuana use shaves a couple points off their SATs, and they will listen to you.”