To understand the impact of Florida becoming the third-largest state, you have to understand how comparatively little time it took to happen.

In 1960, Florida's population was 5 million. The state was smaller than Massachusetts. New York was nearly three times larger. Illinois and Ohio were roughly twice as large, and Pennsylvania was larger still.

Today, Broward and Palm Beach counties alone have roughly 3.2 million people. If they were a state, they would rank about 30th. During the Great Recession, a Wall Street Journal headline asked "Is Florida Over?" as more people were moving out than were moving in. But for the year ending last July 1, the Census Bureau calculated, Florida grew by almost 300,000 people — to nearly 20 million, displacing New York and putting the state behind just California and Texas.

Like most of Florida's politicians and business groups, Gov. Rick Scott wants more. During his inaugural address on Tuesday, Scott said, "I have a message today to the people of New York, Illinois, California, Pennsylvania and others: Move to Florida!"

Scott was speaking to some of the right people. According to a New York Times study, ex-New Yorkers still outnumber those moving here from other states — 8 percent of the total. Next are those from Pennsylvania, Ohio and Illinois. At 21 percent, however, the biggest source of new Floridians is foreign countries.

Though it's been more than half a century since the flow to Florida became a flood, the state's sales pitch still hasn't changed much: Come for the weather and the taxes, or lack of same.

Florida is one of seven states without a personal income tax. A married couple in Ohio making $100,000 pays 5 percent to the state. The nick is lower in Pennsylvania, higher in New York. Florida has no inheritance tax. New York, Pennsylvania and Illinois do. Scott would like to eliminate Florida's corporate income tax.

Scott and others like to draw one kind of comparison between Florida and those states. Other comparisons, though, show that Florida's progress — in ways that matter not just to residents but also to employers — hasn't matched the state's population growth.

Florida ranks near the middle in the percentage of residents with at least a bachelor's degree. New York is close to the top 10 nationwide, the earnings gap between those with a bachelor's degree and those with an associate's degree or a high school education never has been higher. Florida's investment in biotechnology won't pay off unless the state backs it with investments to create a top-tier workforce.

Speaking of what jobs pay, the Wall Street Journal compared wage gains or losses between 2004 and 2013 for all counties in the United States. In roughly two-thirds of Florida counties, average annual pay declined.

No big state did worse in terms of rewarding employees. In Broward County, average pay dropped 2.5 percent, from $46,746 to $45,598.

Palm Beach was one of the few counties to show a gain, from $47,939 to $48,214 — a whopping 0.9 percent over nine years. Scott wants Florida to surpass Texas in being business-friendly, but wages have mostly increased in Texas over the last decade.

Jobs in Florida also are less likely to come with benefits. According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, just 41 percent of Floridians have health insurance through employers. The national average is 48 percent.

You can see why so many state residents sought coverage through the Affordable Care Act exchange. Yet Florida still has one of the highest percentages of medically uninsured, in large part because the Legislature won't expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act to help the working poor. Add the high cost of insurance, and you have a state where too many people are struggling.

By appealing to wealthier Americans and retirees, Florida risks having a larger and larger segment of the population that doesn't have to worry about jobs and might oppose programs that help working Floridians. States need growth, but growth alone doesn't make states better places to live. As Florida grows, the state's leaders need to worry more about how Florida is growing.

Randy Schultz is the former editorial page editor of The Palm Beach Post. He also blogs for Boca Raton magazine.