Topics: Editor's Picks, Kim Davis, Religion, Ted Cruz, Life News, News

The faith-flaunting Senator Ted Cruz and evangelical diehard Kim Davis are meant for each other. It’s a pity both are already married – with Davis, in fact, having been so many, many times.

Davis is, of course, the Rowan County (Kentucky) clerk who, citing authority from a made-up heavenly satrap (aka the Lord Almighty), has defied a federal court ruling ordering her to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples, and who now, as a result, sat several days in a Kentucky jail for contempt of court. Cruz, a practicing Southern Baptist, is campaigning for the Republican nomination, and is displaying contempt for the Constitution he swore to uphold (on a Bible, unfortunately, but some are working to abolish this practice) by supporting Davis. He is thereby fomenting disobedience to the Supreme Court, which, as we know, ruled in favor of same-sex marriages early in the summer.

Article III, Section 1 of the Constitution establishes the Supreme Court as the locus of overriding judicial power in our land. One who defies it must be made to suffer the legal consequences; should any American, for any reason, be able to ignore the Supreme Court and suffer no penalty, we would be justified in saying none of us live in a law-based republic.

That a government employee is displaying symptoms of late-stage faith-derangement syndrome and, as a direct result, behaves boorishly, cruelly and even illegally, should surprise no one. Look no further than the headlines and you will find, on any given day, the votaries of at least one Abrahamic mythology showing no decent respect to the opinions of mankind and behaving in ways that outrage their fellow humans. Wherever you find monotheism, you find pig-headed ignorance, thuggish coercion and even violence – all emergent properties deriving from belief in the supremacy and universal applicability of supernatural despotism. But that an elected official (and an attorney by profession, no less) in our republic should choose to take up the cause of a faith fiend should worry us indeed, and remind us of one thing: religion (in this case, evangelical Christianity) poses a clear and present danger to the rule of law in our society.

Just after the judge on the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals declared that “The court cannot condone [Davis’] willful disobedience of its lawfully issued order,” and commanded her tossed (deservedly) into the slammer, Cruz issued a statement that will live on in infamy as long as the spirit of the Founding Fathers inspires Americans to fight for the (wondrously godless) republic they bequeathed to us. We need to scrutinize Cruz’s communiqué, for it summarizes a faith-infested mindset that is crippling millions of Americans in their ability to deal with the modern world and that continues to influence election results nationwide.

“Today, judicial lawlessness crossed into judicial tyranny,” writes Cruz. “Today, for the first time ever, the government arrested a Christian woman for living according to her faith. This is wrong. This is not America.”

No, senator. America is not a theocracy; in America, the First Amendment inoculates affairs of state against the malady of faith. Davis works for the government – and does so by choice. She has every right to practice her religion, but no right at all to behave in ways that impose it on gays or anyone else she encounters while performing her official duties.

You imply that the Supreme Court’s Obergefell v. Hodges ruling legalizing same-sex marriage is “judicial lawlessness.” See the Constitution (article and section already cited above). Jailing criminal citizens is what courts do at times, and pursuant to the law, not to some arbitrary or perverse whim. Both the Sixth Circuit Court and the Supreme Court turned down Davis’ petition for a delay while she appealed, yet she kept right on refusing to issue marriage licenses. She belongs in jail.

Senator, you then inform us that you stand “with every American that the Obama Administration is trying to force to choose between honoring his or her faith or complying with a lawless court opinion.” The Obama administration is doing no such thing. The Supreme Court (in Obergefell v. Hodges, and in dismissing Davis’ appeal) is, par contre, just doing its job. And as you surely know, its bench consists not of craven Obama lackeys; five of the nine justices were appointed by Republican presidents – something to keep in mind.

You then, Senator, for rhetorical purposes, cite the dissents (to Obergefell v. Hodges) of Justices Roberts and Scalia, in which they declare the ruling unconstitutional and de facto unworthy of implementation. You ask, for perceived political advantage only, “Where is the call for the mayor of San Francisco to resign for creating a sanctuary city — resulting in the murder of American citizens by criminal illegal aliens welcomed by his lawlessness?”

Immigration has nothing to do with the First Amendment and the Equal Protection clause issues the Davis case turns on. Nor does welfare reform or the Affordable Care Act, which you also casually and carelessly invoke. Proposing, as you do, that, “When the mayor of San Francisco and President Obama resign, then we can talk about Kim Davis” is nothing more than a silly, shameless dodge. Kim Davis has to comply with the law, or change jobs. L’affaire Davis boils down to that – nothing more.

“Those who are persecuting Kim Davis believe,” you declare groundlessly, “that Christians should not serve in public office. That is the consequence of their position. Or, if Christians do serve in public office, they must disregard their religious faith – or be sent to jail.”

Presumably, Davis’ “persecutors,” in your eyes, are justices on the relevant courts. Well, no justice has advocated driving Christians from public office, or urged Christians to abandon their faith. But, Senator, surely you know this. Your talk of “persecution” really is meant to arouse the ire of evangelicals already wallowing in self-pity about their protracted (pathetic, messy) defeat in the culture wars. The problem is, your words muddle issues – religion and our secular governance – about which we need clarity if our democracy is to function as the Founding Fathers intended.