A recent survey commissioned by the American Red Cross suggests that social media may be the new frontier for fundraising, though officials stopped short in saying it will take over traditional methods of raising money for nonprofits.

As many charities churn through their crucial holiday fund drives, the Red Cross announced the results of the survey that found seven in 10 social media users are giving to nonprofits, both online and offline. Additionally, many of those donors are sharing information about their largesse on social websites, prompting others to make contributions, the report said.

“I would say social media is a great supplement to our traditional fundraising,” said Linda Biller, regional chief development officer with the Tampa Bay chapter of the American Red Cross. “Social media’s large presence today reaches so many individuals, it allows us to spread the word and help folks identify with our organization and to make a gift.

The organization uses social media to get the word out when it responds to disasters and helps people, she said, and that in turn coaxes potential donors to immediately pledge money.

The online survey of 1,021 adults done in October found that 71 percent of those active on online social networks donated to a charity over the previous year. Of those, six in 10 made their donations online. The poll also found that personal appeals from friends matter more than trending topics.

Seven in 10 social media users said they would take some kind of action, including sharing the post, in response to a friend posting a story on social media about making a charitable donation. While only 3 percent of respondents said social media was the most effective way for a charity to solicit donations, 19 percent said they would likely donate money to a charity if they saw a friend post about a recent donation.

The survey also found that:

♦ while trends online and in the media draw attention to a charity, 72 percent said a charity’s popularity makes no difference in a donor’s decision to contribute;

♦ social media users are interested in giving — not receiving — as 51 percent said that receiving a memento in exchange for a charitable donation would not increase their likelihood to give.

Most large nonprofits rely on regular contributions from businesses and corporations, and social media donors typically are individuals. Social media increasingly is a way to connect with those individuals.

The ALS Association, which supports a cure for Lou Gehrig’s disease, turned a few non-profit heads this year when a fundraising effort exploded across social media. The “Ice Bucket Challenge” swept Facebook and Twitter this summer and raised millions for the cause.

“Social media plays an important role in building philanthropic support because it allows us to build relationships with donors on their terms,” said Kim Hanna, president and CEO of the ALS Association Florida Chapter.

“We have tweaked our strategies after lessons learned from the ‘Ice Bucket Challenge,’ she said. “Social media has replaced traditional email as a desired form of receiving communications, so we let donors know how their donation made an impact through social media instead of just email or mail.”

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760