When Adam Avery went from cooking batches of beer on his stove to opening a commercial brewery in an east Boulder warehouse, it was a fairly significant leap of faith.

Nearly 22 years later, the Avery Brewing Co. he started with his father, Larry, now churns out 50,000 barrels of beer in operations that sprawl across 11 warehouse units at 5763 Arapahoe Ave. in Boulder.

Avery Brewing's entrance into adulthood, however, comes with an exponentially larger jump: that to a brand new brewery that would double the craft brewer's production capacity at the outset. The new facility, with offers room for future growth, was designed to help Avery Brewing both meet booming demand and remain competitive share as the crowd of craft brewers grows and large, traditional breweries make plays in the craft space.

An interior look at the spacious new Avery facility. Avery Brewing Company of Boulder is moving to a new state-of-the-art building in Gunbarrel. The grand opening is Feb. 16. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Monday marks the final day of operation for Avery Brewing's "Avery Alley" operation in east Boulder, a brewery and tap room that swelled to capacity in recent years. The brewery, tucked off a pockmarked stretch of asphalt to the north of Arapahoe Avenue, is shuttering in advance of Avery Brewing reopening Feb. 16 in a state-of-the-art facility five miles to the north in Gunbarrel. At 3 p.m. that day the brewer will open for dinner service, for two weeks. Then it will begin regular operating hours.

Avery Brewing has been drawing down its longtime home for weeks, trucking some tanks up to their new residence while keeping some suds flowing for patrons and wholesale customers. Although all the tanks and the majority of the guts of Avery Alley are coming to the new brewery, the legacy equipment will account for only 10 percent of the engine driving Avery Brewing's next-generation facility at 4910 Nautilus Court.

Avery Brewing invested $30 million in a brewery custom-designed for the "pursuit of making perfect beer," Avery said.

"It is not fair to our old system that makes great beer, but this (brewery) is going to make spectacular beer," Avery said, standing in the heart of his new brewery, surrounded by sparkling, stainless steel tanks.

Years in the making

The largest brewery in the city of Boulder sits on a 5.6-acre piece of land that previously was frequented by hot-air balloonists. The tranquil business park and neighboring Twin Lakes sits in contrast to the compact and crowded industrial housing the brewery occupies now.

The new brewery has been four years in the making and has had a few stops and starts to boot. After property hunts that took Avery around and outside Boulder, he eventually landed the property off Nautilus near 63rd Street in Boulder's Gunbarrel district.

By late 2012, when he and his father paid $1.525 million for the 5.59 acres at 4910 Nautilus, Avery Brewing already was running at full tilt. The craft brewer didn't have the room in its 20,000 square feet of space to expand fast enough to handle the "astronomical" growth, officials said at the time.

Even with brewing at a 24-7 clip, distribution was ceased to some markets.

When construction got under way on the new facility, Avery Brewing officials did some creative rearrangement of equipment at Avery Alley to increase capacity. Avery Brewing also temporarily leased space at New Belgium Brewing's Fort Collins facility to produce kegs of the Boulder brewer's White Rascal Belgian-Style Wheat Ale.

Avery Brewing now no longer needs those short-term fixes.

Outside Avery Brewing's new two-story building — a structure cloaked red, white and black of Avery's logo and complemented with wood — are four, towering, 720-barrel fermentation tanks. Thanks to the quartet, Avery Brewing immediately will double its production capabilities, Avery said, adding that more tanks can be added over the years that would allow the brewer to produce a half-million barrels every year.

An Avery employee walks between two large tanks at the new facility. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Although the project was scaled back to approximately 67,000 square feet from 96,000 square feet, practically all aspects of the new facility are bigger than their current counterparts. The new site includes a negative pressure room for the storage of hundreds of oak barrels, a laboratory more than 10 times the size of Avery Brewing's current 100-square-foot testing area, and a five-cubicle room designed for daily sensory panels.

The seating capacity has doubled with the addition of a sit-down restaurant on the top floor and a casual tap house on the floor below.

Each of those areas has access to 30 tap lines and a 30-head Gruber growler-filler, and also will include food cooked in-house by Chris Blackwood, former executive chef of the West End Tavern.

Blackwood said the recipes that span barbecue, steaks and pub items such as sandwiches will evolve over time and he'll likely incorporate Avery Brewing's beers in some items.

"I don't want to throw beer into a recipe just to throw beer into it," Blackwood said.

The on-site restaurant would be a change-in-pace from the Avery Brewing's Arapahoe Avenue set-up, where food is shuttled across the alley by the neighboring Savory Cuisine.

The departure of Avery Brewing will not go unnoticed, said Bob Sargent, Savory Cuisine's owner.

"It's a bit of revenue, but our catering company is literally going through the roof right now," Sargent said, referencing a recent expansion by Savory into the upper level of its 5741 Arapahoe Ave. building.

Savory's physical expansion will allow the company to add two full-sized pizza ovens and redesign its kitchen to accommodate a growing catering operation as well as a potential pizza delivery business, he said. Sargent added that he's also optimistic and open to forging a relationship with whoever might land in Avery Brewing's old digs.

Avery said he is in negotiations to lease a portion of his brewery's old facility to a craft brewer.

Most of the furnishings inside the Arapahoe Avenue taproom would transfer to the new operator, but the red metal picnic tables and benches will be transported to Avery Brewing's new site, he said.

Custom additions

The aesthetics are one thing, but the heart of the operation is another.

Millions of dollars and years of design work went into the construction of a custom brewhouse and production system for the brewery. In those efforts, Avery Brewing enlisted the expertise of the Krones Group, a German machinery and information technology firm that has built brewing systems for multinational operations.

"They do business with the largest brewers in the world, yet they're here helping us build out the brewery," Avery said.

For a regional brewery that is known for its complex beers that incorporate a variety of yeast strains, malts and grains, Krones' system for Avery Brewing is practically one-of-a-kind, Avery said.

The brewhouse is designed for flexibility so that Avery Brewing can produce its small-batch brews as well as its larger runs of beers that are distributed to 30 U.S. states along with Sweden and Japan.

The custom wet mill system, which complements a destoner machine, should help produce a cleaner and crisper product, Avery said. A three-tank hop-dosing system was installed to accommodate Avery Brewing's hop-heavy beers such as its Maharaja Imperial IPA.

"(The Krones representatives) were taking pictures and sending them back to their friends in Germany," he said, noting that such a system is "unheard of" for a brewery of Avery Brewing's size.

Avery Brewing also invested heavily in Krones automation technology. From a command center in the brewery, Avery Brewing employees can monitor the activities of areas such as the centrifuge, filtration system, yeast propagation and the clean-in-place system.

Other advancements in the brewery include the installation of Super Sack stations, which help to eliminate the heaving of 55-pound bags of malt into the mixer; a new canning line that packages at a speed seven times that of Avery Brewing's current machine; and the presence of a six-bay loading dock.

The latter may not be the most technologically advanced of the new additions at Avery Brewing; but to employees used to loading trucks with pallet jacks and forklifts, it's a boon, said Steve Breezley, Avery Brewing's director of operations.

"The first time we unloaded something here, it was like Christmas," he said.

The added capacity should allow Avery Brewing to open in an additional three to five markets this year, and contribute to a significant revenue boost, according to information provided by Jess Steinitz, Avery Brewing's marketing and events coordinator.

Avery Brewing is expected to record $25.6 million in revenue this year. The privately held Avery Brewing had $17.8 million in revenue 2014, up from the $15 million posted in 2013.

Avery Brewing is among several established, heritage craft brewers that are in expansion mode, said Julia Herz, craft beer program director for the Brewers Association, a Boulder-based trade organization that tracks the independent, craft beer industry.

Avery Brewing's expansion comes alongside continued growth in the craft beer business, which is expected to again tally double-digit annual growth when 2014 data is released next month, Herz said. The 3,200-plus craft brewers also are expected to increase their market share of the overall U.S. brewing industry, she said, adding that new breweries are opening at a rate of one every 18 hours.

More than 2,000 brewers are in the planning stages, according to information provided to the Brewers Association, she said.

Alicia Wallace: 303-473-1332, wallacea@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/dc_alicia