Robert Shiller Getty Images

Nobel laureate Robert Shiller is getting a global classroom—and signing up tens of thousands of students around the world.

The Yale economics professor’s “Financial Markets,” to be taught through the online education forum Coursera, is the most popular among hundreds of offerings for 2014, according to a Coursera representative. Professor Shiller, who has taught at Yale since 1982, has signed up 67,582 students for his online lectures, which will be webcast starting in February.

That tally puts him behind other Coursera hits, which tend to rack up enrollment above 150,000. Thus far, the most popular courses at the site, which launched last year((2012)), are “Social Psychology,” with almost 260,000 enrolled students; “Think Again: How to Reason and Argue,” with 226,000; and “A Beginner’s Guide to Irrational Behavior,” at 203,000.

The third might be a good foundation for study with Mr. Shiller, a scholar of behavioral economics and author of “Irrational Exuberance,” a study of volatility in financial and housing markets. Mr. Shiller said his Coursera lectures will contain “some behavioral finance.”

The lectures aim “to offer understanding of the theory of finance and its relation to the history, strengths and imperfections of such institutions as banking, insurance, securities, futures, and other derivatives markets, and the future of these institutions over the next century,” according to the Coursera description. Participation is free; staying the course through the estimated 6-12 hour-a-week workload doesn’t convey any credits—but there also appear to be no exams or grades.

Most teachers tape their lectures before the course launches and don’t wing it before live cameras in the classroom, the Coursera representative said. Professor Shiller is no stranger to long-distance pedagogy. The lectures for his 2008 undergraduate “Financial Markets” course were taped and offered online through the “Open Yale Courses.”

Earlier this month, Mr. Shiller and the University of Chicago’s Eugene Fama and Lars Peter Hansen, received the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences for their research on asset prices.

In an October telephone interview with the prize committee, shortly after learning their decision, Mr. Shiller said he gravitated to economics “because it deals with really important problems…Finance drew me in because it’s so fundamental to human activity…It follows precise mathematical relations but there’s an element of imprecision that reflects human nature.”