This fall, Microsoft will release the Surface Pro 4, and Apple will release its long awaited iPad Pro. While many feel Microsoft will win with specs, others feel that Apple’s iPad Pro will sell well just on marketing alone. Still, Expert Reviews believes Apple will need more than just talk to beat the Surface Pro.

“However, for all Apple’s talk of ‘desktop-class’ speeds and ‘barrier-breaking performance,’ it’s not like we haven’t seen this all before, as Microsoft has been doing the same thing with Windows tablets ever since the first Surface Pro came out two years ago.”

The article even doubts that the battery life of the iPad Pro can live up to the current Surface Pro 3.

“Apple claims the iPad Pro will be able to last for up to ten hours when surfing the web, watching videos or listening to music. The cellular version, on the other hand, is rated for nine hours of surfing the web when connected to a mobile data network. We’ll be putting these claims to the test when we get one in for review, but I’ll be surprised if its video playback time will be able to match the Surface Pro 3.”

There appears to be one big problem for Apple and that is the fact that the iPad Pro, since it will run iOS 9, cannot replace a laptop. MarketWatch wrote a complete article about it.

“What I saw during the keynote demo was a series of custom apps handling things like retouching, text placement and sketching. The apps looked nice and interaction was smooth, but the features seemed limited.”

The article goes on to note that the programs on the iPad Pro were too clean — meaning that they obviously didn’t allow for more advanced functions that the same programs on a desktop allow. The writer of the article, Jurica Dujmovic, expected the iPad Pro to be a lot more than a tablet and it wasn’t. The same can’t be said about the current Surface Pro or the upcoming Surface Pro 4.

Photoshop works very well on the i5 version of the Surface Pro 3 with 4GB RAM. One can even edit three huge pictures at the same time. The current Surface Pro 3 isn’t the absolute best for video editing when using programs such as Vegas Video, but it works. The Surface Pro 4, which is supposed to be more powerful than the current Pro 3, can possibly be a graphic designer’s dream come true.

Which tablet are you looking more forward to — the Surface Pro 4 or the iPad Pro. Let us know in the comments section.

[Photos by Joe Raedle and Peter Macdiarmid / Getty Images]