The outcome of the midterm elections wasn’t really a surprise. Older, more conservative voters, tend to vote more than other groups during non-presidential years.

Given that reality, it was disappointing how little candidates from both sides of the aisle talked about the real needs of aging Americans in their campaigns, and concrete solutions to meet those needs. And in particular, solutions to the long-term care crisis that is impacting millions of families, and will only deepen in the coming decades.

ADVERTISEMENT

This lack of dialogue and solutions is short-sighted for both parties, not only because long-term care issues will need to be addressed in coming years out of necessity, but because quite simply, caregiving is a winning issue.

Here’s why: our country is aging rapidly. On top of the much-discussed racial shift changing our country’s demographics, there’s an equally large age shift happening — the Elder Boom. Every eight seconds, someone turns 65. According to the U.S. Census, by 2030, one out of five people in the US will be over the age of 65, up from one out of eight today. Soon, there will be more people over the age of 65 than under the age of 15.

This elder boom is shaping our country in ways we have only begun to define and experience, from our economy to our politics to our understanding of aging itself.

But there are several things we know. We know that we all want to age with dignity and maintain our independence, and that for more than 90 percent of our population, that means the ability to age at home. And we know to do that, we need a strong, well-trained home care workforce as well as policies that support unpaid family caregivers.

Yet currently, what we have is a piecemeal long-term care system that ultimately fails most aging Americans, their families, and their caregivers. We are trying to address 21st-century needs with outdated solutions and policies that made sense more than 50 years ago, but not today.

Tens of millions of adults, dubbed the “sandwich generation,” are stuck in between caring for children and aging parents and are stressed, overworked, and desperate. Many have had to leave the workforce just to handle their caregiving responsibilities. This has a huge economic impact on millions of working families and the middle class — not only do they lose income and retirement benefits, but many have to shoulder the financial costs of caregiving alone, with no government support.

Most home care workers who care for our aging loved ones live at the poverty line and struggle to care for their own families. Home care jobs are the fastest-growing low-wage jobs today and for the foreseeable future, yet low wages, a lack of benefits, and little to no opportunities for training mean that there is constant turnover.

People are ready and hungry for solutions. In an AP-NORC survey earlier this year, more than 50 percent of those polled said they would favor a government-administered long-term care insurance program similar to Medicare, and more than 70 percent would favor tax breaks to encourage saving for ongoing living assistance expenses.

And if the minimum wage and paid sick days victories in this last election are any indication of where voters stand on work-family issues, our country is ready for policies that address the reality of our population.

These are issues that unite people, rather than divide.

So, why did neither party seize on the issues of aging and caregiving in the midterms?

We suspect that politicians avoid it because it’s a problem that requires bold solutions, and one that requires not only reaching across the aisle, but hard discussions about our nation’s budgetary priorities.

Instead, candidates from both parties only sidestepped the issue or approached it with fear and cynicism. Candidates on both sides asserted they would protect seniors’ benefits and implied their opposition would do the opposite. For instance, a Democratic ad in Iowa attacked candidate Joni Ernst for trying to privatize Social Security, and cynical ads by conservative group Crossroads GPS threw accusations at Democratic candidates for proposals to raise the retirement age. Both approaches were meant to inspire fear.

Nobody offered a positive future vision.

It’s telling that candidates who spoke up on long-term care earned the support of the older electorate. Take, for example, Republican Governor John Kasich of Ohio, who won re-election. Bucking the notion that expanding access to long-term care are only Democratic Party issues, Kasich has both expanded Medicaid and rebalanced his state’s spending to go more towards home and community-based services, rather than nursing homes. He handily won voters over the age of 50. Sen. Al Franken Al FrankenConsumer internet privacy: Leaving the back door unlocked Senators unveil bill to overhaul apprenticeship programs Dems pressure Obama on vow to resettle 10,000 Syrian refugees MORE (D) in Minnesota talked of the importance of Medicaid as well as protecting Social Security and Medicare and won the over 50 vote by almost 10 points. And in Maine, both candidates for governor Gov. LePage (R) and Rep. Michaud (D), actively supported long-term care initiatives that would help Mainers age in place — and they effectively split the older vote.

Candidates that can harness that energy and craving for solutions with a head-on approach to these issues will be positioned to not only win the senior vote in 2016, but that of working women and all caregivers—a huge section of the voting population. There are small but critical solutions on the table—funding at the state level for home care services, tax credits for elder care, and others. The candidates that seize on these and promote a bold vision for how we care for our nation’s elders and working families will not only get the votes of many aging Americans and their caregivers, but will chart a necessary course for the future of our country.

Kilpatrick is the national campaign director for Caring Across Generations, a nonprofit organization working to transform long-term care in America. Prior to joining Caring Across Generations, Kilpatrick served as the vice president and lead for AARP’s “My Health” Portfolio.