Buy Photo Republican Ted Cruz gives the thumbs up after firing a M&P 15 Saturday, June 20, 2015, at the CrossRoads Shooting Sports indoor shooting range in Johnston, Iowa. (Photo: Michael Zamora/The Register)Buy Photo

The death penalty was made to punish crimes like the recent shooting that killed nine people in a historic black church in Charleston, U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz said Saturday at a shooting range in Johnston.

"Gov. Nikki Haley in South Carolina said this individual who committed the heinous murder in South Carolina should be subject to the death penalty. I got to say the death penalty was designed for people who commit horrid crimes like this," Cruz told reporters.

At multiple Iowa stops this weekend, The Republican presidential candidate has said Obama and Democrats are trying to politicize the shooting instead of using them to bring people together.

"It's a shame that there are some in politics that want to use this to divide us. I think that's wrong," he said.

MORE:

Following the shootings in Charleston, President Barack Obama said the U.S. will have to "come to grips" with gun violence.

"Now is the time for mourning and for healing," Obama said. "But let's be clear: At some point, we as a country will have to reckon with the fact that this type of mass violence does not happen in other advanced countries. It doesn't happen in other places with this kind of frequency. And it is in our power to do something about it."

When asked what restrictions he would place on gun ownership, Cruz said lawmakers should focus on stopping criminals, not law-abiding citizens, from buying guns.

"If you have a violent felon, if you have a fugitive who is illegally trying to buy guns, we should come down on them like a ton of bricks," Cruz said. "I want to know if there are murderers and rapists trying to buy guns. We should stop them."

Cruz also said the shooting does not open the door to crack down on the rights of law-abiding citizens.

Upholding the Second Amendment, he said, is "altogether different and unconnected from a horrific murder committed by a sick and deranged individual."

The Republican presidential candidate spoke before a "Celebrate the 2nd Amendment" event hosted by State Rep. Ralph Watts. Cruz's visit to the event was scheduled about a week before the South Carolina shooting.

After speaking, Cruz took time to shoot a Smith & Wesson M&P 15 rifle.

Cruz has focused his campaign around the idea of abiding by the Constitution. That includes maintaining religious liberty and the Second Amendment, he has said at multiple Iowa stops.

"In Texas, there is a right answer on the Second Amendment: I support the Second Amendment. Unless you are clinically insane, that's the right answer. Heck, even Democrats say they support the Second Amendment in Texas," Cruz said during stops in Johnston and Denison this weekend.

SETTING: A "Celebrate the 2nd Amendment" event held at CrossRoads Shooting Sports, an indoor shooting range in Johnston. State Rep. Ralph Watts, R-Adel, hosted the event. Donations were collected for the Iowa Firearms Coalition.

CROWD: Between 20 and 30 people filtered in to hear Cruz, Watts and Congressman David Young, speak. That's not counting customers who visited CrossRoads Saturday morning.

REACTION: Cruz received some applause and garnered laughs for many of the same lines he's given during past town halls. Those include jokes about Hilary Clinton and the Obama administration, and calls to repeal Obamacare, Common Core and abolish the IRS.

WHAT'S NEXT: Cruz left CrossRoads to visit the owners of Gortz Haus Gallery for a private meeting. The campaign has scheduled two events for Friday, June 26, including a town hall in Sheldon and a picnic meet-and-greet in Pierson.

Keep track of all the presidential candidates' Iowa itineraries at DesMoinesRegister.com/candidatetracker.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1MVuWrD