Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

JACKSONVILLE, Fla. (AP) — Tiffany Mitchell sank her fourth and final 3-pointer, looked to the South Carolina bench and then shimmied.

Coach Dawn Staley may have wanted to do the same. After all, it surely was a moment worth celebrating.

Mitchell scored 20 points, leading five Gamecocks in double figures, and third-ranked South Carolina handled No. 13 Kentucky 93-63 in the semifinals of the Southeastern Conference women’s tournament Saturday.

A day after the Gamecocks turned in their worst offensive performance of the season, Staley’s team delivered one of its best.

This one helped the top-seeded Gamecocks (30-1) advance to their second straight SEC title game. They will face either No. 16 Mississippi State or Tennessee in the championship game Sunday.

If South Carolina plays like it did against the Wildcats (23-7), it could be hoisting another trophy.

“I want to bottle it up and take it into (Sunday) night’s championship game,” Staley said.

The Gamecocks opened up a double-digit lead in the first quarter, used an 11-0 run early in the third to make it a 20-point game and then turned it into a laugher with a barrage of 3-pointers in the fourth.

Bianca Cuevas hit consecutive treys, Mitchell sank her fourth of the game and then Tina Roy added another in a two-minute span that put South Carolina up 77-50 with 6:40 remaining and started the celebration.

“I mean, it just felt good,” Mitchell said. “It felt right at the moment. I was feeling good. Our team was up. We were all just hyped. The whole entire game was very emotional. It’s not really uncharacteristic of me. I just don’t do it a lot. But this game we were just feeling great, so I just let it go.”

Mitchell made 8 of 16 shots, including 4 of 8 from behind the arc, and finished with her sixth 20-plus-point performance of the season.

SEC player of the year A’ja Wilson (18 points), Cuevas (15), Alaina Coates (13) and Khadijah Sessions (10) also reached double figures for South Carolina. Coates added 10 rebounds for her 17th double-double of the season and third in the last four games.