I’m guessing that the majority of the anti-white, pro-cop killing, #BlackLivesMatter thugs … I mean … “activists” are predominantly, albeit loosely, Christian by persuasion.

I could be wrong, but I would be willing to bet that they either grew up in church and/or still go to church in between their “death to cops” marches and their looting schedules.

Now, I’m sure some of them could be Muslim or one of Farrakhan’s step-n-fetchits. That’s a possibility. Which would explain their penchant and approval for executing innocent white deputies while they’re filling up their patrol cars. We all know Mohammad just LOVES killing--especially white Christians.

However, I’m sticking to my guns, and guessing that the vast majority of them grew up in some form of Christianity and that some still go to church.

Which brings me to this question for the black, supposed “Christians” that are burning down neighborhoods and stealing crap in homage to dead criminals while they augur for the death of LEOs: What New Testament passage do you base your base behavior upon?

Do you guys have some Lost Gospel of Jedediah that tells you to slaughter and loot should criminals with your skin color get offed by law enforcement officers? If so, thrill me with it. I’d love to read what you’re feeding off of because the New Testament I bought at Barnes & Noble is absent of that animus.

Indeed, the New Testament that I’ve perused says stuff like:

“You have heard that it was said, ‘Love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’ But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, that you may be children of your Father in heaven. He causes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous. If you love those who love you, what reward will you get? Are not even the tax collectors doing that? And if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? Do not even pagans do that? Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect." - Matthew 5:43-48

"My dear brothers and sisters, take note of this: Everyone should be quick to listen, slow to speak and slow to become angry." - James 1:19

"If I speak in the tongues of men or of angels, but do not have love, I am only a resounding gong or a clanging cymbal. If I have the gift of prophecy and can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have a faith that can move mountains, but do not have love, I am nothing. If I give all I possess to the poor and give over my body to hardship that I may boast, but do not have love, I gain nothing.4Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud. It does not dishonor others, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs. Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres. Love never fails. But where there are prophecies, they will cease; where there are tongues, they will be stilled; where there is knowledge, it will pass away. For we know in part and we prophesy in part, 1but when completeness comes, what is in part disappears. When I was a child, I talked like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. When I became a man, I put the ways of childhood behind me. For now we see only a reflection as in a mirror; then we shall see face to face. Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I am fully known. And now these three remain: faith, hope and love. But the greatest of these is love." - 1Corinthians 13:1-13

And, by the way, it didn’t say that goes for only those who share one’s particular pigmentation. Also, Sweet Jesus is pretty harsh on those who foment theft, murder and destruction. That’s just an FYI.

Finally, black pastors who hold to the verbum Dei, I hope to God you are condemning vociferously this type of behavior. I really do. From what I’ve read, the minister of the Gospel’s job is to fully preach the whole counsel of God and from what I’ve read it loathes baseless rage, murder and vandalism from those who claim the name of Jesus Christ.