As litigation shows no signs of slowing in the next year, insurance professionals need to be aware of emerging litigation trends that may impact the industry, as well as their clients. Crowell & Moring, the 2013 “Washington Litigation Department of the Year,” recently published their annual Litigation Forecast, providing an expert look at legal trends, regulatory landscapes, and upcoming cases that could impact businesses, with both short- and long-term effects. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to PropertyCasualty360.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited PropertyCasualty360.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical PropertyCasualty360.com information including educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, National Underwriter, Claims, and PropertyCasualty360.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including BenefitsPro.com, LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

Health Care - Legislation driven change sets the stage for litigation It is no surprise that the Affordable Care Act is a major driver of litigation. In order to take advantage of the increased federal funding and to keep costs down, some states have expanded eligibility for their managed care programs, presenting an appealing opportunity for health plans as many moved into the Medicaid managed care business.

Financial Services - State courts: the new M&A battleground Merger and acquisition activity has increased significantly over the last few years, resulting in a growth of a new “cottage industry,” whose practitioners file class action lawsuits that serve to delay every deal involving a public company. As a result, this has become a commonplace issue that bankers and lawyers who arrange the deals have to expect.

Energy - New Generation: Who decides what, where and when to build? In the past, the division of authority between state and federal regulators in the electric utility industry was clear. The states would authorize the construction of power plants within their borders and regulated retail rates, while the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission regulated wholesale rates.

E-discovery – TAR enters the mainstream Technology Assisted Review (TAR), also known as “predictive coding,” uses computer analytics to identify the patterns of words and phrases in documents to analyze the content, which provides a richer assessment of documents than more traditional e-discovery methods. For lawyers, this means having the ability to sharpen its focus on documents to specific topics.

Insurance/Reinsurance – Burgeoning concussion lawsuits and changing principles With the highly-publicized lawsuits involving former NFL players and traumatic brain injury, concussion lawsuits have taken center stage. In August, the NFL announced a $765 million settlement, which if approved, would resolve the claims of thousands of retired players. But these suits have also raised a number of insurance coverage issues, leading the NFL and its insurers to file competing coverage actions.

Advertising – False Advertising: Injunction rules get tougher, and the stakes get higher More class action firms are shifting their focus from products liability to false advertising litigation, which is simpler and less expensive in most cases. These firms are on the lookout for false advertising, and companies know it.

White Collar – Challenges from the inside and overseas The Dodd-Frank Act gave authorization to the SEC to reward whistleblowers who provide information that leads to successful enforcement actions. Within the last year, the SEC has increased its activity in this area, and in October, it announced more than $14 million in an investment fraud case—the largest whistleblower payout to date. According to Crowell & Moring, actions like this could become increasingly familiar.

Trade Secrets – Potential New Laws and New Risks Trade secret fraud has become an increasingly high profile issue, resulting in new legislation. The Private Right of Action Against Theft of Trade Secrets Act of 2013 would allow anyone who suffers injury as a result of violation of the Economic Espionage Act to seek damages, adding a civil cause of action to the existing criminal law.