Brent Bendell of Florence Fitness at Bendell Karate, and Johanna Patterson, manager, stand in the facility at 115 E. Main St., Ste. 11 in Florence. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

FLORENCE — — Brent Bendell has reopened a karate studio in Fremont County that also offers a workout gym, an MMA school and fitness classes all under one roof.

Florence Fitness at Bendell Karate is located at 115 E. Main St., Ste. 11, in Florence. The facility offers a weight room, a cardio room, a padded room for judo and MMA classes, a designated space for karate and fitness classes and a play room for children that clearly is visible to mothers who are taking a class, but child care is not provided.

Bendell Karate has been in business for 24 years with schools and programs in Pueblo West, and one was formerly located in Cañon City. Karate classes for all ages are taught by black belt instructors.

For information on karate class times and fees, visit www.bendellkarate.com.

Facility manager Johanna Patterson teaches a number of fitness classes throughout the month including Latin aerobics, pilates/yoga, boot camp and weightlifting. Personal training also is available.

Gym memberships offer 24/7 access. Monthly cost for a single person is $15; membership for a single person with unlimited classes is $30; membership for a family up to four people is $40 ($5 per person after 4); family memberships with unlimited classes is $60; or those interested solely in unlimited classes may sign up for $20 per month. There are no contracts.

Advertisement

"The women love the weightlifting class, because it's intimidating to come in as a woman," Patterson said. "We go trough the weight training with them."

Patterson is a certified personal trainer, yoga instructor and pilates instructor. She has several years of experience in teaching these classes at local gyms.

For information on the MMA classes taught by Cody Connell, call 371-0313.

Florence Fitness at Bendell Karate invites the community to its Business After Hours from 5:30-7:30 p.m. May 29. Tours and refreshments will be provided. For more information, or to schedule a tour, call 371-0313 or visit Florence Fitness at Bendell Karate on Facebook.

The gym easily may be accessed through the alley entrance, the same as Rocky Mountain Bank & Trust in downtown Florence.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com