The NHTSA is promoting unenforceable safety “agreements” with the auto industry that promise improvements to brakes and enhanced data analysis. Administrator Mark Rosekind touted the NHTSA’s honor system of regulation as “proactive” at a hearing last Thursday before a subcommittee of the House Commerce Committee.

“We will continue to keep doing everything we know that works,” Rosekind responded to Representative Frank Pallone, Jr., (D-NJ), who challenged the agreements as lacking subs

tance. Rosekind insisted that the NHTSA did not abdicate its regulatory authority in making what he called its “historic” January deal with 18 automakers, a deal in which the automakers made commitments to safety improvements such as enhanced early warning reporting data analysis.

Rosekind made the case, apparently without irony, that the car companies have agreed to a 100 percent driver response to recalls, including the ongoing recalls associated with Takata Corporation’s faulty airbags. The legislators spent an extended period of time discussing with Rosekind and industry

representatives who were on hand the problem of getting more drivers to respond to recall notices by checking their vehicle identification numbers on the SaferCar.gov website, which lists recalls. The discussion included ideas such as using insurance companies to communicate with drivers in renewal notices, as well as the problem of “recall fatigue.” In a year when major automakers and suppliers such as General Motors, Toyota, Volkswagen and Takata are facing lawsuits for having endangered their customers or the environment and then lying to cover up their wrongdoing, for a committee hearing with the NHTSA to focus on drivers’ irresponsibility in responding to belated recalls is worse than absurd. It reveals the government’s ultimate complicity with corporate America’s betrayal of the American people.

Rosekind also lauded a “commitment” by 20 major manufacturers to install automatic emergency braking in every new car by September 2022. “NHTSA estimates that the agreement will make AEB standard on new cars three years faster than the agency believes it could likely achieve through the regulatory process based upon the agency’s past experience in mandating advanced safety technologies,” Rosekind said in his introductory statement. “During those three years, according to [Insurance Institute for Highway Safety] estimates, the commitment will prevent 28,000 crashes and 12,000 injuries.”

In defending voluntary “commitments,” Rosekind referred to enforceable regulations as “the old cat and mouse game” and stressed the need for cooperation between government and manufacturers. There is a cat and mouse game being played here, alright.

Source: Law360.com. NHTSA Head Defends Voluntary Industry Deal

dailyreportingsuite,com. Rosekind urges House subcommittee support for proposed $1.2 billion NHTSA budget

Join the Discussion