Women's wheelchair race winner Amanda McGrory crosses the finish line during the 2014 Bolder Boulder in Folsom Field on Monday May 26 Memorial Day in Boulder. For more photos and video go to www.dailycamera.com (Paul Aiken)

Winning is nothing new to Josh George and Amanda McGrory, but neither had experienced the thrill of crossing the finish line first at the Bolder Boulder until doing so Monday in the wheelchair races.

George and McGrory have gold medals from past victories in the Paralympics and are current members of the U.S. Paralympic team training in Champagne, Illinois. They have trained together since they were kids and chose to race the Bolder Boulder for the first time this year after hearing good things about it in the past.

George won the men's race in 23 minutes, 7 seconds, the 16th fastest winning time in history, and the fastest since 2010. He crossed the finish line 18 seconds ahead of Aaron Pike, who finished in 23:25, and Gyu Deal Kim finished third in 23:52.

Men's wheelchair race winner Josh George crosses the finish line during the 2014 Bolder Boulder in Folsom Field on Monday May 26 Memorial Day in Boulder. For more photos and video go to www.dailycamera.com (Paul Aiken)

McGrory's winning time was 26:59 and was the 11th best time in race history. She beat 2013 champion Susannah Scaroni by just 3 seconds. Kelsey Lefevour finished third in 30:41. It was the closest women's race since 2009.

Both said it is one of the most difficult 10k courses they have experienced, especially the final climb up Stadium Drive into Folsom Field.

“This is a tough race,” George said. “…I wanted to start out fast and set a fast pace at the beginning to sort of thin the pack out. The first time we had a little climb I attacked hard and Aaron and I got away and then I was able to gap Aaron a little bit in the corners.

“I took it out pretty hard and paid for it in the end. Just the higher altitude and everything sort of caught up to me.”

George, 30, has been on the U.S. Paralympic team since 2004 and raced in three Paralympics earning five total medals. He has started to participate in more road races in recent years, but still competes about 50 percent of the time on the track.

George and McGrory each had to overcome multiple former winners in their races to earn the victory. It was a nice early birthday present McGrory gave herself. She will turn 28 next week.

“There is definitely always an advantage over knowing the course, I think, but I got the opportunity to push it (Sunday) morning,” McGrory said. “We got up really early before there was any other traffic out on the roads. So I was feeling pretty good about that.”

McGrory said she was paralyzed when she was 5 by an autoimmune disease and had a difficult time adjusting to life in a wheelchair. She said she began participating in wheelchair sports when she was 7 and it eventually blossomed into a career.

She has won the New York City, Paris and Chicago marathons in recent years and earned gold (5,000 meters), silver (marathon) and bronze (800 meters) medals in the Paralympics in 2008.

“Bolder Boulder is definitely one of the hardest 10ks I have ever run, but I like those. I like the burners, like the grinders, ” McGrory said. “So I'll be back for sure.”

Contact Camera Staff Writer Kyle Ringo at ringok@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/kyleringo.