Citadel offensive lineman Victor Hill will be disciplined for a comment he posted regarding the Bulldogs' use of cut-blocking in Saturday night's 37-12 loss to top-ranked Florida State. He apologized for the comments Sunday.

Three FSU defensive linemen were injured in the game, and afterwards Seminoles coach Jimbo Fisher was asked about cut-blocking, which is a technique of blocking below the waist used by most college football teams, and used more often by triple-option teams such as The Citadel.

Fisher said there was nothing illegal about The Citadel's blocking - the Bulldogs have not been penalized for an illegal block this season, and film shows FSU also used cut blocks on Saturday night. But Fisher also said he'd rather face "more conventional teams, just because of the chance of injuries that occurred."

Hill, a 6-2, 275-pound senior from Greenville, posted a comment to the article about Fisher's statements on The Post and Courier's website.

"I played in the game last night and also contributed to the injury list and that was just the mindset going into the game," Hill wrote. "Me and my offensive line brothers preached to each other all week that we would be going for knees from the first play to the last play with the A-backs included. We saw it as if they (won't) respect us for blocking them then we'll make them respect us for cutting them!"

Hill's comment drew the attention of FSU fans, and of Citadel coach Mike Houston, who said Hill faces a suspension of some type.

"Victor's words in no way reflect the philosophy, the mindset of what we are trying to build within this program," Houston said. "Anywhere I've ever been, I've tried to do things right and in a first-class manner. I demand that my players play that way and behave that way.

"In no way are the remarks of Victor Hill acceptable for the way I expect a player to think or comment."

In a later comment, Hill tried to clarify his thoughts.

"We don't take pride in ending someone's career," he wrote. "The purpose of a cut-block is to get the defender to put his full attention on the block and to make him play off it. When I said we said we were going for knees it was clearly in thought of cutting not ending careers."

After talking to Hill on Sunday, Houston said his original comment conveyed the exact opposite of what the player intended.

"He was trying to say, in his own way, things like, "Florida State didn't respect us going into the game," and using cut blocks would force them to use their hands to defeat the block and slow them down in back-side pursuit," Houston said. "That being said, it came across the opposite of what he meant."

Hill apologized in this statement on Sunday:

"I would like to sincerely apologize for my statements this morning. I am both embarrassed and ashamed of my comments. They reflect in no way, shape or form how I am taught or coached to perform. I am truly sorry for my immature comments that were made out of frustration. It was senseless on my part and I will accept the consequences for my actions and hope to grow from the experience moving forward. I apologize to Coach Jimbo Fisher, his players and the FSU fans for my negative remarks."