WASHINGTON, D.C. -- Maybe you'll only watch to see what Donald Trump does. But President Barack Obama wants you -- or those of you who are Democrats -- to watch the Republican presidential debate in Cleveland on Thursday night for another reason.

Democrats need to "listen carefully to what the Republican candidates for president say, and then hold them accountable for trying to undo all of the hard work we've done to move this country forward," Obama said in an email message sent today by the Democratic National Committee.

"I can't overstate what an important difference you can make by doing this."

Obama's email probably wasn't necessary. Many Democrats, like Republicans, are holding debate-watching parties. Unless viewers suddenly flock to NBC's "Dateline," ABC's "Mistresses" or CBS's "Big Brother," the Thursday ratings for Fox News are likely to soar above above the norm for the 9 p.m. to 11 p.m. summertime slot.

Obama even previews the show, from a Democrat's perspective.

"I'm gonna bet that they'll all promise to repeal the Affordable Care Act," he writes. "They'll all tell us that even though they aren't scientists, we shouldn't believe in the science behind climate change. They'll all want to reverse course on immigration reform and marriage equality.

"They're going to deny all of the progress we've made together over these past six years," he adds.

"But here's the thing: While these Republicans may have bad ideas, they're still smart politicians. They know how to make policies that will take us in the wrong direction sound like they might actually be pretty good ideas."

So tune in, Obama tells his party. That will make it easier to fight back. The email, incidentally, has a link for a form that recipients can fill out with their names, email addresses and zip codes if they want a debate-watch reminder. The information may wind up on a donor-solicitation or voter canvassing list, but that's smart politics: Never let the other party's event go to waste.