With name recognition, legislative history, big-money backing and opponents that lack established political records, Democratic Congressmen Mike Thompson of St. Helena and Jared Huffman of San Rafael are virtually assured of re-election next week.

The drama on election night, in a midterm election generally lacking in sizzle, lies in how much, if any, of their 17-seat House minority the Democrats can pick up by defending vulnerable incumbents and winning toss-up races, conditions that do not apply to the two Democrat-safe congressional districts that include parts of Sonoma County.

But political parties rarely make gains in their president’s second midterm election, which tends to bring out older, white, rural voters who are “pretty angry,” said David McCuan, a Sonoma State University political scientist.

Two issues that have emerged in the last few months — the Ebola health threat and the Islamic State’s violent spread through Syria and Iraq — have added to an already volatile election landscape, he said. Dissatisfaction with President Barack Obama’s six years in office further dims Democratic prospects.

Many analysts expect the Republicans’ House majority to swell. McCuan said his forecast ranges from a net gain of at least six GOP seats — boosting the party’s majority to 23 — to a net gain of 27 seats, giving Republicans 260 of the House’s 435 seats.

That number would far exceed a Republican campaign, announced in May, called “Drive to 245,” targeting a net gain of 12 seats.

The “most likely scenario,” McCuan said, is a GOP gain of 10 to 15 seats. “That’s huge,” he said, but noted that the average midterm loss for the incumbent political party from 1934 to 2010 is 37.7 seats.

Democrats captured the most recent supermajority by winning 295 House seats, a net gain of 36, during Lyndon Johnson’s presidential landslide victory over Barry Goldwater in 1964.

The incumbents

Thompson, 63, an eight-term House veteran and former California state senator who has never lost an election, is running in the 5th Congressional District, which includes Santa Rosa, Rohnert Park, Cotati and Sonoma Valley, all of Napa County and parts of Lake, Solano and Contra Costa counties.

A Democratic Party rainmaker known for his fundraising prowess, Thompson has collected nearly $1.7 million in his bid for a ninth House term. He captured 80 percent of the vote in the June primary, and faces a political newcomer with no party preference, James Hinton, 40, of Napa in the run-off mandated by California’s top-two primary system.

Huffman, 50, who won the House seat vacated by former Democratic Rep. Lynn Woolsey in 2012, raised nearly $975,000 in his first re-election campaign and took 68 percent of the June primary vote. His opponent, supermarket cashier Dale Mensing, 56, of Garberville, is the only Republican competing in the two congressional races.

The 2nd Congressional District stretches from Marin County to the Oregon border. Democrats account for about half of the registered voters in both districts, with Republicans and no party preference voters splitting most of the rest.

Thompson and Huffman agree that Democrats will not win a majority this year, but Thompson is more sanguine about the party’s prospects.

“I think we’re going to have some success in gaining seats,” he said, without citing a number.

Huffman acknowledged the likelihood of Republican gains, noting that Democrats are defending seats the party won in swing districts in 2012, a presidential election year that drew high voter turnout which typically benefits Democrats.