Topics: Depeche Mode, Editor's Picks, Johnny Marr, Morrissey, Music, New Order, Nine Inch Nails, Patti Smith, R.E.M., Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, The Smiths, Entertainment News

Musicians will tell you that nomination into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame is the last thing on their mind. Fans will tell you otherwise. Not because they are especially excited about seeing their idols accessorize a tuxedo and engage in a lengthy, drunken, finale jam session with Paul Shaffer and company, but because it’s often the only chance they will have of watching said idols reform. You know, get the band back together. Or, at least, stand on the same stage without killing each other.

It’s for that reason that every devotee of rock music should hope that The Smiths, newly nominated for the 2015 Hall of Fame as part of an eclectic list that includes N.W.A., Nine Inch Nails and War, accrue the necessary votes to be inducted next spring. Ever since the British band broke up in 1987, after a hectic five years that produced four studio albums and some 70 original songs, with barely a dud amongst them, fans have asked, begged and occasionally petitioned for the group to reform. The Smiths’ leaders – the relentlessly misanthropic Morrissey and the exhaustingly upbeat Johnny Marr – have consistently indicated that fans might be better off placing extravagant bets on pigs sprouting wings.

“A reformation will never take place because reformations can only work if the same spirit that made the band form in the first place still exists,” said Morrissey last year, in an uncharacteristic display of calm consideration. “If this Government stepped down, I’ll reform the band,” teased Marr the year before, referring to the UK coalition led by a right-wing prime minister whose claims to be a fan of the famously left-wing Smiths is considered disingenuous by Morrissey and Marr alike.

They are right to take such a stance – and not just about the UK government. A large part of The Smiths’ majesty is the manner by which they came, they saw, they conquered – and then broke up. Only 52 months separated their debut single “Hand In Glove” fading in with harmonicas and guitars a-blazing, and their last album petering out, Morrissey opining “I Won’t Share You” in a none-too-thinly-veiled reference to Marr’s musical moonlighting. Their reign was so brief that the band toured the States just twice, though the second go-round included its share of sold-out arenas – testament to how a Manchester group all of Irish heritage connected with an “alternative” American audience desperate for a rock band to honestly reflect the emotional roller coaster of the teenage experience.

There were, it should be noted at this point, four members of The Smiths. Morrissey might not have thought so when he insisted, back in 1983, that the rhythm section get just 20 percent of the record royalties between them – and he didn’t seem any more convinced 16 years later when he labeled them “as readily replaceable as the parts in a lawnmower.” The High Court Judge to whom he offered that opinion didn’t think too highly of Morrissey either, and given that the judge was presiding over a claim from drummer Mike Joyce for an equal, 25 percent share (no, the band never put it in writing either way), it turned out to be one of Morrissey’s more memorable but rather less profitable epigrams.

Once the judge found in favor of Joyce, denouncing Morrissey’s witness-stand manner in the process, it became as certain as a rainy day in Manchester that the four Smiths would never play together again. Indeed, in his best-selling 2013 “Autobiography,” Morrissey’s choice insults about Joyce (at least one of which, “A blubbering mass of blubbering mess” indicated that great lyricists do not always make great memoirists) was matched only by the barbs he aimed at the aforementioned judge; Joyce, when asked for comment, expresses admirably persistent enthusiasm at the prospect of taking to the stage once more with the songwriting pair he last saw in court.