Saratoga Hospital's Terry Lee, Executive Director of the Saratoga Hospital Foundation, addresses a crowd during the ribbon cutting for the new Saratoga Community Health Center at 24 Hamilton St. Photo Eric Jenks/The Saratogian 9/9/13

SARATOGA SPRINGS -- A new era in local health care begins today with the opening of a facility that provides medical services to people who couldn't otherwise afford it.

Several dozen people turned out Monday to dedicate Saratoga Hospital's $3 million Community Health Center at 24 Hamilton St.

The facility is opening with primary medical care and will add dental and mental health services later this fall in addition to social counseling, such as helping people find jobs.

"We've really been given license to provide care in a comprehensive way," said Dr. Renee Rodriguez-Goodemote, the center's medical director. "This is the perfect setting to do it."

Advertisement

The downtown location, just off Broadway, makes the center easily accessible to seniors and people with lower-paying service industry jobs.

Saratoga County is one of upstate New York's fastest growing, most affluent counties. However, many people are still struggling to make ends meet and 24,000 have no health insurance, hospital officials say.

Effective Jan. 1, all U.S. citizens will be required to have some type of health insurance under the Affordable Care Act. But some plans will provide very low coverage with high co-pays and deductibles.

"Coverage is just a card," said Angelo Calbone, hospital president and chief executive officer.

The new center will ensure that people get the care they need regardless of coverage shortfalls. In fact, it's expected to operate at a more than $600,000 per year loss.

"That's very unusual in health care today," said Terry Lee, Saratoga Hospital Foundation executive director.

Money from profitable hospital programs will be used to offset such losses, Calbone said. In addition, a $1 million endowment has been established to help cover the center's ongoing expenses.

A fundraising committee chaired by Linda Toohey and Steve Sullivan raised $3 million to buy the two-story building that houses the center. At present, the hospital is using about half its space. The rest is still leased to a handful of commercial tenants.

As leases expire, the hospital will evaluate the need to take over more space, Calbone said.

"One of our goals is teaching how to use health care appropriately," he said.

Currently, many lower-income people go to the emergency room for things that don't require immediate attention. It's hoped that the new center will relieve some of that strain by having people go to a primary care physician on an ongoing basis.

The center has already created about a dozen new jobs -- two physicians, two physician's assistants and nurse practitioners, four nurses, an administrative manager, outreach worker and clerical staff. When fully operational, about 20 people will work there including dental, psychiatric and social work personnel.

"We have a team that's really interested in trying to provide care for everyone in the community," Rodriguez-Goodemote said.

The center will be open from 7:30 a.m. to 7 p.m. Monday to Thursday and 7:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. Friday. Appointments are required. For more information or to make an appointment, call 886-5600.