The latest on the attacks in Paris and security alert in Brussels. All times local:

3:15 p.m.

Belgian authorities have launched a raid in southern Belgium linked to the Paris attacks but did not detain any suspects.

The raid in Sambreville, 80 kilometers (50 miles) south of Brussels and close to the French border, was carried out around noon. The area was cordoned off and a mobile lab was on place.

The federal prosecutor's office refused to divulge any further details.

2:45 p.m.

A civil protection squad has decontaminated several people as a precaution at the main Brussels mosque after a suspicious parcel arrived.

The person who opened the package discovered white powder and immediately contacted the authorities. A specialized crew from the fire department was sent, witnesses at the scene said.

Fire brigade Capt. Anne Wibin said 11 people underwent a precautionary decontamination until it could be exactly established what the powder is. She said it will take six hours to analyze the powder, but it is not radioactive.

1 p.m.

French authorities have extended a measure banning fans from visiting teams from attending soccer matches in the wake of the Paris attacks.

The French soccer league said all professional matches this weekend all across the country will be played without traveling fans in accordance with a decision by Interior Ministry.

It said the measure will be implemented during Champions League, Europa League, French league and French Cup matches until mid-December "because of a lack of availability of security forces under the emergency state" as well as due to a major climate change meeting in Paris from Nov. 30 to Dec. 11.

Security checks including metal detectors, bag searches and body pat-downs have been reinforced at stadiums after attackers on Nov. 13 targeted France's national stadium as well as bars, restaurants and a concert hall in Paris, killing 130 people and wounding hundreds. Islamic State militants have claimed responsibility for the carnage.

Noon

The co-founder of Eagles of Death Metal, the band that was playing at Paris' Bataclan concert hall on Nov. 13 when it was attacked, says he wants the rock group to return there when the concert venue reopens.

In an emotional interview with Vice released late Wednesday, the band, whose members escaped the carnage, described the moments of shock and horror. Choking back sobs, Jesse Hughes promised to return to the site where 89 people died at the hands of Islamic extremists -- among the 130 people killed in Paris on that Friday night.

Hughes says "I want to be the first band to play in the Bataclan when it opens back up."

He says "Our friends went there to see rock and roll and died. I'm going to go back there and live."

10:25 a.m.

Italy's prime minister has renewed his commitment to fighting terrorism alongside France, saying a broader coalition is needed to destroy the Islamic State group "and the atrocious project that it represents."

In a meeting Thursday with the French president, Matteo Renzi said that Libya must be a priority, saying the north African country `'risks to be the biggest emergency."

French President Francois Hollande is in the midst of a weeklong push for a stronger coalition against Islamic State militants after the Nov. 13 attacks in Paris that killed 130 and left hundreds injured. Hollande leaves Thursday for a meeting in Moscow with Russian President Vladimir Putin. He has already spoken with U.S. President Barack Obama.