Sarner hopes to face Jared Polis in November election

Larry Sarner (Special to the Reporter-Herald)

Longtime Loveland resident Larry Sarner announced Monday that he will seek the Republican nomination in Colorado's 2nd Congressional District, where he hopes to challenge incumbent Jared Polis on the November ballot.

Sarner, 66, said the liberal direction in which Polis has steered the district left him "no choice" but to seek election.

"Our interests are ignored by Jared Polis," Sarner said. "He represents his ambition, not us, in Congress. Congressman Polis has proven to be a serious threat to the welfare and liberties of the people. A serious threat requires a serious response, and that is why I am running to repeal and replace the current congressman."

On Monday, Sarner became the district's second Republican congressional hopeful to announce his candidacy. George Leing, chairman of the Boulder County Republicans, officially entered the race on Jan. 2. Polis, now in his third term in Congress, confirmed by phone Monday that he will seek re-election.

Sarner, who has lived in Loveland for 37 years, retired last year after a lengthy and varied career. Among the highlights are one-year stints as both reading clerk in the Colorado House of Representatives and legislative ratings director for the Colorado Union of Taxpayers.

He also spent 14 years as a self-described "volunteer lobbyist" fighting to keep Colorado's medical care "based on scientific excellence and opposing erection of dangerous pseudo-medical cartels."

Advertisement

If elected, Sarner said he'd work to stop "federal overreach," particularly on the issue of health care.

"Most of the problems in this country today can be laid at the feet of the federal government," he said. "It isn't open to much argument there."

Sarner said he hopes to "retract and recover" from the Affordable Care Act, for which he criticized Polis' perceived inaction. At a town hall meeting in Loveland last year, the congressman made clear to attendees that he wouldn't discuss repealing the ACA.

"Well, gosh, if it's a major problem, it's worth discussing," Sarner said. "That's the kind of arrogance that seems to grow up not just with Jared Polis, but with all sorts of federal officials. Obamacare is not the kind of thing we can afford to move forward on."

Sarner condemned Polis for focusing too much on the topics of education and immigration, when there are "more pressing items" at hand.

"The attempted federal takeover of the health system, that's much more concerned to the people in this district," Sarner said. "I don't see any commitment on his part to actually solving problems, but giving us more of the same. With that kind of approach, I fear for the future."

He added on Monday that he will be a vocal advocate for Colorado's oil and gas industry, accusing Polis of actively trying to prevent advantageous energy solutions.

Sarner also hopes to help replace the Common Core Standards by allowing individual states to seek ways to maximize the educational opportunities for their own children.

"In other words," he said, "get the federal government out of the way."

Alex Burness can be reached at 970-669-5050 ext. 521 or burnessa@reporter-herald.com. Follow him on Twitter @Alex_Burness.