When global law giant Dewey & LeBoeuf officially dissolved in February, nine months after filing for bankruptcy protection, some legal industry experts predicted the death of "Big Law" — the sprawling, corporate firms that employ thousands of partners and associates. Dewey, which was based in New York, once had 1,300 lawyers and annual revenues of more than $900 million, but it sunk under the weight of $245 million in debt. Dewey is believed to be the biggest law firm to fail in U.S. history.

Survivors in the world of Big Law say the industry is not facing its demise so much as a total reboot. In response to the protracted recession, the large companies that have retained Big Law's services for decades are looking to trim every cost they face, including their legal bills. That's forcing law firms to compete for new business, which in turn is causing them to rethink everything from the methods they use to bill clients, to the approach they take to staffing cases.

The goal of the refashioned legal industry is to continue to provide top-notch counsel, but with an enhanced focus on developing niche specialties and staying mindful of clients' bottom lines. "The common phrase is 'Big Law is dead.' I think that's overblown," says Don Lents, chairman of Bryan Cave in St. Louis, which has 990 lawyers in 18 U.S. offices and a presence in Asia and Europe. "The industry isn't going away. But we have to pay more attention to efficiencies and market share. It is imperative that we not be complacent about how we position ourselves for the future."

There's little debate that the Great Recession has taken a toll on the legal industry. Between 2008 and 2012, demand for legal services dropped by 0.4 percent a year — a stark contrast to the previous four-year period, when demand grew 3.7 percent annually — according to a survey of large law firms by Citi Private Bank and Hildebrandt Consulting. Annual revenue growth was just 0.8 percent in the most recent four years, vs. 9.8 percent in the four-year period prior to the recession. Citi is predicting a flat year for the legal profession in 2013.

[READ: The Urge to Merge: Big Law Goes Global]

Large law firms are now serving clients that are no longer willing to accept outsized hourly charges for legal services, with no explanation or accountability for results. "There's pressure coming from [clients] on how they're managing their budgets," says Chris Petrini-Poli, CEO of HBR Consulting in Chicago. "That forces big law firms to undergo the same process — really analyzing what they're spending and why."

In response to cost pressures from clients, many big law firms are moving away from billing by the hour and embracing alternative fee structures that allow them to set budgets up front. Richard Hays, managing partner of Alston & Bird in Atlanta and New York, says his firm of more than 850 lawyers has implemented project management protocols, which include holding discussions with clients about legal expenses before each job starts, and then constantly monitoring costs along the way. "We are redoubling our efforts to be efficient, with more budgeting that brings predictability to cost," Hays says.

In fact, law firms are learning to act more like the businesses they serve. To hold down costs, firms are staffing legal jobs more conservatively, by assembling teams that include a mix of seasoned lawyers and inexperienced — and hence lower-priced — young associates. Some firms are handing off rote legal tasks, such as straightforward paperwork, to inexpensive contract lawyers. Petrini-Poli says some firms have built offices in affordable locales, such as Dayton, Ohio, and staffed them up with young attorneys, who are paid five-figure salaries to handle uncomplicated legal work.

When it comes to providing specialized legal services, some firms are finding innovative ways to set themselves apart. Philadelphia-based Morgan, Lewis & Bockius, with more than 1,300 lawyers in 24 U.S. offices, has built up a practice group it calls eData, which is charged with helping clients sort through electronic documents that may come into play during cases, such as emails. "Clients became focused on how they could get that done cost-effectively, so we invested in technology that would allow us to get better at it," says Francis Milone, a partner and chair of the firm. Morgan Lewis hired a combination of lawyers, paralegals, and tech experts who are trained to manage searches of gigantic databases, and then pluck out the documents that are most relevant to a case. The firm has become so facile at that task that sometimes its eData group is hired by other law firms just to handle electronic documents for cases, Milone says.

The Big Law firms that are thriving are carving out lucrative niches in industries where the demand for legal services is still strong and growing. Those industries include gaming, technology, biotechnology, and pharmaceuticals. The explosion of entrepreneurship, particularly in technology and biotech, has also sparked a demand for patent lawyers who can help companies protect their intellectual property.

Regina Pisa, chairman of Goodwin Procter in Boston, with more than 770 lawyers in seven U.S. cities, says the appetite for initial public offerings in technology and life sciences has also been robust, further boosting the demand for legal services. Pisa says the total fee revenue for Goodwin Procter's technology and life sciences practices has increased 75 percent over the past five years, and the combined client base for the two specialty practices has grown 20 percent over the past year alone. This past spring, in response to legal industry pressures, Goodwin Procter's management team took a second look at a strategic plan the firm adopted in 2002, when it first identified the industries that would provide the greatest opportunities for growth, she says. "The relative priority of some practices has shifted, but technology and life sciences have risen higher on our list," Pisa says.

Some firms have also singled out health care as an opportunity, particularly with the new Affordable Care Act starting to roll out in 2014. As health reform increases the focus on efficiency in health care, more and more hospitals are joining accountable care organizations (ACOs), which are networks of health providers that receive flat "bundled" payments from insurers.

[RANKINGS: Best Law Firms]

Karen Lovitch, leader of the health law practice at 450-lawyer Mintz Levin in Washington, D.C., says her firm has put together a team of lawyers specializing in clinically integrated networks and health care antitrust issues to help in the formation of ACOs. Lovitch says that Mintz Levin has also seen increasing demand for lawyers to handle Medicare and Medicaid false claims cases, as well as disclosures required under new federal legislation mandating that life sciences companies disclose paid relationships with physicians.

To build Mintz Levin's reputation in health care, the firm churns out blog posts and publications on hot topics in health law, and it regularly plans webinars for clients and potential clients. "Growth isn't just about headcount," Lovitch says. "Growth is about branding yourself and letting people know about your expertise."

Among the most notable changes within Big Law is the rise to prominence of professionals who lack a law degree. The need for firms to master the skills of the business world — marketing, budgeting, and the like — has prompted many firms to hire managers who are not lawyers. For example, in August, Detroit-based Dykema announced that it had hired Richard Holdrup as its new chief financial officer. Holdrup is a Harvard MBA who worked in the consumer products industry prior to entering the legal profession in 2002.

Holdrup says his goal is to devise new strategies for boosting 331-lawyer Dykema's revenues and market share by winning business from other firms. "The demand for legal services is fairly flat year to year, so you have the same number of firms competing for a pie of work that isn't growing," Holdrup says. "Firms have to compete on technological capabilities. They have to compete on pricing, and for that, they need some level of financial analysis. It's no longer enough to go out to lunch with someone you went to school with — you have to provide a strong bench of talent in a cost-effective way."

Although many large law firms report they're adding fewer associates each year than they did during the boom, the hiring outlook in the legal industry isn't all that gloomy. More than 30 percent of law firms surveyed in June by Robert Half Legal, a staffing firm in Menlo Park, Calif., said they expected to add positions in the second half of 2013. The top three drivers for the uptick in hiring were predicted to be a rise in general litigation, corporate matters, and health care-related cases.

Vincent Cino, chairman of Jackson Lewis in Morristown, N.J., with 750 lawyers in 54 U.S. offices, says his firm has doubled in size over the last seven years without taking on any debt. The firm has built a range of specialty practice areas, including immigration, collegiate and pro sports, and environmental law.

[ALSO: 2013 Law Firm of the Year Awards]

Cino says Jackson Lewis is more attracted to particular lawyers than it is to locales. "We are fiscally conservative but entrepreneurial at the same time," he says. And when the lease runs out on any of its offices, the firm looks for a more economical space. "The days of huge corner offices, these cavernous enclaves, are over," he says.

But is it time to declare the death of Big Law? Like many leaders of multinational firms, Cino says its demise has been greatly exaggerated. "It really is the evolution of the legal profession at work," he says. "Clients are demanding high-quality work and efficiency at a reasonable price, so there's trust and confidence between the client and the firm. We've embraced that."