U.S. Representative Buddy Carter, Georgia First Congresssional District

This week marks 100 days since I was sworn into the United States House of Representatives. Representing the First Congressional District of Georgia has been one of the greatest honors of my life and I have been working diligently since day 1 to promote conservative values and deliver results. In 100 days, House Republicans have passed dozens of bills to repeal Obamacare, support domestic energy independence, simplify the burdensome tax code, grow our economy, rein in the out of control Administration and so much more.

Monday, April 20, 2015: Sometimes weekends can be the busiest times of all and this weekend certainly was a fine example. After voting shortly after lunch last Thursday, I flew to Columbia, SC, and rode with my colleague from the 12th District, Rick Allen, to Glennville where we attended the annual Public Safety Appreciation Barbecue hosted by Wayne Dasher. This is always a great event as we take time out to honor our Sheriffs and other public safety personnel who do such an outstanding job in our state.

Also, this weekend I had the opportunity to speak to a group of Richmond Hill High School students at their school to share with them my experiences in Congress and for a question and answer session. I was very impressed with how up to date on current affairs these young people were and how thoughtful their questions were. Afterwards, I toured the beautiful Richmond Hill Middle School where I also had the opportunity to meet with students who were most impressive. On Saturday morning, we had our First District Republican Convention meeting in Brunswick where I had the opportunity to address the group along with Secretary of State Brian Kemp.

Later that morning I had the opportunity to visit the Okefenokee National Wildlife Refuge in Folkston for their annual Earth Day Celebration. On Sunday I have the honor of speaking at the Blessing of the Fleet in Darien as they officially open this year’s shrimping season. Later in the afternoon I’m back in Savannah where I have the opportunity to visit Hospice Savannah to meet with Congressional Gold Medal recipient Amelia Jones. This 93 year old American hero was a member of the Tuskegee Airmen during World War II and is certainly deserving of this recognition. Today starts out early as I have the opportunity to welcome members of the Georgia Board of Regents and others to the University of Georgia Skidaway Island Institute of Oceanography for an oyster hatchery visit.

Later in the morning, along with my friend U.S. Senator Johnny Isakson, I have the honor of speaking at the groundbreaking ceremony for a new veterans clinic on Rio Road in Savannah. This much needed facility, five years in the making, will double the space currently available to our veterans and offer more services including ophthalmology, mental health care and a women’s health clinic. Our district is home to some outstanding military installations and the quality of life in our area leads many veterans to retire to our area, making the need for quality healthcare for our veterans a priority.

Tuesday, April 21, 2015: After having two flights to Washington cancelled yesterday, I am up at 3:45AM this morning and at the airport at 4:45AM for my flight out today. Already frustrated, as I’m sure you can understand, I make it all the way through the pre-screening line only to find out that my boarding pass on my phone is suddenly not working. Following directions from the TSA officer on duty, I head back to the ticket desk to get a paper boarding pass. Once there, the attendant informs me that my flight has been cancelled and they have rescheduled me on a 10:15AM flight! Luckily, our first votes of the day are not until later and my staff is able to cover my early morning meetings.

Once at the Capitol, I head straight to the Capitol Visitors Center where I have the opportunity to speak to members of the Georgia Partnership for Excellence in Education who are visiting today. Once I finally make it to my office I meet with the Georgia Telephone Association before meeting with Sergeant Angel Ramon who is currently stationed at Fort Stewart and is a Job Corps graduate from New York. Sgt. Ramon sings the praises of the Job Corps and credits them with helping him to straighten his life out. We are fortunate to have a Job Corps facility located in Brunswick in our district.

Afterwards, we have our weekly staff meeting before I meet with members of the Georgia Association of Nurse Anesthetists including Francie McMath from Savannah who is a member of my home church and attended school with my middle son. After a meeting with the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform to discuss a bill opposing the DC law approving the Reproductive Health Non-Discrimination Amendment Act, I head to the Capitol for my first Whip Team meeting where we review legislation that will be voted on this week. Our first and only votes of the day follow where we pass procedural motions. After leaving the Chamber I take time for a radio interview with CBS news to discuss the recent resignation of DEA Administrator Leonhart.

Wednesday, April 22, 2015: Today begins with a Republican Conference meeting followed by a meeting of the Committee on Education and the Workforce to discuss the challenges facing our Native American schools. Next, I head to a meeting in my office with Mark Moore who is President and CEO of MANA Nutrition, a company that has a facility in Fitzgerald and makes ready to use nutritional products for use in third world countries.

After the meeting, staff informed me of the terrible tragedy that occurred early this morning involving five Georgia Southern University (GSU) nursing students. After a few quiet minutes for prayer, I meet with members of the Automotive Service Association before heading to the House Chamber for votes. Immediately after voting, I meet with Colonel Chad Franks, Commander of the 23rd Wing at Moody Air Force Base in Valdosta for an update on this important military installation in our district. I have two more committee meetings this afternoon as well as two more meetings with visiting groups including members of the Carpet and Rug Institute before we take our last votes of the day as we pass the Protecting Cyber Networks Act.

Thursday, April 23, 2015: I begin the day as I have begun every day since I can remember and that is with prayer. Our hearts are heavy this morning as we are still trying to digest the tragic news involving the five GSU nursing students, including Abbie Deloach from Savannah the beloved daughter of my friend since childhood Jimmy Deloach, as our thoughts and prayers are with the families and the Eagle Nation.

My first meeting is with Colonel Thomas Tickner, Commander of the Savannah District US Army Corps of Engineers, for an extended update on the Savannah Harbor Expansion Project (SHEP). After a meeting with a national pharmacy group visiting my office, I head to the House Chamber where we pass the National Cybersecurity Protection Advancement Act. During our time in the House Chamber, members of the Georgia delegation and I lead the House in observing a moment of silence for the five GSU nursing students tragically killed yesterday.

After our weekly meeting of the Georgia delegation, I have the opportunity to meet with members of the Brunswick-Glynn County Chamber of Commerce who are visiting the Capitol for their annual fly-in. Woody Woodside and his group do an excellent job advocating for their area on such issues as flood insurance and wetlands delineation. Other meetings this afternoon include the Independent Insurance Agents and Dismas, a company that provides re-entry programs for offenders.

Share and Enjoy