Elected officials candid in freewheeling talk

State Rep.Hank Vaupel, R-Handy Township, mets with audience members following Monday's luncheon. (Photo: Wayne Peal/Livingston Daily)

In a room full of Republicans, Donald Trump remains the biggest elephant in the room, even in Livingston County.

The four members of Livingston's all-GOP congressional and Lansing delegations offered support for the presumed Republican presidential nominee — some more reluctantly than others — Monday during a joint appearance in Genoa Township, but they also tackled a number of other issues ranging from bathroom use by transgender individuals to the nation's student loan crisis.

Regarding Trump, state Sen. Joe Hune, R-Hamburg Township, offered the most ringing endorsement.

"I was on the Trump train long ago," said Hune, who will serve as a Trump delegate to the national GOP convention in Cleveland. "I'll tell you what, he took Livingston County by a wide margin (in the March GOP primary)." There, Trump led a still-crowded GOP field with 15,359 votes, roughly more than 6,000 more than either John Kasich or Ted Cruz.

State Rep. Hank Vaupel, R- Handy Township, seemed to agree that Republican elected officials should follow the will of primary voters.

"I'm gong to support Donald Trump," Vaupel said, praising the New York businessman for bringing new voters into the party.

Support from U.S. Rep. Mike Bishop, R-Rochester, and state Rep. Lana Theis, R-Brighton Township, was slightly more nuanced. Both prefaced the comments by noting that Trump was neither their first nor second choice for their party's presidential nominee.

Bishop noted Trump will present a clear choice and clear alternative to likely Democratic party nominee Hillary Clinton.

"I don't know what more we can do for you," he said.

Theis pledged to support "the top of the ticket" but encouraged Republican voters to support the bottom of the ticket, too.

Anti-Trump message

Trump continues to spur passions, even within Republican-dominated Livingston County.

A semi-trailer, spray painted with an obscene message regarding Trump, was on display early Monday along an Interstate 96 exit ramp at Spencer Road, about four miles from the Oak Pointe Country Club where the elected leaders gathered for Monday's luncheon. The luncheon was was sponsored by the Greater Brighton Area Chamber of Commerce.

Transgender issues

The four elected officials also expressed slightly different viewpoints regarding proposed Michigan Board of Education guidelines that suggest schools could choose to allow transgender students to use the bathroom of their choice.

Theis said the issue, for her, was personal and that she would fight to protect the safety of "all students, not just a few."

"I don't know if any of you have a 15-year-old daughter who plays volleyball, but I do," Theis said, noting choice on bathroom issues could lead to expanded confusion about locker room use and sports team membership.

Vaupel said the board was perhaps ahead of itself and should have considered letting schools create unisex bathrooms.

Bishop, noted it was not a federal issue — nor likely to immediately be one — but said he was concerned about a perceived lack of parental notification regarding bathroom use.

Hune said he supported disbanding the state Board of Education altogether but noted it would take an amendment to the Michigan Constitution.

While at least one state senator has proposed students who are “biologically different" from sharing a bathroom, such legislation faces an uncertain future. North Carolina faces a federal lawsuit to preserve a similar bill its legislators approved earlier this year. A bill with provisions that would have been limited only to schools was vetoed by the governor of South Dakota.

College loans

On another largely federal, issues, Bishop said he was working toward giving students more options in terms of college loans and hoped the new Congress would bring all players, including college and universities, to the table in an effort to reduce student debt.

Bishop also said the Affordable Care Act needed revisiting, especially in light of rising health care costs, but cautioned that a better alternative needed to be agreed upon

"Repealing Obamacare isn't enough," he said, calling for a "patient-centered" system.

Contact Livingston Daily reporter Wayne Peal at 517-548-7081 or wpeal@gannett.com. Follow him on Twitter @wpeal.

Read or Share this story: http://ldpaa.com/278KynP