JACKSON, Miss. (WCBI/MSU Athletics) – Mississippi State quarterback Dak Prescott was named the winner of the 19th annual C Spire Conerly Trophy, the Mississippi Sports Hall of Fame and Museum announced Tuesday night. Prescott is the first MSU quarterback and the sixth Bulldog overall to win the award, which is presented to the best college football player in the state of Mississippi.

“I am grateful and honored to be named the recipient of this year’s Conerly Trophy,” Prescott said. “When you think of the great players to have played the game I love in this state, it is a very humbling experience.”

Prescott, also a Maxwell Award and Davey O’Brien finalist, earned the honor after finishing the regular season ranked fifth in the FBS with 228 points responsible for and sixth with 327.9 yards of total offense per game. Thanks to shattering 10 single-season school records, the Haughton, La., native led the Maroon and White to its first 10-win regular season in school history, as well as its first No. 1 ranking in school history.

Along with 2012 Heisman Trophy winner Johnny Manziel, Prescott is the only FBS player in the last seven seasons to average at least 240 yards passing and 75 yards rushing per game. With his success and leadership, State has been ranked in the top-10 for a program-best nine-consecutive weeks.

Prescott won the fan vote, which accounted for 10 percent of the final vote. The other 90 percent was made up of votes from a statewide panel of media. With current Oakland Raiders’ rookie Gabe Jackson capturing the award last fall, Tuesday marked the second time in history one school won the trophy in consecutive years (Mississippi State, 2009-10). Prescott is the fourth Bulldog in the past six years to win the honor, which debuted in 1996.

Bulldog fans can leave Prescott a congratulatory message at his official Facebook page, Facebook.com/DakPrescott.

Mississippi State Conerly Trophy Winners

2014 – Dak Prescott, Quarterback

2013 – Gabe Jackson, Offensive Lineman

2010 – Chris White, Linebacker

2009 – Anthony Dixon, Running Back

2005 – Jerious Norwood, Running Back

1998 – J.J. Johnson, Running Back