THIS week health insurers have begun revealing proposed rate increases to their health-care plans for 2016. These potential hikes, which in some cases exceed 30%, can be partly explained by the fact that insurers low-balled their prices in the early days of the Affordable Care Act in order to gain market share. But there is another reason: higher drug prices. Prescription drug spending increased 13.1% in 2015.

This rise is partly explained by some new drugs for Hepatitis C. More trouble is on the horizon. At the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) in Chicago this week, scientists announced that new immuno-oncology drugs work in a wider range of cancers, and even better when given in combination. The problem is that these drugs are some of the most expensive the country has ever seen.

“These drugs cost too much,” said Leonard Salz, an oncologist at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Centre, in a high-profile speech at the meeting. At $295,000 a year, the price of combination therapy is unsustainable, he explained. At a big drug-sponsored conference, this was like swearing at a vicar's tea party. The fact that the bad news about prices somewhat eclipsed the good news on cancer treatment was an irony lost on no one. And the problem of drug costs is expected to only get worse as Americans get older and fatter and the rates of cancer go up.

Innovation in the drug industry is expensive and risk must be rewarded. Some novel drugs may be worth paying high prices for. Yet drug prices in America often have more to do with what the market will bear than anything else. For example Gleevec, a drug sold by Novartis to treat blood-based cancer, seemed rather dear when it was first sold in 2001 at around $30,000 for a year's supply, yet the price still tripled in the past decade. One economist at a closed-door session of pricing experts at ASCO dryly remarked that she could find no economic theory to explain how companies price their drugs.

For years the high price of American drugs had been seen as a success: drug companies were being rewarded for innovations that benefit people. Yet too many drugs have long charged outsized prices for trivial benefits. For example Avastin, one of the most popular cancer drugs in the world, which raises billions of dollars a year for Roche, a Basel-based drug company, has long been seen as having questionable utility. “Almost worthless,” muttered one oncologist at ASCO. Drug companies also tend to charge Americans more for the same drug sold in other markets, in part because other countries often have a single-payer system that negotiates better deals for consumers.

This problem of sky-rocketing costs for questionable drugs has festered in America for several reasons. First, pharmaceutical companies can advertise directly to patients in America, which helps ensure demand. Second, price increases have been largely invisible to both patients and their doctors, in part because health-insurance plans often shield buyers from the true costs of their drugs. Third, Medicare, the public-health programme for those aged 65 and older, is the country’s largest drug customer, yet it is not allowed to negotiate prices with drug companies—with predictable results.

In the face of rising drug prices, insurers have two options. They can either raise the cost of their insurance, as many would like to do this year. Or they can continue to limit the coverage of their plans, either by using co-pays on drugs or increasing the amount that patients must pay out of pocket before insurance kicks in (ie, high-deductible plans). Yet high-deductible plans tend to deter patients from seeking medical help. If high drug prices for a few speciality drugs drive more people onto high-deductible plans next year, then the needs of a select few may end up distorting the health outcomes of the masses. Examples also abound of patients who are brought to ruin by the costs of their drugs, and others who are forced to abandon life-saving therapies altogether.

Rising drug prices create other problems, too. Companies that are forced to pay higher health-insurance premiums for their workers are less inclined to raise salaries, says Steve Miller, the chief medical officer of Express Scripts, a company that manages drug benefits for insurers. Drugs for Hepatitis C alone will have $20 billion in sales this year, he says. Divided by 180m workers, this is a 5 cent-per-hour tax on every single paycheck.

Express Scripts has long been a thorn in the side of the pharmaceutical industry. In recent years the company has begun excluding drugs from coverage if they are seen as overpriced or underwhelming. Last year Express Scripts decided to forgo use of Gilead's $84,000 drug for Hepatitis C in favour of a cheaper alternative. If drug prices continue to soar, expect other insurance companies to follow this lead.