Chip Kahn, the brains behind the "Harry and Louise" campaign, is pictured. | Matt Sobocinski 'Harry and Louise' — and Hillary The godfather of a classic attack ad weighs in on health reform and the 2016 campaign.

Who should Hillary Clinton blame for the infamous ad campaign that killed her 1993 health reform plan?

Hillary Clinton.

Story Continued Below

That's according to Chip Kahn, the brains behind the "Harry and Louise" campaign, who told POLITICO's "Pulse Check" podcast that Clinton's scathing attack on the insurance industry-funded ads only brought them more visibility and ultimately helped sink health reform, a signature issue of her husband's new administration, less than two years into his presidency.

Not seeing the podcast? Click here to listen on Soundcloud and click here to subscribe on iTunes.

"'Harry and Louise' was made by Mrs. Clinton," said Kahn, formerly an insurance lobbyist and now the head of the Federation of American Hospitals — and a supporter of Obamacare. He pointed to Clinton's blistering tirade against the ads in a November 1993 speech as the pivotal moment that accidentally elevated insurers' agenda. "Every time we did a new ad ... we were on the evening news."

"It's one of those things that starts drip, drip, drip — and then it pours," Kahn said. "It wasn't meant to necessarily have the effect it did."

The demise of their signature health initiative shadowed the Clintons for the rest of their time in the White House, and Hillary Clinton even boasts of the experience these days as one of her liberal bona fides, saying, "I've got the scars to show for it." But much of her success in November may come down to how well she has learned the lessons from that defeat.

Kahn said the scenario the industry's campaign created — start a firestorm with some paid ads, then fuel it with a lot of free coverage — reminds him of the rise of Donald Trump.

The $20 million ad campaign has become part of Washington lore for its devastating simplicity: A pair of middle-age actors sitting at a kitchen table, fretting about the horrors in store if the Clinton plan creates a government-driven system to control their health care. The middle-aged couple pored over calculators and piles of paper, fretting about the new bureaucratic restrictions, extra costs and lost choices, often finishing with the lament: “There’s gotta be a better way.”

All the industry wanted, Kahn said, was a seat at the table, even before it began running the ads. But the White House was "very negative," he said, especially Hillary Clinton and top health care adviser Ira Magaziner. In one meeting, Magaziner "turned off his hearing aid," Kahn said.

"There were many middle grounds we could find, but they didn't look for them and we didn’t stop" running the ads, he said.

And Hillary Clinton’s response, he said, further fanned the flames.

The campaign quickly became a burr in the side of the White House, fighting to save its beleaguered health plan. As anxiety mounted, a Democratic National Committee staffer threatened the actress who played Louise, telling her that if she didn't quit the ads, she'd never work in Hollywood again. And Hillary Clinton was "getting angrier and angrier," Kahn says, culminating in a speech at a convention of pediatricians where she delivered a scathing, unscripted attack on the campaign and the industry that had funded it.

"They have the gall to run TV ads that there is a better way," Clinton said. "The very industry that has brought us to the brink of bankruptcy because of the way they have financed health care."

It was arguably the most furious attack on a major industry ever made by a sitting first lady, David Broder and Haynes Johnson write in their book "The System." And it drove a damaging narrative that the unelected spouse of the president was overly involved in public policy.

Within months, the White House health reform effort was on life support — and Bill and Hillary Clinton were reduced to performing a "Harry and Louise" parody skit (written by a "Saturday Night Live" writer) at the Gridiron dinner.

The insurers' attack ads have had an enduring legacy — they eventually helped shape Democrats' approach to crafting Obamacare and have continued to influence Clinton's health care policy as a candidate. Obama administration officials learned they needed buy-in from the industry to pass a big health reform package, which ultimately meant that Obamacare included compromises that disappointed liberals.

But in a pair of symbolic reversals, the "Harry and Louise" characters were resurrected in 2009 to sing the praises of the Affordable Care Act during its drafting — and Kahn, too, largely became an Obamacare supporter, though he doesn't hesitate to call out its flaws.

"I work for hospitals," Kahn said, explaining his conversion. "The best situation for Americans —and for those that hospitals serve — is for everyone to have [health] insurance."

On the other hand, he’s also not taking sides yet between Clinton and Trump.

Kahn did say that the government should build on the framework created by the Affordable Care Act, and if Clinton gets elected, that will be her framework too — while with Trump, we'll go a "different direction." But if Trump wins, he thinks Republicans will maintain the House and the Senate. "I can't envision him winning without them gaining control. They'll take significant action on health reform."

Clinton today repeatedly cites her 1990s battle with the insurance industry as proof of her experience fighting for liberal causes. She also uses it to cast Bernie Sanders' government-run, single-payer health care plan as a pure fantasy that powerful Washington lobbies would never allow.

Clinton, whose criticism of single-payer during the Democratic primary has stunned liberals who support the idea in principle, has instead advocated incremental reforms to make health insurance more affordable within the current system. Those ideas, which include capping out-of-pocket costs and forcing drug companies to negotiate prices, haven't won much support from the deep-pocketed insurance and pharmaceutical industries, either.

Clinton's most recent idea — resurrecting a "public option" and allowing younger Americans to buy into Medicare — has a wary critic: Kahn.

"That is a proposal that is misdirected and would be a big mistake," Kahn said.

He has not yet commissioned "Harry and Louise" to explain why to voters, though.