MONTGOMERY, Alabama --- Gov. Robert Bentley, who campaigned as an opponent of expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, now says his administration might seek a block grant for expansion.

The governor said he hasn't changed his position, saying he first began talking about that in 2010.

"A block grant has no strings attached," the governor said. "They give you the money and allow you as a state to design a program."

The governor brought up the idea while speaking to legislators last week.

Bentley said it would be a plan designed to cover people earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty limit.

That's the income level that would be covered by expanding Medicaid under the ACA, also called Obamacare.

Bentley said he would support an Alabama-designed plan that required recipients to be working or in a work training program.

Advocates for Medicaid expansion under Obamacare have noted that many of those helped would have been working families.

Bentley said with a block grant the state could request proposals from private insurers to provide the expanded coverage.

Bentley's Democratic opponent in the general election, Parker Griffith, proposed seeking a federal waiver to expand Medicaid coverage through private insurers.

Griffith wanted to debate Bentley about the issue, but the governor refused.

Bentley said he talked about the block grant idea in 2010.

"If you look back and see what I have said in the past, you'll see I'm totally consistent with what I've said before," Bentley said today. "I have not changed."

Bentley said he doubted the federal government would approve such a block grant now.

But he said that could change with Republicans controlling both chambers in Congress.

He said a court ruling could also change the landscape.

A federal appeals court ruled in July that subsidies that help people buy insurance on the federal exchange set up by Obamacare are outside the scope of the law. The court ruled the ACA only allows subsidies for those who buy insurance through state-run exchanges. Alabama and 33 other states use the federal exchange.

The U.S. Supreme Court announced in November it would hear the case.

Bentley said if the court determines that subsidies can't be used in Alabama and the other 33 states, "then everything is on the table. I guarantee you the federal government will be looking at all sorts of plans out there."