Darrell Webb,of Wilmore, with the help Brenda Sewell, signed up for health insurance with Kynector Joseph Yunker at the Fayette Mall in Lexington on Dec. 9. (Photo: Jonathan Palmer)

Darrell Webb generally doesn't go to the doctor because he has no health insurance. But last week, the seasonal asphalt worker's live-in girlfriend Brenda Sewell helped him sign up for Medicaid — which she hopes gives him access to long-delayed care.

Webb is one of 101,114 Kentuckians who have newly enrolled or re-enrolled in Obamacare health plans during the first 30 days of open enrollment through the state's health insurance exchange, kynect. State numbers released late Tuesday afternoon show that 16,139 residents met eligibility requirements for Medicaid, 9,215 newly enrolled in qualified health plans and 75,760 auto-renewed last year's private kynect health plans since re-enrollment began Nov. 15.

"I think (kynect) is great. There's a lot of people who don't have insurance," said Sewell, 65, of Wilmore, who helped Webb sign up at the Fayette Mall in Lexington. "You never know when you might have to go to the hospital or the doctor."

People had to sign up for qualified health plans by Monday for coverage to begin Jan. 1, but they can still sign up for the plans until open enrollment ends Feb. 15. Enrollment in Medicaid, which the state expanded under the Affordable Care Act, continues on a rolling basis all year.

Last year, more than 521,000 Kentuckians enrolled in plans through kynect, mostly in Medicaid. A Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index report said Kentucky's uninsured rate fell from 20.4 percent in 2013 to 11.9 percent midway through 2014 — the second-highest reduction of uninsured people in the country.

"We were really thrilled with the number of people kynect enrolled last year, but there are still thousands of Kentuckians who need insurance for themselves and for their families," said Carrie Banahan, executive director of kynect.

Sign-ups slower but plentiful

Most people without insurance face a penalty, which in 2015 will rise from $95 per adult, or 1 percent of household income, to $325 per adult or 2 percent of household income, whichever is greater.

State officials said as of noon Tuesday, 159,184 individuals had conducted preliminary screenings through kynect; 209,871 calls had been handled by the kynect contact center, 15,734 accounts had been created and 38,309 new applications for coverage had been submitted.

Far more people are signing up for Medicaid than qualified health plans, like last year. A month into last year's sign-up period, more than 32,000 people had enrolled through kynect, but only 15 percent purchased a private plan through the exchange. The remaining 85 percent enrolled in Medicaid. To qualify for the Medicaid expansion, a person's income must fall below 138 percent of the Federal Poverty Level — less than $16,000 a year for an individual or around $36,000 for a family of four.

Kentuckians can buy private health plans on or off the exchange but can get subsidies to help pay premiums if they go through kynect. State officials have estimated that around 290,000 Kentuckians are potentially eligible for subsidies with the Obamacare plans. For example, a 35-year-old single parent of two who earns $35,000 per year could get a monthly subsidy of $240; a retired couple with $50,000 in income could get a $526 monthly subsidy.

Officials encourage new enrollees as well as the 80,000 people who purchased private plans on the exchange last year to shop around on the exchange, which has a larger pool of providers this year. Premium and subsidy amounts are changing in many plans — rising in some cases. But if those with existing plans don't do anything, they are automatically re-enrolled in their current plans.

Sign-ups have been slower this year. But Kentucky officials, like those in other states, say they expect the pace to pick up as the final deadline for sign-ups nears.

"Isolated Issues"

Compared with other states, Kentucky's health exchange has run pretty smoothly since it was launched. The federal HealthCare.gov site, which melted down last year during the first launch, has also suffered a spate of problems this year. And some other states that run their own exchanges have also reported problems.

Still, some Kentuckians have faced difficulties.

"There haven't been any widespread issues, but there may be some isolated issues," said Gwenda Bond, a spokeswoman for the state Cabinet for Health and Family Services.

Sewell said she and Webb, 56, faced problems last year. First, they tried to sign up online, she said, but "couldn't get it to go through." When they tried the call center, representatives couldn't find a record of what they had done.

"We didn't have any success," she said. "It was so confusing, we just quit."

This year, Sewell said they heard about a pop-up retail store in the Fayette Mall where people would help consumers sign up for care — and she and Webb had no problems at all. "It's better they've got an office where people can go to," she said.

State officials said 4,256 people have visited the kynect store, completing 2,343 applications for new coverage.

Besides adding the pop-up store, the state has taken other steps to ensure a smoother enrollment, adding staff to reduce wait times at call centers and working with twice as many insurance agents as last year.

And the state's pre-screening process, in which residents can look at potential plan costs without actually starting applications, now allows them to estimate subsidies as well as premiums. One way they can do this is through the new mobile app, which allows people to see if they qualify for coverage, get information about the type of coverage and monthly cost and get connected to an insurance agent or kynector, who can assist people with signing up.

Those who sign up between now and Jan. 15 would have coverage with a Feb. 1 effective date, while those who enroll after Jan. 15 would have a March 1 effective date.

"Enrolling is easy," Banahan said. "You can check out kynect online, by phone or in-person with an insurance agent or kynectors, or stop by (the Fayette mall) location."

KYNECT HELP

•To examine kynect options, visit https://kynect.ky.gov or call

1-855-4kynect (459-6328)

•To find the location and hours of a state office for assistance with your application, visit https://kynect.ky.gov/General/LocateAnOffice and type in your county or ZIP code.

KYNECT NUMBERS

•101,114 Kentuckians have newly enrolled or re-enrolled in Obamacare health plans during the first 30 days of open enrollment

•16,139 residents met eligibility requirements for Medicaid

•9,215 residents have newly enrolled in qualified health plans.

•75,760 residents have auto-renewed private kynect health plans

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1DIYDfu