MUMBAI, February 20, 2014 /PRNewswire/ --

Bharat Book Bureau presents The U.S. Weight Loss Market: 2014 Status Report & Forecast. This new report presents a wrap-up of 2013 performance for the U.S. weight loss market. (http://www.bharatbook.com/healthcare-market-research-reports/the-us-weight-loss-market-2014-status-report-forecast.html)

The value of the market actually declined by 1.8% to $60.5 billion, largely as a result of slumping diet soft drink sales, and flat performance in most other market segments-including the large chains. The market is forecast to grow only 1.2% this year, as the DIY dieting trend continues, more competitors appear, and diet companies try to sort out the effects of the Affordable Care Act.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130128/590935 )



The report covers discussions of: 2013 market performance, recent competitor developments and top management turnover, Nestle's sale of Jenny Craig, new programs for 2014 diet season (by Weight Watchers, Jenny Craig, Nutrisystem), the coming paradigm shift from diet PRODUCTS to diet SERVICES, dieter demographics/latest trends, why the Affordable Care Act can be profitable for companies providing counseling (who qualifies), CVS drugstore chain enters market with mini-clinic program, threat posed by Walmart, weight loss & fitness apps - how big a threat?, new diet books, reasons why market growth is slow - how diet companies can execute better, customize programs, form new retail partnerships, and more.

The U.S. weight loss market has entered a new phase of flat to low growth, constrained mainly by a weak economy and a shift to do-it-yourself plans by consumers. Yet, some competitors are doing well, and many untapped niches exist.

Individual Status Reports for the 10 major weight loss market segments (2013 performance/dollar value, 2014 forecasts)… diet soft drinks, artificial sweeteners, health clubs, commercial weight loss chains, OTC meal replacements and diet pills, diet websites & apps, medical programs (weight loss surgery, MDs, hospitals/clinic programs, Rx diet drugs, bariatrician plans, VLCD programs), low-calorie dinner entrees, diet books, exercise DVDs.

Request for sample pages: http://www.bharatbook.com/RequestSample.asp?pid=467678

Table of Contents

Summary & Performance of the U.S. Weight Loss Market in 2013 1-10

Discussion of market paradigm shift, from emphasis on diet products to diet services

Table: $ value of weight loss products vs. services, 2013 growth rate

Table: Total diet mkt. value, segments value: 2010-2013

Recent Competitor Developments

Summaries of new programs launched for 2014 diet season: Weight Watchers, Jenny Craig , NutriSystem, Medifast

, NutriSystem, Medifast NutriSystem Fast Five Plan, June 2013 affiliation with 4,000 Walmart storesNS D Jump Start kit) - description, prices

affiliation with 4,000 Walmart storesNS D Jump Start kit) - description, prices Weight Watchers Simple Start 2-week plan - description, prices

Nestle sells Jenny Craig to North Castle partners in Nov. 2013 - discussion, synergies with Curves fitness chain (also owned by North Castle)

to North Castle partners in - discussion, synergies with Curves fitness chain (also owned by North Castle) Closure of 100 Jenny Craig centers in No. America

EDiets.com exits meal delivery business under new owner (As Seen On TV)

Dieter Demographics, Dieter Trends, New Fads 11-12

Discussion of total number of U.S. dieters, percent that are DIY dieters

Research survey finds avg. number of diets a woman tries in her lifetime

91% of college age women trying to lose weight, new research

2014 Market Outlook & Effects of Obamacare 13-20

Major diet market trends and developments, 2014 forecasts

Table: 2013 & 204F dollar values of all diet market segment, 2014 growth rates

Discussion of Obamacare's preventive health benefit, coverage of obesity screening and counseling sessions, terms & conditions, who qualifies, who can provide counseling, diet companies that have an advantage

Obesity classified as a disease by the AMA, Doctors told to be more proactive in fighting obesity, opportunities for counseling revenues

New competitors: CVS drugstore chain just launched DASH diet at its healthcare mini-clinics, description of, costs, opportunity for diet companies to partner with other drugstore chains (Walgreens, Rite Aid, etc.).

New diet book: Pastor Rick Warren Launches New Daniel Diet Plan.

Weight Loss & Fitness Apps: How Big A Threat? 21-31

Discussion of weight loss apps: why diet companies are overemphasizing their competitive threat and not looking internally at what's wrong with their own programs/services

Descriptions of most popular fitness/weight loss apps: MyFitnessPal, LoseIt, Fooducate, Diet2Go, WeightBot, Noom, DietPoint

Table: the major weight loss websites, year created, Alexa traffic ranks

For more information and complete table of content: http://www.bharatbook.com/healthcare-market-research-reports/the-us-weight-loss-market-2014-status-report-forecast.html

Related Reports:

Related Category:

About Bharat Book Bureau

Bharat Book Bureau is the leading market research information aggregator that provides market research reports, industry analysis, company profiles, business reports, country reports, newsletters and online databases. Our clients include Corporate, Consulting firms, and Academic Institutions and Government departments across the globe. Bharat Book Bureau provides over a million reports from more than 400 publishers around the globe. The market research reports we provide, help global companies examine the different markets before setting up a business or expanding into different countries across the world. They give a complete perspective on the current market scenario, trends, segments and future outlook.

Contact us:

Poonam

Bharat Book Bureau

USA/Canada - 1-866-279-8368 (Toll free)

India: +91-22-27810772, 27810773

Blog: http://blog.bharatbook.com

E: poonam@bharatbook.com

W: http://www.bharatbook.com

SOURCE Bharat Book Bureau