.......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... ..........

Copyright © 2015 Albuquerque Journal

WASHINGTON – New Mexico’s congressional Democrats oppose giving President Obama fast-track trade authority, putting them at odds with the White House, business groups and Republican leaders in Congress.

Obama has asked Congress to pass so-called Trade Promotion Authority legislation that would prohibit congressional amendments before an up or down vote on the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a proposed trade agreement involving 12 countries throughout the Asia-Pacific region, including Latin America and Mexico.

State and national business leaders told the Journal the Trade Promotion Authority – and the larger Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal – would be good for the economy and American workers. Organized labor opposes the deal.

Proponents of fast-track authority consider it essential to preventing highly complex trade deals from getting bogged down in politics on Capitol Hill. But those who oppose the authority say it would require Congress to rubber-stamp a complex trade deal. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said last week that the Trade Promotion Authority is a legislative priority that could come to a Senate vote before the end of May.

Obama, GOP congressional leaders and the head of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce contend that the larger Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal would spur the U.S. economy and create jobs, while many congressional Democrats and U.S. labor leaders contend the deal is secretive and would erode critical environmental, labor and consumer protections, while enriching corporate interests.

“Time and again, we’ve heard the promises associated with free trade deals, that they will actually be good for American workers,” said Sen. Martin Heinrich, D-N.M. “But cheaper Tupperware has never begun to make up for the lower American wages that have resulted from agreements like NAFTA. Unfortunately, before I ever see the details of the Trans-Pacific Partnership and before the American public gets to see the details of the deal, I am being asked to give away any chance I would have as a U.S. senator to change it, make it better, or fix what could be fatal flaws.”

Jon Barela, New Mexico’s secretary of economic development, said he and Gov. Susana Martinez support fast-track authority and the Trans-Pacific deal, which he said would allow New Mexico’s already surging export growth to expand further.

“These (trade deals) will allow us as a state to access markets in the rapidly expanding economies of the Asia-Pacific region,” Barela said.

Thomas J. Donohue, president and CEO of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, told the Journal that Trade Promotion Authority is critical to completing landmark agreements with America’s allies, who might otherwise be reluctant to go through lengthy, delicate negotiations knowing U.S. lawmakers could tinker with the final product. The Chamber has been lobbying Congress heavily on Trade Promotion Authority.

“If you don’t have it, you’re not going to be able to close these other (trade) deals,” Donohue said. “Who the hell would want to negotiate an agreement that 435 members of the House and 100 members of the Senate are going to edit? Forget it.”

Donohue also said the larger Trans-Pacific Partnership deal presents the U.S. with “a great opportunity to influence the rules under which trade with the Pacific is going to be written because, if we’re not there, Canada and others will go over there and make that deal.”

Sen. Tom Udall said the Trans-Pacific Partnership “appears to benefit corporations above U.S. health and safety standards that keep our families safe.” Udall wants to preserve the ability of Congress to alter any deal.

“Trade deals between nations ripple down and have a direct impact on New Mexico families – affecting wages, labor standards, safety, environmental and health standards, and other protections that American workers have fought for over many decades,” Udall said. “So I have deep concerns about fast-tracking the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which is not available to the public and threatens these protections for middle-class families, as well as privacy rights and the open Internet. I cannot support broad presidential authority to fast-track such a wide-ranging deal, which would limit the Senate’s ability to review trade agreements and represent our constituents’ interests.”

On Tuesday, White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest told reporters that White House officials have been lobbying Democrats in Congress on the fast-track bill.

“The president is hopeful that Democrats, as they take a clear-eyed look at this proposal, will acknowledge that the best way to advance the kinds of progressive values and the best way to advance the interests of middle-class families all across the country is to support this particular trade bill,” Earnest said.

Rep. Steve Pearce, the New Mexico delegation’s only Republican, was noncommittal on the coming congressional vote on fast-track authority. House Speaker John Boehner has announced his support.

“Free trade is critical to closing the current trade deficit our nation faces, but equally critical is the assurance of fair trade,” Pearce said. “Any fast-track legislation before the House must include substantial repercussions for countries who engage in currency manipulation, and safeguards against substandard working and environmental conditions.”

Rep. Ben Ray Luján, D-N.M., told the Journal “fast-track authority would limit Congress’ ability to ensure that any trade agreement addresses critical concerns that impact hard-working families in New Mexico.”

“I am opposed to a path forward that excludes Congress from playing a meaningful role,” he said.

Rep. Michelle Lujan Grisham, D-N.M., also opposes fast-track authority.

“The secretive nature of the negotiations and desire to cut Congress out of the details makes it impossible to know whether there are adequate worker protections in a prospective trade deal,” said her spokesman, Gilbert Gallegos.