Buy Photo Former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum stopped at Iowa City's Hamburg Inn to talk with supporters over breakfast on Monday. (Photo: Zak Neumann/For the Press-Citizen)Buy Photo

Former Pennsylvania senator and Republican presidential candidate Rick Santorum lambasted the Affordable Care Act, as well as Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders' single-payer health care proposal, over eggs and hash browns Monday at Iowa City's Hamburg Inn No. 2.

"Bernie Sanders says, 'We're going to take all your choices away. We're going to make government do everything and you're going to get what the government gives you.' And young people here say, 'Hell, yeah, that's great. We'll take whatever the government gives us.' Really?" Santorum asked the group of about 20 people. "You're not going to have any flexibility, you're not going to be able to pay less for this or pay more for that. You're not going to be able to do what you do in every other aspect of your life, like come into a restaurant and pick what you want."

Rania Batrice, a spokesperson for Sanders' Iowa campaign, said in an emailed statement in response to those remarks that "Senator Sanders has fought for equality and fairness for over 30 years — tuition-free public colleges and universities, equal pay for women, moving from the current starvation wage to a living wage, healthcare for all, lowering prescription drug prices — all issues that resonate and are important to not only young people, but middle-class families across Iowa and the country."

Santorum advocated for consumer-driven health care, warning against policies that try to "micromanage the health care system from Washington, D.C." Mentioning the Health Care Savings Plan Act he proposed 23 years ago, Santorum said the solution to rising health care costs is health savings accounts, which allow users to make tax-free deposits that could be used later for medical costs and to shop around for coverage.

MORE:

In the time since the Affordable Care Act was enacted, Santorum said promises President Barack Obama made have not been kept, and that emergency rooms are now overrun with patients.

"There are lines in emergency rooms. ... It's very expensive care, and the cost of health care keeps going up," Santorum said.

Coralville resident Bill Warner, 68, asked Santorum how the former senator would reduce the rate of gun violence in the U.S.

"I keep coming back to whether it's our criminal justice system, whether it's our education system, whether it's our economy or health care. The root of every problem in this country here at home is the breakdown of the nuclear family," Santorum said, particularly fatherless homes.

Warner said that while there are many contributing factors to gun violence, he said he was glad Santorum drilled down on the issue.

"I think the nuclear family is a big part of it. He's got a strong point about families," Warner said. "The right only wants to talk about mental health, it seems like, and the left only wants to talk about gun control. There's at least four to six different factors that cause these 33,000 to 34,000 deaths a year, and we need to work on all of them."

On the issue of immigration, Santorum said he would give immigrants living in the country with expired visas three months to return to their native countries voluntarily, allowing them to reapply.

"You can go back to your country, you can apply for another visa, and we're not going to treat you any differently than anybody else," Santorum said. "If you don't, and we have to enforce removal, we say you're barred from the United States and we don't let you come back."

With one week left until the Feb. 1 Iowa caucuses, Santorum also planned to make stops in Washington, Davenport, Burlington, Otumwa and Oskaloosa on Monday.

Reach Andy Davis at 319-887-5404 or at aldavis@press-citizen.com, and follow him on Twitter as @BylineAndyDavis.

About the event

SETTING: Hamburg Inn No. 2 restaurant on Iowa City's north side.

CROWD: 20 people, including local Republican Party members and political activists, and local residents eating breakfast.

REACTION: Attendees applauded Santorum's plans for health care reform, immigration policy proposals and his remarks that deterioration of the nuclear family lies at the heart of the country's gun violence.

WHAT’S NEXT: This was the second day of Santorum’s eight-day tour of Iowa ahead of the Feb. 1 caucuses. On Tuesday, he will make stops in Williamsburg, Monticello, Dubuque, Anamosa, Cedar Rapids and Monroe.







Read or Share this story: http://icp-c.com/1VlCdFC