This week on The Broke and the Beautiful, Ne-Yo’s accusing his ex-manager, who invested his money in a company that went bankrupt, of conning him. Also, investor and reality-TV host Marcus Lemonis owns a bakery that supplied cupcakes to Crumbs.

Ne-Yo arrives at the Brit Awards in London on Feb. 20, 2013. European Pressphoto Agency/Facundo Arrizabalaga

We don’t know if Ne-Yo is a gambling man (he’s from Vegas after all), but we’d bet the singer-songwriter is pretty mad at his manager, Kevin Foster. According to Courthouse News (h/t New York Daily News), Ne-Yo has accused Mr. Foster of conning him and is now suing him for $8 million. Included in the $8 million Ne-Yo is seeking is $3.5 million Mr. Foster allegedly deceptively put into sports-drink company OXYwater in 2012. In 2013, OXYwater filed for bankruptcy with in millions in debt. Ne-Yo claimed that unknown to him, Mr. Foster was president of the company, whose founders later were indicted for wire fraud and tax crimes related to the company.

Ne-Yo, real name Shaffer Smith, is accusing Mr. Foster of fraud, securities violations, negligence and other charges. Mr. Foster couldn’t be reached for comment. A phone number for his firm, which Mr. Foster established after leaving an accounting firm that managed Ne-Yo’s money, was out of service.

Marcus Lemonis (right), the CEO of an RV and camping company, during a scene from The Profit, his CNBC business-makeover show. Heidi Gutman/CNBC

The investor, the baker, the cupcake maker: CNBC’s Marcus Lemonis, who sought to rescue cupcake shop Crumbs from bankruptcy and criticized on air the very product he was looking save, owns a bakery that supplied the cupcakes for many of Crumbs’ stores. And as Bankruptcy Beat reported, it’s something he hasn’t previously called attention to. Unlike other cupcake chains, Crumbs gets its confections from third-party vendors like Mr. Lemonis’s bakery, Little Miss Muffin. Prior to the company’s abrupt shutdown, Mr. Lemonis cut off service because the company allegedly stopped paying its bills. A Crumbs spokeswoman contested the assertion, noting the cupcake chain didn’t fall behind on bakery payments.

Jackie Marcello places labels on 16mm film leader at Kodak’s Rochester, N.Y., film production plant. Nick Brandreth for The Wall Street Journal

Eastman Kodak is long out of bankruptcy, but the company’s movie film business is a shadow of its former self. But if a group of studios has its way, though, the company might be able to keep the business alive, The Wall Street Journal reported. Talks between Kodak and the group of studios are expected to yield an arrangement in which the group will buy a certain amount of film for the next few years despite that most movies and TV shows are shot digitally. That’ll help keep the company’s Rochester, N.Y., film production plant in business, according to Chief Executive Jeff Clarke. The studios in talks with Kodak include Warner Bros. Universal Pictures and Paramount Pictures.

(And just for fun: The New York Post has a timeline of “Real Housewives of New Jersey” star Teresa Giudice’s journey from housewife to court life, and Forbes looks at how “angry wives” push up the sale process of major sports teams.)

Write to Melanie Cohen at melanie.cohen@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @MelanieLisa.