Revamped Uppababy Vista pushchair: what's new? Five things you need to know about new pushchair

The updated Uppababy Vista pushchair is due to hit the shops in early 2015

Thinking about buying the popular Uppababy Vista pushchair? Here we reveal five key things you need to know about the latest version.

Uppababy has just revamped its popular Vista pushchair and the new version will be hitting the shops around January 2015.

We've fully tested the original Uppababy Vista and members can log in now to read our full test report. If you're not a member, sign up for a £1 trial to Which? for instant access to this pushchair review and to unlock all our other reviews - from car seats and baby monitors to washing machines and TVs.

We'll be taking the new model for a spin soon, but for now we've rounded up the five things you need to know about the new Uppababy Vista.

Five changes to the Uppababy Vista pushchair

1. It's now a true double pushchair

A carrycot will be included in the new Vista package, along with the seat unit, so you can use the carrycot with your baby from birth and then switch to the seat when they are older. And, as you can attach both the seat and carrycot to the chassis at the same time (providing you buy the double adaptors), this means you could use the Vista as a double pushchair for a younger baby and older child straight out of the box.

The original Vista converted to a double with the addition of a rumble seat which couldn't be reclined. Uppababy has updated this seat so it does recline now, and it's now also possible to use the Vista in a variety of other combinations including as a double for two babies from birth by buying another carrycot and/or adding two car seats. There's also an option to buy a 'Piggyback' board to carry a third child.

2. It should be easier to fold

Uppababy has improved the chassis, including working on the hinges and improving the folding mechanism on the pushchair - these are changes our lab experts will assess when we test the new version of this pushchair.

The Uppababy Vista pushchair is now a true double pushchair and can be used with twins

3. It should be a more comfortable pushchair

The seat shape has been changed to better cradle your child, which should make it more comfortable, and the recline is now easier to operate. The new Vista also comes with a longer footrest to better accommodate taller children.

4. You can use the carrycot for overnight sleeping

The new carrycot has a fully vented bottom which makes it suitable for overnight sleeping. It can also now be removed from the chassis with just one hand - thanks to a clever slide button on the top of the handle.

5. There's more space for shopping

Storage is always an important issue when it comes to pushchairs, so parents will be pleased to know the storage basket on the updated Vista is now bigger.

We'll be getting the new Vista in to test as soon as we can. In the meantime, if you're tempted by an Uppababy pushchair, check out our guide to Uppababy pushchairs. Or head to the full test results and reviews for the Uppababy Vista, Uppababy Cruz and Uppababy G-Luxe

More on this...