Each year, the Media Research Center presents the “Worst of the Worst” awards for the year’s worst reporting, a compilation of the most outrageous and/or humorous quotes uttered by media representatives. It’s an enviable task that’s sure to have gotten easier with the onset of Obama-mania in the U.S. media.

The winner of the dubious 2014 “Quote of the Year” honor is CNN anchor Carol Costello, who could not contain her glee while setting up a recording of Sarah Palin’s daughter, Bristol, describing to police how she was physically and verbally attacked by a man at a party.

Costello said:

“OK. I’m just going to come right out and say it: This is quite possibly the best minute and a half of audio we’ve ever come across — well, come across in a long time anyway. A massive brawl in Anchorage, Alaska, reportedly involving Sarah Palin’s kids and her husband. It was sparked after someone pushed one of her daughters at a party….And now police have released audio of that interview. It does include some rather colorful language from Bristol. Here now is Bristol’s recollection of how that night unfolded. So sit back and enjoy.”

To quiet the critics, Media Research Center has put together an arduous process to select the winners, including tapping a panel of 40 radio talk show hosts, magazine editors, columnists, editorial writers and expert media observers.

The runner-up for the “Quote of the Year” award is Eleanor Clift, a writer for The Daily Beast, for her claim that Ambassador Christopher Stevens was not murdered. She said:

“Every media organization has investigated this [Benghazi] to death. This animates the right wing of the Republican Party. And I would like to point out that Ambassador [Chris] Stevens was not murdered. He died of smoke inhalation in the safe room in that CIA installation.”

And no such list would be complete without MSNBC, whose frequent contributor Michael Eric Dyson made second runner-up for comparing President Obama to Jesus Christ.

Incredibly, Dyson said:

“You know, I’m a Christian preacher, and God finally said, ‘Look, I can’t send nobody else. I got to go myself.’ And I ain’t saying that Obama is Jesus, but for many of his followers he is.”

“For the liberal media, 2014 was a banner year … of failure,” Media Research Center President Brent Bozell said, according to Newsbusters. “They celebrated violence against conservative women, downplayed the global terror threat, overlooked and suppressed news reports about the utter devastation Obamacare wrought on our health-care system, and peddled the race card as an explanation for any opposition to President Obama’s lawlessness and failed policies.”

For additional category winners, see the full report HERE.