In an article titled, “Proof That Obama is Linked to Radical,” Alinsky, stated is that article Obama spent his entire youth taking classes and later teaching workshops on Alinsky’s methods. He worked hard to follow Alinsky’s rule of “blending in.”

As to when Barack Obama began his Alinsky worship, it was very early in his career. According to a study on Alinsky , “in 1985 Obama began a four-year stint as a community organizer in Chicago, working for an Alinskyite group called the Developing Communities Project.”

“Obama learned his lesson well, I am proud to see that my father’s model for organizing is being applied successfully beyond local community organizing to affect the Democratic campaign in 2008. It is a fine tribute to Saul Alinsky as we approach his 100th birthday.”

Consider what Saul Alinsky’s son, L. David Alinsky , had to say in a letter written for Obama 2008 campaign:

Perhaps it has to do with their lack of understanding how deeply Saul Alinsky’s Rules for Radicals are ingrained in the thinking of the Democrat Party. Both exhibit the same ideals.

To deny that the tenets advocated by Alinsky in Rules for Radicals were not embraced by Obama during his time as a community organizer would indeed be fool hardy. Some might question and even find it difficult to believe how Obama can be linked to radical Alinsky.

Generally considered to be the founder of the modern community organizing movement, Alinsky’s Rules for Radicals were practiced by President Obama when serving as a community organizer in Chicago back in the 70’s.

Saul David Alinsky is best known as an American community organizer and writer. Although Saul Alinsky died in 1971, his writings continue to influence those in political control of our nation today.

Later in the same same article is an account of how Obama also helped fund the The Woods Fund, a nonprofit community-organizing group on which Obama served as paid director from 1999 to December 2002. On the board with Obama at the Woods Fund was William Ayers, the founder and terrorist of the Weather Underground. The Woods Fund provided funding for yet another community organizing group, Midwest Academy, which teaches Alinsky tactics of community organizing.

Unfortunately there are many Americans who cannot admit or whose closed-minded progressive ideology prevents them from understanding the path down which President Obama is taking this nation as a Marxist Alinskyite.

Without this recognition by voters of who and what President Obama represents when choosing one to succeed Obama in November 2016, this nation could elect another Alinsky devotee in the guise of Hillary Clinton who did her senior college thesis (Wellesley College class of 1969) on Alinsky’s writings. For the eight years of Bill Clinton’s presidency it was locked away.

Hillary’s claims to fame consists of being the wife of a former president for eight years and serving as President Obama’s Secretary of State. Even Hillary was hard pressed in an interview to name her top accomplishment as Secretary of State.

Below are six of the rules Saul Alinsky advanced in “Rules for Radicals” which provide insight into why Obama does what he does:

1. Politics is all about power relations, but to advance one’s power, one must couch ones’ positions in the language of morality. 2. There is only three kinds of people in the world: rich and powerful oppressors, the poor and disenfranchised oppressed, and the middle-class whose apathy perpetuates the status quo. 3. Change is brought about through relentless agitation and “trouble making” of a kind that radically disrupts society as it is. 4. There can be no conversation between the organizer and his opponents. the latter must be depicted as being evil. 5. The organizer can never focus on just a single issue. He must move inexhaustibly from one issue to the next. 6. Taut one’s opponents to the point that they label you a “dangerous enemy” of “the establishment. Republicans are now implying this rule to those of their own party.

It was Saul Alinsky who taught Obama to say one thing and to do the opposite (to flip-flop). Alinsky believed that it was fine “to present oneself as a moderate, even a centrist, for the purposes of securing power.” Once power was obtained it was “perfectly acceptable to revert back to who (and what) you really are.” Alinsky merely simplified Vladimir Lenin’s original scheme for world conquest by communism under Russian rule. Stalin described his converts as “Useful Idiots.”

Useful Idiots have destroyed every nation in which they have seized power and control. It is presently happening at an alarming rate in the U.S.A.

You need to be prepared to make an informed, educated decision when you enter the polling booth in November of 2016. I strongly recommend you read the books on both lists below, regardless of your political views. In so doing you will be better prepared to defend your own political positions and educate others.

These recommended books will also show you how long it has taken for socialism/communism to creep into the United States and the insidious way it infiltrates every fiber of our lives. And of most concern, how difficult it will be to stop and eliminate it.

For those of you on the Left:

For those of us who studied socialism and communism when we were in school and actually lived through the Cold War with Russia and China, some of this may be a refresher course. For those of you who are younger and have not been taught any of this in school – or, have been taught a white-washed version of it – you need to read these books first, then read the Levin books below.

As far as Obama is concerned, you need to read his books now, before you vote in November because what he sold himself to you in 2008 and who he actually is are two quite divergent things. These books will give you a clearer picture of why our country is in such turmoil – and, danger. Read them and learn something.

The Communist Manifesto, 1848, Karl Marx. (What you need to know about the philosophy of socialism/communism.

Rules For Radicals, 1971, Saul Alinsky. (What you need to know about the implementation of socialism/communism and how Obama is installing it).

Dreams From My Father, 1995, Barack Obama. (What you need to know about the president and why he thinks the way he does).

The Audacity of Hope, 2006, Barack Obama. (What you need to remember about his promises to see how he’s broken them).

For those of you on the Right:

There are lots of political books and authors, but I chose four books by Mark Levin because I listen to him every week night from 9-12:00 p.m. on 890, WLS. He really is a constitutional lawyer (as opposed to Obama), is a conservative and tells it like it is.

His legal organization, Landmark Legal Foundation, helped prepare the arguments for the Supreme Court for Obamacare. Out of all the talk show hosts I listen to (including liberals), Levin makes the best points and matches my feelings about what’s going on in the country today, and what’s coming for us if we don’t make a radical turn in the road in November of 2016.

What I recommend below is not pap-writing. You will have to think and use your head. All four books have been on the best-seller lists upon their issuance. Read them and learn something.

Men in Black, (2005), Mark Levin. (The story of how the Supreme Court came to be the way it is.)

Liberty and Tyranny, A Conservative Manifesto, (2009), Mark Levin. (An analysis of the attack on our Constitution and the growth of Big Government.)

Ameritopia, The Unmaking of America, (2012), Mark Levin. (Where America is headed and why.)

The Liberty Amendments: Restoring the American Republic, (2013), Mark Levin. (Guidance to restore the American Republic as envisioned by our Founding Fathers and the Constitution.)

The election that will determine the course our nation is but two years away. Start reading. There is no time to waste. Share this information with others so informed choices can be made at the polls If otherwise, uninformed and confused voters could rule the day by electing one who will continue to destroy the very foundation upon which this nation was conceived and then presented to future generations of Americans by our Founding Fathers to keep and preserve.

[First published at Illinois Review.]