Updated: Mar 12, 2015 - 4:52 PM

The money is part of a federal program known as the Low Income Pool, or LIP, a program that is coming to an end. Locally, LIP funding contributes $55 million to Orlando Regional Medical Center and another $85 million to Florida Hospital to help pay for the medical expenses of the poor and uninsured.



In February, Gov. Rick Scott told Eyewitness News that he was confident that the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services would extend LIP funding , a cornerstone of his budget. Following the announcement that CMS would not extend LIP in Florida, Scott sent a letter to President Obama to make the state’s case for continued funding, writing: “As with previous negotiations we are optimistic that you will not terminate LIP and we will be able to reach an agreement.” CMS has yet to reverse its position.

READ: Letter from Rick Scott to President Obama

"Any time tens of millions of dollars disappear from an operation, there are consequences to the operation and how it does business,” Florida Hospital CEO Lars Houmann said. “Some hospitals in the state are very vulnerable to the loss of this money.”



Florida Hospital is joining other hospitals as well as the Florida Chamber of Commerce in calling on state leaders to expand health care in some form, although the method continues to be a source of debate. Right now, it is estimated that there as many as 800,000 Floridians who could benefit from the state expanding Medicaid and accepting federal dollars.



“I think the most important thing about this is the disadvantage that Florida experiences from not accepting money that essentially has already been taxed and taken in a variety of ways from Floridians, and even from our hospitals in our state, as we’ve contributed to the cost of and paying for the Affordable Care Act,” Houmann said. “We’re leaving money to go to other states.”



The Florida Senate Health Policy Committee on Tuesday unanimously approved a plan (SPB 7044) to use billions of dollars in federal money to provide private health insurance to people who do not qualify for Medicaid. The plan has already received support from key state leaders, including Sen. David Simmons (R-Altamonte Springs), who told the League of Women Voters that the bill is "important, and I hope our colleagues in the House see that. It is not a case of expanding Medicaid. It is a case of expansion of the free enterprise system."



The Senate plan would create a health insurance marketplace that would allow low-income residents to choose an insurance plan. The targeted group would be people who do not qualify for Medicaid and have an income up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level. In addition, the bill requires participants to remain employed or be in the process of looking for work and pay a monthly premium based on their salary.



“This has become abundantly clear as the most important issue,” Houmann said .



“We’re opposed to expansion of Medicaid under Obamacare in any form,” Andres Malave of Americans for Prosperity said. “There are a lot of hospitals that are trying to make this about LIP funding, but we should be looking at solutions and being innovative about things like this. Let’s expand scope of practice, look at reforming certificate of need, let’s look at bringing tele-medicine to Florida.”