Bruce Jenner’s suit from the family of Kimberly Howe alleges that the Keeping Up With The Kardashians star was “careless and negligent” when he crashed his Cadillac Escalade back in February of 2015. This car crash death happened to coincide with the timing of Jenner’s transgender announcement and already, some are mocking the new lawsuit saying it is simply a case of Jenner “driving like a woman.”

In a related report by the Inquisitr, Bruce Jenner’s car crash was caught on video. According to reports, Jenner was not using his cell phone and he was not speeding, but it appears as though Jenner saw slow moving traffic in front of him and steered his Cadillac Escalade in order to avoid the traffic jam. Unfortunately, the car accident caused a chain reaction and Kim Howe’s vehicle was propelled into oncoming traffic and she was hit head-on by a Hummer.

As of this publishing, Bruce Jenner’s suit has not received any comment, although Jenner had previously released a statement apologizing for the Malibu car crash.

“My heartfelt and deepest sympathies go out to the family and loved ones, and to all of those who were involved or injured in this terrible accident,” Jenner said in the statement according to KTLA. “It is a devastating tragedy, and I cannot pretend to imagine what this family is going through at this time. I am praying for them. I will continue to cooperate in every way possible.”

Unfortunately, some have used Bruce Jenner’s lawsuit as an occasion for forced levity. Over on Twitter, some people have begun repeating the same type of joke.

“Looks like Bruce Jenner already driving like a woman.” “Bruce Jenner got in a car crash and someone died? Already driving like a woman I see.” “Bruce Jenner’s transformation is almost complete! He’s already driving like a woman. (RELAX PEOPLE JUST A BAD JOKE)”

Writing for The Federalist, a former transgender person named Walt Heyer claims Bruce Jenner’s sex change in combination with the lawsuit and other factors will only lead to regret years down the road.

“No one knows how Jenner’s story will end. Two deaths, a gender transition, divorce, and a pending trial could psychologically derail the best of us. The odds are that Jenner’s life, like that of many transvestites who transition, will experience the euphoria of extraordinary highs in the beginning followed years later by a downward spiral…. We should all be concerned for Jenner. A whopping 41 percent of transgenders report attempting suicide.”

According to reports, Bruce Jenner’s suit is seeking unspecified damages and the cost of the lawsuit. Although the accident involved four vehicles, the family of Kimberly Howe claims she was not at fault in any manner. The car accident remains under investigation by police.