Other Republican senators said that while Mr. Rubio and Mr. Cruz were never close, they had detected a chill between the two. “Their relationship has diverged,” Senator John McCain of Arizona said.

Photo

One senator used the word “wariness.” Another said that an unpersuasive argument for getting one on board with legislation would be pointing out that it was championed by the other. They, like other senators and staff members, spoke on the condition of anonymity to speak frankly about their colleagues.

Now both 44 and eager to become the first Latino president, Mr. Rubio and Mr. Cruz are content to stay out of each other’s way on the campaign trial, both seeming more concerned now with clearing out competitors in their respective lanes. It was no accident that Mr. Rubio sparred in the debate with Jeb Bush, his rival for the support of Republican establishment donors. Or that Mr. Cruz steered clear of any conflict as he spoke directly to the camera about his born-again father in an effort to solidify his support among evangelicals.

But they are already competing in the Senate for the endorsement of Senator Mike Lee of Utah, who is admired by the conservative base for his anti-spending positions, and whose backing is considered a conservative seal of approval.

Mr. Cruz has made an overt pitch to Mr. Lee, talking about his success in fund-raising, why he stacks up better against the other candidates and why different pools of conservative voters will coalesce around him when, in his telling, the campaigns of Donald J. Trump and Ben Carson inevitably evaporate, according to a person with knowledge of the conversations.

But a recent spat in a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing exposed signs of strain in the relationship between Mr. Cruz and Mr. Lee, who in the past had been described, to the annoyance of Mr. Lee, as Batman and Robin. In the hearing, Mr. Cruz argued that measures proposed by Mr. Lee would weaken punishment of violent offenders, which Mr. Lee called a mischaracterization.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Rubio seems ready to capitalize, though in a subtle manner more reflective of his congenial style. He has made a point of asking Mr. Lee about his family, said a person with knowledge of those conversations. And Mr. Rubio’s “super PAC” airs ads in New Hampshire championing a tax plan he and Mr. Lee sponsored.

The two candidates declined to comment about their relationship, but their advisers sought in interviews to tamp down any notion of tension, while acknowledging their differences. On a more personal level, Mr. Cruz’s musical tastes are country, while Mr. Rubio’s run toward West Coast rap, and they have shared few, if any, meals outside the Senate. Nevertheless, the advisers described a collegial relationship based on common backgrounds — both talk of their Cuban émigré families on the campaign trail, and oppose President Obama’s opening of ties to Cuba — and an ability to rib each other over political headaches (the government shutdown for Mr. Cruz, immigration policy for Mr. Rubio).

Mr. Rubio won his Senate seat in 2010 as a deeply conservative outsider who thrashed Florida’s governor at the time, the moderate Charlie Crist.

First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday - Friday.

Then Mr. Rubio, a popular lawmaker who came up through the Florida Legislature, gravitated to the Republican center, upsetting some of his more conservative patrons and suggesting that he believed that the party, despite its turn further to the right, still preferred an establishment presidential candidate.

That view came more into focus when Mr. Rubio drew closer to Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, and when he accepted the invitation of Democratic senators to join Mr. McCain and Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina in a bipartisan group seeking an immigration policy overhaul that created a potential path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants already in the country.

Around that time, Mr. Cruz had a meeting in Mr. Rubio’s office to figure out where they stood on the nuances of immigration laws. Mr. Cruz defused any tension by sharing a story about how he had mistaken an aide’s tobacco spit cup for his coffee and taken a swig during an important phone call.

“They were doubling over in laughter,” recalled Chip Roy, then an adviser to Mr. Cruz who accompanied him to the meeting.

That was something of a high-water mark for the pair, and soon it would be Mr. Rubio seeking association with Mr. Cruz, the Harvard-trained lawyer who has claimed Mr. Rubio’s ground as the Tea Party outsider in the Senate.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Stung by revulsion in the Republican base to his immigration bill, Mr. Rubio abandoned the legislation and sought to champion an issue that would shore up his right flank. In the summer of 2013, Mr. Cruz and Mr. Lee were leading the fight in the Senate to defund the Affordable Care Act, threatening to shut down the government and making enemies in the Senate.

On July 30 that year, Mr. Rubio stood next to Mr. Cruz on the Senate floor as Mr. Lee asked them alternating questions about the importance of defunding the health care law. Fidgeting with pens and the lectern, Mr. Rubio seemed uncomfortable amid his colleagues who had become the leaders of the shutdown threat. Nevertheless, he argued that it was essential to end the health care program.

“And I would ask the senator from Texas if he, too, shares those thoughts and those feelings,” Mr. Rubio said as Mr. Cruz adjusted the microphone clipped to his tie.

“I do indeed share those thoughts and feelings,” Mr. Cruz said. Raising the stakes, he added that he also felt obliged “to honor our words and put action behind our words.”