Bloomberg

The World’s Most Important Number was rigged in exchange for some curry.

The Libor scandal has a new set of embarrassingly blatant instant messages and emails between the people implicated in the rigging of the interest rate benchmark.

Wednesday, the subject of the case is ICAP, a U.K. brokerage firm alleged to have had a role in the broad manipulation of the London interbank offered rate. ICAP agreed to pay $87 million to regulators in the U.K. and U.S. over its role, while the Department of Justice announced criminal charges against three former brokers at ICAP.

Darrell Read, Daniel Wilkinson and Colin Goodman were charged with criminal fraud including for their involvement with the man alleged to be at the center of the scandal, former UBS and Citigroup trader Tom Hayes.

(Lawyers for the three couldn’t be reached Wednesday, and Mr. Hayes has said in a text message to WSJ previously that this goes much higher than him.)

Mr. Wilkinson was the supervisor of the desk of brokers. That included Mr. Read, who executed trades for Mr. Hayes in the Yen Libor rate. Mr. Goodman, dubbed Lord Libor, was in charge of emailing taders at large banks “suggested Libors,” a daily email with his firm’s predictions for where Yen Libor would fall.

Mr. Hayes bet on the directions of Yen Libor, which was set in various month durations, such as six-month, or 6m, in their parlance.

Here are some of the highlights of their electronic conversations, taken from CFTC and the DOJ complaint.

October 23, 2006 – Read set the tone early in the day: He lost his credit card bowling but promises curry if Goodman can come through for Hayes.

Read: “Morning Lad [Goodman], On the scrounge again, if possible keep 3m the same and get 6mos as high as you can. My guy has an enormous fix on Wednesday in 6mos and will want it as high as possible. Waiting for my credit card to get returned to me from a drunken night out bowling, but will be supplying you with copious amounts of curry on it’s imminent return. Cheers”

October 24 2006 – More curry is promised.

Read: “Realise it might be getting harder but need 6m kept as high as possible ….tomorrow I have a massive fix, today just large. Ta mate Get your curry order ready will send [someone] round tomorrow.

Goodman: How high … above 552?

Read: If you can get them up there and keep them there tomorrow reckon the trader from ubs Tokyo will cover over and buy you a curry himself!

In a separate chat Read and Hayes discuss what is needed.

Read: let me know a little later what you need . . . i know u want 6′s high tomorrow

Hayes: well today and tomorrow then i can breath a little! 2morrow fix is huge 400b

Read: i know you told me . . . ok as long as the futs don’t get outdone by any libor moves south?

Hayes: …libors going up saved me one day looked like i was going to lose 50m jpy on futs vs libs

Read: ouch!

Hayes: but then 6m went up a bp and i was saved well almost

Read: curry was cheap then :- D

Hayes: yes mate seriously whatever it takes bill me!

October 25 2006 – Goodman makes a demand for more than curry. And signs it Mlord.

Goodman: Depending where it sets k10 [a restaurant] for lunch or cash would be preferable!! Out or curry tonite. Mlord

April 18 2007 – Goodman gets fed up about not getting paid and complains to the boss Wilkinson.

Goodman: “with ubs how much does he appreciate the yen libor scoop? It seems to me that he has all his glory etc and u guys get his support in other things. I get the drib and drabs. Life is tough enough over here without having to double guess the libors every morning and get zipper-de-do-da. How about some form of performance bonus per quarter from your b bonus pool to me for the libor service.

Wilkinson: Lord Baliff, I would suggest a lunch over golden week. Monday or Tuesday if you are around. As for kick backs etc we can discuss that at lunch and I will speak to Tom about it next time he comes up for a chat

April 19, 2007 – Goodman threatens to end the whole process if he isn’t paid.

From the DOJ complaint: Goodman sent Wilkinson an email with the subject line “LIBORS NO MORE” in which Goodman threatened to discontinue sending out misleading “SUGGESTED LIBORS” after Wilkinson informed him that a brokerage fee paid by Hayes was intended for the Yen MIRS desk brokers and not for Goodman. “As far as I was concerned tom was paying for the libor assist for my assistance. You have as far as I am concerened have charged him bro on the deal. Happy days for u. fyak all for me again!!” Goodman signed the email “Mlord no more mr. libor.”

Wilkinson responded “I have been thinking of ways of sorting you out. If the needs be I will look into it on a bigger scale eg your salary package.”

June 28, 2007 – Read, who emails in all caps, told Wilkinson that Hayes was getting hit hard.

“DAN THIS IS GETTING SERIOUS TOM I S NOT HAPPY WITH THE WAY THINGS ARE PROGRESSING . . . CAN YOU PLEASE GET HOLD OF COLIN AND GET HIM TO SEND OUT 6 MOS LIBOR AT 0.865 AND TO GET HIS BANKS SETTING IT HIGH. THIS IS VERY IMPORTANT BECAUSE [HAYES] IS QUESTIONING MY (AND OUR) WORTH.”

November 1, 2007 – Read tells Hayes that they need to be “a little more subtle.”

Read in an email to Hayes: “HI MATE, JUST HAD DAN BACK ON RE-LIBORS, HAD A LOT OF COMPLIACNE PRESSURE RECENTLY DUE TO THE CREDIT PROBLEMS, WE BOTH NEED TO BE A LITTLE MORE SUBTLE IN OUR ‘VIEWS’ … IE’ I THINK FWDS ARE SUGGESTING THIS 6MOS LIBOR SHOULD BE LOWER … ETC. MY E-MAILS ETC. NEED TO BE WORDED MORE CAREFULLY.”

December 7, 2007: Read thanks Goodman and says champagne is coming.

Read: Hi [Goodman], Thanks again for all your efforts, … Can you do your best to drive these libors higher,especially 3 mos if you can and it is still well bid….UBS had to stagger their move up but will definitely be in the count today. … p.s Bubbly on its way

January 2009 -- Read to an unnamed broker spells it out.

Read: I hope Tom is not being too painful, he has had a storming start and is very happy with the libors Colin and yourselves re managing to fudge for him (as long as he thinks you are trying!).