We could all have free health care because the cost would be paid for by...

1. The 1 percent

2. The Health Care Fairy

3. You, except it would cost you even more than it does now

It's a simple concept that liberals seem allergic to. Here, with the wonder usually reserved for a small child learning how magic works, is a liberal discovering that the consumer still pays for ObamaCare.

And that’s where the consumer comes in. Someone is “it,” the party paying the bill. And that “it” is increasingly you, whether you receive insurance on the exchanges or from an employer.

But what about the Health Care Fairy?

But we're halfway there. "It" is always you, unless you're a member of the welfare class. If your employer paid for your insurance, that was a factor in what you were paid. ObamaCare is just a complicated machine for redistributing more stuff to the welfare class at the expense of the working class.

The problem is simple. As Trudy Lieberman reported this month in Harper’s, the ACA made a decent stab at solving the problem of Americans lacking insurance. Unfortunately, the bargain struck to get the bill to a point where lobbyists for the hospital, insurance, and pharmaceutical industries to sign on, or at least not fight it, did not adequately address the issue of overall medical costs.

Medical costs are always going to be the product of a process arrived at by different interests. Even if you have that magical GovHealth, if you nationalize every aspect of health care, that just means those same interests will be functioning under the umbrella of government.

And yes, once the profit motive is "eliminated", you'll discover that there's a lot more profit and waste in government. Also that government solutions are bigger and even more ruthless.

It is wonderful though that liberals refuse to learn anything from history or reality and are still looking for ways to keep the consumer from being stuck with the bill... despite the fact that a working consumer will always be stuck with the bill in one way or another.

Unless the Health Care Fairy comes to the rescue.