Many of the evacuated Jamestown residents gathered at a restaurant in Boulder on Sunday night to share stories and updates and stay connected as they figure out how to restore their homes and rebuild their town.

All connecting roads were washed out by deadly floodwaters and mudslides, stranding the small mountain town's 300 residents without water or electricity until they could be evacuated by National Guard helicopters starting Friday afternoon. About 40 people chose not to evacuate and remain in Jamestown.

Today, helicopters plan to make another run to Jamestown, Lyons and other foothills areas affected by the floods to get more people out.

David Mans, a town firefighter, was one of three main people who organized rescue efforts in Jamestown and stayed in contact with Boulder County authorities throughout the flooding.

Advertisement

Mans and his family -- wife, Emma Hardy, 17-year-old Hayden and 14-year-old Henry -- live right on the river. They got the call around 1 a.m. Thursday that they needed to get out. After that, he said, "It was nonstop."

He and others said the town's residents banded together to make sure everyone was accounted for, had a place to stay and had food and water. As the waters rose and a 100-foot-wide flood split the town in half, residents built a pulley system across the raging waters, equipping the rope with a bucket to ferry medication, food and supplies to residents on the other side.

Those with houses that were on higher ground took in people whose houses weren't safe -- or washed away entirely. Others took shelter at Jamestown Elementary, which sits on higher ground and wasn't damaged. Water was boiled or filtered, food collected, cooked and shared. Residents are "endlessly grateful" to rescuers but were prepared and ready to spend several more days in town, Mans said.

"Everything was organized and focused," he said. "We all took care of each other. We had a long-term vision of how to keep everyone safe."

Courtenay Bedell said she was "very proud to be a part of the community."

"I can't describe how impressive it was how everything was handled," she said.

Still, she said, watching the homes of those she loves fall into the water or become swamped by floodwaters was traumatic. Her home on the creek quickly became an island surrounded by water, she said.

"It was really intense," she said. "It was a lot of loss."

Mans said their house on the river survived, though a rental house that they own that sits on a hill is gone. He and his family are staying with his brother, who lives in Boulder.

"We've got a hell of a lot of work ahead of us," he said. "We have our town, and we're going to reassemble it."

Cheyenne Wills, who's lived in Jamestown for a few years, said his street is now a streambed and, before he evacuated, the house he lives in with his wife was filled with about 6 inches of water. He said he got most of the important stuff off the floor but couldn't save his wife's large loom or a piano.

"The real question is when will the town be inhabitable," Wills said. "I want to go home."