UW linebacker Joe Schobert fills up the stat sheet with three sacks, two forced fumbles and one fumble recovery. Credit: Rick Wood

By of the

Saturday at a glance:

PLAYER OF THE GAME

By the end of UW's four-point loss to Iowa, the play of Joe Schobert had fans asking whether the senior linebacker could spend some time on offense, too.

Why not?

Schobert, who was an all-state safety and tailback at Waukesha West High School, was magnificent Saturday as UW fell to Iowa for the first time since 2009.

Let the numbers tell the tale:

Eight tackles, including 3½ for loss; five quarterback hurries, one of which resulted in an interception; three sacks; two forced fumbles; and one fumble recovery.

Schobert drilled Iowa quarterback C.J. Beathard as he was releasing the ball, causing an errant throw and an interception by safety Michael Caputo. That gave UW the ball at its 45 in the third quarter and led to a field goal.

Schobert forced a fumble by Beathard and recovered the ball at the Iowa 27 early in the fourth quarter. That led to zero points, however, because Joel Stave fumbled the ball at the Iowa 1.

Schobert later forced a fumble by Iowa tailback Jordan Canzeri, but the Hawkeyes recovered at their 19.

Through five games, Schobert has nine sacks and 13 tackles for loss. He entered the day tied for the national lead in tackles for loss and tied for fourth nationally in sacks.

"I've been impressed with Joe ever since I started watching tape of him," UW coach Paul Chryst said, "and then when you're around him...I'm not surprised because I think that he's earned the right where you expect it a little bit."

OFFENSIVE PLAY OF THE GAME

At the time the 1-yard touchdown pass from Beathard to Iowa tight end George Kittle didn't seem all that significant.

The play helped Iowa take a 7-3 lead with 2:59 left in the first quarter, leaving UW with 32:59 to dig out of the four-point hole.

UW couldn't muster enough offense to do that, however, making Beathard's play and Marshall Koehn's subsequent conversion huge.

Iowa took over at the UW 31 thanks to an interception and 15-yard return by cornerback Desmond King.

The Hawkeyes moved to the 1 on four plays, and on first and goal Beathard faked a handoff and rolled right.

Kittle, who entered the day with four catches for 69 yards and a touchdown, came across the field from left to right. When he came open on the right side, Beathard found him for an easy score.

DEFENSIVE PLAY OF THE GAME

UW's players and coaches will be sick — if they aren't already — when they review the lost fumble by Stave with the Badgers facing second and goal at the Iowa 1 in the fourth quarter with Iowa leading, 10-6.

Right guard Micah Kapoi was pushed back just enough that his foot landed on top of one of Stave's feet. Stave, who according to Chryst took a false step forward after the snap, fell back toward the turf.

Instead of holding onto the ball and settling for third and goal at about the 4, Stave tried to hand the ball to tailback Taiwan Deal.

The ball fell to the turf, Deal missed a chance to corral it and Iowa's Faith Ekakitie recovered at the 4.

Crushing.

"I came close to it," Deal said. "I felt it on my hip but I couldn't get it. There was too many Iowa defenders around."

SPECIAL TEAMS PLAY OF THE GAME

After an uneven start as a freshman, kicker Rafael Gaglianone made his final 14 field-goal attempts to finish 19 of 22.

Gaglianone won't be able to match that conversion rate of 86.4% no matter how well he kicks the rest of the 2015 season.

The sophomore made 2 of 3 attempts in the loss to Iowa, hitting from 46 yards twice and missing from 42. That left his season mark at 6 of 10 (60%).

The miss from 42 yards, with 11:43 remaining in the second quarter, turned out to be crucial.

UW held a 3-0 lead at the time so the miss prevented the Badgers from padding the lead and hurt in the final quarter when Iowa was clinging to a 10-6 lead.

That meant UW had to go for a touchdown on its final possession rather than a potential game-winning field goal.

"I'm having a tough time with the wind," said Gaglianone, who missed from 52 in Week 3 against Troy and from 51 in Week 4 against Hawaii. "It has been a different year. It has been a tough couple of games....

"But I've got to put that behind me and focus on next week."

INSIDE THE HUDDLE

■ UW defensive coordinator Dave Aranda, who had used a 2-4-5 scheme in each of the last three games because the Badgers faced spread offenses, stuck with that look for much of the game Saturday. The change came in how Aranda pared the down linemen. He opened with freshman Olive Sagapolu and Arthur Goldberg on early downs. He used Chikwe Obasih and Conor Sheehy together and went with Zander Neuville and linebacker T.J. Watt on passing downs. Watt, 6 feet 5 inches and 244 pounds, lined up over the center. Goldberg led the linemen in tackles with four. Sagapolu added two assisted tackles.

■ Iowa was without two key players — wide receiver Tevaun Smith (knee) and left tackle Boone Myers (stinger). Smith was leading the Hawkeyes in yards per catch (19.6) and receiving yards per game (58.8). He also was tied for the team lead in touchdown catches (two).

QUOTE OF THE GAME

"I thought the defense did a tremendous job continuing to battle, giving us opportunities. We just have to come away with something."

BY THE NUMBERS

4 Turnovers by QB Joel Stave (above)

8 UW drives ending in Iowa territory

10 Iowa points off UW turnovers

14 Tackles by Iowa LB Cole Fisher

33.3% UW's third-down conversion rate in the last three games (11 of 33)

86 Rushing yards for UW

UP NEXT

UW (3-2, 0-1 Big Ten) at Nebraska (2-3, 0-1), 2:30p.m.Saturday

The loser of this game likely can bid farewell to its hopes of winning the Big Ten West title. Nebraska suffered a 14-13 loss Saturday at Illinois after the Illini scored twice in the fourth quarter. Wes Lunt threw two touchdown passes in the quarter, including a 1-yarder with 10 seconds left for Illinois.

Jeff Potrykus