Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Ducey talks KidsCare Yvonne Wingett Sanchez/azcentral.com

Editorial: Senate President Andy Biggs should not block a bill that is good for Arizona.

Senate President Andy Biggs. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic) Story Highlights The restoration of KidsCare in Arizona is a no-cost way to help the children

The federal government will pay the full cost of health coverage for children of the working poor

Senate President Andy Biggs should stop blocking a bill that easily passed the House

“I don’t support KidsCare,” says Arizona Senate President Andy Biggs.

So a bill to restore health-care coverage for the children of the working poor could die in the Senate.

“I don’t support KidsCare,” says Biggs.

So a bill that passed the House 47-12 may not even come to vote in the chamber Biggs controls.

“I don’t support KidsCare,” says Biggs.

So a bill that could let 30,000 kids see a doctor at no cost to the state could be blocked by one state lawmaker with national political ambitions.

Don't let it happen. If you support KidsCare, tell Biggs not to kill House Bill 2309.

As Senate president, Biggs has the power to prevent a bill from moving through the usual process that leads to a vote. That’s what he’s doing. The clock is ticking. If he doesn't act soon, it will be too late.

How to contact Andy Biggs Pressure Senate President Andy Biggs to allow a vote on KidsCare. You can: Send him an email: Fill out this online form. Call his office: (602) 926-4371.

As a candidate for Congress in the heavily Republican Congressional District 5, Biggs may hope to win points with GOP primary voters by blocking a federal program.

It could help him in the contested GOP primary. GOP state Rep. Justin Olson, who just entered the CD 5 race, voted for KidsCare in the House. So did other Republicans who recognize this is about children, not politics.

Biggs’ opposition to KidsCare won’t help Arizona.

Why Arizona needs KidsCare

Arizona has the highest rate of uninsured children among the families who would benefit most from the restoration of the program.

Restoration would allow KidsCare to once again bring health care to children whose families make too much to qualify for the state’s Medicaid program, but too little to buy insurance on their own. These are children of the working poor. Despite the expansion of Medicaid eligibility, there are kids left out. Some working families whose children would be eligible for KidsCare cannot afford to buy coverage through the Affordable Care Act.

KidsCare was frozen during the recession even though doing so did not make economic sense.

In those days, KidsCare brought in a 3-to-1 federal match. Dismantling it saved Arizona $12.9 million in fiscal 2011, but cost the state $41 million in federal matching money that year, according to the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured.

It won't cost Arizona a penny

Now the feds are willing to pay the entire cost.

That’s right. The program Biggs is blocking would not cost the state one cent. The federal government will pay 100 percent of the cost of the program at least through 2017, and possibly through 2019.

In response to concerns that Arizona could be on the hook for the program after that, Republican Rep. Regina Cobb’s bill was amended to make it clear that Arizona can end the program if the federal money dries up.

Opponents who suggest that it would be politically tough to stop the program once kids enroll are forgetting history: the program was frozen during the recession.

There's also an exit strategy, if we need it

The truth is that even with a 3-to-1 match, this program made sense for Arizona. Nevertheless, an exit strategy is built into the restoration.

Those who oppose KidsCare on the principle that the federal government should be not be spending on social programs are ignoring reality: If Arizona doesn’t take this 100 percent deal, the money will go to some other state.

And sick kids in Arizona won’t get to the doctor.

Senate President Biggs can vote against KidsCare if he doesn’t support it. But he should not use his position to prevent other senators from voting.

Public pressure can help, and the Legislature’s website (azleg.gov) makes it easy to tell Biggs that KidsCare deserves fair treatment in the Senate – regardless of his personal views.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1pgdeJG