Yesterday, it looked like moderates in the House of Representatives, led by John Boehner, had finally concocted a plan to avert a default and end the government shutdown. Then the plan went down in flames.

The deal, the result of weeks of haggling, removed proposals to defund Obamacare and left in its place a provision stripping healthcare from Congressional staffers. It was an cruel deal, but a deal nonetheless, with the support of a majority in the House. And it looked like it was going to pass until this:

Key Vote: “NO” on House Spending and Debt Deal http://t.co/0yZCqc1wR3 #Obamacare #Shutdown — Heritage Action (@Heritage_Action) October 15, 2013

Marking a vote as a key vote indicates that Heritage Action will include the vote on their scorecard gauging a representative’s conservative bonafides. It suggests their propensity to support, and fund, a primary challenge against a Republican who voted for the compromise. As the National Review’s post-mortem on the collapse of the compromise yesterday put it:

A key moment in the fight came when Heritage Action announced it was “key voting” against the bill. Support was already flagging, and the decision made up the minds of many members sitting on the fence. “People are thinking about primaries, they really are,” says a GOP chief of staff.

What followed was a conservative revolt, which killed the deal and left Congress back where it started. It’s barely worth reiterating the levels of mendacity involved in this, but it’s worth reiterating: The Heritage Foundation heavily promoted the individual mandate, the basis for the Affordable Care Act, during the late ‘80s, early ‘90s. Now it insists on defunding or else.

It does so through the Heritage Action Fund, a 501(c)4 formed shortly after Citizens United, which opened the door for such outside money groups to raise and spend unlimited amounts without disclosing donors. Heritage Action has been pushing hard for a government shutdown over the Affordable Care Act since the summer, joining with the now-ubiqitious Senator Ted Cruz. The Washington Post put it well, writing that now "in the topsy-turvy world of Republican politics, a 31-year-old [head of Heritage Action] can lead a shutdown of the federal government using secret funding."

Cruz has drawn the lionshare of the attention, but he has Heritage to thank for the institutional support, with the allegiance of Congressional Republicans to his cause certainly heightened by the clout of the big money behind him. Cruz himself is no stranger to this fact: he won his Texas Republican primary in large part thanks to a $5.5 million dollar infusion of outside money by the Club for Growth. Paul Blumenthal of the Huffington Post charts the rise of campaign spending in Republican primaries:

The result? A more extreme and intransigent party.

Some have argued that the surge of outside spending means we should just go ahead and strip the rules limiting campaign spending altogether. They point, hopefully, to McCutcheon v. FEC, an upcoming Supreme Court case that would remove the aggregate limits on what individuals can donate to federal candidates, parties, or committees. But that solution is misguided.

More money in the system won't lessen the influence of the wealthy, nor will it lessen the appeal of dark money groups like Heritage Action or the Club for Growth that have brought our legislative body to its knees. Only getting big money out will make legislators more responsive.

Citizens United has clearly emboldened libertarian outliers to defy the popular will. So while this debt-ceiling crisis may soon be over, the perverse incentives accompanying a fidelity to the idiosyncratic (and secret) rich remain. That should terrify all of us for the next inevitable round of brinksmanship.