Topics: Common Core, Diane Ravitch, Editor's Picks, Glenn Beck, Jeb Bush, Louis C.K., Maureen Costello, Mike Huckabee, Phyllis Schlafly, Rand Paul, Southern Poverty Law Center, The Common Core, News, Politics News

Comedian Louis C.K. and public intellectual Diane Ravitch may be the most prominent critics of the Common Core, but they’re hardly alone. The Common Core State Standards Initiative, as it’s officially called, is an effort to establish consistent educational standards across the entire United States. And as is the case with any major aspect of the general education reform movement, it has inspired great controversy.

On the left, Common Core is derided as yet another manifestation of the education reform movement’s obsessive rationalization and data fetishism. Chicago Teachers Union president Karen Lewis, for example, recently came out against the new standards, describing them as “an overreach of federal power into personal privacy as well as into state educational autonomy” that “eliminates creativity in the classroom and impedes collaboration.”

And on the right? Well, the antipathy is often no less pronounced, but as a new report from the Southern Poverty Law Center shows, the criticisms leveled against the Common Core by right-wing extremists tend to be, in a word, crazy. Often, they’re far less about the standards themselves than a generalized hatred for secularism and public education, one that has roots stretching all the way back to the 1950s and is most pronounced among religious Southern conservatives who worry Big Brother is trying to turn their progeny liberal.

Earlier this week, Salon talked about the new report, and the far right’s assault on Common Core, with SPLC’s Teaching Tolerance director, Maureen Costello. Following is a transcript of our conversation, lightly edited for clarity and length.

What made you want to study the anti-Common Core movement on the right?

We wanted to shed some light on the nature of the debate, because you can’t pick up a newspaper these days (if in fact you pick up newspapers) or open your online news source without seeing some kind of headline about the Common Core. I’ve been in education for over 30 years and it’s really only been recently that you’ve had educational topics in the national headlines. That’s a little bit unusual.

What also came to our attention was that [Common Core] evokes a very lively debate about real issues, and issues about whether the standards are appropriate at all grade levels; whether they are being implemented too quickly; whether, in fact, there should be more time for implementation before there’s any kind of testing done; and what … those tests should look like; and should teacher evaluations be linked to the standards or, rather, linked to the tests? Are we troubled by the role of big money — Gates Foundation money, other foundations’ money — in developing these standards? Those are legitimate debate questions.

But what we began to notice was some spectacularly bizarre allegations being made about the standards, and that a lot of the so-called debate, particularly coming from the right … saw this as “big government” taking over and … talked about “indoctrination camps” in the same ways that some folks from the right talk about FEMA camps. There’s this notion that … data was going to be collected on individuals and that they would be tracked for the rest of their lives because of the Common Core …

So we started looking more at the stuff that was coming out of the right, and what we saw was that Common Core was just the latest and best weapon [against public schools], and that there was a real pattern over the last 30 or 40 years of withdrawal from the public school system in reaction to desegregation, to school prayer decisions on the Supreme Court, to the rise of sex education … There’s been a series of topics associated with making education more secular and reflecting a more multicultural and diverse society that has steadily pushed the right wing to further withdraw from the public school system.

So we wanted to see if the dots connected. Were the same people who were making absurd comments about the Common Core also previously the same people who were saying there shouldn’t be public schools, or public schools should bring God back or whatever? We found there’s an enormous amount of overlap.

Who are some of the leaders of the right-wing anti-Common Core movement?

The most familiar one is Glenn Beck … I saw that he has a new book out against the Common Core. So he certainly is one of the more prominent ones.

Then you … have the American Principles Project, which is providing a lot of the intellectual backbone and organizing force against it. You have the Heartland Institute, which is based in Chicago. There’s to some degree the Heritage Foundation, and the American Enterprise Institute … But you also have groups like Freedom Works; so there’s those very, very conservative groups. And then if we get a little more extreme, you’ve got groups like the John Birch Society that have come out against it; you have some Tea Party groups certainly that have; [and Phyllis Schlafly’s] Eagle Forum. And in the states where there are local chapters of Eagle Forum, they’re usually very dedicated to defeating the Common Core as well …

[I]t’s hard to put your finger on one single group that’s leading it, except all the arguments start to look the same after a while. And in any state where there’s been, what appears to be a grass-roots movement — states like Utah or Arkansas or Indiana, which was the first — there’s, like, 25 [anti-Common Core] groups. They’re usually like “Mothers Against Common Core,” or the state version of the Eagle Forum or something like that. But many of them are going to the same places for their information.

Is Common Core an issue that these people cared about before Obama became president?

I don’t think so; but that’s not to say that they haven’t cared about schools … [W]e’ve got statements from people like Jerry Falwell that call for an end to secular public schooling that go back to the 1970s … You also have to recognize that this is the population … that is most likely to home-school. In the South, this is the population that has been more likely to take their kids out of public schools, especially if those public schools are overwhelmingly African-American.

So there’s already been a kind of concerted attack-by-withdrawal on the public school system [from the right]. And, certainly, if you look at some of the rallies and photos from the rallies against Common Core, it’s not just school-age parents; it’s older people who — and I’m not saying they don’t have a stake, certainly we all should have a stake in our schools — but you get the feeling [that] this is a reaction to something that is not just “my child’s schooling” but this belief that they’re losing the America they knew. That definitely precedes Obama.