Topics: ADA, Books, Editor's Picks, Enabling Acts, John Sununu, Ted Kennedy, The Americans with Disabilities Act, Politics News

JULY 28, 1989

In an upstairs room at the Capitol, Senator Ted Kennedy slammed his hand down on the table with a force that shook the room. His hefty body, now raised from his seat, angled across the solid wooden surface as he glared at President George H. W. Bush’s chief of staff, John Sununu, their heads inches apart. Kennedy screamed at Sununu, “You want to fight? Fight with me. You want to yell? Yell at me.” Kennedy’s face was red with anger, the tendons bulging from his neck. Sununu suddenly became pale and quiet and backed down.

Around the gleaming walnut table were a group of senior and seasoned legislators—Senators Orrin Hatch, Tom Harkin, David Durenberger, and Bob Dole, as well as Attorney General Richard (Dick) Thornburgh, Secretary of Transportation Samuel Skinner, and Senate and White House staff members. The date was July 28, 1989, and all of them were there to negotiate the details of the massive and significant legislation known as the Americans with Disabilities Act.

The meeting had been called because after ten weeks of staff-level negotiations between the White House and Congress, progress had been made but a deadlock was now apparent. The heavyweights had gotten together to see what could be done. Dole, the minority leader, offered his spacious conference room with its marble fireplace and large table. One by one, the members of the Senate and the White House filed into the air-conditioned room from outside, where the ninety-degree summer day was broiling the city. Harkin had brought along his staff member Bobby Silverstein, who used a luggage trolley to wheel in a stack of massive black binders—the legislation as it had been crafted thus far. After some brief chitchat, the principals began their own discussion. Sununu served as the point person for the White House, although Thornburgh, as attorney general, was part of the executive branch.

Hatch leaned over and whispered into the ear of his staffer Mark Disler: “You watch! In fifteen minutes you’ll see how impassioned Kennedy is about this bill.”

A majority of the Republicans in the room were of the conservative stripe, but Sununu’s role in the White House was to serve as watchdog for archconservative values. He thought that some crucial mandates, including the very touchy idea of forcing businesses to retrofit their establishments to make them accessible, were too liberal in the bill. Wouldn’t that measure cost ordinary small businesses a fortune? As an uncompromising conservative, Sununu had many objections to what he saw as wording that was not business-friendly. What if the business couldn’t afford to make these changes? What if, for example, there was a barbershop on the second floor of an existing building in New Hampshire? Would you expect the poor barber to have to install an elevator to accommodate some wheelchair-using customer in need of a haircut?

Silverstein, small eyes peering through large glasses into the mysterious abyss of the pages upon pages of legislation, had been silently noting and mentally rebutting Sununu’s objections. Kennedy cautioned Sununu: “You’re flyspecking the bill.” But Sununu continued picking away. Silverstein, having done his conscientious homework in advance, finally raised a defense to one of Sununu’s objections about the bill. Sununu’s features began to twitch with irritation. He started speaking to Silverstein in a controlled voice but worked his way up to more impassioned tones: “Every time I say something, you always bring something up. I don’t want to hear from you anymore.”

Harkin, sitting between Silverstein and Kennedy, was just shuffling his papers, trying to think how to defend his own aide, when Kennedy jumped to his feet, his bulky frame creating seismic jolts as it crashed against the table. The hours of negotiations—indeed the years of maneuvering—to get this bill through Congress were taking their toll. Harkin remembers: “I thought [Kennedy] was going to grab [Sununu] by the collar.” Kennedy pointed his finger at Sununu’s face and bellowed, “If you want to yell at anybody, you yell at me, or you yell at Senator Harkin. You don’t go after the staff! You go after the big boys. You got something to say, you say it to me. You want to yell at me? You go right ahead and yell at me!”

In a moment of disgust with Silverstein and his ilk, Sununu then suggested that the room be cleared of all staff and that only the elected members of Congress should stay. Kennedy’s response: “I said, fine, then Sununu should leave because he was staff.” That seemed to quiet things down.

Kennedy sat back down as an awkward silence filled the room. Sununu’s usually robust frame seemed to sink down in his chair, and his face was drained of color. An hour and a half later, agreement had been reached. As they left the room, Kennedy said to Hatch, “Jack [Kennedy] wouldn’t have done that. He wouldn’t have sent his chief of staff; he’d have sent the attorney general or the chief counsel.”

That is the story many of the major players tell. It is compelling because of the high stakes in play and the success of the outcome. What raised the stakes was that the men and women gathered in that room all shared one thing in common—disability. Almost everyone in the room, aside from Sununu, had experienced firsthand the discrimination and inequity that can face a person with a disability. Each participant at the meeting was determined to end the kind of abuse and segregation that had held sway in the laws of the land. Not since the seismic upheavals around civil rights during the 1960s had a piece of legislation aimed at such a massive transformation of society and culture. Up until 1990, none of the members of the disabled minority group had the full range of civil rights that nondisabled US citizens had. One by one, other minority groups—notably African Americans, other people of color and various nationalities, and women—had all fought for and achieved those rights. Now it was the turn of essentially the largest minority group in the United States to claim its rights.