Topics: 1960s, Detroit, Editor's Picks, Electricity, poor, Poverty, Scarcity, suburbs, tom dinapoli, Water, Politics News

The controversial decision this summer by the City of Detroit to shut off the water to thousands of families who were in serious arrears on their utility bills prompted a 1960s flashback for me.

Back in the summer of 1969 I was 13 and the oldest of six kids living on Goodviet Place, a dead-end street in Glen Rock, New Jersey, when the Ridgewood Water Co. shut our water off for lack of payment. A guy from the municipal utility just pulled up to our curb, got out with with a tee-shaped rod that he used to shut off service from the street. It was the same summer I met my first elected official, Bergen County Sheriff Joe Job, who had handed me the foreclosure papers on my family’s home because my parents were not home to accept service.

We had experienced the electricity being shut off before, but that felt more like a rustic adventure. It harkened back to a cooler historical time like the American Revolution. If Thomas Jefferson could compose the Declaration of Independence by candlelight I could use it to finish my homework. Our mother drilled into us that it was not the hardships we faced that defined us, but how we survived them that mattered.

But the water shut-off felt different. It was that kind of threatening act that made me feel like the local powers-that-be wanted us to move on like we were undesirables. There is nothing cool about being thirsty or enduring the smell of full toilets in the middle of a hot summer, especially when some of your siblings are still really little. Electricity can be optional but water is not. The water-human link is primordial — as a species we build our settlements in proximity to water. We will go to war if access to it is blocked. We will lie, steal or cheat to control it.

My family was in this chaotic financial free fall because of an economic downturn in which my father had lost his job in the textile industry, which was leaving the country in pursuit of higher profit margins. A proud Irish Catholic, he had concealed our deteriorating financial condition from my mother until it was too late. At one point my dad left the house and started living in a rental car; his own car had been repossessed, which he only learned after he mistakenly reported it stolen to the police.

Now, as the oldest of the “men of the house,” it fell to my younger brother Andrew, who was 10, and I to conduct the water raids on the Esso Gas Station up on Lincoln Avenue in Hawthorne, the next town over. No doubt we were quite a third-world sight, in the midst of suburbia, carrying those heavy five-gallon buckets several blocks.

But it was empowering, an end run around the capitalist system that had no regard for what we as children were experiencing. It was the real America — no money, no water, no exceptions. For us, taking the cover off the toilet tank and dumping in big oil’s fresh water, so we could finally flush the toilet, was a direct action that gave us a sense we could control something in our lives.

Back in 1969 our water shut-off galvanized our fractured nuclear family but we suffered in isolation. Today, more than 40 years later, the decision by the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to shut off the water for thousands of people has prompted international outrage that extends well beyond the bankrupt city limits.

Last month the U.N. Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner issued a sharp rebuke to the city utility for the “violation of the human right to water,” quoting three world-renowned experts who all called for the immediate restoration of service. In a sign of hemispheric solidarity, the Council of Canadians, a social justice nonprofit , delivered 200 gallons of tap water to thirsty Detroit residents.

“The human suffering is that of a major disaster, one that grows every day,” Maude Barlow, national chair of the Council of Canadians, said in statement. “I ask Obama, with his sense of justice, to intervene and to declare a state of emergency. It is appalling that this has been allowed to happen, even more to go on for so long.”

Last month the NAACP Legal Defense fund filed a class action suit on behalf of Detroit’s residential households asserting that the water utility had a double standard because it was letting commercial accounts, which owed hundreds of thousands, continue to get their water while it was shutting off service to its residential customer base, which is overwhelmingly African-American. For its part, the utility reports that 89,000 customers owed more than $91 million in back bills with more than half of its residential accounts at least two months behind. In order to make up for the operating shortfall and massive bad debt on the books the City Council boosted water rates by a whopping 8.7 percent, putting water service further out of reach of those who struggled to afford the existing rates.

The utility denies that it has unfairly targeted the city’s poorest residents. “Every customer that has come to the DWSD with a legitimate financial hardship has not had their service terminated. In cases where the water has been shut off, it’s been restored,” said Darryl Latimer, a DWSD deputy director in a statement. The Detroit News editorialized that the U.N. Human Rights Office was overreacting, observing that in May, when termination notices were sent out to 47,000 accounts, more than 90 percent paid up with just 4,500 accounts being actually suspended with many of those located in vacant buildings.