WKYC's Tom Beres with Medicaid patient (Photo: WKYC)

LAKEWOOD, OHIO - Erin McCabe was grateful when she got her notice from the state of Ohio that she is eligible for Medicaid. She uses the program to pay for prescriptions, doctors' visits and counseling to help her battle mental health issues of depression, anxiety and attention deficit disorder.

Ohio Governor John Kasich made a concerted effort to bring that part of Obamacare to Ohio to expand coverage for Ohio's working poor.

"This is what the Lord wants," he said, at the time.

But now many Medicaid recipients are concerned about what Republican lawmakers want.

Kasich signed legislation that will have the state ask the federal government for permission to start charging able-bodied Medicaid recipients up to $99 in annual premiums.

Erin is on a shoestring budget. She wants to work but often cannot.

If she had to pay a premium, "I wouldn't be able to pay for my prescriptions, I wouldn't be able to pay for my psychiatrist visits, I wouldn't be able to go to counseling."

Republican lawmakers claim the proposal, which is named Healthy Ohio, would save money and make Medicare recipients more responsible.

The projection is it could save a billion dollars within five years of being adopted.

The state also projects up to 140,000 Ohioans would drop Medicaid because of the change.

Critics accuse Governor Kasich of backing off his commitment to Medicaid. He signed the bill making this happen.

The governor's Press Secretary Joe Andrews said, "The governor is proud that Medicaid expansion is making a difference in our state and helping people get healthy, stay healthy and better participate in the workforce. At the same time, we have worked hard to improve the system's quality and accountability so taxpayers get the value they deserve."

So what will happen to those Medicaid recipients who no longer have coverage?

In Greater Cleveland, many will likely turn to MetroHealth Medical Center.

MetroHealth Dr. James Misak said, "The proposed waiver would cost MetroHealth millions of dollars a year to provide vital health care coverage to patients who lose their Medicaid coverage and become uninsured. We will not abandon these patients."

U.S. Senator Sherrod Brown calls the proposed change "morally reprehensible," saying " (lawmakers) with good salaries and government-paid health care would try to take it away from the working poor,"

He is leading a crusade against the change. He held a hearing about the issue in Cleveland.

"When we kick people off health care plans, costs rise for everyone," he said.

Ohioans have until May 16 to make comments about this proposed change before it goes to the federal government for review.

Brown is encouraging Ohioans to visit his website to share their experiences about what Medicaid expansion means to them and their health.

600,000 Ohioans became insured because of the Kasich-led expansion which bypassed the legislature by getting approval from the State Controlling Board instead..

Ohioans can submit comments by emailing HealthyOhio@medicaid.ohio.gov. or writing to Healthy Ohio Program, 1115 Demonstration Waiver (Bureau of Health Plan Policy) Ohio Department of Medicaid., 50 W. Town St. , 5th Floor, Columbus, Ohio 43218.

The federal government can approve all, some or none of the proposal.

If the plan is approved, it would take effect in 2018.

Erin considers health care a right. What does she think will happen to her and others like her if this passes?

"We will fall through the cracks. We'll become those statistics that end up people on the street," she warned.