The founders of GlobalLogic could well have voted to see Republican representative and Bain Capital veteran Mitt Romney win last year’s presidential election, if only to back an executive from the private equity industry as they negotiated to sell their software R&D firm to buyout giant Apax Partners.

However, they would have secretly wished Barack Obama won a second term to buoy the probability of success of their other venture hCentive.

Tech entrepreneurs of Indian origin Sanjay Singh, Manoj Agarwala and Tarun Upadhyay, who founded GlobalLogic along with India-based Rajul Garg, started hCentive Inc in 2010. hCentive provides technology to build and run online health insurance exchange and banks on The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) aka Obamacare as its business model.

After selling GlobalLogic to Apax Partners earlier this year for $420 million—the largest Indian PE/VC exit deal this year, they are now betting big on health insurance market in the US for their newer venture.

The idea to start hCentive came to Sanjay Singh when he was still working at GlobalLogic.

“I was closely following the debate on Obamacare which was at that time being discussed in US Congress. At the time, we were thinking of quitting GlobalLogic and realised that this could be the next big thing,” Singh, who doubles up as the CEO of hCentive, told VCCircle.

Obamacare was passed on March 23, 2010, making it mandatory for all people who live in the US to get health insurance. Among other things, it makes it mandatory for all the state government to have functional health insurance marketplaces online by January 2014.

hCentive is one of the companies that leaped on this opportunity and started offering services to create online market places for these state governments.

“We provide the technology to run these market places and charge them a licence fee,” says Singh.

The company created market place for New York, Colorado and Kentucky. The portfolio product of the company is WebInsure Exchange Manager which has created a marketplace model where people can compare and buy health insurances and determine how much a particular insurance would cost depending on their income group, age and other factors.

“Apart from building marketplaces for state governments, in the last three years have also been exploring opportunities to build exchanges for health insurance companies and other private players,” says Singh.

One of the clauses in Obamacare made it mandatory for companies of certain size to offer health insurance to its employees. Also, private health insurance players are planning to run similar models on their own websites.

hCentive, which has a team of 500 employees of which 400 work out of the company’s office in Noida, while 100 work onshore in the US, is keenly looking at this space.

“We started by creating online marketplaces for state governments but now we are creating them for health insurance companies. The third wave is where employers will themselves create their own marketplaces,” says Singh.

According to Singh, this could build huge demand as around 140 million people are employed in the US and most of them get their insurance through employers who, in turn, get it through brokers.

Apart from removing brokers, this model will also integrate benefits like including dental insurance, life insurance and short-term disability among other services. This essentially will be the second bucket of revenue for the company.

“The two main models are health insurance for state governments and integrated health management for private players,” says Singh.

The revenue stream for the company would differ in both these models. The model for state government would involve the company to charge a license fee while marketplaces for private players would be maintained by hCentive which will charge a usage fee per member buying insurance.

Targeting private companies would also mean that hCentive would have to expand its strength.

“When we go live with our private exchange offering, we will have a distributed model where there will be a call centre in the US while a second tier of support will be manned by our India centre,” Singh explains.

The company would start targeting private players in second half of next year, but for now it has its work cut out.

The recent surge of users on US national healthcare insurance marketplace Healthcare.gov, which leads users to state websites, has crashed number of times due to heavy traffic. While Singh assures that this never happened with state marketplaces running on hCentive’s solution, many state websites have experienced serious glitches.

Further while Obamacare opened opportunities for start-ups like hCentive, it is also a coveted segment with high competition and presence of some big players like Accenture, CGI Global (which services exchanges in Hawaii, Vermont and Massachusetts) and Deloitte which services 19 state marketplaces in the US.

Tackling competition and targeting new segments would mean increasing strength and putting more capital in the company, given the founders’ history with GlobalLogic, Singh does not see it as a problem.

GlobalLogic pooled in capital from a slew of venture capital investors like WestBridge Capital, New Atlantic Ventures (NAV), New Enterprise Associates (NEA) and Sequoia Capital. In 2010 it also raised capital from Goldman Sachs Asset Management International, which was expected to be a pre-IPO investment.

"Over the past decade, we built GlobalLogic into a 6,600 person-strong global innovation engine," GlobalLogic CEO Shashank Samant said.

"The decision to bring in Apax as an investor is based on the need to continue and grow the momentum and market share that we have gained and will allow us to significantly increase our global reach for clients in key markets," he added.

hCentive does not have any institutional investors at present but has attracted interest from the VC community. “We have till now resisted bringing in outside capital but could look at that opportunity depending on our expansion,” according to Singh.

hCentive is generating annualised revenues of close to $30 million and is targeting a topline of more than $200 million in the next five years, he said.

(Edited by Joby Puthuparampil Johnson)