BOULDER — Perhaps intending to stir up some good karma, Colorado brought it for the Buffaloes’ first home game Saturday night against No. 16 Arizona State at Folsom Field.

CU chose the Pac-12 opener as its annual game to wear all-black uniforms. The Buffaloes unveiled three new levels of premium seating overlooking the north end zone and two beer gardens in the stadium area.

And the CU-graduate creators of “South Park” produced a pregame, 20-second vignette that introduced the running of the live buffalo mascot Ralphie.

But Colorado (1-2, 0-1 Pac-12) didn’t have Taylor Kelly, a savvy senior who led the Sun Devils to a 38-24 victory over the Buffs to go 3-0 over CU for his career.

Through three quarters, Kelly had thrown for three touchdowns, giving him 10 TD passes for three games against the Buffs.

And after Colorado pulled to within 31-17 early in the third quarter, Kelly raced 50 yards up the middle for a touchdown on a quarterback draw, pushing ASU’s lead to a 21-point margin.

Kelly suffered an undisclosed foot injury and did not play in the fourth quarter. But he had done enough, finishing with 13-for-21 passing for 195 yards and three scores. He netted 70 yards on the ground.

Still, Colorado trailed by just two touchdowns with 8:38 remaining after Nelson Spruce’s second touchdown grab.

“It’s a tough game,” CU coach Mike MacIntyre said. “I definitely felt we had chances to win it.

“This hurts, really hurts.”

PHOTOS: Colorado vs. Arizona State in Pac-12 Football, Sept. 13, 2014

In the three previous meetings as members of the Pac-12, Arizona State (3-0, 1-0) had romped by an average score of 51-15. This one began true to form, with ASU taking a 14-0 lead after outgaining the Buffs 222-22 in offensive yardage during the first quarter.

But as if a switch turned on, Colorado’s offense came alive in the second quarter. The Buffs marched down the field on consecutive 77-yard touchdown drives and pulled to within 17-14 with 5½ minutes left before halftime.

“The team just clicked,” said CU junior running back Christian Powell, who netted 118 yards. “Everybody felt it was time to go.”

Colorado has one of the youngest rosters in the country, but two seniors, wide receiver Tyler McCulloch and running back Tony Jones, set up the scores. The 6-foot-5, 215-pound McCulloch found a seam down the middle and caught a 26-yard pass to the Sun Devils 9 on the first drive. Jones, 5-7, 185, ran four times for 35 yards to spark the next possession.

“Our kids battle valiantly,” MacIntyre said. “We’re getting better. We’re playing faster and tackling harder.”

CU sophomore quarterback Sefo Liufau, remaining poised all evening against a relentless Sun Devils pass rush, finished both drives by threading touchdown passes, to Shay Fields, on a quick slant in traffic by the freshman, and to the junior Spruce on a skinny post route.

A crowd of 38,537 roared for the underdogs. But the momentum didn’t last long. While fighting for an extra yard, Colorado running back Michael Adkins II was stripped of the ball by defensive back Jordan Simone. Kelly hit running back D.J. Foster in the corner to give the Sun Devils a 24-14 cushion at halftime.

“That’s Michael’s first turnover since he’s been here,” MacIntyre said.

Two ASU touchdowns in the third quarter, including Kelly’s 50-yard run, ended Colorado’s upset bid.

D.J. Foster, the Pac-12’s leading rusher, netted 147 yards on 20 carries, with two touchdowns.

“I thought our team showed a lot of passion,” Foster said.

Liufau finished with 31-of-46 passing for 278 yards and three touchdowns with two interceptions. He directed a 99-yard drive in the second half.

“We don’t want moral victories,” CU’s Liufau said. “That’s for people that want to be mediocre. We should have won.”

FOOTNOTES

Colorado starting left tackle Jeromy Irwin suffered a concussion. His availability is listed by the team as day to day. … True freshman receiver Donovan Lee made his college debut. He netted 45 yards on one reverse and lost seven yards on the other. … ASU’s second touchdown was scored by freshman Kalen Ballage on a 38-yard pass from Kelly. Ballage, a former 4-star prospect from Falcon near Colorado Springs, is the son of a former CU player Howard Ballage (1976-78).