I have never spoken to Dr. Monica Wehby, and now that she has won the Republican primary in the U.S. Senate race, I doubt I ever will. After her victory Tuesday night, she was already fleeing for the bunker, "a blur" -- as The Oregonian's Joseph Rose put it -- "in a red dress."

In her campaign against Jeff Merkley, the Democratic incumbent, there may be occasion for a rushed question at an arid Medford photo-op. But something personal? Something in depth? Anything that might give me -- or you -- the opportunity to change our minds about the character and fortitude Wehby would take to the Senate?

What are the odds of that? Especially now that Wehby counts reporters among the bad guys, the arms' dealers in what she calls the Democrats' "war on women." How did her campaign manager, Charlie Pearce, put it? "If Dr. Wehby were a man, I doubt her private life would be so needlessly sensationalized."

Like David Wu, Sam Adams and Jefferson Smith, I'm rolling my eyes.

Wehby's frustration is understandable. Whatever their expectations about being vetted -- or vetted more strenuously than by the National Republican Senatorial Committee -- neither the candidate nor the party were prepared to be hit by all those embarrassing police reports.

Last Friday, Politico reported -- aided by the cloak and dagger of a Democratic "operative" -- that former boyfriend Andrew Miller accused Wehby of "stalking" him after their breakup. Miller went so far as to flee his home in a panic 13 months ago and call 911 after Wehby showed up uninvited one night -- for the fifth time in 10 days, Miller told police -- and entered the house through an unlocked back door.

On the very eve of the primary, more police reports popped up when The Oregonian discovered that Jim Grant, Wehby's former husband, accused her of "ongoing harassment" during their 2007 divorce, and called the cops in 2009 to complain she refused to leave his house until she saw their children.

No one looks good in this mess. But only Wehby is running for political office.

And I do mean "running." Last Friday, she dashed off the stage after her City Club of Portland debate to avoid questions. In the bizarre scene Tuesday night in Oregon City, she dodged all one-on-one interview requests even as her aides badgered reporters for their press credentials.

And when Wehby finally resurfaced Wednesday on Lars Larson's radio show, she did her best to forgo the details of these troubling incidents and lament "the politics of personal destruction."

What's politically destructive for Wehby is that the narrative has changed. She is a pediatric neurosurgeon, the perfect candidate for a party that counts 98,000 physicians among the "1 percent," all of whom profited quite well off the health-care system that inspired the Affordable Care Act. She could lead with that "Keep your doctor, change your senator" schtick, and little else.

No longer. Everyone knows that terrible things are said, or alleged, in your average divorce; Wehby insists all is now calm and supportive between her and her ex-husband. But with the Andrew Miller audio still echoing in the cloud, many voters have understandable questions about Wehby's obsessiveness, her ability to deal with anger and frustration, and her judgment when it comes to relationships and forced entry.

Those questions will only intensify over the summer. With Wehby on the run, reporters will do what comes naturally, and pursue her, their conclusions about fortitude solidifying each time she disappears in a red blur.

-- Steve Duin