This week’s Campaign Stops column tries to reckon with an important part of the Trump surprise, which is the willingness of Republican primary voters — who are plugged-in, high-information, politically-savvy voters by the standards of the country as a whole — to support a candidate who is neither ideologically reliable nor obviously electable. The ideological part is fairly easy to understand: Trump represents (among other things) a revolt of ideologically-heterodox Republicans against the party’s litmus tests, which lots of people saw coming even if we didn’t imagine would take this form or rope in quite this much support. But the electability issue is trickier to parse: No Republican (or Democratic) primary in generations has produced a nominee with anything like Trump’s unfavorable ratings or long general-election odds, and you would think the combination of eight years of Obama and the hated Hillary waiting in the wings would have concentrated voters’ minds on that, ah, problematic aspect of Trump’s candidacy.

Not so, not so … but then neither have Republican voters simply cast the electability issue aside. Instead, on the evidence of polls, even many not-Trump voters have convinced themselves that Trump is the most electable candidate available, that he’s better positioned than his rivals to beat Hillary, and that given the alternatives supporting him is actually the pragmatic thing to do.

I don’t have a complete theory for how this self-deception has been accomplished: My column threw out several possibilities but hardly exhausted the list. But the possibilities I cited were mostly sub-rational — a reaction to Trump’s media dominance, a reaction to his winning streak, a reaction to his demagogue’s charisma, a tribal wishful thinking — plus the logical fallacy that having once proved pundits wrong Trump can always do so.

For the most rational case for Trump’s electability, though, and one that some Republicans have probably internalized, I recommend reading this Will Rahn piece touting Trump’s chances against Hillary, and particularly these passages:

Hillary’s weak points aside, Trump also has one main advantage, which is that he’d be probably the most moderate nominee in decades. Now, Trump is not normally what we think of when we think of moderates – “reactionary moderate” is perhaps the best term to describe him. But border walls and Muslim bans aside, Trump really most closely resembles an old-school northeastern centrist Republican. Trump likes the welfare state. He’s made protecting entitlements central to his pitch. It’s safe to say that he’s likely, at heart, socially liberal — the story of how he became anti-abortion, for example, doesn’t make a great deal of sense. … And given the milieu he’s always existed in, it’s hard to believe he really opposes gay marriage, either. Trump has had the benefit of never really fleshing out what he believes about specific policies; nearly a year into his campaign, we still don’t know what he’d replace Obamacare with. He is, as his longtime advisor Roger Stone says, a “big picture” guy: pro-business, pro-military, pro-America. The rest is all open to negotiation, to making the best deal. And, as Jim Antle notes over at The Washington Examiner, that puts him pretty squarely into the vast middle of the American electorate … Now, there are still plenty of reasons why someone who agrees with Trump on a whole mess of issues might still be unwilling to vote for him. But it’s a mistake to assume that the man doesn’t have a natural constituency outside the GOP.

It’s true: If you just take Trump’s mixture of positions, quasi-positions and non-positions and apply them to our current partisan divides, he does seem like he could have a large constituency in the American center. As a blue-state social liberal campaigning as an America First populist, he offers a kind of mash-up of stances taken by Acela corridor Bloombergists and Middle American radicals, and while some of those positions cost you turnout on the Republican side, on paper you could make up for that deficit by winning voters in the center who are turned off by libertarianism or neoconservatism or religious conservatism, but who’d give a tough-talking businessman who doesn’t seem all that ideological a second look.

So this could be what some Republican voters, especially moderate-ish Republican voters, are thinking when they imagine that Trump is more electable than his more ideologically conservative rivals. And if the pundits are all proven wrong one more time and Trump makes a real race of it, this will be the reason why.

But we won’t be, because this logic lacks the cultural imagination required to see that Trump’s positions won’t get a hearing with groups that might find them appealing otherwise, precisely because they’re associated with, well, Donald Trump himself.

Are there Hispanic swing voters who would vote for a Republican who promised to protect entitlements and avoid messy foreign wars? Sure. Are there upper-middle-class white women who would vote for a Republican who seemed to be friendly to gay rights and favorably disposed to Planned Parenthood? No doubt. Are there African-American voters who would support a candidate who wants to renegotiate trade deals, limit low-skilled immigration and spend more money on U.S. infrastructure? I’m certain there are.

But will any of these constituencies vote for Donald Trump? For Trump the rank misogynist, Trump the KKK-flirter, Trump the deport-the-Mexican-rapists candidate? If you read seven of Trump’s positions to the median Hispanic voter, they might agree with five or six of them … but Trump’s favorability/unfavorability ratings with Hispanics are 12/77. If you go back to last August, before the campaign began, Trump had a 20 percent favorable rating with African-Americans; by Republican standards that’s not terrible. Six months of race-baiting later, he’s winning 5 percent of the black vote against Hillary Clinton. And women … well, he’s losing women, let’s put it that way, on a scale that no Republican nominee ever has before.

Hence his essential unelectability, which no centrist positioning is likely to much change. And the fact that so many Republican voters can’t seem to see this, haven’t been able to see this, may be a sign of cultural isolation above all. They can see how Trump might be able to win on the issues if he hadn’t alienated so many millions of Americans on the basis of their race or sex … but they can’t quite grasp how powerful that alienation is for the people who experience it, and how impossible it will be for Trump to overcome.