Runners jog past Tiananmen Gate at the start of 2013 Beijing International Marathon on Oct. 20, 2013. Associated Press

This year’s Beijing Marathon runners who need to take a leak will have to hold it or find somewhere private to go — unless they want to be disqualified.

Contestants for this year’s Beijing Marathon, a 26.2-mile race that starts at Tiananmen Square and snakes through the heart of Beijing, ending at the National Stadium, will be eliminated from the race should they choose to urinate in public places, state media reported Wednesday. A woman answering the phone at the organizing committee of the Beijing Marathon office confirmed the regulation and said pre-registration for the 2014 Marathon, which will take place on October 19, opens this week.

Last year, some of the more than 30,000 marathon runners, many of them foreign, drew ire from Beijing authorities when they urinated on the red walls of the Forbidden City and on hedges along the route. Pictures of runners peeing went viral, sparking outrage on China’s lively social media networks.

At the time, Beijing marathon organizers said that runners had no reason to urinate so freely. The committee told the Beijing Youth Daily the public peeing instead was because of “uncivilized behavior,” adding that enough portable toilets – two to three for every five kilometers along the route, according to one staff member – had been provided.

Less than a month after the controversy, Beijing’s government ordered organizers of large, public events to provide at least one portable toilet for every 70 people present, compared to the previous standard of one toilet per every 100 participants.

Veteran marathon runners say it’s not uncommon to see people publicly relieving themselves at races in other cities, as lines for portable toilets can easily get crowded. For example, runners crossing the Verazzano-Narrows Bridge from Staten Island to Brooklyn, where the New York City Marathon begins, like to urinate off the side. Likewise, Paula Radcliffe, the world’s female marathon record holder, made headlines when she squatted on the side of the London Marathon course in 2005 to defecate four miles from the finish line.

In the fall, Runner’s World reported that Portable Sanitation Association International, a trade association, was going to review its standards on how race organizers should plan for the number of toilets per event, the first such review in more than 20 years. The current formula is based on sheer number of event participants, but may be revised to also reflect gender breakdowns of participants, among other factors.

Readers, do you think it’s fair for Beijing Marathon runners to be disqualified for public urination? Take our poll and let us know in the comments section.

– Alyssa Abkowitz. Follow her on Twitter @AlyssaAbkowitz