Michael Cotton poses with children at the school the Voices4Peru foundation serves in the Lima suburb Ventanilla. ( Courtesy photo/Michael Cotton )

Michael Cotton has deliberately adopted a scruffy look, for this month, at least.

He's made this a "No-Shave November" and says "it's annoying," but it's for a cause.

Cotton, a writer and a fitness instructor at Frederick's Tri Town Brazilian Jiu Jitsu Academy, and his wife Emily, the pharmacy manager at Firestone's King Soopers store, are on the board of Voices4Peru, a foundation that sponsors a school, a soccer club and other activities for children in Ventanilla, an impoverished Peruvian community in the foothills north of Lima.

In September, the Firestone couple made their first personal visit to that community and the kids and families benefiting from the foundation's work in that crime-ridden community, a trip he said was "a life-changing experience."

Now that they're back, Michael Cotton is resuming his efforts to raise awareness about — and funds for — Voices4Peru. Hence, the November beard.

"They say when your palms itch, you are about to come into some money," Cotton has written on his Facebook page. "Well, I hope that saying is true about beards too, because mine is driving me nuts. I hope you get the itch to donate."

If end-of-November contributions total $1,200 — the annual amount it costs to send one child to the foundation's school — Cotton will shave his head, including the increasingly uncomfortable beard.

If the donations total $1,800, he'll temporarily leave enough hair for a "Mr. T"-style mohawk, named after the actor best known for his roles in the TV series "The A-Team" and the movie "Rocky III."

If he's able to get $2,400 for the foundation, Cotton has promised to undergo an on-camera chest waxing — something, he joked, might rival the one administered to actor Steve Carell in the film "The 40 -Year-Old Virgin."

Cotton is appealing on Facebook and his organization's website — V4Peru.com — for people to donate whatever they can, even if it's only $1 or $10 — not just for his current personal drive, but for he year-around fund raising he said Voices4Peru needs to help children and families in Ventanilla.

Michael Cotton is growing a beard as part of a fundraiser for Voices4Peru. Depending on how much money is raised, Cotton will shave parts or all of the hair on his head, including the beard. (Courtesy photo/Michael Cotton)

"It doesn't take a lot (but I'd like you better if it was a lot) to make a big difference for these kids in Peru who need the kind of opportunities we take for granted," Cotton wrote on Facebook.

The Cottons already were sponsoring one of the children at the Ventanilla school, a 5-year-old girl named Geraldine, and in September they finally got to meet her.

"She was amazing," Michael Cotton said. "She was so smart and so engaging as she talked to us, played with us."

But Cotton emphasized that he and his wife, who spent much of her own part of the visit on a two-week medical mission, "were there for all the kids."

He said, "The big thing was how excited the kids were to have us there," and how grateful they were for even being able to go to school — a school Cotton said the children and their parents knew had been made possible by the foundation.

"When Emily and I showed up, they understood that we were part of that," Cotton said, and the Peruvian children "were asking how come more people don't come down and play with them. They were very loving."

Said Cotton: "We will return to Peru. We just don't know when." He said it would be nice if he and his wife could visit the children and families there annually but that it might have to be every other year.

In the meantime, there's a continuing need for sponsors for the children participating in the foundation's school and other programs, Cotton said, and he appealed to people to help out, even if they can't afford a full sponsorship.

"Even if it's only a $1 donation, that's $1 we didn't have," Cotton said.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc