DUBLIN, April 3, 2014 /PRNewswire/ --

Research and Markets (http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/r5vkr6/us_healthcare_bpo) has announced the addition of the "US Healthcare BPO Market by Payer, Provider and Pharmaceutical - Trends and Global Forecasts to 2018" report to their offering.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130307/600769 )

The US healthcare BPO market is undergoing significant transformation with the changing landscape of the US healthcare system. The US pharmaceutical outsourcing market is the largest market in terms of market value, followed by payer and provider outsourcing. The U.S. provider outsourcing market is the fastest-growing segment of the US healthcare BPO market, owing to the implementation of the ICD-10 conversion reform and the shortage of skilled personnel, particularly medical coders in the US.



The US healthcare payer, provider, and pharmaceutical outsourcing markets are valued at $11.1 billion, $6.8 billion and $65.6 billion, respectively, in the year 2013. The U.S. healthcare payer market has been greatly impacted by the introduction of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA). This market is particularly driven by claims processing services. As the act expanded insurance access to more than 30 million US citizens, the increased claims processing workload led to large-scale outsourcing of these services by payers. Medical billing dominates the US healthcare provider outsourcing market, while contract manufacturing organizations hold the largest share in the US pharmaceutical outsourcing market in the year 2013.



The overall healthcare BPO market is highly fragmented with various players trying to gain a competitive edge and increase their market share. The players in the payer and provider outsourcing market are Accenture (Ireland), Medusind (U.S.), GeBBS Healthcare (U.S.), and Genpact Limited (Bermuda). The players in the pharmaceutical outsourcing market space include Lonza (Switzerland), Catalent (U.S.), Boehringer Ingelheim (Germany), DSM Pharma (U.S.), Quintiles (U.S.), and Covance (U.S.), among others.



Key Topics Covered:



1 Introduction



2 Executive Summary



3 Market Overview



4 U.S. Healthcare Payer Outsourcing Market, By Services



5 U.S. Healthcare Provider Outsourcing Market, By Services



6 U.S. Pharmaceutical Outsourcing Market, By Type



7 Geographic Analysis



8 Competitive Landscape



9 Company Profiles



Companies Mentioned:

Accenture Plc

Accretive Health, Inc

Anthelio Healthcare Solutions, Inc

Boehringer Ingelheim Gmbh

Catalent Pharma Solutions, Inc

Cognizant Technology Solutions Corporation

Covance, Inc

GEBBS Healthcare Solutions, Inc

Genpact Limited

IBM Corporation

ICON Plc

Infosys Bpo Limited

LONZA Group Ltd

Parexel International Corporation

Quintiles Transnational Holdings, Inc

WNS (Holdings) Limited

For more information visit http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/r5vkr6/us_healthcare_bpo



Media Contact: Laura Wood , +353-1-481-1716, press@researchandmarkets.net

SOURCE Research and Markets