If you were one of the thousands of people around the world who used Uber for safe transportation on New Year's Eve and woke up in the morning to higher Uber charges than you realized, there's a reason for that — surge pricing.

Uber is relatively new to Connecticut, but it's growing more popular as an alternative to driving that's affordable, particularly when people know they'll be drinking alcohol and want to avoid driving and get home safely. While regular surge pricing is no new concept, more than 100,000 downloaded the app around the world after midnight, so it may have come as a surprise to some first-time or newer Uber patrons.

Surge pricing is when the demand for Uber drivers is much higher, so the normal fares are multiplied depending on how big the demand is as a way to give more drivers an incentive to be available to give rides, according to Uber.

"Uber rates increase to ensure reliability when demand cannot be met by the number of drivers on the road," Uber explains on its website. "Our goal is to be as reliable as possible in connecting you with a driver whenever you need one. At times of high demand, the number of drivers we can connect you with becomes limited. As a result, prices increase to encourage more drivers to become available."

Some people took to social media to complain, using the hashtag #SurgePricing, reporting as much as nine or more times the normal fare, whereas others defended it saying they didn't understand what all the fuss was about and that there were plenty of notifications with information about it and that it was still cheaper than any fines for drunken driving.

Uber points out on its website that the company takes "notifying you of the current pricing seriously," so a notification screen will pop up when you order an Uber and there's surge pricing.

"You'll have to accept those higher rates before we connect you to a driver," Uber says.

An Uber customer service representive also said you can enable surge pricing notification on the app after 30 minutes if fares are no longer surging in your area. Surge pricing is reduced or eliminated once the demand decreases and more cars free up to give rides.

Uber reported on its website that more than 150,000 people "were in an Uber at the stroke of midnight" on New Year's Eve and that demand increased by 250 percent between 12:01 a.m. and 12:30 a.m.

About 84 percent of Uber trips in the United Stats cost less than three times the normal fare in surge pricing. About 60 percent of the trips in the country were normal pricing with no surge increase.

At its peak worldwide, Uber drivers were dropping off more than 165 trips per second.

Uber teamed up with Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD), State Sen. Tony Hwang, Fairfield police and other officials in Connecticut "to urge residents to act responsibly on New Year's Eve."

The company also offered promotions for existing and new riders on New Year's. New Uber users could signup for Uber using the promo code MADDCT for $25 off their first ride, donating $5 to MADD Connecticut fore each signup, according to a news release about the initiative. Existing Uber users could also put in the promo code MADDCT2015, donating $5 for every ride on New Year's Eve and Day to MADD Connecticut.

"It's an honor to work with MADD, elected officials like Senator Hwang and local law enforcement, both during the holidays and throughout the year," Matt Powers, general manager of Uber Connecticut, said. Events like this give us the chance to remind people that there are other ways to get home when you've been out celebrating. When more people make responsible decisions, we can and will save lives."

Even in times of surge pricing, Uber riders can also split fares to share the cost, sending notifications to people in their party giving the option to accept splittling the cost of the ride.

Tipping Uber drivers is not required and cash is not needed to ride, according to Uber's website, as all rides are charged to the credit card linked to your account on the Uber app.

The company also offers the option to uberPOOL, matching you up with other riders trying to get to a destination in the same direction of you, making trips up to 50 percent than the regular Uber option, according to its website. The company announced the launch of uberPool in August of 2014.