GAYLORD — Gaylord Family Practice, the office of Dr. Gary Lingaur, Dr. Christopher Milan and Dr. Michael Samalik, has signed an agreement to join the McLaren Northern Michigan network of health care providers.

The new affiliation will take effect Friday, July 1.

“We are very pleased to announce an affiliation with such a dedicated and talented group of physicians,” said David Zechman, president and CEO of McLaren Northern Michigan. “Gaylord Family Practice has a long history of exceptional patient care, literally caring for generations of families in the Gaylord community. This partnership ensures their ease of access to an entire network of high quality care, and reaffirms McLaren’s long-term commitment to the health of the Gaylord community.”

“We see many patients with very complex needs,” added Samalik, “and we’ve been partnering with McLaren Northern Michigan for many years for their treatment. McLaren is a quality health care organization with specialists from some of the most renowned programs in the country.”

All across the country, independent physician practices are seeking closer alignment with larger health systems.

“Running an independent practice has become increasingly more complex since the enactment of the Affordable Care Act in 2012,” stated Lingaur. "McLaren took these challenges on early and developed a robust practice management model that has proven to be successful in practices all over the state. It’s a model that allows physicians to maintain their focus on patient care.”

“This affiliation is also about planning for the future,” added Milan. “We’re all very aware of the physician shortages in America. And, practicing in a rural area makes physician recruitment even more challenging. If we want to ensure that our practice is here to serve patients in Gaylord long into the future, we’ll need the resources of a health system like McLaren.”

Gaylord Family Practice will continue to see patients at the current location, 1320 E. M-32 in Gaylord.

For information on services available at McLaren Northern Michigan, call (800) 248-6777 or online at northernhealth.org.