Gov. Bruce Rauner did not take part in Turning Point Behavioral Health Care Center's annual town hall meeting last week about mental health, but he certainly was on the mind of many in the room.

Elected leaders feared that Rauner would propose harmful or even devastating cuts to mental health services in order to address Illinois' serious fiscal crisis.

"The budget address is next week and I don't know what is going to happen," said State Rep. Laura Fine, D–17 at the gathering in Skokie. "It's very different coming from business than coming from government. We don't know what the outcome is going to be."

Fine ominously speculated about the proposed budget Rauner will deliver to the legislature.

"My guess is we're going to see pretty much a bloodbath," she said.

She also said no matter what proposed budget Rauner hands over, it is not the final word. Contacting legislators and protesting cuts in services can make a difference, she said.

Cuts in services have already made a negative difference to many who rely on access to mental health care resources. Attendees voiced concerns at the Feb. 13 meeting at the Skokie Public Library.

"Many of our PSR (psycho-social rehabilitation) clients are being denied authorization for continuation of these services," read a question on behalf of Turning Point clients. "What this means is that they will not be able to attend any of the PSR groups that they utilize on a regular basis to learn important skills, keep them stable and sometimes prevent hospitalization."

One woman in the audience said she has been "thriving" in PSR programs and now has been cut off, although Turning Point continues to carry her in hope the situation will be resolved.

"I'm fighting tears right now," she said, calling Turning Point her family and source of support. "It's affecting me physically. I don't want to go to a hospital. I don't want to go to an emergency room."

This marked Turning Point's 14th annual town hall meeting on mental health care in which experts discuss the impact of the current political and economic climate on mental health services.

In addition to a handful of panelists, the forum included about a dozen "local experts," those on the front lines in dealing with different aspects of mental health care services.

"Each year has been important, but today's meeting feels especially important," said Turning Point CEO Ann Fisher Raney. "Our state government is in transition and the Department of Mental Health and related offices that oversee our work are undergoing changes."

Established in 1969, Turning Point is an outpatient mental health care center providing "expert, affordable mental health care to all."

In recent years, it created The Living Room, an alternative to hospital emergency rooms providing comfortable, non-clinical space for people undergoing a psychiatric crisis. Recently, Turning Point won the 2015 Excellence in Behavioral Health Care Management Award.

Social service agencies dealing with mental health, including Turning Point, have had to grapple with formidable challenges in maintaining or expanding services in a time of fiscal austerity for the state.

State Sen. Daniel Biss, D–9, recently-named chair of the Senate's Human Services Committee, said he is extremely concerned about future funding for needed mental health care services.

"It's a new and different set of priorities that we're trying to understand," Biss said. "The governor has said a lot of things, and frankly a lot of enormously controversial things, about many, many issues."

Still, Biss said, he has not talked about the core financial questions facing the state.

"The real challenge before us is what to do about our tax code," Biss said. "The tax code dropped dramatically Jan. 1 placing us in an enormous situation of fiscal pressure."

But not all of the impact on mental health services comes from Springfield. The federal Affordable Care Act, for example, has resulted in more than 540,000 people being added to Medicaid coverage.

"I think the Affordable Care Act has been an amazing policy," said State Rep. Robyn Gabel, D–18, adding that many in Illinois receive health care coverage now who did not before.

The result, though, also creates a demand on state employees, of which Illinois has among the fewest per capita in the country, Gabel said. Funding has been allocated to the state's human services department to hire more people.

"All that said, they are still further behind than they would like to be," Gabel said. "They're making progress."

U.S. Rep. Jan Schakowsky, D–9, has attended many of the annual town hall meetings. Although in Washington this year, she delivered a statement through spokesperson Ann Limjoco.

Like Gabel, Schakowsky said Obamacare has made a significant difference in many people's lives. But efforts to improve Obamacare have had little success, she said, because of Republican opposition.

Skokie Mayor George Van Dusen brought the discussion to a local level, noting that Skokie and Evanston provide more affordable housing than any town in the northern suburbs. The village places high priority on providing adequate mental health services, he said.

Dan Wasserman of the mental health division in the Illinois Department of Human Services said some of the most important mental health services are provided by community-based nonprofit agencies like Turning Point.

He acknowledged changes at the state level are taking place.

He also agreed that psycho-social rehabilitation services are among those that are important to recovery. But funding for such services has to be looked at as part of a whole, he said.

"PSR services are not funded in isolation," Wasserman said. "They're really part of an array that could be used together."

misaacs@pioneerlocal.com

Twitter: @SKReview_Mike