Topics: Barack Obama, Editor's Picks, Empathy, GOP, Immigrants, Immigration Reform, Jeb Bush, Mitt Romney, Republicans, The Right, Undocumented immigrants, Politics News

“What would you do in their shoes?” That’s the question I ask my fellow conservative friends whenever we debate immigration, and in particular the question of what should happen to immigrants who illegally cross the U.S. border. “What would you do if your family were hungry, your wages minuscule, and your government so corrupt or incompetent that there was little hope of conditions improving any time soon?”

The question became newly relevant recently when former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush made headlines by suggesting that love prompts many foreign nationals to illegally enter the U.S. They come, he said:

“… because their families – the dad who loved their children – was worried that their children didn’t have food on the table. And they wanted to make sure their family was intact, and they crossed the border because they had no other means to work to be able to provide for their family. Yes, they broke the law, but it’s not a felony. It’s an act of love.”

The conservative response was strong, swift and almost unanimously negative. A few pundits even claimed that, with his “act of love” remark, Bush dashed any hope he may have had of winning the Republican nomination for president in 2016.

Much of the criticism was of the “We are a nation of laws” variety. (Of course, some of these same people supported Cliven Bundy in his battle with federal land managers; perhaps if immigration reformers labeled their cause “civil disobedience,” they’d attract more conservatives to their cause.) But Bush stated clearly that he thinks those crossing the border illegally should pay a “price” for breaking the law.

More to the point, just because an act is “illegal” does not mean it can’t be done out of love. Which brings me back to my original question to my fellow conservatives: What would you do in their shoes? Would you break the law to feed your family, or follow the law and risk endangering them?

I have yet to encounter anyone who has told me that they wouldn’t do whatever it took to help their family — including crossing a border to find work. In fact, I’d argue that people living in the direst circumstances would not only be permitted to break the law, but be obligated to do so.

I am not the only one who feels that way. So, apparently, do many of those most directly responsible for preventing such acts of love from happening.

Recently in National Affairs, immigration expert Peter Skerry wrote that one thing “which no [Border Patrol] agent I have ever talked with has failed to voice unprompted, is, ‘If I were in [the undocumented immigrants’] shoes, I’d be doing the same thing and crossing that border to better things for me and my family.’”