The Eye

Madonna Releases Six Tracks From Upcoming Album 'Rebel Heart' After Demos Get Leaked Online

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images/Jamie McCarthy) Madonna unveils six songs from her upcoming album "Rebel Heart" after demos for the record were leaked online.

Madonna has released six new songs from her upcoming album "Rebel Heart," according to a report by People.



The pop icon took to Instagram to announce the surprise release. She posted a photo of the record's artwork and captioned it: "X-mas is early! Pre order my album and download 6 tracks! Happy Holidays!"



The released tracks include "Living for Love," "Ghosttown," "Devil Pray," "Illuminati," "Bitch I'm Madonna" and "Unapologetic Bitch," says Rolling Stone.



More songs will be made available on Feb. 9 and the entire album will be released in March.



The release comes five days after demos for her new record, which was originally planned to be released in spring 2015, were leaked online.



"I was hoping to release my new single 'Living for Love' on Valentine's Day with the rest of the album coming in the spring," the singer said in a statement.



She added, "I would prefer my fans to hear completed versions of some of the songs instead of the incomplete tracks that are circulating. Please consider these six songs as an early Christmas gift."



Madonna responded to the demo leak on Dec. 17 by thanking her fans for not listening to the tracks.



In another post, which has now been deleted, the singer questioned the intention of people behind the attack.



"This is a form of terrorism. Wtf!!!!" the singer wrote. "Why do people want to destroy artistic process??? Why steal? Why not give me the opportunity to finish and give you my very best?"



Prior to her entire album getting leaked, the song "Rebel Heart" was also released prematurely in late November, according to the Huffington Post.



The Grammy winner addressed the incident by posting a photo of a smashed iPod on her Instagram with the caption: "This broken ipod is a symbol of my broken heart! That my music has been stolen and leaked! I have been violated as a human and an artist! #f***edupshit."



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.