President Obama acknowledges there are some glitches as his massive ObamaCare reorganization launches.

And one major problem is, contrary to the Democrat’s confident prediction when signing it, the more Americans learn about his signature transformation of the United States, the less they like it.

Much less.

A new CNN/ORC International Poll just out shows that today a strong majority of Americans oppose most or all of the plan’s provisions, now scheduled to begin registering Americans on Oct. 1.

While support for the so-called Affordable Care Act has plunged by 23%, or 12 points. In January a majority of Americans, 51%, favored all or most of ObamaCare.

Today, only 39% do.

Fully 57% now oppose all or most of ObamaCare,according to the new survey.

Much of the growing unpopularity is blamed on further blows to the weak economy attributed to requirements of Obama’s health measure, such as employers cutting back hiring and work hours to get beneath the 30-hour requirement to provide employee coverage.

From a political point of view, Obama is relatively immunized from the growing disapproval since he’s done with elections. Still, public approval of his healthcare policies continues to wane. Forty-two percent now approve of his job in that area, down from 44% in April.

During the same time period, those disapproving of his healthcare work grew slightly from 55% to 56%.

But the growing unpopularity of ObamaCare could present a real threat to Democrats’ chances of holding the Senate and regaining the House in next year’s midterm elections. At his numerous fundraisers for that cycle, Obama has proclaimed that restoring Nancy Pelosi to the House Speakership is a key political goal.

His party paid a heavy price for its obedience to his requests to vote to approve ObamaCare. Democrats lost more House seats then than in any midterm since pre-World War II. Historically, a president’s party loses additional seats in his second term midterm balloting.

What’s especially surprising though is where ObamaCare’s support is fading the furthest fastest.

“Support has dropped in virtually all demographic categories,” CNN found, “but it has fallen the farthest among two core Democratic groups — women and Americans who make less than $50,000.”

RELATED:

For a healthy laugh on ObamaCare, watch this

Turns out, you can’t really keep your healthcare plan if you like it

Obama promised healthcare premiums would drop $2,500; Fact: They’re up $3,000