More than 1,000 University of Missouri graduate students have added their signatures to a list calling for a union election.

Graduate students started considering forming a union in August after MU said it could no longer subsidize health insurance premiums for graduate student workers because of a recent IRS interpretation of the Affordable Care Act. Facing a backlash from the students, MU rescinded that decision for this school year, and a task force began work to examine MU’s options for assisting with premium costs in future years.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Eric Scott, co-chair of the student committee leading unionizing efforts, said the group has had a productive semester.

“In August, the idea of unionization was kind of a pipe dream for most of us, and now it is really within our grasp,” Scott said. “I’m absolutely confident we will have a ratified graduate labor union by the end of the” spring “semester.”

Scott is a member of the Forum on Graduate Rights, a group unaffiliated with the university that formed after the initial health insurance announcement in August. Since then, the group has worked to advocate for better graduate student benefits, including better pay, guaranteed subsidized health insurance and on-campus graduate student housing.

Scott and co-chair Connor Lewis have hosted multiple union informational sessions this semester and started a union signature drive that aimed to collect a supermajority of graduate worker signatures.

A union will give graduate students more say, Lewis said.

“At the moment, pretty much all we can do is tell the administration what we want, and they may or may not listen,” Lewis said. “What this does is put the entire process into a legally designed process where they have to sit down with us as equals and both sides have to negotiate with good faith.”

The group wants to collect signatures from two-thirds of the about 2,800 graduate student workers on campus, Scott said. Just fewer than 2,000 signatures will get the group to its goal and allow it to hold a union election.

Scott and Lewis will consult with the National Education Association, a national teachers union with which graduate students have associated their potential union, during the holiday break to plan a strategy for union efforts during the spring semester. Scott said the signature drive has picked up significantly the past two weeks. He doesn’t expect they will have to collect signatures long in the spring to get the number they need.

Initially, the Coalition of Graduate Workers — the potential graduate student union — aimed to have enough signatures to hold a vote by the end of the fall semester. Scott said it is possible the recent unrest on campus slowed the group’s progress.