Germany's Felix Neureuther goes on his first run at the men's World Cup slalom Sunday in Yuzawa, Japan. ( Yusuke Ogata / Kyodo News )

YUZAWA, Japan — Germany's Felix Neureuther won the men's World Cup slalom in Japan on Sunday, edging Sweden's Andre Myhrer.

Neureuther, fifth after the first run, clocked a time of 56.96 seconds in the second run to finish 0.05 seconds ahead of Myhrer. Austria's Marco Schwarz was third, 0.24 off the pace.

"It was a tough race today," Neureuther said. "It started raining in the second run. You guys were so unlucky with the weather — one meter of fresh snow and then it became so warm and you guys did a really great job."

Neureuther's father Christian was on the podium here 41 years ago.

"It's of course a very, very good feeling," Neureuther said.

With his first slalom World Cup win of the season, Neureuther moved into third place in the standings with 323 points, 393 behind leader Henrik Kristoffersen, of Norway, who was seventh.

France's Alexis Pinturault who won Saturday's giant slalom at the same venue, was disqualified during the second run.

Overall World Cup leader Marcel Hirscher, of Austria, was disqualified for straddling a gate during the first run.

Myhrer earned his first podium since December's giant slalom in Alta Badia, Italy.

"It was a tough day," Myhrer said. "First run was good visibility and second run we had really bad visibility and water on the goggles and didn't see much. I've been struggling for a while in slalom and I feel happy to be back on the podium."

Advertisement

The next World Cup event will be a downhill and alpine combined in Chamonix, France.

Women's WC downhill canceled due to soft snow conditions

CRANS-MONTANA, Switzerland — The rescheduled women's World Cup downhill race in Crans-Montana has been canceled because of safety reasons due to soft snow conditions.

The race was originally scheduled for Saturday but was moved to Sunday — in place of the combined event — after about three feet of snow fell overnight.

It was postponed for two hours Sunday morning, before it was finally canceled.

There is also a slalom scheduled for today that was moved from Maribor, Slovenia.

The last time Crans-Montana held World Cup races, in 2014, the downhill also replaced the combined event after heavy fog on the Saturday.