(KUTV) Dave Ingram is battling stage-4 cancer. Last year, his doctors told him he might not make it until Christmas.

But Dave is a fighter. He did make it to Christmas and well into the New Year.

Naturally, Ingram needs health insurance. In January, he signed up for Molina Healthcare through the federal healthcare marketplace that was established under the Affordable Care Act. Planning ahead, and optimistic that cancer will not beat him in 2016, Ingram paid 100 percent of the annual premium up front.

"I paid for the whole year of coverage so that I wouldn't have to worry about bad days," he said.

So imagine Ingram's surprise when he got a letter in the mail from Molina Healthcare telling him his account is delinquent. He investigated and learned he had accidentally signed up for insurance twice - two separate Molina Healthcare policies.

Ingram told Molina Healthcare and the marketplace to go ahead and cancel the extra policy and he thought everything was fine until a few weeks later when he attempted to have a prescription filled.

"The pharmacy told me that my insurance had lapsed and they couldn't send my meds out unless I wanted to pay the $15,000," he said.

Ingram says he panicked, calling the marketplace to ask why he doesn't have health insurance. He says he was relieved to be told that the marketplace shows he has insurance and that the bill is paid in full for the year.

He was sure it must be a simple misunderstanding that could be rapidly remedied.

Alas, it proved not so simple when he called Molina Healthcare. The insurance company insists that Ingram's instance policy is delinquent - and thus has lost coverage.

Ingram says he sent proof he's already paid and begged Molina Healthcare to reinstate his policy so he could get his cancer fighting medication.

"Even though we told them it was life and death, I was told it could take 30 days," he said.

For several weeks, Ingram called Molina over and over again and was repeatedly told he would need to wait. He says the wait has resulted in exactly what he feared.

"I've had pneumonia caused by not taking my pill, blood clots in my lungs from not taking my pill and the tumor has come back in my liver. That's different and this pill won't fight it anymore," he said.

Running out of time, Ingram decided it was time to Get Gephardt and we reached out to Molina Healthcare on his behalf. Even though Ingram eagerly gave his permission for the health care company to speak to us they refused, hiding behind "patient privacy laws."

In a generic statement, a spokesperson blamed a "glitch in the system," triggered when Ingram became double insured.

"When these types of glitches do occur, we initiate a review to determine how the error happened and resolve it as quickly as possible," Molina Healthcare said.

Ingram says his situation certainly was not resolved as quickly as possible, at first, but after our calls to Molina Healthcare, his health insurance was reinstated within one hour, he said.

"I've seen you guys work miracles," he said.

Molina says they are working diligently to assess and improve procedures, policies, staff training and technology to try and ensure this type of "glitch in the system" does not occur again.