Dr. Alvin Powers, director of the Vanderbilt Diabetes Center (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights States with expanded Medicaid programs have seen an increase in diabetes diagnoses.

200,000 Tennesseans could unknowingly be living with diabetes.

States that expanded health insurance coverage through Medicaid programs under the Affordable Care Act are seeing more people diagnosed with diabetes.

States with expanded Medicaid programs saw a 23 percent increase in patients newly diagnosed with diabetes, compared to a 0.4 percent increase in the states that didn't expand Medicaid, according to the American Diabetes Association. ADA worked with Quest Diagnostics to identify newly diagnosed type 1 and type 2 cases in a database. The study has been accepted for publication in journal Diabetes Care.

In Tennessee there are 750,000 to 1 million people who have diabetes although many do not know they have the disease, said Dr. Alvin Powers, director of the Vanderbilt Diabetes Center.

"Tennessee has one of the highest rates of diabetes in the country. The significance of this (study) is that you are detecting diabetes at an earlier stage … it lowers the long-term problem that comes from diabetes," said Powers, who is also a board member of the ADA.

Roughly 12.2 percent of adults, or 797,000, in the state had been diagnosed as of 2013, according to the The State of Obesity 2014 by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

"What happens is that often the symptoms in early diabetes in type 2 — this is in every population that has been looked at — the onset is insidious for most people. They don't become obvious for several years," said Powers.

Allowing diabetes to go untreated can lead to serious and costly complications such as amputations, kidney failure, blindness and nerve problems.

Medicaid expansion programs use federal funding to expand coverage to adults who do not qualify for Medicare and have income at or below 138 percent of the federal poverty level, or about $16,105 for a single adult.

Gov. Bill Haslam proposed Insure Tennessee, a coverage expansion plan in December, to bring insurance access to Tennesseans who are ineligible for TennCare and buying insurance on the federally run insurance marketplace. Insure Tennessee failed in a special senate committee.

Diabetes can be found at early stages by testing blood glucose levels when fasting. People in expanded Medicaid programs have better access to tests where diabetes can be found, said Powers.

"Regardless of the politics, this to me, is an economic issue. People who have diabetes, we know they cost more to the (health care) system, they are out of work more — it really becomes an economic issue," he said.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

By the numbers

•750,000-1 million of 6.54 million Tennesseans have diabetes

•12.2 percent or 797,000 were diagnosed as of 2013

•200,000 could be living with the disease but be undiagnosed

Source: Dr. Alvin Powers, director of the Vanderbilt Diabetes Center, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation

Find out whether you have diabetes risk factors and whether you should get tested: askscreenknow.com

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1bqgpb4