WASHINGTON (KMOX/AP)- By a vote of 65-33, the U.S. Senate has approved a year-end budget package that boosts federal agency spending and awards tax cuts to both families and an array of business interests.

The compromise measure, approved earlier Friday by a 316-113 vote in the House, combines $1.14 trillion in new spending in 2016 and $680 billion in tax cuts over the coming decade.

The Senate’s action sends the bill to President Barack Obama, who is expected to sign it.

Reaction from some of our area’s Congressional delegation:

Sen. Claire McCaskill (D-MO) voted No: “This package is one fiscally irresponsible step too far. It includes important provisions for programs I support, like a boost to the E/A-18 Growler and F/A-18 Super Hornets production lines in St. Louis. But the bulk of this package is just a series of huge, expensive tax giveaways to the wealthy and special interests—not paid for—that will add significantly to our national debt and hamper our ability to achieve my goal of a simpler, fairer tax code.”

Sen. Dick Durbin (D-IL) voted Yes: “The way the Senate works is when a constructive cooperative majority can find a constructive cooperative minority, that’s why this significant bill was passed today.”

Rep. Mike Bost (R-IL) voted Yes: “While this legislation may not have included everything we wanted, it does make significant reforms that are win-wins for Southern Illinois,” said Rep. Bost. “Now that we’ve come together to provide long-term certainty for our military members, small businesses, and hardworking families in Southern Illinois, we can now redouble our efforts on the important initiatives that were not included in this bill and hopefully make progress there as well.”

Rep. Blaine Luetkemeyer (R-MO) voted Yes: “Today’s passage of the legislation that will fund the government for the next fiscal year represents a bipartisan compromise that includes a number of priorities that are important to Americans. National security is arguably the biggest concern right now and this legislation fully funds our military and tightens security requirements for those entering our country under the nation’s Visa Waiver Program. It includes no new funding for Obamacare, and in fact, undermines Obamacare’s funding; reduces EPA’s budget to its lowest level since 2008 and cuts its employees to the lowest number since 1989; blocks the anti-gun UN Arms Trade Treaty; repeals mandatory Country of Origin Labeling, which is hurting America’s farmers and ranchers; prohibits taxpayer funding for abortions and cuts the UN’s Population Fund. This legislation will also repeal the decades old oil export ban which will help grow jobs and promote greater exploration of natural resources in our country. While this bill is not perfect, it ultimately is a step in the right direction. It is my hope the House of Representatives will get back to regular order and pass appropriations bills one-by-one so Congress can avoid governing by crisis.”

Missouri Senator Roy Blunt (R) & Illinois Senator Mark Kirk (R) both voted Yes.

Missouri Reps Lacy Clay, Ann Wagner, Blaine Luetkemeyer, & Vicky Hartzler all voted Yes. Jason Smith voted No.

Illinois Reps John Shimkus, Rodney Davis, & Mike Bost all voted Yes. Darin LaHood voted No.

(TM and © Copyright 2015 CBS Radio Inc. and its relevant subsidiaries. CBS RADIO and EYE Logo TM and Copyright 2015 CBS Broadcasting Inc. Used under license. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. The Associated Press contributed to this report.)