Wisconsin Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen is seen during a 2014 interview. Credit: Rick Wood

It should be a no-brainer.

Who gets first dibs on the assets and incomes of state inmates and others on supervised release?

Any victims owed court-ordered restitution certainly should be first in line.

Right?

Not according to a legal opinion handed down by then-Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen during his final days on the job this month. Van Hollen said the state Department of Corrections can collect a "supervision fee" from offenders before victims get all that they are owed.

"DOC first, victims second?" asked one prominent official who alerted the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel to the ruling.

Now Van Hollen's successor, Brad Schimel, is urging lawmakers to get involved in the matter. Schimel and Van Hollen are both Republicans.

"Former AG Van Hollen answered the question, and his formal opinion is in the books," said Anne E. Schwartz, spokeswoman for Schimel. "We now know that legislative action will be necessary to resolve this problem."

In his Jan. 2 legal opinion, Van Hollen concluded that state corrections officials may step in front of crime victims to collect the so-called "supervision fee" from offenders under its authority.

That fee covers the cost to the state for locking up and monitoring criminals. Corrections officials are also responsible for collecting restitution.

"You ask whether restitution payments must be prioritized over the supervision fee under (state law)," Van Hollen wrote on Jan. 2. "No source of authority requires this."

Only after an offender has paid the entire supervision fee is the state obligated to kick any additional dollars to the victims.

"Neither the Wisconsin Constitution, statutes, nor the administrative code prohibits supervision fees from being collected when court-ordered restitution obligations remain outstanding," Van Hollen wrote.

"Therefore, DOC may lawfully collect supervision fees from an offender before court-ordered restitution is paid."

State corrections officials were checking late last week to see how they currently handle restitution and supervision fees. They did not say how much the fee usually costs.

Dane County District Attorney Ismael Ozanne, who sought the legal opinion, said Van Hollen's letter could prove harmful not just to crime victims but also for offenders.

Specifically, victims may not end up getting all that they are owed.

"You want victims to be made whole," said the Dane County Democrat.

But Ozanne, who ran unsuccessfully for attorney general last year, said state corrections officials often ask courts to extend state supervision of criminals who have yet to pay off their restitution.

In some cases, he said, an offender may owe something to a victim only because corrections officials decide to keep a portion of the criminal's income for themselves to cover the supervision fee.

Ozanne said Dane County prosecutors usually side with requests by the state to extend supervision for those in prison or on probation. But this might not be such an easy call if offenders couldn't pay restitution only because officials divert dollars to pay the state fee.

What will his office do in that case in the future?

"We would have a take a strong look at it," Ozanne said.

Schimel, the state's new top cop, was a member of the Crime Victims Council, which sought clarity on the issue, according to his spokeswoman.

An AG's formal opinion represents his official legal advice on how an agency or official should handle an ambiguous legal matter.

"Victim advocates needed an answer to guide their next steps," Schwartz said.

Now it's up to lawmakers to decide what to do next.

A done deal?

Gov. Scott Walker says he is seriously considering whether he should run for president in 2016.

One of the state's top Republicans believes the decision has all but been made.

In a chat with Journal Sentinel editors and reporters on Friday, Assembly Speaker Robin Vos was asked how likely he thought it was that Walker would jump at the chance to compete for the Republican presidential nomination.

Vos didn't hesitate to answer.

"Ninety-nine percent," said Vos, a Rochester Republican. "I don't know about you, but I wouldn't be spending money on hiring a national campaign manager if it was just for show."

The Journal Sentinel reported last week that Walker had hired Republican operative Rick Wiley to oversee his likely presidential campaign. CNNfirst disclosed the appointment.

A former state Republican Party executive director, Wiley served in a top position in former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani's 2008 presidential campaign. Wiley later worked as the political director for the Republican National Committee. He is a consultant with Washington, D.C.-based Mercury Public Affairs.

This past week, TheWashington Post put Walker, who just began his second term, at No. 3 in its latest rankings of the GOP presidential field.

"I'd be shocked if he did not (run)," Vos said of Walker.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice or on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.