A winning year for ELGIN MILITARY MUSEUM and HMCS OJIBWA.

The museum on Wednesday in Ottawa was named recipient of the Canadian Tourism Awards' Brewster Travel Innovator of the Year Award, at the Travel Industry Association of Canada's annual gala.

“This is an incredible finish to a great year,” museum executive director IAN RAVEN is quoted.

Accepting the award, Ian invited EML MP Joe Preston to join him onstage in recognition of his efforts to bring the retired Cold War sub to Port Burwell. And joining for a photo op, Justice Minister Peter McKay who, as then minister of national defence, signed over Ojibwa.

Since opening for tours in June, 2013, Ojibwa has welcomed close to 50,000 visitors.

This week's award bookends the Tourism Industry Association of Ontario's 2014 Tourism Innovator of the Year Award two weeks ago.

* * *

If the lights dim a bit this weekend in Port Stanley, well, that's just DENNIS TAYLOR and RAYMIE JEWELL plugging in, don't you know.

For a fifth year, the Port couple has decorated almost every inch of their Selbourne Dr. home and yard with an extravaganza of holiday lights, for Make-A-Wish Southwestern Ontario.

Dennis and Raymie and volunteers pass a bucket to passersby who take in the show. In four years, they have collected more than $18,700 for the charity which grants wishes of seriously ill children – more than 1,100 wishes since 1986 including 60 this year.

(And each year, Dennis and Raymie also tribute their great neighbours.)

This year's display totals more than 65,000 lights, synchronized to music. Dennis hits the post-Christmas sales each year to build up the show. (And, actually, it's quite energy efficient.)

They switch on Saturday at 291 Selbourne and continue nightly thru Dec. 31, 6-9 p.m. Sunday-Thurs., and to 10 on Fridays and Saturdays.

* * *

Meanwhile, the season's just a bit brighter for three families in Malawi where HIV has claimed parents and children now are the heads of their households.

Inspired to become kids helping kids through Turn the Tide, a charity which supports child-headed households in the African nation, St. Thomas preteen pals INDIA PARKER and CLARK RENAUD organized a homemade Christmas gifts sale on Saturday and raised some $2,000 for food and education for the three families they have pledged to aid.

India is daughter of Tim and Kim. Clark, son of Jeff and Jenn. The two families friended after the kids were born at the same time at STEGH.

Earlier this year, the two 10-year-olds organized a pasta dinner and raised a similar amount.

Clark matter-of-factly describes the issue and says helping is a right thing to do.

Non-profit Turn the Tide was established two years ago by Michelle Timms, an overseas pal of Kim's and a mission worker in South Africa.

Michelle describes on the charity's webpage how she was moved to act.

“Turn The Tide was started in August, 2011 when I came face to face with a 12-year-old boy who was the head of his household in a small village in rural Malawi.

“I had visited lots of families, documented lots of poverty for my master's thesis, but when I looked into the eyes of this one boy, all that theory went out the window.”

She says young Christopher had nursed his parents through their final days. At age 10, same age as India and Clark, he took on responsibility for himself and a younger brother and sister.

(The Parkers are best neighbours in the world, organizing a yearly neighbourhood street party, and a column came away with gift bags that are gonna be hard to gift away.)

The webpage is turnthetideafrica.blogspot.ca

* * *

“What!?! My family has family dinners?!?”

Incredulous is STEVE DOUKAS.

For 15 years, his Sunday nights have been saved, like others, for the Beanery.

But Steve has left the iconic StT resto.

After a fall and a broken leg earlier this year, thoughts of all those missed family dinners – and of getting evenings off – were too good for Steve to resist. And the eatery has been sold.

New owner is Roy Ewart, who took over Monday after meeting and greeting the Bean's regulars in the past few days. There's a few. The eatery has been cooking for 18 years.

For 32 years pre-retirement three years ago, the St. Thomas man was Nova Sales in town, purveying industrial cutting tools and machinery through southwestern Ontario. Wife Barbara was the finance department.

But before, Roy was seven years a navy cook. And a butcher who learned his trade at Thomas's Meat Market and Gord Haddock's in town

“I love food,” he says. And coming out of retirement to buy the Beanery with Barbara's support, a celebration of that.

“I really wanted to own a restaurant like this . . . not fast food but fine dining, and the opportunity came up.”

Though active in Knights of Columbus and busy with community work, Roy says there just was something missing.

Smoothing a tablecloth – a new lunchtime touch – Roy says prime rib's a favourite dish. And he says a good one's already on the Beanery menu.

He is promising no wholesale changes but to continue the Beanery's affordable, fine dining experience.

“No one is going to have to leave town on a Saturday night – or a Tuesday night, for that matter.”

* * *

The snow was all gone by the time Santa rolled into town Saturday in St. Thomas as guest of honour of the annual St. Thomas Optimist SANTA CLAUS PARADE, bringing with him almost-balmy temperatures . . . if a bit wet.

But let's complain about the weather. Does a lot of good!

Perennial winners Presstran again grabbed prize for best overall entry in the Cartoon Christmas themed night parade.

St. Thomas Energy/Ascent, best commercial; St. Thomas Downtown Development Board, most photogenic; Elgin Theatre Guild, best portrayal of theme; Arthur Voaden Secondary School, best high school; Early Learning Centre, best children's entry.

And Emerald Legal Services, mentioned last week in this corner, most unusual for Ty Hayes' ice sculpture mentioned last week in this corner.

St. Thomas police and fire services collected clost to 5,000 pounds of food before and during the parade for Christmas Care.

And there you have it.

Santa continues his pre-Christmas rounds with visits Friday tonight to Port Stanley and West Lorne.

It's an almost quiet weekend for the jolly old elf . . . next weekend, he's gonna have to crack the whip on Donner and Blitzen if he wants to make it on Dec. 6 to Rodney, Springfield and Port Burwell and Dec. 7 to Fingal and Belmont. On the 13th, Staffordville.

* * *

The Grand Theatre's holiday 2014 production of Shrek The Musical doesn't open until tonight but with high demand for tickets and a number of performances already sold out, the show's run has been extended by eight performances thru Jan. 3. Tix for the added shows went on sale Thursday.

Meanwhile, Elgin Theatre Guild says seats for performances of Snow White, a traditional British panto, continue to fill and online sales for several more shows are now ended with tix available in person only at Bell's BookBin.

* * *

A real save-the-date . . . the 2015 edition of North America Railway Hall of Fame's popular calendar has arrived from the printer's and now are available now at the Canada Southern railway station.

The limited-edition calendar features scenes of local railway history. The 2014 calendar sold out two printings, leaving some last minute gift-givers disappointed.