Topics: AlterNet, fox & friends, Fox News, Ted Cruz, William O'Brien, Politics News

This article originally appeared on Alternet

1. On Fox TV, it is assumed that the Nicaraguan meteorologist knows all about tacos.

It’s fairly obvious by now that Fox News is a place where being offensive and ignorant is not just permitted, but encouraged. For example: How much fun is it to make fun of someone’s ethnic heritage inaccurately? So much fun. In an exchange that is indistinguishable from schoolyard bullying and outright nincompoop-ism, Fox News host Brian Kilmeade on Friday said he assumed that the network’s Latina meteorologist “grew up on tacos,” because she is from a Spanish-speaking country, and of course, they are all the same.

Being the multi-ethnic bastion that it is, Fox & Friends featured a segment on making tacos to celebrate National Taco Day. Kilmeade turned to Fox News Weather team member Maria Molina, who was born in Nicaragua and grew up in South Florida and asked, “So what are the tips we need to know? You grew up on tacos, correct?”

“No, I did not grow up on tacos!” Molina snapped. “I’m Nicaraguan. It’s not a native food.”

Does she really think that these people are educable?

2. Poor Ted Cruz: first a Republican “lynch mob” is after him, and then Democrats hurt his feelings.

Some Republicans are very mad at Ted Cruz, whose antics against Obamacare spiraled into the impasse that became the government shutdown, which is beginning to play very badly for the GOP. So on Wednesday, a group of Senate Republicans, including Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, railed against Cruz at a private luncheon, according to theNew York Times. Sen. Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire and Sen. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin were there as well, and some of these senators became very angry with Cruz’s intransigence, and lit into him. An unnamed senator described the scene thusly to the Times: “It just started a lynch mob.”

Lynch mob is a term that is being tossed around rather cavalierly these days, if you ask us. But then a lot of racially loaded terms are flying during the Obama administration, and anyone who thinks that is an accident is a fool. (See next item.)

Poor Ted Cruz was feeling really picked on all week, and not just by his own party. Democrats, he said at week’s end, are portraying him as the “root of all evil in the world.” How could they, when really everyone knows that Obamacare, or affordable healthcare, is the root of all evil in the world?

3. Rep. William O’Brien, R-N.H.: “Obamacare is as bad as Fugitive Slave Act.”

Obamacare, in the conservative echo-sphere, is the worst thing ever to befall mankind, and that is why it must at any cost be prevented, no matter how futile, ridiculous or damaging these actions may be. Rep. William O’Brien joined the anti-Obamacare hysteria this week with his racially tinged analogy comparing Obamacare to the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, which made it against the law not to return runaway slaves to their owners. Hmmm, wonder why something slavery-related popped into his head to describe the signature legislation of the first black president.

Here’s how he justified his offensive comparison to the Manchester Union Leader: “Just as the Fugitive Slave Act was an overreach by the federal government, so too we understand that Obamacare is an assault on the rights of individuals.”

Oh, so nothing racial about it at all.

4. Rep. Todd Rokita, R-Ind.: Obamacare is the worst law known to man, pretty lady.

Crazed Republicans are really enjoying the attention they are getting what with the shutdown, and how they are saving the world from the abomination of Obamacare. Rep. Todd Nokita took full advantage of his moments in the sun this week, first when he said: “We just want to help the American people to get through one of the most insidious laws created by man, that is Obamacare.”

Please save us, Republican heroes.

Still enjoying the spotlight, Rokita mixed it up with CNN’s Carol Costello later in the week, again defending the shutdown as a small price to pay for saving America from the horror of affordable healthcare. Finally, he gave up on trying to explain this all to Costello, saying, “Carol, you’re beautiful, but you have to be honest as well.”

Mmmm, sexism. That’s hot.

5. Not to be outdone: Bill O’Reilly finally weighs in on Obamacare

It did not seem possible, but Fox News host Bill O’Reilly took fear-mongering to a new level on Thursday when he told viewers to think of President Obama’s healthcare law as a “vicious motorcycle gang” coming for their daughters.

Yeah, that’s right.

“It’s like this,” O’Reilly said. “Your teenager comes to you, saying she wants to attend a dance. You have some misgivings, but you say okay because she’s so passionate about the issue. Then you learn a vicious motorcycle gang may well show up at the dance, so you change your mind based upon best available evidence. And you protect your daughter from possible danger. Obamacare is like that.”

See?

6. Rafael Cruz (yep, Ted’s Dad): Obama’s on the side of the Muslims.

Ted Cruz is not the only member of his family with political aspirations and a talent for crazy talk. Speaking at a GOP rally in Adams County, Colo., Ted’s dad, right-wing pastor Rafael Cruz said: “So Barack Obama said: ‘If the winds shift, I will side with the Muslims.’ McCain couldn’t say that, because it’s not politically correct. It is time to stop being politically correct!”

What he really meant is it’s time to stop being correct at all, or to have your words reflect any sort of reality. That’s what time it is, America.