WORCESTER — A national bond rating agency has predicted a negative outlook for the region's largest medical organization and downgraded its bond rating.

Moody's Investment Services announced UMass Memorial Health Care's change in bond status earlier this month and Dr. Eric Dickson, president and CEO of medical system, shared the information on his blog, on Monday.

"The downgrade and negative outlook reflect ongoing core operational challenges including declining admission volumes, constrained revenue growth, the need for extensive expense containment including layoffs, and a complex debt structure, with bank and bond documents containing multiple financial covenants," according to a news release posted by Moody's Investors Service on March 6.

Despite the change in rating status, UMass health care officials said that the system remains committed to quality, affordable health care and that any operational challenges that exist are short-term.

Tuesday afternoon, UMass Memorial's Director of Media and Public Relations Rob Brogna said, "UMass Memorial Health Care, like many other health care systems across the country, is experiencing rating downgrades; particularly as inpatient volume declines continue to challenge all health care providers in Massachusetts as well as the implementation of the Affordable Care Act."

"We have a plan to return UMass Memorial to profitability, with important achievements toward that goal in the first four months of this fiscal year," Brogna wrote. "However, the decline in volume continues to present a challenge in achieving our planned budget for this year. This requires us to accelerate a variety of recovery efforts across the health care system in order to meet our fiscal year 2014 financial plan."

UMass Memorial had a $55 million dollar operating loss in the last fiscal year. In his blog, Dickson wrote that although progress is being made to reduce that loss, it is not happening fast enough. For this reason the company's bond rating was downgraded from a Baa3 to a Baa1, a rating that is considered to be risky for investment.

According to the Moody's release, "Although the new senior management team is implementing strategies to improve performance, rapid progress will be challenging and the new team faces headwinds."

Those challenges, according to the rating agency, include reduced cash flow, a large unionized employee base and declining in patient admissions, in addition to a complex debt structure and 19.4 percent of the Worcester-based medical center's income tied to Medicaid reimbursement.

Over the past few months, UMass Memorial Health Care has held sporadic employee layoffs and announced the transfer of ownership of its Palmer-based Wing Memorial Hospital campus to Baystate Health.