Loveland's popular Fourth of July event draws thousands each year

Vanessa Olivas, 15, left, Tianna Ontiveros, 15, Jasmine Ontiveros, 17, Jennifer Olivas, 10, and Fabiola Olivas, 10, share a laugh Friday while hanging out together at the north end of Lake Loveland celebrating the Fourth of July holiday and also Tianna's birthday. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

More than half a day before the first fireworks blossomed over Lake Loveland on Friday, Jenn Platzek had claimed her family's spot near the shore at the northwest tip of Lake Loveland.

"We like this spot because there are no trees," said Platzek, who started setting up about 6:45 a.m.

Her family has been erecting canopies and spreading out tarps to claim the prime fireworks-watching territory at North Lake Park every Fourth of July since 2000, she said.

In the middle of the afternoon, she said was expecting as many as 40 family members to join the group before the fireworks started.

"This is my favorite holiday, this is my deal, and I don't care if nobody shows," she said with a laugh.

That narrow strip of green along the shore, across the entrance road from the main area of North Lake Park, proved popular for old-timers like Platzek as well as families taking in Loveland's Fourth festivities for the first time.

Two years ago, people came from out of town to watch Loveland's vaunted fireworks show over Lake Loveland because every other city nearby had canceled theirs because of the fire danger.

But the people who came from other cities this year were here because it already was a tradition for them or because they'd heard about the event from others.

Antonio Muñoz, his three brothers and their families had set up their grill near the water and were watching the little ones splash in the lake.

The families live in Denver, and this year is their first they have driven to Loveland for the event.

"We heard it's pretty nice up here for the family," said Muñoz, who set up about 10 a.m.

Martha Ontiveros said her family has been driving over from Milliken every Fourth of July for 14 years.

Milliken has no fireworks show, she said, and her family likes to make a big deal of the day because it's her daughter's birthday.

Lee Morales grills some hamburgers while spending the day Friday at North Lake Park with friends and family. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Tianna Ontiveros, who turned 15 on Friday, was sporting a red, white and blue, star-spangled shirt. "She likes the fireworks," her mom said.

Halfway through the afternoon, the crowd was slowly starting to build. The park at the center of the city's July Fourth activity usually fills with thousands by the time the fireworks start at 9:17 p.m.

Lt. Brent Newbanks, incident commander for the Loveland Police Department, said more than 40 officers would end up working at the park or on the streets around the lake before the night was over, hoping to keep the crowds and the traffic under control.

Along the road through the park, vendors had set up tents and were selling their wares or sharing their message with passersby. Among them:

• Serving Youth of Northern Colorado, formerly an Optimist Club, was frying burgers, bratwurst and hot dogs as a fundraiser for the group, which donates to youth-related organizations such as Reflections for Youth, Hearts and Horses, the Alpha Center, Life Choices and Colorado Youth Outdoors.

• Freedom and Joy Ministries of Loveland had a sign advertising "Free Encouraging Words."

"We believe God's good, and he's in a good mood," said member Matt Baldwin, explaining that ministry members would "hear and release that encouragement over people's lives" for anyone who stopped in at the booth.

• Not for Sale, an international organization spreading information about human trafficking.

"There are still people who are surprised there is slavery in the United States," said regional director Barb Linder.

• Loveland Girl Scout Troop 3, which was selling handmade bracelets, hair accessories and driftwood pieces from the Oregon coast to raise money for a service project in an orphanage in Peru two years from now.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Craig Young at 970-635-3634 or cyoung@reporter-herald.com. Follow him at twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.