The Florida Associated Press Broadcasters have awarded WFSU News four statewide radio reporting awards.

The WFSU News staff, along with WMFE news manager Matthew Peddie and WJCT reporter Kevin Meerschaert, won Best Breaking News Coverage for their collaborative work on the resignation of Lt. Gov. Jennifer Carroll. Carroll’s resignation followed the state’s investigation into an Internet gambling ring that posed as a veterans' charity. Carroll had worked to promote Allied Veterans of the World, though she was never charged with a crime.

Sascha Cordner and Jessica Palombo took home the first-place award for Best Continuing Coverage for their series of stories on the ongoing investigation into a now-closed state-run North Florida reform school. The “White House Boys” have claimed for years that boys who attended the Dozier School were abused and killed. The University of South Florida later won permission to explore Dozier and found hundreds of unmarked graves on the property. Cordner has been following the story for years and continues to do so as families search for loved ones who never returned from the school.

And Lynn Hatter took home the state’s Best Investigative Reporting prize for her NPR story “Adding To Insurance Confusion, Outside Groups Try To Cash In.” It all started when she attended a Tallahassee meeting put on by the “Obamacare Enrollment Team.” Through public records requests she determined the group represented a private insurance agency trying to sell plans that did not comply with the Affordable Care Act. She also uncovered complaints filed against the company in Florida and Illinois. After this story aired, the state of Florida began investigating the Fiorella Insurance Agency. The company has since removed all references to “Obamacare” from its advertising materials and website.

Finally, WFSU News intern Nick Evans was the finalist for Best Use of Sound among the state’s college students. His story, “New Cultivation Technique Offers Hope For Florida Oyster Industry,” followed one fishing family as they struggle through the oyster crisis in Apalachicola Bay.