The beauty of the Internet: It’s probably easier to find a sugar daddy online than sign up for Obamacare on the federal health insurance exchanges. Healthcare.gov may not be looking for a sugar daddy per se, but SugarDaddyForMe.com has offered its services to fix the Obamacare website for free. If only the federal government would agree to be the site programmer’s sugar baby, the next “Obamacare girl” could be this (somewhat confused) woman sitting atop a giant diamond.

Founder and CEO Gautam Sharma claims the site is “the world’s largest sugar daddy or millionaire dating website,” and also that the site and its affiliates “are far more complex than Healthcare.gov in many ways.” All the sites are interactive, and Sharma said in an e-mail, they’ve “performed flawlessly 24 (hours) a day, every day for the last eight years.”

Ways he said the site is more complex than Healthcare.gov:

“Tens of millions of visitors who register and complete dating profiles, with the ability to each upload an unlimited number of photos of any size and then retrieve and display photos on demand within one second.”

“Interactive communication between members with unlimited exchanges of emails and Instant Message chat sessions with as many members as a user wishes. IMs can include two-way audio and video connections via web cams. Members can post private digital notes on each profile and even share their weekly availability calendars to help schedule meet-ups.”

Intensive search capabilities to match couples

Different users have different membership plans (and can therefore access different parts of the site or not)

I’m not sure I’d trust such a site security with HIPAA protected information, but hey.

Why is the website showing this strange token of kindness? Because many of its users are single mothers who might benefit from the health plans (and, you know, it’s pretty good PR without a high likelihood of having to lift a finger). From the e-mail:

Many of the women on SugarDaddyForMe.com are single mothers, and most are in need of a working website that can provide their families the affordable health care they need. Therefore, the SugarDaddyForMe.com team of state-of-the-art, high traffic volume programmers have volunteered, at their own expense, to help make the Healthcare.gov website work perfectly. SugarDaddyForMe.com and its online dating associates are offering to diagnose the problems and fix the Healthcare.gov so that it works perfectly once and for all.

While it’s beyond unlikely Obamacare supporters will take Sharma up on this offer, it’s still interesting to think about what websites are more complex than Healthcare.gov. (SugarDaddyForMe.com’s home page is pictured above.) And what kind of help the government must turn down because of guidelines that are outdated in the Internet age. As President Barack Obama said in his fix speech last week, the federal government is still not great at IT procurement.

Follow MedCity News on Facebook and Twitter for more updates.