Brenda and Bob Iles take home the Puppy Love auction item Saturday night at the Hearts of Gold Gala. ( Christy Steadman / Daily Record )

Local artist Mary Shell works on a speed painting, which was auctioned off Saturday at the Hearts of Gold Gala. (Christy Steadman / Daily Record)

The Abbey Event Center filled with 275 people with hearts of gold Saturday night for St. Thomas More Health Foundation's 13th annual Hearts of Gold Gala.

The event included a cocktail hour with speed-painting demonstrations by local artist Mary Shell, a three-course dinner, a live and silent auction and a dance floor with live music performed by Tiny Barge & The Big Chill, of Colorado Springs. Gala attendees also were able to purchase a ticket, in the form of a playing card, to win a $500 giveaway. News 13 Good Morning Colorado Anchor Jon Karrol was the Master of Ceremony.

"It's such a big event that people are already buying tickets for next year," said Shirley Baney, president of the St. Thomas More Health Foundation. "It shows the community supports health care needs and St. Thomas More Hospital."

The annual gala is a fundraising event for the foundation. According to Baney, the foundation only holds this one fundraiser yearly, and every year, the event sells out.

STMH's CEO Sheri Trahern said this year, as with many years, the gala produced a "fabulous turnout."

"(The hospital is) moving forward to make sure the community is in good health," Trahern said. "It's great that the community partners together, like tonight, to help that."

According to the St. Thomas More Health Foundation's website, "the foundation supports the hospital's mission to enhance the health of the individuals and communities it serves through promotion and distribution of philanthropic gifts...(the foundation) provides funding for equipment needs, programs, services and charity care for patients."

Advertisement

"We're very fortunate to have a great board of directors who understand the need for philanthropy," Baney said.

Baney said the items donated for auction were "amazing." There were hundreds of items available for the silent auction, which included everything from fine jewelry and clothing to Cañon City High School Tigers 2014 memorabilia to artwork and home decor.

Shirley Baney, president of the St. Thomas More Health Foundation, welcomes attendees to the 13th annual Hearts of Gold Gala Saturday night. (Christy Steadman / Daily Record)

Baney said described the items from the live auction as "very unique." Saturday night, people bid on Shell's four speed paintings, a wine rack with assorted wines, dinner reservations for two occasions with 12 guests at the Robinson Mansion prepared by STMH chefs Barret Barth and George Sigeti, a Royal Gorge Bridge & Park admission package, among other items.

Brenda and Bob Iles took home the Puppy Love this year — a puppy donated by the Fremont County Humane Society, check-up and shots donated by Dr. Ron Smith of Fremont Veterinary Hospital and a puppy care package with a bed and toys for the puppy's new home.

Trahern said STMH's mission is caring for the ill and creating a healthy community.

"If you don't have good health, you can't get a good education, you can't get a good job and you can't become a productive member of the community," said Baney. "And (the foundation) really support(s) health care for the community."