The digital health revolution is in full swing, powered by whizzy new technologies that promise to transform patient care by spurring more efficient means of monitoring and managing people’s medical conditions.

Such innovations come at a time of growing cost pressures on global healthcare systems. They promise to help address stretched healthcare providers, who feel the effects of a rapidly ageing population and squeezed public health budgets.

Examples range from wearable tech to measure vital signs and fitness to more futuristic devices such as the digital contact lenses being crafted by Novartis and Google that could help diabetes sufferers by measuring glucose levels in their tear fluid.

Such outlandish ideas are catching the eye of the world’s elite business school students, who may once have sought out careers at McKinsey or Goldman Sachs, but are increasingly lured by the prospect of innovation and having a positive impact on society.

“There has never been a more exciting time to be in the healthcare industry,” says Blake Long, chief clinical officer at Mosaic Health Solutions, which invests in companies pioneering innovation in healthcare. “The digital revolution is having a monumental impact,” says Blake, who studied at Duke’s Fuqua School of Business, pointing to data analytics, which impacts precision medicine.

The gentle switch to healthcare among MBA students mirrors some of the brightest business minds. David Ebersman for example, former chief financial officer at Facebook, launched Lyra Health, a start-up using big data to aid treatment of depression and anxiety. Phil Mui, head of analytics at Google, swapped search engine for 3D modelling at HeartFlow, a start-up working on diagnosing heart disease.

“We call these people e-health managers,” says Federico Lega, director of the masters in international healthcare management at SDA Bocconi School of Management.

Career opportunities are sprouting at global health giants such as Anthem, Johnson & Johnson and GSK, but also at nimble life sciences start-ups bringing biotechnology to market, and also tech companies like Google, Apple and Samsung, which are exploring digital health.

“There are a number of new fields emerging in the digital revolution,” says Eivor Oborn, professor of healthcare management at Warwick Business School.

Eivor points to three sources of career expansion: analyzing data to inform patient health, health organization efficiency, and medical research. “These are all growth areas,” she says.

Tuyen Huynh, pictured right, will join the leadership development program at McKesson , the largest US pharmaceutical distributor. He is attracted by the innovation which has the potential to improve patient health.