Seventh-, eighth-graders inducted into National Junior Honor Society

The 79 Fort Morgan Middle School students inducted into National Junior Honor Society on Thursday gather for a group picture after the short ceremony. It was a proud moment for all students, but also for the parents and loved ones watching and taking pictures at the induction. ( Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times )

The seventh- and eighth-grade students getting inducted into Fort Morgan Middle School's chapter of National Junior Honor Society read the society's pledge during the induction ceremony Thursday. A total of 79 students were added to the NJHS rolls at the ceremony. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

National Junior Honor Society members The following Fort Morgan Middle School students from the seventh and eighth grades were inducted into the National Junior Honor Society on Wednesday: Uriel Rey, 13, tells a joke for the audience at the National Junior Honor Society induction ceremony Thursday at Fort Morgan Middle School. Re-3 School District Superintendent Ron Echols, right, asked Rey and Braxton Parks, left, to tell jokes to break the ice before he spoke to the crowd. Both boys were among the 79 FMS students inducted into NJHS. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times) Marcos Altamirano Toriz, Ryan Bain, Jared Baker, Allie Bauman, Kendra Bell, Alejandra Beltran Mendoza, Amabel Bernabe Jimenes, Grace Breneman, Daisy Castillo, Jacqueline Castillo, Isaiah Celestino, Argudit Chauhan, Allie Christensen, Samuel Christensen, Noah Clough, Rachel Creighton, Caden Edson, Nimo Elmi, Natalie Flores, Whitney Frasco, Devin Gerken, Cole Givens, Harrison Godin, Maria Gomez, Natalia Goncharova, Hannah Graff, Simon Graff, Audrey Greenwood, Madison Griffith, Emilee Heier, Emily Hernandez, Javier Hernandez, Jose Jimenez Sixtos, Kelsey Kalous, Lauren Keller, Kathryn Lane, Amber Lauck, Elizabeth Liston, Gemma Longoria Vega, Yvonne Lopez, Jennipher Lopez Godoy, Jesus Mandujano Rodriguez, Anibal Martinez, Chassidy Martinez, Esperanza Martinez, Yazmynn Mendez, Bradley Miller, Andrew Monroe, Dylan Nipper-Moises, Nicholas Norris, Jacob Ortega, Fernando Ortiz-Madera, Braxton Parks, Rylee Pettyjohn, Dakoda Prevost, Savannah Reagan, Uriel Rey, Elizabeth Reynolds, Roberto Robles, Noah Rojo, Pamela Rowland, Citlally Ruedas, Luis Ruedas, Christopher Schneider, Nancy Serrano, Samuel Shaver, Joey Shurtleff, Peyton Smith, Samuel Swoape, Alondra Valles, Sarah Vicente, Evelyn Vicente Orona, Tanya Viezcas-Valdez, Kolby VonFeldt, Melody Watson, Autumn Wheatley, Kyle Wunsch, Carmen Zhu and Alexis Zuniga.

It was a proud moment Thursday afternoon for 79 Fort Morgan Middle School students and all of their friends and family members gathered in the school's auditorium.

That's because the students were inducted into the school's chapter of National Junior Honor Society.

The induction was the culmination of the students' hard work and proof of character and commitment to academics and service over the course of the school year — and previous years.

Savannah Reagan, center, the incoming president of the National Junior Honor Society chapter at Fort Morgan Middle School, reads the names of the new members as they each walk in front of the stage and shake hands with other NJHS officers, teachers and school district officials during the induction ceremony Thursday. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

The 36 eighth-graders and 43 seventh-graders met the academic and service standards and got recommendations from faculty members before their induction was approved.

At the ceremony Thursday, Assistant Principal Erik Christensen welcomed everyone and introduced the guest speaker, Re-3 School District Superintendent Ron Echols.

The superintendent chose to have a couple students, seventh-graders Uriel Rey and Braxton Parks, lighten the mood at the serious event by telling jokes.

Rey's joke was about a one-story house that was all pink, both inside and out. He asked the crowd, "What color were the stairs?" A mix of groans and laughs filled the auditorium as the audience got it. There are no stairs in a one-story house.

The mood sufficiently lightened after both boys' jokes, Echols got down to business.

"We all expect great things from you in the future," he told the students getting inducted. "I certainly do."

Echols also said, "It takes courage to grow up and become the person you really are."

He told the students that they were on the right path for doing that and then quoted President John F. Kennedy: "Every day, you are growing yourself to become the person you want to be."

The superintendent urged the students to "be very careful and make sure you're making the right decisions to be who you want to be."

After Echols spoke, NJHS Chapter Faculty Adviser Sheila Fenderson declared that the students about to be inducted had demonstrated that they had the personal qualities of the honor society: scholarship, leadership, service, citizenship and character.

The organization then installed the new NJHS officers: President Savannah Reagan, Vice President Nancy Serrano, Secretary Autumn Wheatley and Treasurer Cole Givens.

The five candles representing the qualities of NJHS members then were lit, with faculty members Carolyn Klimper and Cynthia Christensen lighting the one for scholarship and describing it and then the officers lighting candles and describing the other four qualities.

After that, all of the students recited the NJHS Pledge: "I pledge myself to uphold the high purposes of the National Junior Honor Society to which I have been selected; I will be true to the principles for which it stands; I will be loyal to my school; and will maintain and encourage high standards of scholarship, service, leadership, citizenship and character."

The students then walked one at a time across the front of the stage, shaking hands with Echols, the new officers and faculty and receiving their NJHS membership pins.

That was followed by lots of picture-taking and congratulatory hugs with loved ones, as well as a reception with punch and cookies in the cafeteria to celebrate the students' achievement.

Jenni Grubbs: jgrubbs@fmtimes.com, Twitter @JenniGrubbs or tout.com/jennigrubbs