Did you know that America's middle class is getting murdered? It is. I should know. I'm a S.O.B. (son of a butcher) and grandson of a butcher, a second generation American who graduated Columbia University alongside my classmate Barack Obama…and became a self-made successful small business owner, conservative politician, Vice Presidential nominee and conservative media commentator. Only in America!

I'm living proof that capitalism, American exceptionalism, Judeo Christian values, faith in God, country and work ethic and the great American Dream all work. But there is an evil plot to destroy them all.

America, the greatest nation in world history, is being destroyed, plundered and looted by the premeditated “murder of the middle class.” This is no accident, mistake, or coincidence. This is a purposeful plan. This is the boldest, grandest criminal conspiracy in world history.



Although the man at the center of this massive world-class fraud is Barack Obama, there are many moving parts and co-conspirators. These include famous billionaire businessmen, corporate CEOs, the Federal Reserve, Wall Street bankers, central bankers, government employee unions, the IRS, EPA, NSA, the Bar Association, assorted communists and America-haters, and even some well-known D.C. establishment Republicans. It’s quite a shocking list of conspirators.



Lies and fraud are at the center of this “murder of the middle class.” President Obama and various big government politicians need to distract the middle class from their real agenda. Lies are their WMD- weapon of mass distraction.



So they claim ObamaCare is about “saving the sick and uninsured”…when the real objective is income redistribution (through higher taxes and higher premiums) to make the middle class poor and dependent on government.



They claim environmental regulations and green energy will save us from global warming…when the real objective is bankrupting the middle class by tripling utility bills, gas bills and grocery bills.



They claim immigration reform is about “protecting innocent children”…when the real objective is to create 12 million new low-wage employees in the labor force…depress middle class wages for generations to come…and create 12 million future Democratic voters.



They claim higher taxes are to “create equality”… when the real objective is income redistribution and starving the biggest donors to conservative causes and candidates- small business and the middle class.



They claim higher education spending is “for the kids,” …when the real objective is enriching teachers unions so they can funnel hundreds of millions back to Democrat politicians.



The Fed claims quantitative easing is “to save the economy”…when the real goals are printing enough fake money to pay for $3.7 trillion in government handout bribes to Obama's voters…and making billionaire crony capitalists like Warren Buffett far richer last year, by turning Wall Street into a fixed craps game that makes bankers and CEO's filthy rich…while our children and unborn grandchildren owe back trillions in debt. By the way Obama's buddy Warren Buffett made $12.7 billion last year. How'd you do?



It's always about lying to cover-up the real agenda of murdering the middle class; redistributing wealth; making it impossible for small business to compete with big business; rewarding lobbyists, lawyers and crony capitalists; keeping politicians in office for life; and putting big government in control of our every move.



But the biggest lie of all is when politicians like Obama claim, It’s all OK. Things are getting better. We’re in a recovery. Look away, there’s nothing to see here.



It’s not OK. This author was just notified by his health insurance company that my family’s policy has been cancelled. Because of the lies of ObamaCare my family will have no insurance. Tens of millions of middle class Americans will soon receive the same notice. This is no mistake. This was premeditated fraud upon the middle class.



My grocery bills have skyrocketed. How about yours? My electric bills are at all-time highs. How about yours? Gas prices have doubled since Obama became president.

How can middle class people survive, without becoming dependent on government? Ah, that’s the point. Government acts exactly like a drug dealer, hooking you on government checks for survival, just like drug dealers addict you to cocaine.



The economy is in crisis and collapse. The GDP for the first quarter was NEGATIVE 2.9%, one of the worst showings in history, six years after Obama’s trillion dollar stimulus promised to “save” the economy. That stimulus went to Obama’s voters (the poor) and Obama’s donors (the super rich). But the bill (in the form of debt) goes to the middle class for decades to come.

And jobs? You were told in June we created 288,000 new jobs. What the media forgot to tell you is that 525,000 full-time middle class jobs were LOST in June and 800,000 part-time crappy low wage jobs were created. Does that sound like good news to you? No, it's more murder of the middle class.



No, things are not all right. Here are just a few of the facts that support, the middle class is being murdered:



China is set to pass America as the world's #1 economy based on consumer spending. THIS YEAR. It will be the first time since 1872 that America has not been the #1 economy in the world.



For the first time in history America’s middle class isn’t #1 in the world. Canada's middle class has passed us.



For the first time in American history more businesses are closing each day than starting up.



There are now 70% more Americans collecting entitlement checks than working in the private sector (148 million “takers” vs. 86 million “makers”)… a fact provided by the U.S. Census Bureau.



The average full-time male employee now earns less (adjusted for inflation) than 40 years ago.



Twenty percent of U.S. families don’t have a single member who is employed.



Record numbers of Americans are not in the workforce (over 92 million).

More On This... Boom times or bust ahead?

The number of working age Americans without a job has increased by about 10 million in Obama’s first 5 years as president. That means each and every year of Obama’s Presidency, 2 million more Americans disappeared from the workforce.



America’s second largest employer is a temp agency.

Seventy of Americans believe we are still in the middle of the economic crisis, or that the worst is yet to come. And, I fear they are correct.

There is no doubt the great American middle class is being murdered. My new book, “The Murder of the Middle Class” launches this week across America.

This fight is just getting started. I will not go down without a fight. Will you? Get informed and join the battle.

In "The Murder of the Middle Class" I present unique ideas and policies for how to save America, the U.S. economy; create millions of middle class jobs; protect your family; and instantly turn this economic bust into the greatest boom of all time -- by giving the power and the money back to the people…and taking it away from government.

God Bless America and save us from "the murder of the middle class."