Buy Photo Gov. Bill Haslam continues to face pushback, from fellow Republicans and Democrats, on his legislative agenda. (Photo: File/George Walker IV / THE TENNESSEAN)Buy Photo

Lately, Gov. Bill Haslam just can’t catch a legislative break. On those hard-to-push, can’t-please-everyone type of bills, anyway.

The governor took a hit after his push to provide federally funded health care benefits fell flat — thanks to his fellow Republicans — at the General Assembly. The legislative agenda he unveiled several days later contained nothing nearly as contentious as Insure Tennessee.

And yet, on his plan to cut a pay perk currently available for many of the state’s roughly 43,000 employees, he’s facing still more opposition from the legislative leaders and other members of his own party.

“While (Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey) supports Governor Haslam’s overall goal of moving the State of Tennessee toward a more merit-based compensation system, he believes that changing longevity pay for existing employees will be a tough sell in the legislature,” said Ramsey spokesman Adam Kleinheider.

Senate Majority Leader Mark Norris, R-Collierville, put it less diplomatically.

“Longevity pay has a long way to go,” Norris said on its chances of gaining support in the General Assembly.

Right now, state employees are eligible to receive a “longevity pay” benefit after they’ve worked for the state for at least three years. After that point, the employee receives an annual lump payment of $100 for every year they’ve worked for the state. So a state employee with 10 years service would receive $1,000. Beyond 30 years the payment remains at $3,000.

Haslam wants to end the program, in accordance with his merit-based pay plan.

“The governor’s goal is to shift away from an emphasis on compensating employees based on seniority to merit and performance,” said Haslam spokesman David Smith.

Originally, Haslam proposed offering employees 50 percent of their longevity pay check, with the other 50 percent going toward paying the merit-based pay system. In that case, that 10-year employee would receive $500 extra in his base pay, but no more lump sum bonuses.

The Tennessee State Employees Association, the union for state employees, hates the plan — although Haslam thanked them for their help in crafting the TEAM Act legislation that created his merit-pay structure in 2012. Even after the state proposed amending the bill to give employees 100 percent of their current longevity pay as a base salary raise — think a $1,000 base-pay raise for that 10-year employee — association Executive Director John Summers asked lawmakers to reject the amendment and the bill.

Not surprisingly, Democrats in the House and Senate oppose the plan. But conservative lawmakers traditionally don’t balk at things like merit-based pay, a concept Haslam touts as something that works in the private sector.

“Some of the newer members seem to be more about ideology than governing, and it’s not always easy to track the logic or consistency of their ideology,” said Tom Ingram, a well-known Republican political consultant.

Ingram, who has helped on Haslam campaigns, said he doesn’t think the governor will shy away from contentious issues in his second term. He argued Haslam had several key victories in his first term, but noted those victories came with the support of the GOP legislative supermajority.

“He’s going to have to figure out how to deal with supermajorities that are more concerned with their primaries than their general elections,” Ingram said.

“(Haslam’s) still extremely popular, and that matters to the public in general. But it doesn’t matter as much always to legislators who are more concerned about being primaried themselves than they are the governor’s popularity.”

The governor’s repeatedly postulated a fear of any tie between Insure Tennessee and the Affordable Care Act — “Obamacare” — helped doom his health plan. That fear is obvious, if not also purely politically guided, for a Republican lawmaker afraid of an attack from the right.

But the fact Haslam can’t get enough Republicans behind a far less controversial plan predicated on clear conservative ideology might not bode well for other battles Haslam might try to gear up for in future years.

The governor’s proposed changes to longevity pay aren’t due up in committee again until March 18. Smith said it’s too early to say if the administration will offer other changes to the bill, but they’re planning more conversations on the topic with lawmakers.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1BSNE0E