By Hiroshi Furusawa

On April 24, President Obama and Prime Minister Abe met in a top-level summit during the president's state visit to Japan. Among the topics discussed were the continued importance of the U.S.-Japan military alliance and the enhancement of our already strong economic relationship. In the face of new security challenges in Northeast Asia, Prime Minister Abe and President Obama reaffirmed the fundamental commitment of Japan and the United States to act together as agents of peace and stability in this vital region and around the world. They also continued negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a 12-nation trade bloc that would stretch from Asia to Latin America. Though the agreement was not finalized, it remains the best current framework for breaking down trade barriers between our countries and expanding prosperity throughout the Pacific region.

But here in Oregon we are already seeing a resurgence of business with Japan and the benefits it brings. It has been just over a year since I arrived to take up my post as consul general of Japan in Portland. In this time 10 new Japanese businesses have invested in or begun operations in Oregon and southern Idaho. Companies such as the sporting and outdoor goods retailers Mont Bell and Snowpeak have opened stores in Portland, as well as the cutlery company Toyokuni Knives. The shoe giant ABC Mart has partnered with Danner Boots, Ajinomoto North America and the Mizuno Institute have expanded and Toyota has acquired Cascade Industries. There are more than 110 Japanese companies in Oregon employing over 5,000 Oregonians, and these numbers are growing. Japanese businesses are being drawn to the Northwest, and there are concrete, quantifiable reasons for this trend.

The week before President Obama and Prime Minister Abe held their summit, a 39-person delegation from the state business development department, Business Oregon, was in Japan to hold its 5th annual "Doing Business in Oregon" seminar. Since 2010, Business Oregon, in cooperation with the Portland Development Commission, the Japan-America Society of Oregon and business and political leaders from around the state, has held these intensive and informative meetings to attract Japanese small and medium-sized companies and teach them how to expand business operations to the state of Oregon. The result has been a resounding success. This year, 66 company representatives attended the seminar in Osaka and 105 participants took part in Tokyo.

This year's mission to Japan resulted in the successful signing of a memorandum of understanding between the Oregon Business Development Department and Nikkan Kogyo Shimbun, one of the largest daily business and industry newspapers in Japan. Nikkan Kogyo has agreed to promote Oregon as an excellent location for Japanese businesses to expand their operations overseas as well publicizing information on Japanese companies already doing business here. From June 4-8,h Nikkan Kogyo will organize a delegation to Oregon of 15-20 Japanese businesses considering this state as a foreign direct investment location. Moreover, they will conduct two seminars in 2014 to promote investment in the state of Oregon to Japanese technology and manufacturing firms at their facilities in Japan. There is great interest in Oregon from high-technology companies in particular.

There are many reasons why Japanese companies are attracted to Oregon and the Northwest. First, there is the environment, the beauty of the area and the availability of high-quality and affordable water and electricity supplies, which greatly reduce the cost of manufacturing. State and local governments partner to offer tax incentives as well as assistance in facility location and construction. Beyond this, Oregon has an abundance of highly-skilled, well-educated workers. This state is second in the nation, behind only Hawaii, in Japanese language learners per capita, and there is a long and deep historical and cultural connection between this corner of North America and the Japanese archipelago.

In short, there is a bond between Oregon and Japan. Japanese people and their companies feel welcome and comfortable here. This affinity also shows in the growing tourism market and in Portland's burgeoning reputation for being a model green, sustainable and compact city. The eyes of Japan are on Oregon, and we look forward to times of even greater growth, connection and prosperity.

Hiroshi Furusawa is consul general of Japan in Portland