In fact were it not for an enterprising newspaper of another country, The Telegraph, the Free World may never have known about Michelle Obama’s Coming Out Party in the Orient because American reporters were banned from the multi-million dollar trip.

“But I wouldn’t trade it for anything in the world.”

“My husband and I are on the receiving end of plenty of questioning and criticism from our media and our fellow citizens, and it’s not always easy.

“Freedom of information, expression and belief should be considered “universal rights”, Michelle Obama, the US first lady, told students in China on Saturday.

“When it comes to expressing yourself freely, and worshipping as you choose, and having open access to information - we believe those are universal rights that are the birthright of every person on this planet,” Mrs Obama told an audience of around 200 students. ( The Telegraph , March 22, 2014).

The Coming out Party of Michelle Robinson Obama in China proves she’s as big a hypocrite as her husband the president.

“Freedom of information, expression and belief” has all but died a tragic death on her husband’s watch. Barack Obama and his top flight lieutenants former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and former US Ambassador to the United Nations Susan Rice blamed the deaths of four Americans, including Ambassador Christopher Stevens in Benghazi on an obscure Internet video.

Her husband uses the raw power of the IRS to blog Tea Party ‘dissidents’ whom he has openly called “Tea Baggers” and continues with his mission to fundamentally transform America that rips the soul out of the country the world looks up to for leadership.

In pretending to espouse “freedom of information, expression and belief” as “universal rights”, Michelle Obama, who is counting on Chinese students not knowing about what is going on in the U.S., couldn’t be more wrong.

Chinese students top the class enjoying the reputation as the best students worldwide.

Michelle Obama would have as much credibility with the Chinese students at Peking University as she did when she turned up at the Summer Palace wearing a shirt emblazoned with a picture of a horse, it being The Year of the Horse in China.

“Speaking at Peking University on the second full day of a weeklong, bridge-building family tour of the country, Mrs Obama said: “It is so important for information and ideas to flow freely over the internet and through the media.” (The Telegraph)

“Mrs Obama, who arrived in China on Thursday evening, avoided directly criticising Beijing’s draconian control of the internet, media and religion.

“Social media sites including Facebook, YouTube and Twitter are blocked in China and Xi Jinping, the president, has been waging a fierce war on dissent since coming to power in November 2012.”

Just this month Barack Obama has forfeited US control of the Internet, handing it over to the “international community” which is headed by China and Russia.

According to The Telegraph, China’s heavily controlled state media made no mention of Mrs Obama’s comments.

You can depend on them being the talk of the Internet back home.

Some will report that while her mother did the “barking”, Michelle did the lying.

Not likely any of the students Obama addressed could afford the $8,350 per night American taxpayers paid for her stay in the Beijing Presidential Suite.

Interesting how she would answer one student’s question that “Barack has dragged me kicking and screaming into things that I wanted no parts of.”

Like any other woman of her day Obama could have applied the universal: “Just Say No”.

Meanwhile, the Free World has just become a more dangerous place. There is no longer one but two liars in the White House. And no one ever elected the second one.