LYLES - A little boy sat in the health clinic at East Hickman Elementary School on Monday, waiting for the nurse.

Principal Angie Manner asked him, “Why do we wash our hands?”

“Germs!” the little boy replied, smiling.

“Right,” the principal said. “We don’t want to spread germs!”

It was simple prevention in the middle of an ongoing, if diminishing flu outbreak.

Hickman County schools were hit hard last week but were back in session Monday. The virus was so bad among teachers, it closed schools Thursday and Friday.

“We couldn’t get substitutes,” Superintendent Dr. Jerry Nash said. “Everyone seemed to be sick.”

More than 15 percent of the county’s teachers were ill, forcing Nash to call a timeout. But an increasing number of students were sick with flu and strep throat, even though the number did not reach 15 percent, an arbitrary threshold for closing the district.

“To be honest with you, the Affordable Care Act has handcuffed us a bit,” Nash said. “We cannot let subs work more than 30 hours a week.”

If substitutes work 30 hours a week for one-third of the year, they become eligible for employer-mandated health insurance under Obamacare, a budget breaker for many school districts. The district needs more teachers to work less hours, a seemingly impossible task in a small county like Hickman during a flu outbreak

“We don’t have as many as substitutes as we’ve had before,” he said. “When they get sick, or their kids get sick, or another school district has them, it makes it difficult for us.”

More than 91 percent of Hickman’s 3,600 students were in class Monday, the superintendent said. Last week, attendance dipped into the 87-88 percent range. When attendance drops to 85 percent, that’s when Nash said he considers closing school for student sickness.

“We sent everybody home last week and said let’s just sanitize the schools and go from there,” Nash said. “Hopefully, that will break the cycle.”

Hickman schools had a large flu outbreak before Christmas, too. Students were absent in the 10-12 percent range.

“We thought it had come and gone before the holidays, but it came back with a vengeance.”

At East Hickman Elementary, the clinic sits next to the principal’s office. It was a revolving door last week, Manner said. Monday, traffic was down. Students at school seemed to be feeling better.

“We haven’t been hit with the flu like other schools,” Manner said. “We haven’t had a ton of students out. It seemed to peak earlier last week for us.

“We were having anywhere from 40-50 students absent,” she said. “We usually have in the 20-30 range, without the flu.”

The school, with 480 students, had 43 students absent Monday. There were 56 absent Feb. 2, a week earlier. Ten full-time staffers were absent Wednesday, a huge gap in a staff of 60.

“I think it was a good decision to close schools,” Manner said. “It’s a tough call because we’re preparing for Stanford Achievement tests in March, but it’s better to close the schools than to have to go back and teach material all over again to students who were out.”

Laughter and high-pitched voices filled the school cafeteria Monday as students ate lunch. There were few sounds of coughing or sniffling.

“Last week, we had students who had temperatures and upset stomachs during lunch,” school assistant Donna Gossett said. “They seem to be feeling better. They’re eating more of their lunch, not raising their hands to say they’re feeling sick.”

A large sign in the East Hickman clinic explains to students how to stay healthy. Most students at the school, who range in age from 5 to 8, might not be able to read it. But there’s no mistaking the top line: “Wash your hands.”

“I just ask everyone to be healthy and practice good health regimens,” Nash said. “I hope everyone washes their hands and comes to school ready to learn.”

James Bennett is editor of The Daily Herald. Contact him at jbennett@c-dh.net.