Topics: 9/11, cops, Department of Homeland Security, Dick Cheney, Editor's Picks, Police, police militarization, Radley Balko, SWAT, un-American, Video, warrior cop, Politics News

Sometime after 9/11 strange stories began to emerge about small town police agencies all over the nation receiving grants from the newly formed Department of Homeland Security to buy all kinds of high-tech equipment to fight “terrorism.” One famous early example from 2006 was a bizarre report from the village of Dillingham, Alaska:

[E]yebrows were raised in January when the first surveillance cameras went up on Main Street. Each camera is a shiny white metallic box with two lenses like eyes. The camera’s shape and design resemble a robot’s head. Workers on motorized lifts installed seven cameras in a 360-degree cluster on top of City Hall. They put up groups of six atop two light poles at the loading dock, and more at the fire hall and boat harbor. By mid-February, more than 60 cameras watched over the town, and the Dillingham Police Department plans to install 20 more — all purchased through a $202,000 Homeland Security grant meant primarily to defend against a terrorist attack.

Dillingham has a population of 2,500 people. It is only reachable by boat or plane.

As Radley Balko thoroughly documented in his book “Warrior Cop” the military industrial complex has created a new industry: the police industrial complex. And it’s been quietly militarizing our police agencies for quite a long time. Indeed, he traces this trend back to the early 1980s under the freedom- and liberty-loving Ronald Reagan. The Gipper deemed the drug war to be a real war and easily passed the Military Cooperation With Civilian Law Enforcement Act, “which allowed and encouraged the military to give local, state, and federal police access to military bases, research, and equipment.” The police got training from the armed forces to use their new war-making equipment and the military became involved with intelligence and operations in the drug war. Every president since then, including the current one, has reauthorized the program, putting more and more money on the table. Balko wrote, “Then-Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney declared in 1989, ‘The detection and countering of the production, trafficking and use of illegal drugs is a high priority national security mission of the Department of Defense.'”

So this really isn’t a new thing. But it’s been on steroids since 9/11 with the creation of the new Department of Homeland Security. Needless to say, that was just the tip of the iceberg. Since 9/11 the United States has been spending vast sums of money through DHS to outfit the state and local authorities with surveillance and military gear ostensibly to fight the terrorist threat at home.

What we have been seeing in Ferguson, Missouri, these past few days is largely a result of that program — and an entire industry has grown up around it. Attorney General Eric Holder is reportedly concerned about this deployment of military gear. Where in the world has Eric Holder and every other officeholder who’s expressed dismay these last couple of days been? This equipment didn’t just materialize on its own. As we’ve seen, it’s mostly been paid for by the federal government. Indeed, in less than a month a group of militarized police equipment vendors across the nation will be gathering for an annual confab called “Urban Shield” (“Critical training for critical time”) in Oakland, California. It features dozens of sponsors, from the Department of Homeland Security and police agencies all over the country to such vendors as Armored Mobility Inc., which bills itself as “the Worldwide Leader in Dynamic Mobile Armor and Shields: Today’s threat is rifle rounds and they are coming in bunches, through doors, walls and ceilings! Our Dynamic Armor and Mobile Armored Shields will save lives!!!!” Here’s one of its “highlight” videos:

The Department of Homeland Security disburses somewhere in the vicinity of $3 billion a year for this sort of thing. Add in the loot that’s legally appropriated by police agencies in the war on drugs and you have a massive incentive to turn the streets of Ferguson, Missouri (or Zuccotti Park) into a scene that looks more like the siege of Fallujah. After all, that’s explicitly what that video is telling these “troops” they need the Robo-Cop equipment for. And that’s the problem. If you build a police state, the police are going to want to use it. It’s human nature. In fact, according to Balko, they’re commonly using SWAT teams to deliver all search warrants in some jurisdictions now — no matter what the crime. What else are they going to do? There simply aren’t enough “sieges” going on in any given town on any given day to justify all this gear.