The Union Ministry of Women and Child Development has recently proposed that the 12-week maternity leave granted to working women under the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, should be increased to eight months.

Can India, which is still struggling to ensure even basic rights for people, especially in remote areas, afford the luxury of eight months of maternity leave? With the current financial capacities, will a majority of organisations not feel that they have been saddled with eight months of pay for no work? Another million-dollar question is whether the proposed eight-month leave would really benefit women or would it ironically prove detrimental by creating yet another hiring hurdle for them?

Meeting the interests of economics as well as child nutrition and women’s well-being are equally essential. The suggestion is to take the middle path by adding a couple of weeks of paid leave to the 12-week provision. Over and above this, there can be unpaid leave of another five months. In toto, the paid plus unpaid leave can together stretch up to about eight months, rather than the entire period of leave being paid for.

Also, during the period when the woman is on leave, companies should be allowed to hire fixed-term employees as substitutes. A provision should be made that as soon as the woman employee rejoins work, the contract of the fixed-term employee would be automatically terminated. Currently, a woman is entitled to maternity leave as soon as she completes 80 days of service. This time period should be revised to about six months.

While the proposal of eight months of paid maternity leave may not be feasible for many Indian entrepreneurs, some value-based multinationals—especially the ones headed by women—have brought out proactive gender balancing strategies that offer lucrative maternity leave of eight months. Many of them are also offering back-up child care, including for sick children.

Countries like Germany, Japan and New Zealand offer 14 weeks of paid leave. Most of Europe, especially Scandinavia, offers great benefits ranging from nine months of leave to even a year. We may not be ready to adopt Scandinavian/European standards for working women in India in most sectors, but ensuring compliance of basic requirements has been inordinately delayed by our administrative and executive machineries. The most important sectors that need to be urgently catered to are the rural areas and the unorganised sector. Women in such areas should be made aware of the existing basic provisions. Women in the construction sector need special attention. Hundreds of crores of rupees in cess are lying in the government coffers in the name of workers’ welfare. This, too, can be utilised for women and child development. Further, there is a need to encourage compliance of the provision of creches, which already figure in the Factories Act and the Building and Other Construction Workers Act.

Also, schemes, regulations and provisions should be framed for maternity needs of self-employed women like lawyers, doctors and other professionals as well as shopkeepers, hawkers and vendors. Another area that needs a check is the government sector, which provides for two years of leave for child care over and above six months of maternity leave as per the pay commissions. Misuse of the two-year provision for child care also needs a check.

To cater to the hiring hurdle for women, especially in their marriageable and child-bearing age, a provision should be made for mandatorily keeping women employees in the interviewing committees.

It’s not easy being a woman in India, though we have come quite far. Eight months of paid maternity leave may not be affordable, but other basic requirements need to be served across the country on an urgent basis.

raavibirbal@gmail.com

Birbal is an advocate specialising in labour, civil, litigation and corporate laws