The exterior of GE’s West Burlington plant. The company will add two new production lines and 50 jobs to the plant. (Photo: GE/Special to the Register )

GE West Burlington plant expansion

COST: $1.3 million

OWNER: GE

LOCATION: West Burlington, Des Moines County

PROJECTED COMPLETION: End of 2015

JOBS: 50 created; about 230 employees currently

FUNDING: All from GE

DESCRIPTION: The addition of 50 jobs at GE’s West Burlington plant is “better than your run-of-the-mill economic development project,” said Jason Hutcheson, president and CEO of the Greater Burlington Partnership.

About four years ago, Hutcheson said GE was ready to pull out of the West Burlington location. All production and jobs at the plant were going to be moved elsewhere.

Employees, the city and the state managed to change GE’s mind, however. Hutcheson said the employees took some cuts, while the city and state provided some incentives to keep GE in the area.

Now, GE is adding two new production lines at the plant. One will produce low-voltage air circuit breakers. The other will make parallel switchgears to control the flow of electricity for specific types of buildings, such as data centers and hospitals.

“You always hope that if you incentivize the right strategic investments, more will happen down the road,” Hutcheson said. “That’s exactly what happened here.”

In 2010, the Iowa Economic Development Authority approved $2 million in incentives for GE’s West Burlington location.

ABOUT THIS FEATURE: Each Sunday, Development Spotlight will feature new and ongoing projects happening around the state. Read more at DesMoinesRegister.com/ Development. Matthew Patane covers economic development and jobs for the Register. He can be reached at mpatane@dmreg.com, or follow him on Twitter via @mattpatane.

About the Greater Burlington area

Population: About 40,300

Unemployment rate: 5.4 percent

Major industries: Manufacturing, education and health care

Major employers: Great River Medical Center, ammunition-manufacturer American Ordnance, snack-maker Snyder’s-Lance

Source: Greater Burlington Partnership; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1mR8ame