Speaking over the weekend at the 50th anniversary of civil rights clashes at the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Alabama, President Obama called on Congress to fix the Voting Rights Act, which the Supreme Court weakened in 2013 when it invalidated a key provision requiring the federal government to sign off on local voting changes in states with a history of discrimination.

Politico reports that in coming weeks, Democrats hope to pressure Republicans to agree to proposed legislative reforms that would plug the hole in the VRA resulting from the Court’s ruling:

Democrats believe they could easily pass these bills in Congress with a bipartisan majority, if only the Republican leadership would let them come up for votes.

But could a voting rights fix actually pass the House with a bipartisan majority? I put the question to David Wasserman, who closely tracks House races and districts for the non-partisan Cook Political Report. His answer: Maybe, but only a minority of House Republicans would likely vote for it, and in any case, it is unlikely to get a vote in the House anytime soon — largely because of the makeup of the House GOP majority.

The most prominent proposed fix to the VRA is the bill offered by GOP Rep. James Sensenbrenner and Dem Rep. John Conyers, which would restore some federal oversight over states and localities that take steps that reduce minority voting rights. In striking down the core of the the VRA on the grounds that its formula for determining federal monitoring is out of date due to racial progress, the Court called on Congress to set a new formula. But it hasn’t acted to do so. Meanwhile, proponents of local voting restrictions immediately seized on the ruling to move forward with such initiatives, and voting rights advocates are still hopeful Congress will restore VRA protections, arguing that such restrictions disenfranchise minority voters.

But it’s unlikely to happen. There’s no incentive for House Republicans to act.

“A strong plurality of House Republicans are from the south, and their strategy has been to pack African Americans into one district across some southern states, and preserve every other district for themselves,” Wasserman of the Cook Political report tells me. He adds that Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, South Carolina, Virginia and Tennessee each have one such black-heavy district, while North Carolina has two.

Selma is a good example. It’s in the Seventh Congressional District in Alabama, but as Wasserman notes, Republicans have “drawn every African American into the seventh district so they can have a six-to-one advantage [in the state].”

“House Republicans are pretty happy with the status quo in the south — particularly the fact that packing African Americans has led to safe Republican surrounding districts,” Wasserman continues. “Any efforts to newly implement a pre-clearance regime could interfere with that status quo.”

“Republicans aren’t going to bring something to the floor that is supported by 40 of them, but opposed by 200 of them,” Wasserman says.

As E.J. Dionne notes today, voting rights is an area where Republicans can legitimately claim to have participated in historical, bipartisan reform. But 50 years later, such bipartisan action is unlikely.

*****************************************************************

* HOW SUPREME COURT COULD SIDE WITH OBAMACARE: It’s good to see the New York Times has front-paged an article explaining that the conservative Justices could, and perhaps should, side with the government against the King v. Burwell lawsuit due to federalism concerns. The challengers’ reading of the ACA would impose serious hidden consequences on the states without any clear warning, and the Justices should opt for an interpretation that doesn’t raise such concerns:

The court often uses “basic principles of federalism embodied in the Constitution to resolve ambiguity in a federal statute,” Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. said in his opinion for the court in an unrelated case nine months ago….Justice Kennedy has long been a protector of the states. They need clear notice of the conditions attached to federal funds so they can “guard against excessive federal intrusion into state affairs and be vigilant in policing the boundaries of federal power,” he wrote in 1999.

As I’ve reported, legal scholars believe Roberts and Kennedy may be susceptible to this argument, and that to side with the challengers, they would have to abandon previously stated principles. Of course, it’s not hard to imagine that happening, given that this is the ACA we’re talking about here.

* JEB BUSH STICKS TO PUSH FOR IMMIGRATION REFORM: Over the weekend, the 2016 GOP presidential contenders appeared at an agricultural form in the crucial caucus state of Iowa, and Jeb Bush kept up his heresy on immigration:

“I think we need to fix this broken immigration system,” Bush said. “Immigrants that are here need to have a path to legalized status.” Bush called for bringing immigrants who are in the country illegally “out from the shadows” by making them pay fines, learn English, hold jobs with provisional work permits and “earn legalized status over the long haul,” without receiving government assistance.

Of course, the question remains whether Bush will call for achieving some kind of legal status concurrently with “securing the border,” as opposed to agreeing we must accomplish the latter first. But still, it’s good to see Bush forcing this discussion.

* BUT REFORM IS PROBABLY DEAD IN NEW GOP CONGRESS: Politico reports that in the wake of the GOP cave on funding for Homeland Security, Republicans are not eager to take up any efforts to legislate on immigration on their own. As always, the excuse is that Obummer is to blame: “if there was any question, Obama’s executive actions, which are deeply despised by Republicans, likely extinguished any remaining prospects of this White House working with the GOP on immigration.”

Whatever. Democrats, with Obama’s help, passed bipartisan reform through the Senate nearly two years ago; House Republicans have since refused to offer their own proposals. And as Republicans dithered throughout 2014, it was obvious reform would only get harder this year, not easier.

* GET READY FOR MORE HOUSE GOP CHAOS: Speaking of the Homeland Security funding mess, this is only the beginning. Ashley Parker tallies up what Congress is facing in coming months, and reasonably asks whether there’s any chance House Republicans can united on any of it:

In May, the Highway Trust Fund runs dry. In June, the charter for the federal Export-Import Bank ceases to exist. Then in October, across-the-board spending cuts return, the government runs out of money — and the Treasury bumps up against its borrowing limit.

Great! And so, if Congressional leaders had hoped to achieve something on tax reform and trade, you have to wonder whether there will even be time for anything other than sustained theatrics, division, and drama around the more fundamental things that have to get done.

* QUOTE OF THE DAY, LUNATICS-RUNNING-THE-ASYLUM EDITION: Also in the above story, GOP Rep. Charlie Dent explains why House Republicans will continue to struggle to achieve consensus:

“We really don’t have 218 votes to determine a bathroom break over here on our side. So how are we going to get 218 votes on transportation, or trade, or whatever the issue?”

Sounds daunting! But there are plenty of Democrats in the House, too. Republicans will have to rely on them, one supposes!

* AND THERE WON’T BE ANY MEANINGFUL GOP ‘FIX’ TO OBAMACARE: The Hill also takes stock of all the looming must-pass stuff coming in Congress and the GOP divisions that will likely erupt around them, and adds:

Amongst these deadlines, Republicans will have to find time to advance two of their biggest priorities: a replacement for ObamaCare, which will become more pressing if the Supreme Court strikes down the federal healthcare exchanges in 34 states, and tax reform. A senior Senate Republican aide said both initiatives are wending their way through the committee process. The aide predicted healthcare legislation will remain under wraps until closer to when the Supreme Court is expected to rule in King v. Burwell.

Maybe. Or perhaps all this chatter of a contingency plan is merely designed to persuade the Justices that the consequences of an anti-ACA ruling won’t be all that dire, thus making such a ruling more likely. Just a thought.