Topics: chairman mao, David Talbot, Internet, Journalism, online journalism, Salon, Silicon Valley, technology, Technology News

In the fall of 1995, a few days after Salon first ventured out into the strange new territory of the World Wide Web, I reviewed the site for an online magazine called Web Review. I said nice things about the quality of the content, but concluded that “the medium fails Salon’s message.”

The superb writing, graceful layout and inspired selection of story ideas deserve better than the pale light of my monitor and the discomfort of my desk chair. There’s too much content to sort through and the articles, though shorter than those in the New Yorker, are still too long to be enjoyably read online. And that’s the rub. SALON, more than anything else I’ve come across on the Web, falls victim to the fundamental deficiencies of online reading.

Ha. Ha. Ha. I was a grumpy codger even when the Web was young. But the joke was on me. A few months later I was freelancing for Salon. A year later I was hired as the magazine’s first full-time reporter. My beat: The Internet. And God only knows how many words I’ve written for the delectation of Salon’s online readers in the years since.

But eighteen years later, the time has finally come to move on to new challenges. The future of journalism is still being invented and there’s a book I want to write. And 18 years, in this day and age, is an eternity to spend at one job.

But it’s still hard to get my head around the fact that I’m leaving. I’ve helped Salon cover five presidential elections, the dot-com boom, the bust, 9/11, the great financial crash, and the rise of the smartphone. I’ve been a reporter, editor, blogger, pundit and then reporter again. I even tried to write a book on Salon.

When I started out with Salon, I sometimes had to explain to the people I was interviewing what exactly this thing we called the Internet was before I could explain what exactly an “Internet magazine” was. Eighteen years later, that’s no longer necessary. The Internet is embedded in every facet of our existence. And a funny thing happened to me along the way. I made a slow, painful transition from cheerleader to critic. You might even say I switched sides in the tech culture wars.

Of course that kind of binary thinking betrays a mindset too locked down in ones and zeroes to capture the messiness and nuance of what’s really going on. I still love technology. I love my smartphone. I’m excited by new ways of doing things and the unlimited potential of the future.

And I’ve always felt the duty and desire to be a critic. I will never forget how my jaw dropped when my superiors at Salon announced that we were going to have an IPO. But, but, but — I’d spent the previous year mocking the greed and chicanery of and endless sequence of dot-com fiascos. Oh well. What is it that Chairman Mao wrote? “All contradictory things are interconnected….”