Dallas-based Tenet Healthcare Corp. saw its second quarter revenue spike by nearly 40 percent year-over-year, growing in admissions, outpatient visits, surgeries, and emergency visits while also slicing its bad debt as more residents gained access to care.

Tenet CEO Trevor Fetter announced the findings in an earnings call on Tuesday morning. The for-profit healthcare chain reported an adjusted EBITDA of $460 million for the period that ended on June 30, roughly $124 million more than the same quarter last year—roughly a 36.9 percent increase.

Admissions and adjusted admissions grew by 2.8 percent and 4 percent compared to 2013 while outpatient visits sailed upward by 7.1 percent. Surgeries grew by 8.3 percent and its bad debt dipped by 18.2 percent, which is about 7.3 percent of its revenue compared to the 9 percent it made up in 2013.

Fetter tapered expectations that the Affordable Care Act is the primary reason for the increases: Only about one-quarter of the EBITDA growth and about one third of adjusted admissions are due to strategies implemented around the ACA, he said.

“In a way, I’m delighted to have this fantastic quarter,” he said in an interview, “but it would’ve been nice to show a quarter like this pre-ACA because it would’ve demonstrated that the business is solid and the strategies are working. The ACA is just icing on the cake.”

During the open enrollment period, Fetter says 97 percent of Tenet’s hospitals—which reached 80 total this week, with the purchase of the 354-bed Emanuel Medical Center in Turlock, California—were contracted in at least one exchange plan. Eighty-seven percent of those were contracted with the lowest or second lowest priced Silver plan.

Exchange plans accounted for 2,700 admissions and more than 24,000 outpatient visits during that period: “We were well positioned, and as a result we are confident that we have gained market share in these important commercial insurance products,” he said during the call.

So what’s accounting for the rest of that growth? In addition to the aforementioned California acquisition, Tenet opened a hospital in New Braunfels. It acquired Texas Regional Medical Center in Sunnyvale. It opened a new Heart Hospital at the Detroit Medical Center and a large emergency room at Sinai-Grace hospital in northwest Detroit.

It also reached a new contract deal with United Healthcare that will include all former Vanguard Health Systems hospitals and facilities, which became part of Tenet after it bought the Tennessee-based company last year.

And Conifer, its Frisco-based health solutions company, is growing as its clients grow. For instance, it manages revenue cycle and business process services for the Colorado-based Catholic Health Initiatives, which has grown by 70 percent since partnering in 2012, and Tenet, which has grown by 60 percent, Fetter said. Conifer is set to bring in $1 billion in revenue this year.

“This growth is being generated by investments we made in the hospitals, techniques we’re using to make our hospitals more accessible to patients, and IT investments we made to make our care more efficient and less costly,” Fetter said. “It’s all those things we’ve been doing.”

There’s still room for further growth, as evidenced by metrics in the five states where Tenet has hospitals that have chosen to expand Medicaid. Uninsured and charity admissions there declined 54.3 percent and Medicaid admissions jumped by 22.9 percent. In states that chose not to expand, Medicaid admissions were up by just 3 percent, Fetter said.

In Texas, the company is turning its attention to the legislature. When it reconvenes in 2015, it will again take up whether to expand Medicaid, a move that would cover an estimated 1 million Texans, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.

“It would provide a very substantial source of growth if they’re able to do it,” Fetter said. “What would need to happen to get any kind of traction to support it is that the ideological argument must take a back seat to the practical argument.”

As a result of its strong second quarter, Tenet boosted its expected third quarter EBITDA from $400 million to $450 million. It now forecasts $1.95 billion in EBITDA by year’s end, up from $1.85 billion.