Local View: If we don’t control overpopulation, Mother Nature will do it for us

Local View: If we don’t control overpopulation, Mother Nature will do it for us

Local View: If we don’t control overpopulation, Mother Nature will do it for us

By evaluating Easter Island’s demise, we can see the threat of overpopulation in today’s world, especially if we continue with present practices. Can we stop overpopulation before it does us in like it did Easter Island?

“Overpopulation leads to famine, desertification, shocking inequalities between rich and poor nations, unconscionable waste and devastation of irreplaceable resources, deforestation, increasingly rapid extinctions of species, decrease(s) in biodiversity, (increases in) global warming, and (the) pollution of our oceans and freshwater,” Jacqes-Yves Cousteau said in a 1992 speech at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro.

The words of the famous explorer and conservationist are well on their way to becoming reality. Global warming and the pollution of our oceans are scientifically documented as a result of overpopulation.

Why have we evaded the problem? Its solutions are not simple. There are extremely strong beliefs and opinions by people who find the most-obvious potential solutions most difficult, even as dire circumstances increase. But do strategies for population control — specifically birth control, abortion, and immigration — have to be so difficult? We have to slow population growth. There are now more than 7 billion people and counting on Mother Earth. We’ve known of this need for some time, but the manners to reduce population offend individual choice and/or religion.

China took major action in 1980 with its one-child policy. Demographers estimate the policy averted at least 200 million births between 1979 and 2009. It seems most unlikely the U.S. would — or could — pass such a law, but we still need to reduce the poverty birth rate.

The April 18-24 issue of the Economist magazine reported, “Long-acting contraceptives make it easier for the poor to escape from poverty.”

Alan Weismann, the author of “Countdown,” said in a speech last year that, “Eight billion dollars annually would provide contraceptives for everyone on Earth who wants them.” Compare that with our military expenditures. A two-child policy would be worthy of consideration.

After contraceptives, as much as it is disliked, abortion is a necessity. No one takes it lightly; but unless an unborn child has parents awaiting its arrival with support for years of upbringing, is allowing the child to be born a reasonable gamble? Is it moral, given the child is unwanted and the parents are unprepared and unwilling? Can we mouth “pro-life,” given the realities of what’s sure to come?

Leaving a pregnant female without abortion rights, while the impregnator goes scot free, is another societal issue that needs correction. Why have female rights been so late in arrival? Let’s be the great country we claim to be. As was written in the Economist, “What we believed to be true … we know for certain now; we cannot get ahead by leaving half our population behind.”

In addition, immigration must be controlled. We have too many border miles. Innumerable border guards and fences sky high would be needed to secure it all. One rule would suffice, since the new immigrants work cheap. The new law would dictate that employers hiring workers without valid citizenship documentation be subject to 30 days in jail. No ifs, ands and buts. Stop allowing foreign-visitor visas for immigration-worker purposes. We should freeze foreign aid to nations that won’t cooperate.

If we continue to ignore our population problems and overuse nature’s resources, Mother Nature will control our population — brutally and totally, as she did with Easter Island.

Bernie Hughes of Superior is professor emeritus of educational administration at the University of Wisconsin-Superior.