Before the Broncos determine whether to save Kapri Bibbs a roster spot, the undrafted running back must first save his position.

Running the ball in the NFL has become what home phones are to communication. You still see it. Just not as much.

“That’s a horrible turn,” Bibbs said at the Broncos’ rookie minicamp. “I’m used to running backs controlling the game. If you can hand off the ball and get those sure yards, you can dictate the game. You put the ball in the air and anything can happen. I always thought running the ball was a great thing. I guess somewhere along the line, people disagree with that.”

When Bibbs left Colorado State after playing only one season with the Rams, the plan was to get selected in the fifth, sixth or seventh round during the May 8-10 draft.

But when no running back was selected in the first round, and the first rusher didn’t come off the board until two-thirds through the second round, that pushed all of the others back in the draft.

And for Bibbs, getting pushed back from the end of the draft meant falling off to the pool of undrafted free agents.

With the Broncos, Bibbs is a longshot to make the 53-man NFL roster. He only got a $2,000 signing bonus, second-lowest among the team’s undrafted free agents.

Then again an undrafted defensive back named Chris Harris only got a $2,000 bonus in 2011. And Bibbs may have signed with the right team. Here are the combined NFL starts of Denver’s running backs: zero.

If Montee Ball starts the season opener against the Indianapolis Colts, it will be his first. Ronnie Hillman has played two seasons with zero starts. C.J. Anderson got some mop-up carries in the Super Bowl but little other experience as a rookie last season.

To twist a favorite idiom of coach John Fox, Denver running backs don’t have skins on the wall.

“No, we’re leaning pretty heavy on Montee,” Fox said. “And rightfully so. We’ve got guys who played in games last year, C.J. and Ronnie Hillman. We have some young guys here and we’ll see what they can do.”

The Broncos probably will start the season with four running backs, even if one is stashed on the practice squad. Don’t be surprised if the Broncos sign a veteran after June 1, when free agents no longer count in the compensatory draft-pick formula. Michael Bush, Ronnie Brown, Felix Jones and Bernard Scott are among the running backs still on the streets.

“By no means is our roster set in stone,” Fox said.

Until then, the Broncos will take a look at their three undrafted rookie tailbacks: Bibbs, Brennan Clay and Juwan Thompson.

The Broncos like Bibbs for a couple of reasons. One, they know he has the type of pure running skills that translate to the NFL. He not only rushed for 1,741 yards and averaged 6.2 per carry last season, his 31 touchdowns that led the nation proved he knows how to negotiate through goal-line scrums.

Two, he comes from a pro-style offense at CSU and coach Jim McElwain, who is respected in the NFL.

“I know I have the talent to play at the top level,” Bibbs said. “I know there are guys at the top and I’m a guy who is trying to fight the guys at the top.”

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis