Aberdeen, SD

The Northern State men’s basketball team recorded assists on 20 of its 25 made field goals Friday as the Wolves ran away from Winona State for a 74-51 victory inside Wachs Arena. The 20 assists ties a season-high as a team for the Wolves. NSU also made a team-best 13 three pointers in the contest.

NSU (11-2, 5-2 NSIC) made 52 percent of its shots from three-point range, going 13-for-25. Overall from the field, Northern shot 47.2 percent while holding the Warriors (5-6, 2-5 NSIC) to 35.8 percent shooting overall and just 3-of-20 (15 percent) from beyond the arc.

Tydan Storrusten led all scorers with 19 points in the win. Storrusten hit 4-of-5 from downtown and also collected four boards, two assists and two steals in the win for the Wolves. Skye Warwick dropped 15 points, all of which coming from beyond the arc as he hit five three pointers in the game. Seth Bachand added 13 points on 6-of-8 shooting and collected a game-high nine rebounds on the night.

Northern held a 38-34 edge in rebounding and also had a 10-2 advantage in second-chance points. WSU held a 22-18 advantage in points in the paint and also had 14 points off of 15 Northern turnovers while the Wolves scored nine points off 12 Winona turnovers. The NSU bench doubled-up the Warrior bench as Northern reserves scored 18 points to WSU’s nine.

Much of the first half was a close affair as the Warriors kept the game within single digits. The Wolves led by as many as 10 points on two separate occasions, the last coming on a Spencer Pankonin three-pointer to beat the buzzer and propel the Wolves to a 34-24 halftime lead. In the second half leading 38-31 with 17:35 left to play, the Wolves hit four consecutive from deep and pushed its lead to 19 with 15:06 left to go and wouldn’t look back from there. Northern pushed its lead to as many as 25 points in the half as WSU could only get to within 15 points at 62-47 with 5:31 left to play.

The Wolves return to action Saturday as Upper Iowa comes to Wachs Arena for a 7 p.m. tip-off. The Peacocks defeated NSU in the two’s only meeting last season in Aberdeen.



Kevin DeVries, NSU

News

Non-Homepage

Sports

College {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.