U.S. Rep. Diane Black, R-Tenn. (Photo: Submitted)

U.S. Rep. Diane Black is proposing bipartisan legislation that could help cash-strapped rural hospitals.

Rural hospital executives are sweating the reductions in Medicare payments because they come alongside ever-increasing technology and recruitment costs.

Black, R-Tenn., wants to establish 0.874 as the national floor for the average wage index, or AWI, in the Fair Medicare Hospital Payments Act of 2016. The AWI takes into account market trends, such as labor and benefit costs, and is used as a multiplier for determining what Medicare reimburses hospitals. The higher an AWI, the higher the Medicare payment.

Raising the floor on the AWI would help rural and urban hospitals as they face planned reductions in Medicare payments in the coming years under tenets of the Affordable Care Act, which was designed to offset the decreased payments with expanded Medicaid payments.

There is no additional federal Medicaid funding because a handful of Tennessee state lawmakers in 2015 killed Insure Tennessee, Gov. Bill Haslam's plan to expand coverage using federal Medicaid funding.

“As a registered nurse, I know that protecting our quality of life and public health in Tennessee goes hand-in-hand with ensuring that our hospitals get a fair deal from Washington. The current area wage index formula discriminates against rural hospitals like those across my district while letting hospitals in the wealthiest neighborhoods of California and Massachusetts cash in on this flawed payment model," said Black in a prepared statement.

Hospitals in other states pay employees more than in Tennessee, in part because the cost of living is higher and advocacy by unions, which mean those hospitals get a higher reimbursement. The AWI is budget neutral, so as some states gain a higher AWI, other states fall. Nearly a decade ago, the federal Medicare Payment Advisory Commission recommended repealing the AWI.

Tennessee is divided into 10 districts, eight of which fall below Black's recommendation. The Memphis core based statistical area, a federal geography, has the highest AWI in the state at 0.8923. Three districts, Bristol, Knoxville and Morristown, have the lowest at 0.7327.

The highest AWI in the country for fiscal year 2016 is Santa Cruz, Calif., which has a $72.27 average hourly wage and 1.723 AWI.

Across Tennessee, the lowest average hourly wage is $28.86 in Johnson City, where the AWI is 0.7397; Chattanooga has the highest average hourly wage at $35.99, with a 0.8625 AWI.

Since 2000, nine of Tennessee's districts saw reductions in AWI. Memphis increased from 0.8244 to 0.8923. In the same period, the AWI for Santa Cruz increased from 1.3927.

"It's a major factor that's hurting our hospitals," said Craig Becker, president of the Tennessee Hospital Association."We’re one of the lowest AWI in the country. When you compare us to California, it’s almost obscene.”

The proposed minimum AWI "will bring the most benefit to the largest number of core base statistical areas with the least amount of harm to the upper CBSAs,” Black said in a statement to The Tennessean.

The National Rural Health Association is backing the legislation along with lawmakers from about a dozen states because financial strain from reductions in AWI is not just a "Southern phenomenon," Becker said.

Rep. Terri Sewell, D-Ala., is a co-sponsor. All of Tennessee's representatives support the legislation.

Becker said the Tennessee Hospital Association will keep pushing for reform until it passes.

"It's going to take a while," Becker said. "It will definitely pass at some point — it's a question of when."

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1XtALm3