The Senate overwhelmingly approved a bipartisan opioid abuse bill Thursday, despite Democratic concerns about a lack of funding tied to the legislation.

Senators voted 94-1 on the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act, or CARA. Sen. Ben Sasse (R-Neb.) voted against it, saying he wasn't sure fighting addition was best addressed by the federal government.

ADVERTISEMENT

Democrats took to the Senate floor ahead of the vote to express their disappointment that most Republicans had rejected an amendment from Sen.(D-N.H.) to include $600 million in emergency funding.

They argue the amendment was needed to make sure money gets quickly to communities ravaged by the drug epidemic.

Sen. Sherrod Brown Sherrod BrownThe Hill's 12:30 Report Clinton urged to go liberal with vice presidential pick Groups urge Senate to oppose defense language on for-profit colleges MORE (D-Ohio), who supported the legislation, slammed Republicans, saying, "They want to do things on the cheap, they want to pass things to pat ourselves on the back."

Republicans, including Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Mitch McConnellOvernight Healthcare: Momentum on mental health? | Zika bills head to conference | Only 10 ObamaCare co-ops left Trump outlines ‘America First’ energy plan Senators hope for deal soon on mental health bill MORE (Ky.), argue there's approximately $400 million included in last year's omnibus spending bill that could be directed to CARA.

The legislation — from Sens. Rob Portman Rob PortmanJuan Williams: Electoral map looks grim for Trump McConnell touts 'Senate squad' in Wes Anderson-style video Liberal super-PAC hits Johnson for supporting Trump MORE (R-Ohio) and Whitehouse, authorizes but doesn't appropriate funding for programs to combat prescription opioid abuse, in addition to increasing the availability of naloxone, a drug to treat overdose.

While House lawmakers have introduced their own bills, Portman suggested Thursday he was hopeful they would be able to avoid a conference committee.

Portman said he'd left a voicemail and sent a text message to discuss the issue with Speaker Paul Ryan Paul RyanOvernight Finance: GOP faces dilemma on spending bills | CEOs push Congress on tax rules | Trump talks energy Overnight Energy: Trump outlines 'America First' energy plan in North Dakota Bible verse prompts GOP walkout after LGBT vote labeled a sin MORE (R-Wis.)

"I think there's strong interest in the House of moving this legislation," he added. "I think we have a very good prospect of getting this done."

An identical version of the Senate's bill in the House has 92 co-sponsors.

Despite the funding fight, lawmakers heaped praise on the legislation for weeks, arguing that it's a necessary step after the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported that overdose deaths reached an all-time high in 2014.

During a weekly press conference where he was peppered with questions about the budget and the 2016 presidential race, McConnell quickly noted that "at the risk of sounding like I'm lecturing all of you, just because something passes overwhelmingly doesn't mean it wasn't important."

The legislation gives the Republican leader an election-year win as he looks to prove the Senate can still govern amid a deeply partisan fight over President Obama's forthcoming Supreme Court pick.

It also marks a boon for blue-state Republicans, including Portman, who have put combating the opioid epidemic at the center of their reelection campaigns as they seek to put space between their elections and a divisive presidential battle.

McConnell gave a shoutout to Portman and Sen. Kelly Ayotte Kelly AyotteOvernight Defense: Pentagon chief fears sequestration's return Senate GOP ties Iran sanctions fight to defense bill VA secretary comes under fire for comparing wait times to Disneyland MORE (R-N.H.) on the Senate floor Thursday morning, saying the New Hampshire Republican "cares deeply about this issue and has studied the problem carefully."

Democrats have targeted Portman and Sen. Pat Toomey (R-Pa.), suggesting they are touting CARA while brushing over mixed voting records on opioid abuse funding.

Both of the senators voted against a spending bill late last year that included extra funding to help combat opioid abuse, though their opposition was unrelated to the funding for the drug overdose crisis.

Sens. Ted Cruz Ted CruzFiorina returns to attack Clinton's 'lust for power' Trump clinches GOP nomination Eleven states sue Obama over transgender bathroom directive MORE (R-Texas), Mike Lee Mike LeeOvernight Cybersecurity: Guccifer plea deal raises questions in Clinton probe Senate panel delays email privacy vote amid concerns Senate amendments could sink email privacy compromise MORE (R-Utah), Claire McCaskill Claire McCaskillSanders aide: Easier for Dems to unify if Wasserman Schultz steps down Dem senator: DNC head ‘has to make a decision’ on her own future Wasserman Schultz fights to keep her job MORE (D-Mo.), Marco Rubio Marco RubioTrump encourages Rubio to reclaim Senate seat The Trail 2016: Interleague play Rubio: I'd speak on Trump's behalf at convention MORE (R-Fla.) and Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersSanders laughs off Trump's third-party question Sanders: Clinton showing 'tinge of arrogance' Trump and Sanders whip up debate buzz MORE (I-Vt.) each missed the vote. Rubio signed on as a co-sponsor to the legislation a day before the New Hampshire primary.