The custodian is considered to be acting in a corporate capacity and not as an individual, so the Fifth Amendment right is unavailable even though the records provided could be used against that person. The court justified this dichotomous view of the custodian and individual on the grounds that if the privilege against self-incrimination could be asserted to protect a business’s records, then it “would have a detrimental impact on the government’s efforts to prosecute white-collar crime, one of the most serious problems confronting law enforcement authorities.”

That view of the distinction between the individual and the corporation is in stark contrast to the Supreme Court’s more recent decisions in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission and Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores about the rights of corporations. In Citizens United, the court struck down a ban on corporations spending money on behalf of candidates in political campaigns, pointing out that it has “rejected the argument that political speech of corporations or other associations should be treated differently under the First Amendment simply because such associations are not natural persons.”

In Hobby Lobby, the court applied the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, which prevents the government from substantially burdening “a person’s exercise of religion,” to a corporation that objected on religious grounds to the requirement of the Affordable Care Act that its health insurance program provide birth control.

In determining whether the right to religious freedom extended to a business, the court found that corporations were “persons” under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act because “a corporation is simply a form of organization used by human beings to achieve desired ends.”

If corporations are really just a collection of individuals, then the protection afforded by the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination may apply to a business, especially when there is only one owner and employee who will be incriminated if forced to turn over its records.

Yet, the appeals court in the Grand Jury case summarily rejected that argument in a footnote. “We discern nothing in Supreme Court jurisprudence that suggests the court has, in any way, signaled its readiness to depart from its longstanding precedent regarding corporate custodians’ inability to invoke the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination,” it stated.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Corporations are not without some constitutional protection in an investigation. The Fourth Amendment, which recognizes “the right of the people” to be free from “unreasonable searches and seizures,” protects the privacy of a business to the same extent as an individual. No less than Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote in 1920 in Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States that “the rights of a corporation against unlawful search and seizure are to be protected even if the same result might have been achieved in a lawful way.”

The Supreme Court was closely divided in the Braswell, Citizens United and Hobby Lobby decisions, each decided on a 5-4 vote of the justices. The court decided the Braswell case in 1988, well before the more recent cases involving corporate constitutional rights articulated the view that organizations are an embodiment of the individuals who choose to associate themselves. There is a sharp contrast in how the court has treated corporations in these areas, relying on the legal fiction of a separate organizational existence to deny the Fifth Amendment protection to corporations while piercing through it to protect First Amendment rights.

Justice Anthony M. Kennedy may play a central role in pushing for reconsideration of the approach in the Braswell decision to the rights of an individual representing a corporation responding to a subpoena. He wrote a strong dissent in that case, arguing that the majority gave “the corporate agent fiction a weight it simply cannot bear.” He wrote the majority opinion in the Citizens United decision, and in a concurring opinion in the Hobby Lobby case, he noted that “the plaintiffs deem it necessary to exercise their religious beliefs within the context of their own closely held, for-profit corporations.”

If the doctor in the Grand Jury case decides to pursue the challenge to the subpoena to the Supreme Court, it could be a vehicle to reconsider the scope of the collective entity rule. Large, publicly traded companies are unlikely to be affected by any change in the availability of the privilege against self-incrimination because they can easily respond to a demand for records through a custodian who has no connection to potential wrongdoing. For a smaller business, like a medical practice or professional partnership, recognizing the right of an owner to assert the Fifth Amendment privilege would make it more difficult to investigate white-collar crime by placing an new obstacle in the way of seeking records.

Whether the justices are willing to hamstring investigations in the name of protecting the rights of individuals operating through a business organization will be an important consideration in deciding whether the Fifth Amendment should apply to corporations.

So the Supreme Court may be called on once again to decide how much corporations really are like people.