Federal rules for election campaigns apparently limit the time Donald Trump can appear in TV spots promoting his upcoming appearance on “Saturday Night Live” to four seconds — but that was still more than enough time for Trump to promote himself, insult his rivals and generate controversy.

NBC on Wednesday released promos featuring Trump and “SNL” cast member Cecily Strong strung together in a two-minute video clip. The video quickly bounced around the Internet — and then briefly got pulled by NBC before being restored, minus three of the promos. NBC News correspondent Peter Alexander tweeted that a spokesperson said some of the promos were not meant to air.

.@NBC spox: NBC accidentally posted wrong @YouTube link w 8 @nbcsnl promos - 3 of them not for air, inc Trump calling Carson a "real loser." — Peter Alexander (@PeterAlexander) November 4, 2015

In one cut promo, Strong explains the time limits resulting from FCC rules that stipulate equal time for presidential candidates. "So let me just say this," Trump chimes in. "Ben Carson is a complete and total loser!"

Related: Donald Trump Is Now Losing to a Guy Who Isn’t Even Trying

In another spot, Strong says that Trump vowed he wouldn't brag or say "he's the best of anything" during the broadcast.

“That's right, Cecily, and I'm going to do the best job that anyone's ever done not saying it,” Trump adds.

Despite his seeming ability to poke fun at himself, Trump’s upcoming appearance is already rife with controversy. Several major Hispanic groups have called on NBC and “SNL” producer Loren Michaels to “Dump Trump” because of his views on immigration.

Trump’s off-the-cuff speaking style also opens the show to awkward, potentially harmful comments. Now that a handful of national polls show him trailing Carson, and losing ground to Sen. Marco Rubio (R-FL), Trump might be tempted to use the show’s staple opening monologue to tear into his rivals.

Related: Here’s Why Trump Is Still Ahead, Despite Carson’s Surge

Democratic presidential frontrunner Hillary Clinton appeared in a skit on the show last month, part of a weeks-long push to reboot her image following a summer that saw her tumble in the polls. However, the guest-spot, where the former secretary of state played a bartender, was only a few minutes long. As host, Trump will no doubt see considerably more airtime.

Watch Trump's SNL promos: