Executives have valuable lessons to learn from the botched rollout of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), and not just the fairly obvious point that you want to test your website carefully before you go live. Website functionality problems will pass, but their existence now could contribute to a longer-term and more serious danger to the ACA, a danger that all companies want to avoid.

The difficulties of signing up for insurance on healthcare.gov will deter some people from acquiring insurance. One worry is that people who are sickly, and who know that insurance is very valuable to them, will persevere in signing up while relatively healthy people will be particularly put off by the website hassles. This could tilt the risk pool of insured people towards a higher risk/higher cost group. Known to economists as “adverse selection”, the worst-case scenario is that this could effectively kill the ACA through what is known as a “death spiral.”

Just as bad risks lead to higher prices which lead to worse risks which lead to higher prices and so on in health insurance pools, some businesses have found that servicing high cost customers leads to higher prices, which lead to higher cost customers and so on. These businesses have learned the hard way about product death spirals.

A great example of this was American Airlines’ attempt to lock in its best customers when it introduced the AAirpass in 1981. Price at $250,000, the AAirpass offered unlimited first-class travel on the airline for life. For an additional $150,000, the buyer could bring a companion on any flight she took. To the most frequent of frequent fliers, it turns out that it is not all that hard to run through a few hundred thousand dollars of tickets at first-class prices. So, while the AAirpass purchasers were frequent fliers, they ended up being such frequent fliers that they saved a lot of money relative to paying for each flight. Some AAirpass holders flew so much in one month that buying the tickets would have cost $125,000.

Bob Crandall, American’s CEO for much of the life of the AAirpass, admitted, “We thought originally it would be something that firms would buy for top employees. It soon became apparent that the public was smarter than we were.”

So what did American Airlines do? They raised the AAirpass price. But then only people who used it even more than the original group bought it. The cost of serving the customers went up just as quickly as the price went up because the pool of customers just got more and more expensive. After several price increases topping out at $1 million for an AAirpass, they gave in to the inevitable death spiral and stopped offering the deal.

There’s a more positive side to adverse selection, though, if you can find a way to cherry pick the most profitable customers from competitors that cannot fine-tune their products enough. In fact, this strategy led Capital One’s credit card business to rise from a third-rate player to a market leader.

You may know Capital One as the company with the silly Viking ads. But the story of Capital One, now a huge provider of credit cards and other financial services, began as a lesson in using adverse selection to one’s own advantage. Capital One was founded in 1988, when Richard Fairbank convinced a small regional bank to experiment with its credit card unit. At that time, pretty much all credit cards issued in the United States had the same interest rate on unpaid balances. Annual fees were comparable across cards. Fairbank believed that he could generate higher profits by tailoring the fees and interest rates to the cardholder’s risk of default.

After several unsuccessful experiments, Capital One struck gold (and their competitors were stuck with adverse selection) when it offered the first balance transfer program. Capital One would pay off the person’s credit card debt and charge the new customer little to no interest for the first year (after which interest rates increased to market rate).

One important thing to know about the credit card industry is that the most profitable customers are those who carry balances and do not default. Balance transfers, at least in 1988, appealed to credit card customers who had both of these attributes. A customer would not have a balance to transfer if she did not carry one on her credit card, and wouldn’t bother transferring a balance she did not intend to pay off. As a result, Capital One was able to cherry-pick the most profitable customers from the other cards. Customers who paid their balances in full every month and those who were likely to default did not find Capital One’s balance transfers attractive. But those customers are unprofitable and the other banks were stuck with them — adverse selection at work.

There are probably some entrepreneurial health insurers out there trying to figure out how to cherry pick the good risks who aren’t bothering to sign up for health insurance on healthcare.gov. But the ACA has made that difficult. Rules such as the individual mandate and the fact that insurers cannot base prices on preexisting conditions are meant to specifically deter cherry picking and avoid a death spiral. Most businesses, though, are freer than health insurance companies to learn from the examples set by American Airlines and Capital One. Executives at those businesses can think strategically about how to cherry-pick the most profitable customers and how, at the very least, not to be particularly attractive to the most costly customers.