WYOMING, MI — A "strategic partnership" will lead to the sale of 70 percent of Metro Health to Tennessee-based Community Health Systems, but operational decisions for the West Michigan hospital are expected to remain under local control.

Mike Faas, the chief executive officer of Metro Health, told the Grand Valley Metro Council on Thursday, Feb. 20, that the hospital will end a due diligence period of exploration in 60 to 90 days with the organization before reporting its findings to state regulators for approval.

Faas says Metro is positioning itself to grow its presence and improve patient care while confronting the sweeping changes of the Affordable Care Act, which creates a new payment structure that changes the health system landscape. The new model offers motivation for hospitals and healthcare systems to become larger and have better access to resources.

"All that this will mean is higher quality care at a lower cost because of scale," Faas said. "It's going to mean more locations and a better focus on prevention and wellness and it's going to put real choice in the market.

"That's our goal."

Faas said Metro administrators and CHS will have an equal representation for decisions that affect West Michigan.

Last year was Metro's most successful in terms of growing its footprint, Faas said, employing more medical professionals and building the amount of cash on hand at about $120 million. A partnership with CHS rids Metro of $160 million of debt with "no financial handcuffs once we do the deal," Faas said.

The partnership positions Metro to compete with Spectrum Health and Mercy Health St. Marys, and gives it more ability in the marketplace to grow. CHS is a for-profit organization with 135 affiliated hospitals nationwide, including the renowned Cleveland Clinic.

"We're working with CHS as an equity owner that can help us resolved ... (much) of the major issues currently facing Metro ... standing between us and where healthcare needs to go," Faas said.

Andrew Krietz covers breaking and general police/fire news for MLive | The Grand Rapids Press. Email him at akrietz@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter.