A sketch of the September 21, 2014 People’s Climate March in New York, made by artist Hallie Bateman. Hallie Bateman

World leaders, actors, politicians and a polar bear were among the thousands who walked from Central Park West to 11th avenue for the People’s Climate March. And Hallie Bateman, 25 years old, an illustrator and cartoonist who lives in Brooklyn, was there to take it all in, with her sketchbook and pen.

The march, with intentions to bring awareness to the needs of the environment, was held on Sept. 21 before the United Nations began its summit on the climate crisis. Ms. Bateman, who moved to New York City from a small town near the Yosemite area in California, walked along with the estimated 400,000 others and live sketched the signs, buildings and people she saw along the way. What follows is a lightly edited and condensed transcript of the conversation.

WSJ: Why did you decide to live sketch the big Climate March?

I’ve done sort of a live-sketching thing before for different events, and I was invited by a friend I really respect to attend with her. But I wasn’t really sure how I felt about it – I’ve never done anything like that before and for me, I tend to process things through drawing so it’s all very natural to me. I’m really glad I had my sketchbook with me. By having my sketchbook, I was much more observational and much more aware of everything around me.

WSJ: What do you mean by processing things through drawing?

It’s writing and drawing. For me, it’s like just kind of hacking away at uncertainty. It can mean so many things. When I finished the march I had 40 something images, and when I left I felt kind of confused. I had a lot of conflicting feelings, having the drawings were fact to the world – they are things that happened, that I saw. I was able to sort through the facts of everything I saw and using the words that I wrote I was kind of able to narrow it into a feeling that I felt was true and that reflected my experience.

WSJ: And what was that feeling?

It’s funny, I went into it not knowing how I felt. I didn’t have any particular stance and I definitely consider climate change is a problem that deserves to be a huge priority internationally and to everyone, and it’s very important the urgency of this be brought to our leaders. But I wouldn’t say I’m much of an activist, I never marched in anything before. There was a lot of extremes going on around me, and I’m glad I went as an observer because I didn’t have a need to belong to any of them. I could just be there and record everything

WSJ: So how exactly do you live sketch?

I do everything from life. I basically carried a notebook with me and a pen, and I suppose I was in my head very conscious of images that would represent a solid side of a certain group or image that was representational at the march, so when I saw a sign with a phrase put a certain way that I felt could have multiple meanings, I was definitely drawn to that, or if I just saw a unique or notable character. I remember the guy that made me understand what my comic was going to be about – it was a guy walking holding his backpack straps, he was in a group of friends my age and they were talking but walking along. So much was going on and I saw this guy with a look of wonder, and I really related to him. I think that’s what live sketching is all about.

WSJ: But how were you able to translate what was happening in front of you to your sketchbook?

Every drawing I posted was the immediate sketch, some of them I pulled over so to say and spent more time on them, but they’re all straight to pen and some very quickly. The whole idea is to capture the energy and not worry about, like, if it looks roughly like a human being, that’s fine, but I wasn’t picking or erasing or thinking of anything like that. It was just in order to get everything down as quickly as possible. I was walking by and I had to look at and try to not have them see me looking at them, which was not too hard in a crowd. It’s a very freeing way to draw.

WSJ: Having been there, what do you think was the overall message that came out of the march?

I suppose I would sum up my whole experience just saying that it is very complicated and conflicting. It was all very inspiring and I was moved by just the fact that people walked, that they cared. I had a long conversation with my friend and he told me his favorite sign was “Give a s—,” and I loved that. I didn’t see that sign and I didn’t put it in my piece but the whole basic idea is kind of like – that’s what I took out of it. You can point out there’s a lot of “what has marching accomplished?” and “what was the climate impact of the march itself?” – a lot of problems people addressed, but I think it was to show people gave a s—in a world where it’s kind of hard. It kind of is a good experience to be alongside a lot of people who at least want to try.

WSJ: Do you think that’s possible in New York City?

I’m pretty confused by that and think about it all the time. I come from a very rural town – the complete opposite of New York City as you can get and I’m constantly dumbfounded by everything you can see. We just have to change the structure people live in, even if you have the best intentions, but the world around you isn’t constructed in a sustainable way, there has to be a change in infrastructure.