A Leon County man was arrested in Bay County after sheriff's officials say he kidnapped an 11-month-old child.

Saturday morning, Bay County Sheriff's officials arrested Clifford Fairfax, 50, for kidnapping.

Sheriff's deputies say it all began Friday in Tallahassee, where Fairfax was with a female acquaintance and her 11-month-old child. They shopped at several stores around Tallahassee before arriving at Fairfax’s residence, according to Leon County Sheriff's Officials.

Around 9:00 p.m. Friday, Fairfax, the female, and her child left the residence so Fairfax could drive them home. At one point the female noticed Fairfax had missed the turn. When she told Fairfax he missed the turn, he became angry and yelled at her not to talk to him that way. He continued to drive and began to make sexual advances toward her. Fairfax also began telling her the 11-month-old child was his; however, but Fairfax is not the biological father.

As they arrived in Midway, Florida she continued to ask him to turn around and take her home. Fairfax decided to turn around and began to drive back toward her residence. The argument was ongoing and Fairfax continued to tell her the child was his. When they got close enough to the residence, Fairfax stopped and let her out. She got out of the car and went to the back seat to get the child. As she grabbed the door handle Fairfax drove off with the 11-month-old child still in the backseat of the car.

According to deputies, she called Fairfax throughout the night telling him to bring the child back. Fairfax told her he was going to bring the child back in a few minutes but never did. After Fairfax refused to bring the child back she then notified the Leon County Sheriff’s Office.

During the investigation it was determine that Fairfax was most likely in the Bay County area. Leon County Sheriff's officials contacted the Bay County Sheriff’s Office for assistance. Around 5:30 a.m. Saturday, Bay County Sheriff’s deputies located Fairfax and the child near a convenience store in Bay County. Fairfax was taken into custody.