Stephen Ubl and David Nexon

February 10, 2015

The recent February issue of Health Affairs, which features a series of articles on innovation, provides us with an opportunity to examine the state of America’s innovation ecosystem for medical technology. This ecosystem has produced a myriad of medical advances, ranging from advanced imaging to molecular diagnostics, minimally invasive surgical tools, and incredibly sophisticated implants. These technologies have shortened hospital stays, reduced the economic burden of disease, and saved and improved millions of lives.

But the system is severely stressed. Policy improvements are essential if America is to remain a world leader in medical devices and diagnostics and fulfill its potential for medical progress in this century of the life sciences. In the following blog post, we will look at the current state of the medical technology industry and make some policy recommendations covering regulatory approval processes, payment and coverage policies, and tax policy.

An Ecosystem Under Stress

In launching its bipartisan “21st Century Cures” initiative, the House Energy and Commerce Committee noted, “The discovery, development, and delivery process [for medical advances] is a cycle … The country that fully embraces the entirety of this cycle will be the innovation leader for the 21st century.” For the nation’s medical technology industry, every part of this cycle the innovation ecosystem is under stress.

The danger signs of a stressed system include:

Reduced investment. Venture capital flowing to the medical device sector is both an essential generator of future progress and an index of the attractiveness of investing in the development of new treatments and cures. Many of the true breakthrough therapies and diagnostics in medical technology flow from venture funded start-ups.

Venture investment in medical technology declined by 42 percent between 2007 and 2013. Even more ominous is the decline in investment for start-up companies at the earliest stage — the seed corn for the next generation of treatments and cures. First time funding for medical technology start-ups dropped by almost three-quarters over the same period. There was an increase in 2014 from the low of 2013, but much of the increase was concentrated in digital health, informatics, and self-pay technologies leaving potential technological breakthroughs to diagnose and treat major diseases still starved for resources.

Two articles in the Health Affairs issue, Sabin Russell’s “Investor Drought and Regulatory Headwinds Slow Device Innovation” and Jonathan Fleming’s “The Decline of Venture Capital Investment in Early-Stage Life Sciences Poses a Challenge to Continued Innovation,” explore the causes and consequences of this decline.

Reduced revenue growth. For “pure play” American medical device companies—companies that are not conglomerates making other products besides medical devices and diagnostics—net revenue growth has been essentially zero from 2011-2013, the last three years for which data is available. Gross revenue growth averaged just two percent a year during the same period.

This contrasts with years of double-digit and high single-digit revenue growth prior to the recent recession. This flat revenue growth suggests a slow-down in development and uptake of new products and is another sign of reduced innovation.

Movement of clinical trials and first product introduction out of the United States. For more complex products, the new normal is to conduct the first clinical trials and product introductions outside the U.S. Often, patients in other nations get the second or even third version of a novel treatment or diagnostic while patients in the U.S. are still waiting to get the first version. The average lag time between product introduction in Europe and the U.S. is between three and five years.

The decisions to introduce abroad first are driven by the higher cost and time involved in conducting clinical trials in the United States; delays and inconsistencies in the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) review, including review of proposals for the Investigational Device Exemptions (IDEs) that are necessary to start clinical trials; and, increasingly, uncertainties about coverage and payment.

Because devices typically progress by incremental improvements based in part on feedback from practitioners, this movement of first introduction abroad, if not reduced, will inevitably move expertise and innovation abroad as well.

Increasing difficulty in achieving coverage by public and private insurers for new medical devices and diagnostics. The openness of the U.S. medical system to new treatments and diagnostics has been a major strength in stimulating U.S. leadership in development of new products and rapid patient access to improved care. Public and private insurers, however, are raising the evidentiary threshold for coverage. A study by researchers from Tufts University—included in the Health Affairs innovation issue—found a therapy that is considered for Medicare national coverage today is twenty times less likely to receive a favorable decision than it was ten years ago.

A survey of insurers reported that large proportions said that they had raised their requirements for coverage in the last three years and that they expected to raise requirements further over the next three years. Almost half of plans said that it will become more difficult for clinically appropriate but costly technologies to gain coverage.

The problem of increased barriers to coverage and reimbursement is compounded by the fact that U.S. payment systems provide incentives to providers to cut costs but little to reward value, particularly value that accrues over a longer period than an immediate hospitalization, as demonstrated by another article in the Health Affairs issue.

Start-up companies are reporting that the first question that prospective investors now ask is often about the prospects for coverage and payment, while the previous focus was almost exclusively on the FDA.

Disincentives for providers to adopt new technology. New payment methods such as Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs), bundling, and other provider risk-sharing programs spreading rapidly in both the public and private sector can have the effect of penalizing providers who adopt new treatments that raise short-term costs, even if they represent therapeutic improvements and can reduce long-term costs.

The survey of insurers mentioned above found that half of commercial lives were under some form of risk-sharing arrangement three years ago. That proportion had risen to just under two-thirds today and was expected to reach three-quarters in three years. In effect, new technologies face a double whammy: coverage is becoming more difficult and the providers who would, in the past, have been expected to champion new treatments now increasingly face the possibility of financial penalties for adopting them.

The solution is not to move back from appropriate incentives to provide high value care or to suggest that products that do not offer therapeutic benefits should be covered, but rather to implement the public policy changes necessary to assure that the new emphasis on cost does not result in the unintended and unwanted consequence of undermining development and adoption of new and better treatments.

An article in the Health Affairs issue by John Hernandez, Susanne Machacz, and Jamie Robinson highlights the inadequacy, even before the rise of the new payment systems, of the measures the U.S. adopted to support adoption and diffusion of new technologies. The article documents that Medicare’s new technology add-on payment program has resulted in far less actual revenue flowing to these new technologies than Congress or CMS estimated and shows that comparable systems in Germany, France, and Japan identify far more technologies as deserving special encouragement.

While the article does not discuss problems in the other countries cited—including inadequate reimbursement—it is powerful evidence that the U.S. needs to do more to recognize and encourage adoption of medical technologies.

Declining U.S. competitiveness. Other countries are anxious to wrest leadership from the U.S. in biomedical research and in the life sciences industries. The U.S. medical technology industry has been the unchallenged world leader for many years. We still lead, but our continued leadership is clearly threatened.

A study in 2011 by PricewaterhouseCoopers showed U.S. leadership on each of the drivers of medical device innovation to be eroding. In addition, as discussed further below, the U.S. tax system places medical technology products developed and manufactured in the U.S. at a significant competitive disadvantage — a disadvantage which is dramatically increased by the medical device excise tax.

Solutions

Policy changes could revitalize medical technology innovation while maintaining other key public policy goals, including continued assurance of the safety of medical devices and reducing health cost growth. We’ve outlined some key steps below.

Breakthrough Products. The FDA and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) should adopt a seamless, accelerated process for approval of breakthrough products that offer the promise of significant improvements in treatment or diagnosis of serious illnesses. The guarantee of rapid coverage and reimbursement for truly important products that receive the FDA stamp of approval would be an important spur to investment and would make valuable innovations available to patients much earlier than is typical today.

Access to New Medical Devices. The FDA needs to continue to progress toward the goal articulated in the device center’s recent vision statement that patients in the U.S. will have first in the world access to new medical devices. Achieving this goal does not require reducing FDA’s rigorous safety and effectiveness standard.

Rather, it can be achieved by such steps as better training for front-line reviewers; continued implementation of the groundbreaking 2012 user fee agreement, with the goal of meeting and exceeding the agreement’s goals for reducing total review times and achieving timely and productive interactions between sponsors and the agency; revitalizing the “least burdensome” standard enacted in 1997 directing the agency to use the least burdensome evidence requirements necessary to show safety and effectiveness in clearing and approving new products; and finding other ways to make development and review of devices less costly and time consuming.

Encourage Medical Innovation. CMS needs to view encouraging medical innovation as part of its mission and review all its policies with this goal in mind, consistent with the President’s Executive Order 13563. From its inception, Medicare has been more than just an insurance program for the elderly and disabled.

When it was first enacted, it was used as a prime tool for desegregation of health institutions. The diagnosis-related group (DRG) system was designed to explicitly support the research and teaching missions of academic health centers, because these missions serve an important social purpose.

In more recent years, there has been bipartisan recognition that CMS programs should encourage the reorganization of care delivery to support higher quality and lower cost. It is now time to recognize that supporting the development of new treatments, diagnostics, and cures to benefit today’s and tomorrow’s patients is an equally important public goal.

There are a number of specific steps CMS should take to achieve these goals. For example, it should establish a time-limited exclusion from the rewards and penalties available under risk-sharing programs such as ACOs and bundling for significant new treatments. This would be analogous to the new technology add-on payment currently available under the DRG hospital payment program and would assure that these systems neither discourage nor encourage providers from adopting these treatments.

The coding process, which can extend the time before new technologies can be covered for months or years, should be streamlined. Just as Medicare coverage was expanded to recognize that prescription drug coverage was an essential part of 20th century medicine, Medicare coverage should be expanded to support the 21st century potential of technologies used in the home to prevent disease and improve health. And there are numerous other steps CMS can take to support investment in development of new treatments and more rapid availability of those treatments to patients.

Reform Tax Policy. U.S. tax policy needs to be reformed to put knowledge-based, high value-added industries on a level playing field with competitor countries. Prior to the enactment of the medical device tax, medical technology companies paid an effective federal tax rate of 31 percent on activities located and taxed in the U.S., but an average effective rate of 14 percent on activities located and taxed abroad (internal AdvaMed survey).

The medical device tax increased the industry’s federal tax burden by 29 percent. At a combined tax rate of 40 percent, surely one the of the highest industry tax rates in the world, a company that wants to locate its research or manufacturing in the U.S. faces a powerful disincentive. The medical device excise tax drains funds away from investment in research and development and from job creation.

At this point, the tax has little to do with the debate over the Affordable Care Act (ACA): the proceeds of the tax just go into general revenues and repeal would not subtract one dime from the subsidies for the uninsured the ACA provides. The U.S. tax system clearly needs broad reform, but repeal of this special burden should be a high priority for restoring the medical technology ecosystem.

Other steps that should be considered in tax reform include incentives for investment in start-up companies and consideration of provisions like a “patent box” that other countries use to encourage local development of intellectual property and manufacturing based on that property.

A Healthy Innovation Ecosystem

There is broad support for medical progress among policymakers and the public. All of us want to make better treatments and cures available to patients, and there is increasing recognition that medical progress can drive economic progress by reducing the burden of disease, increasing productivity and labor force participation, and stimulating employment and growth of the life sciences industries.

But there has been less recognition of the critical roles that regulatory policy at the FDA, payment and coverage policy at CMS, and tax policy play in determining whether or not there is a healthy innovation ecosystem.

Advances in fundamental knowledge of human biology, in computing, and in materials science provide the foundation blocks for rapid development of groundbreaking new treatments and diagnostics. But the ecosystem that supports innovation in the medical technology industry is facing a crisis. Improved public policies are essential to make the promise of medical progress a reality for patients and to assure continued American leadership in the life sciences.