Parents of a child with a permanent disability face a difficult challenge assuring their child’s lifetime care. Without a chronic medical condition, his or her life expectancy is more than 70 years. More than half of the children with special needs will outlive both parents.

There are 40 million people in the U.S. with a disability, about one person in eight. Because of chronic underfunding of social services by federal and state governments, 21 million American families, or about one in six, care for someone with a disability. Seventy-two percent of people with an intellectual disability live with a family member. One in four family caregivers are older than 60.

Comprehensive special needs planning starts with a vision of the life you want for your child and what it will take to make it happen. Identify the resources that are required. Have a financial plan to pay for the resources. Have an estate plan to take care of a child who outlives you.

Don’t focus on the disability. Focus on the person’s capabilities, their potential for independence, an active social life, employment if possible, perhaps a place to live they can call their own.

And don’t look to the government to provide a good life. Public policy is to take care of life-sustaining needs and support someone at the poverty line at best. Parents will need to provide additional support to lift their child out of poverty.

What’s affordable and how to pay for what’s needed is what a financial plan addresses. This is especially important in Colorado, where the wait list for comprehensive developmental disability services is long. My adult daughter, who has Down syndrome, has been wait-listed for 12 years. She wants to live in an apartment with one of her friends. My wife and I have given up waiting for state help. We’ll pay for it ourselves. Fortunately, we can afford to.

Legal planning usually includes setting up a special-needs trust so parents can put aside money for their child without causing them to lose eligibility for government assistance. A special-needs trust must conform to Social Security and Medicaid regulations. An elder law or a trust and estates attorney should draft the document.

A big challenge is estimating the cost of lifetime financial support. Without knowing the cost, you don’t know if the life plan is affordable or what’s needed to fund the trust.

Certified financial planners with experience in specialneeds planning are hard to find. (When my wife and I started working on our daughter’s future many years ago, we couldn’t find one. That’s what led me to start my practice.) However, a good CFP can help. They have expertise in retirement planning. That’s important because most parents with a special-needs child will retire as a family of three. CFPs also know estate planning. That’s important if your child outlives you. The Colorado chapter of the Financial Planning Association can help you find a CFP.

Some insurance companies train agents to help special-needs families. However, the agent should be qualified to do more than sell insurance. They should also be competent in personal financial planning. Make sure the agent, called an insurance producer in Colorado, commits to advise you in your best interest. This is known as a fiduciary standard of professionalism.

Create the circles of support to take over for you when you die or can’t continue. Write a letter of intent to guide those who will come after you. A letter of intent is a statement that describes your family, what you want others to know about your child, what you want for their future, what your child wants and what needs to be done.

Many parents hope their other children will play a role in the care and support of their sibling. Call a family meeting to review your life plan and letter of intent. Explain the roles you hope each family member will play. Go over the arrangements you have made. Listen to your children’s concerns and ideas. Make sure everyone is understands and accepts his or her role.

This can be one of the most meaningful conversations you will have. A special-needs child can bring a family together. Our daughter has brought our family closer together.

Hal Wright (hvwright @earthlink.net) is a certified financial planner and a nationally known consultant and public speaker on special-needs planning. His book, “The Complete Guide to Creating a Special Needs Life Plan,” is available through Tattered Cover and from Amazon. He is a parent of an adult child with Down syndrome and a director of the Rocky Mountain Down Syndrome Association. He also is a member of the Colorado chapter of the Financial Planning Association.