Read the transcript:

Jerry Seib: I’m Jerry Seib with the Wall Street Journal. Today we’re joined by former Senator Chris Dodd, author of the Dodd/Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Did I get that right?

Chris Dodd: You got it all right.

Seib: And we’re talking 5 years after the real financial crisis hit September 5 years ago and I’m wondering as you look back on that and having traveled the road to get to the Dodd/Frank Reform Act, do you think we’ve done a lot, have we done enough to make this system safer?

Dodd: We’ve done a lot and I hope by the end of this year, at least what I’ve heard from Jack Lew and others, they really want to get these rules done…

Seib: The implementation of your act?

Dodd: The implementation get done. And then of course you’re going to have to test it, I mean, like anything else Jerry, I mean, we did the best we could but you’re sailing in the dark to a large extent. When we wrote the Too Big To Fail provisions in the Bill, the Dodd/Frank legislation I think we got it right and there are more and more indications we may have but the ultimate test will be when you’re called upon to really make it work so I’m sure there are unintended consequences, this wasn’t talmudic this was not biblical when we wrote this, I had to get 60 votes in the senate of the United States, a super majority to pass the Bill and so you’re hobbling together elements, it’s not everything I would have written had I been King for a day at all. Your colleagues are co equal partners in all of this because every vote can make a different in the passage of the legislation. But I think it will stand the test of time. I think one of the indications people talk about repealing Obamacare but no one is talking about repealing this legislation and they made tweaks to it, changes to it, which I may totally support by the way in time but I think overall we’ve made a difference, we’re not going to go back to the environment, in fact, much of what we did in the fall of 2008, today under the Dodd/Frank legislation is illegal.

Seib: For example?

Dodd: Well for instance you can’t have the writing that using taxpayer money out of the Federal Reserve system you couldn’t do that today, it’s against the law in a sense so the idea that funeral plans were actually these institutions you’re going to have to pay for their unwinding process to get an orderly process, the FDIC will do it, the legitimate question is about that but I think the FDIC could do this.

Seib: Do you think core problem that you mentioned at the outset, the too big to fail, has that really been solved?

Dodd: We think so but again, it will take a test in time. There are a couple of things that, you know, again, when you’re looking back at a perfect world I think bankruptcy laws probably need to be examined a little more closely as to whether or not we have the capacity to unwind under our present current structure of the bankruptcy laws and I worry about that a little bit. But aside from that I think the idea of having the funeral plans in advance I think will help tremendously, that the burden does fall on not only the institutions that are being unraveled but also other institutions are going to have to pay the cost of that. I think there’s going to build in a discipline to this that minimizes these kinds of things occurring in the future as well, raising the capital standards, raising leverage, the oversight, the financial services oversight board seems like such a simple idea and you wonder why it wasn’t done rather than legislating be required to be done. We actually have these agencies talking to each other on a regular basis identifying products and institutions that pose systemic risk. Simple things like that, getting real time data in the Department of Treasury independently so that you’re collecting information. I’ll go to my grave believing that had in 2007 even early in 2008 we would have had a crisis but a far less significant one because we waited so long to recognize the depth of this problem and the implications of it.

Seib: Do you worry that we still have regulators tripping over each other doing the same things one on top of the other?

Dodd: Yeah. You may recall in 2009 I proposed what I called a Discussion Draft Bill and that Discussion Draft Bill I created one prudential regulator and in fact I was…

Seib: That wasn’t a widely popular ideas as I recall.

Dodd: A number of people who said we should have listened to you more carefully, it made lot more sense and I would have put consumer protection and prudential regulation sort of in the same house where they would have complimented each other a bit. Again, I wasn’t king for the day and you’re right, I had a very negative response to the idea of cleaning out is involved, just regulatory arbitrage over the years, AIG being the classic example of that so they got rid of the OTS and others but I would have done more. I think more consolidation can still occur.

Seib: If you were King for a Day today, now, is there one thing you would have done differently in drafting the legislation and pushing it through?

Dodd: That I would have liked to had that. I think that would have been a major reform. Fannie and Freddie, I’m a great advocate of housing finance, I think having the government play a role, I think the 30 year fixed rate mortgage has been a great wealth creator, taking people from poverty into the middleclass and we shouldn’t underestimate that. We made that obviously the residential mortgage crisis was where this all was born so obviously opening up the flood gates to anybody showing up without doing the due diligence to determine who could qualify is a problem but you need a new housing finance structure. It wasn’t for lack of trying, Judd Greg had it right one day on the floor of the Senate when asked the question, he said we tried, we just couldn’t come up with an answer for it but I regret that.

Seib: That was just a bridge too far?

Dodd: Bridge too far, no one knew what they wanted to do. In fact, Hank Paulson made the recommendation of what he called a public utility model which I’ve always liked that idea.

Seib: The housing finance public utility model.

Dodd: Yeah. Because you had that conflict between your investors and the mission and that’s where a lot of this went where you had that clash where you’re trying to satisfy your investors’ needs and their obligations as investors and then completing the mission of providing housing for those who couldn’t afford it.

Seib: And it doesn’t appear that since you left the senate anybody else has figured out the Fannie/Freddie solution.

Dodd: Not yet although Mark Warner and Bob Corker are getting close to something that I think has a lot of merit and looks as though it’s got some chance of building some broad bipartisan support so I watch that now as I’m sitting in the bleachers, I watch this now, Jerry.

Seib: There’s the regulatory structure and there are processes but there’s also attitudes; I wonder if you think Wall Street has learned its lesson. You can regulate the activity but you can’t necessarily regulate mind set. How do you think we’ve come on that path?

Dodd: Not far enough. I get asked the question a lot – tell me what you are trying to do with this Bill and obviously the too big to fail and oversight transparency consumer protection but the one word I constantly kept in my mind through all of this was the word confidence. It had been shattered by this process and restoring it was critical, you can’t quantify it, I can’t legislate it, you just hope that by creating or doing certain things you restore that, consumer confidence, investor confidence. I still think we haven’t closed that gap despite all the other things we’ve done and a lot of that comes in my view from the community itself, the recognition that we did get off track. I’m not asking you to agree with every provision I wrote in the Bill, that would be silly, I realize you disagree with a lot of that but to understand what happened. I’ll never forget years ago a manager of Sovereign Wealth Fund, I asked him, I said why do you park so much of your money in the United States and he said well, for two reasons very simply; one, the Americans are pretty good at making money but secondly and more importantly than the first reason, I’ve never lost a wink of sleep worrying about the architecture of your financial sector. He said I made bad bets, I’ve lost money but never because the architecture was wrong and it is now and getting the architecture wrong…

Seib: At that point he thought it was wrong.

Dodd: Yeah, absolutely and rebuilding a 21st Century architecture of financial services was what was on my mind obviously but restoring confidence was really the purpose, ultimate vision what are you trying to do.

Seib: Do you think that confidence factor is one of the reasons that having gotten through the worst of the crisis and having changed the system we’re still seeing an unsatisfactory economy. Unemployment has not really been resolved, the housing sector is not really fully back, is that a confidence issue?

Dodd: I believe it is. I think it’s a question where you get moments when people seem to feel a little bit and then they pull back again as well, and I think that lack of that sense of security that things are going to be okay, that the structures are good again I think is a major, major factor, it’s not the only one but I think it’s a major factor that we really haven’t taken off in ways that we should.

Seib: Let me ask you this final question just as an observer one of the big players in any scenario like the one you live through in 2008 and afterwards is the Federal Reserve; how would you rate its performance or the things that it should be thinking about doing differently as time goes forward?

Dodd: Well, I think history will give Ben Bernanke a tremendous amount of credit. I think he was slow to start candidly, I think in 2006, 2007 when I became chairman of the committee we did 90 hearings that year and I believe very strongly that had I gotten more of a response from the administration and the Fed in 2007 we could have stopped this metastasizing of this problem but Ben Bernanke in my view will go down in history as a great leader, one of the most serious economic crisis in history of the country. So I have a higher degree of respect and regard for him in many, many ways. I honestly believe as well that we ought to be looking at architecturally the Federal Reserve system, I have serious questions about the validity and need of regional banks, the way that it is presently structured, the supervisory function, while it’s getting better we certainly included it in the Bill, I’d like to see more participation. Historically there was not a lot or maybe they’re getting better so the Fed is a critical player. One of the major provisions we avoid in this Bill and that is requiring the kind of auditing that certain elements were insisting upon, we maintain the independence of the Fed and had you destroy the independence of the Fed as many wanted to do I think we would have…

Seib: And you think the auditing outcry would have produced a diminution of the independence…

Dodd: We provided some auditing but what they wanted to do I think would have clearly but a major, major destroyer of the Feds independence.

Seib: And that’s been preserved in your view?

Dodd: In my view we preserved it.

Seib: Chris Dodd, Author of the Dodd/Frank Act, The Biggest Legislative Response to the Financial Crisis. Thanks for joining us to share some thoughts.