President Barack Obama speaks during a joint press conference with Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi at the White House in Washington, D.C., last Friday. He is scheduled to deliver an Earth Day speech in Florida this week. Jim Watson/AFP/Getty Images

President Barack Obama hits the road again this week, continuing what could be called the Blue POTUS/Red State tour. This time, the destination is Florida, where Obama will deliver an Earth Day speech on “the threat that climate change poses to our economy and to the world.”

Kind of an interesting choice for the president, and a possible political two-fer.

[READ: Three-Minute Briefing: After 2016 GOPers Hit Hillary in N.H., CNN Poll Shows She’s Barely Scratched ]

Florida’s Republican governor, Rick Scott, is beefing with the White House over Obamacare – he rejected federal money for health insurance exchanges, argued the law wasn’t working and is now suing to get federal money for health insurance exchanges under a differently named program. The sight of Air Force One touching down at Miami International Airport is likely to revive what’s an embarrassment for Scott; no word on whether he’ll greet Obama at the airport with a summons in one hand and a collection plate in the other.

Delivering an Earth Day speech in the Everglades, meanwhile, could dial up a bit of pressure on the Sunshine State’s own Sen. Marco Rubio, a 2016 Republican presidential aspirant who’s apparently done a 180 on climate change since hitting the national political spotlight. Back when he was speaker of the Florida legislature a scant eight years ago, Rubio seemed to think climate change was a real thing, CO2 emissions were to blame, and his state’s entrepreneurs could fill a fleet of Priuses with the money they’d make from clean energy:

Recent polls show Rubio’s the GOPer who comes closest to catching Hillary Clinton so far; he’s only 14 points behind her in the latest CNN poll. But with climate change heavyweights like Tom Steyer ready to spend a few millions on climate-change issue ads, that flip-flop could turn into a cudgel for the left – assuming Rubio makes it out of the GOP’s demolition-derby primary.

[ALSO: Three-Minute Briefing: Marco Rubio Throws Shade On His Elders, Rand Focuses on Clinton]