CLEVELAND, Ohio – Landmark Supreme Court rulings have upheld President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act and legalized gay marriage nationwide, generating talk about the president's legacy.

In an article Sunday on cleveland.com, we explored some of the events of the past couple of weeks that are helping to shape Obama's legacy. We also mentioned there are other events outside of these recent actions that have occurred during Obama's 6½ years in office that may also define how people view Obama's presidency.

So we asked what you agree or disagree with the most about what Obama has accomplished during his time in office. We also conducted a poll, asking you what event will define Obama's legacy. Nearly 63 percent of voters said the Affordable Care Act twice being upheld by the Supreme Court will most define the Obama presidency. The only other option that received more than 10 percent of the vote was authorizing the operation that killed Osama bin Laden (12 percent).

"President Obama had a great week, but I still think his 2 greatest weeks were when he passed the ACA and when he killed Osama Bin Laden," commenter Buckeyes_and_Browns said.

Many commenters posted that Obama deserves none of the credit he is receiving.

"When the truth is out, Obama will have an asterisk* beside his name," commenter browngrowler said. "He has replaced the Trojan Horse as the biggest hoax ever sprung on a country. Above all the other " firsts" attributed to Obama, electing him was America's first defeat."

Commenter Muzzy3 said Obama has been a failure.

"Obama's legacy will be Obamacare period," Muzzy3 said. "He has failed in foreign policy and ending the wars, that he made worse. He has turned Americans against the police, turned blacks against whites, turned the north against the south, turned all political parties against each other, he is endangering the American economy by opening all borders, allowing millions of illegal immigrants into our public assistance programs and jobs market. He has singlehandedly obliterated relationships with our allies, while crawling in bed with the leaders of Iran and Cuba, both countries who have US hostages and dissidents. Obama's legacy? Failure. Failure. Failure."

Commenter The Darkside said President George W. Bush had a hand in Obama's success.

"I've been writing for the past year about Obama's legacy and him ending up being in the top tier of President's. His current approval rating of 50% is almost twice of that of George Bush (27%) at the same juncture in Bush's tenure," The Darkside said. "Somehow, Bush should be given some type of mention for Obama's sterling record. If Bush hadn't ruined the nation, there would have been nothing there for Obama to clean up. I've always wondered what if it was Obama that entered his presidency with a balanced budget and a federal surplus like Bush did."

Commenter redz28 said all 10 options in the poll contribute to Obama's legacy.

"I only wish I could vote for all the options. Thanks Obama! I can't wait for 8 years of Clinton 2.0. Maybe (Chelsea) Clinton can run after her mother in 2024. The options for betterment of this country would be endless," redz28 stated.

So what do you think? What will be President Obama's legacy – good or bad? Is it too early to determine what will define Obama's presidency, as several commenters suggested? Tell us what you think in the comments section below.