Targets for more students from poor backgrounds should be abandoned and TAFEs and private universities should be allowed to enrol as many students as they wish, an Abbott government review into higher education funding has recommended.

The report, released on Sunday, calls for TAFEs and private providers to be included in the federal government's "demand-driven” funding system which allows public universities to decide how many places they offer and in which disciplines. The report was welcomed by the university sector and TAFE Directors Australia, which called on the Abbott government to act on the recommendations as soon as possible.

While Education Minister Christopher Pyne has not released his official response to the report, it is understood the government is prepared to include an expansion of the demand-driven system in the May budget.

Advertisement

In their review, education consultant Andrew Norton and former Liberal education minister David Kemp also advise the government to ditch the goal for 20 per cent of university students to come from poor backgrounds by 2020. The goal for 40 per cent of all young Australians to have a degree by 2025 should also be abandoned, they argue. Both goals have almost been achieved.

"The important aspect of the demand-driven system is that it can adapt to individual needs, not that it can help meet arbitrary centrally determined targets,” Dr Kemp and Mr Norton write in their report.

Mr Norton said uncapping places for diploma courses - which are a pathway to university for students with lower year 12 results - was a more practical way to help poorer students gain degrees. He estimated this would cost the federal government hundreds of millions of dollars a year.

The introduction of demand-driven funding for universities in 2012 led to an instant surge in Commonwealth-supported students.

Despite concerns the rapid growth in enrolments would lead to a drop in standards, the Kemp-Norton review concludes that "there is no persuasive case for returning to the ‘capped’ system,'' and the demand-driven system should be retained, expanded and improved.

The review also call for demand-driven funding to be introduced for a limited number of postgraduate courses.

The Group of Eight (Go8) universities and Universities Australia both welcomed the report. Universities Australia deputy chief executive Greg Evans said "arbitrary" targets for university attainment were unnecessary and should be scrapped.

Go8 chairman Ian Young said: "Broadening pathways is a key step towards further expansion of opportunity for students, regardless of their background.”

Opposition higher education spokesman Kim Carr called on the government to keep both targets and said he was concerned that more deregulation could lead to higher fees and a drop in standards.

“We are witnessing a softening-up process, a precursor to what we anticipate will be significant changes to deregulation,” Mr Carr said.

Mr Pyne said last year that he was "not obsessed with percentage quotas” and that his focus was on the quality of education.