Six people were on board, including a two-year-old, when the powerboat exploded and burst into flames Saturday afternoon at the Tarpon Point Marina in Cape Coral.



Smoke could be seen from miles away.

Only one remains in the hospital, 55-year-old Sarah Witter, who will likely require surgery on her leg.

Witnesses, like Ronald Plotka could see and feel the explosion.

"It sounded like a bomb went off. Oh yeah, you could feel the explosion. We looked straight up and we saw things flying in the air."

It was like a scene out of a movie, captured with cell phone pictures and video throughout the area Saturday.

Investigators say 55-year-old Jeffrey and Sarah Witter of Iowa, had just finished refueling their 40-foot powerboat.

After starting one of the boat's internal engines, they tried to start the other and it caused the engine to explode.

Gary Wandrey was helping the Witters refuel and was just yards away from the blast.

"All the shrapnel went up, rather than flying out to the sides, or we would've had a lot more injuries."

Bystanders were able to push the boat away from the dock where it took firefighters more than a half hour to put out the flames.

Both Jeffrey and Sarah Witter were taken to the hospital with minor injuries. Four others on board including their two-year-old granddaughter escaped injury.

We contacted the family and they wanted us to pass along their gratitude for the response:



"Please do pass along our appreciation to all of the individuals that helped us get to safety, the first responders, police officers, EMT's, doctors and nurses. Everyone was so wonderful and we can't express enough how appreciative we are. Thank you, Hannah Kustes"

Once the fire was out, the boat was towed to shallow water. Sea Tow and the Coast Guard will remove the boat and take it to a secure location.



Cape Coral Police, Cape Coral Fire Department, Sanibel Fire Department, Iona McGregor Fire Department, Lee County EMS, Lee County Sheriff's Office and FWC all responded to the incident.





?