Toney (Photo: Submitted by Eric Toney)

Our community, like many across Wisconsin and the nation, is experiencing a surge in heroin use and related crimes. Case filings in the District Attorney’s Office have seen a dramatic increase in recent years, and this has put strain on many areas within our criminal justice community and beyond.

We have seen an increase not just in criminal cases but also civil child in need of protection and services (CHIPS) and termination of parental rights (TPR) cases.

RELATED: Heroin OD treatment saves lives, doesn’t help addiction

RELATED: Where can heroin addicts find help in Fond du Lac?

RELATED: Fake it until you make it: Heroin addict’s recovery

Consider the numbers:

• We’ve seen the average number of felony filings per year rise from 421 a year between 2001 to 2011 to 669 per year from 2012 to 2014.

• The average number of drug-related charges rose from 202 per year between 2003 and 2010 to 347 a year in 2012 and 2013.

• The number of CHIPS filings rose from 103 to 148 in one year, from 2013 to 2014.

• From 1994 until 2012, we only averaged 18 TPR cases a year, but that number spiked to 47 in 2013.

It is clear that heroin and other opioids are having a significant and negative impact on our community and criminal justice system as a whole.

Begins with prescription abuse

Heroin is an opioid drug. Other opioid drugs are OxyContin, Oxycodone, Hydrocodone and Vicodin. Heroin and those prescription drugs are all considered opioids.

Heroin users often begin their opioid use by abusing prescription opioid pills and then migrate to heroin.

Heroin is often seen as an alternative to prescription pills because heroin is cheaper and easier to obtain compared with prescription opioid pills. Heroin presents a significant danger because it is illegal, unregulated and often mixed or “cut” with other substances.

These additional substances can dilute or increase the potency, depending on the substance used. Heroin users will not know the precise amount of heroin they are putting into their body, which can lead to overdose and even death.

Some may wonder what the big deal is because they haven’t experienced a loved one exposed to opioid abuse.

Much of the property crime occurring in our community has a link back to individuals using opioids/heroin. This includes theft, burglaries, robberies, retail theft, fraud, ID theft and more. They commit these crimes to help them obtain more opioids.

Friends and relatives are often the first victims of an opioid user. Families become torn apart, and the opioid user often shifts to victimizing strangers and businesses. Stolen items can often be exchanged for heroin.

A bindle of heroin usually sells for $20 to 40. The relatively low cost allows many lower value stolen goods to be traded for heroin and prescription pills.

Few options available

Once these cases reach the court system there are limited options available to the courts. Some of the most common options are prison, jail, probation, fines and treatment alternatives such as drug court and a post-charging division program through the District Attorney’s Office.

Non-violent offenders that are not dealing drugs are screened for the treatment alternative programs. These programs provide for frequent drug testing within our jail. The programs also offer treatment options and more structure, especially within the drug court program.

The treatment programs are crucial for non-violent criminal defendants because many of them have a companion CHIPS or TPR case (some have multiple open cases). These programs assist the defendants in obtaining treatment with the goal that we will not see them in the court system in the future as well as assisting them in becoming a successful parent.

Children suffer most

The children are the ones that suffer the most. Foster care is a stop gap measure, and court-ordered conditions are put in place, as required by law, to provide the parent an opportunity to regain custody of their child.

If the parent is unsuccessful, a TPR petition may be filed in which the parent(s) could lose their rights to their child. The children can go months or years not knowing if they will go back to their parents.

The lack of stability for the children is devastating. I have also seen cases where the children are viewed as a source of income, or parents show no regard for their children until the financial assistance that comes along with the children is taken away once the child is removed from their residence.

The strain on our criminal justice community continues, but progress is being made. Our community is fortunate to have dedicated foster families and members in our criminal justice community. These include probation agents, law enforcement, social services, court staff, treatment providers, Drug Free Communities, attorneys, the grateful support of our county executive and county board, and may more.

Our community should be proud as I have witnessed a groundswell of community members interested in joining the Opioid Coalition that was formed under the guidance of Tina Potter, Mary Gerlach, Chief Bill Lamb and I.

As Chief Lamb has said: “We will not arrest our way out of this problem.”

Community support like this is what will make a difference.

For more information on the Opioid Coalition please contact the City of Fond du Lac Police Department or the District Attorney’s Office.

Eric Toney is the district attorney for Fond du Lac County.

By the numbers

Felony filings:

1991-2011: 421 per year (average)

2012-2014: 669 per year (average)

Drug-related charges:

2003-2010: 202 per year (average)

2012-2013: 347 per year (average)

(Exact numbers are imprecise as cases are unable to always be correctly categorized based on insufficient information at the time a case is charged. The exact numbers are likely higher.)

Child in Need of Protection and Services (CHIPS) filings:

1997-2012: 90 (average)

2013: 103

2014: 148

Termination of Parental Rights (TPR) filings:

1994-2012:18 (average)

2013: 47

Source: Fond du Lac County District Attorney’s Office

Read or Share this story: http://fondul.ac/1Nki52K