One of the hottest debate topics in the United States is over abortion. Is it a woman's right to chose, or does life begin at conception? Former Minnesota Gov. Jesse Ventura recently gave his thoughts on the controversial topic.

youtube.com

Ever since the Supreme Court decided in Roe v. Wade that a woman had control over her body and reproduction rights, the issue of abortion has become the most debated social issue of the last 40 years. During a recent interview with the "Big Think" on March 11, Ventura was able to sound off on the pro-life movement.

"I don't call them pro-lifers anymore. I call them pro birthers," Ventura says, explaining, "They all want to outlaw abortion and then all these kids come into the world and you have the same people take away welfare and they take away the very safety net that many of these unwanted children are going to need to survive." Ventura continued, giving the reason why he considers himself to be pro-choice.

"If you're anti-abortion then you should be pro welfare because somebody's going to have to take care (of the children). In many cases, not every child is born into your perfect 'Leave It to Beaver' family, you know? People get pregnant, but my belief unequivocally is it’s a women's right to choose because that woman has to give birth to that child and that woman has to raise that child."

The former governor also touched on the recent battle between right-wing religious conservatives and the women's health care clinic Planned Parenthood. "Banning Planned Parenthood or stopping money for that is ridiculous," the governor said, noting, "If you’re anti-abortion you should be pro contraception."

Ventura has been back in the headlines recently, shifting support to Sen. Bernie Sanders in the 2016 election. The former Navy SEAL Frogman has also gone on the record that he is considering a possible independent run for president if Sanders fails to become the Democratic nominee. In 1998, Ventura famously "shocked the world" when he defeated the Republican and Democratic challenger on his way to winning the governorship of Minnesota as an independent.