TAX SEASON: What are your last-minute filing options? Share Pin It 1 of 2 More Galleries Related article » MAILING TIPS Extended hours: The U.S. Postal Service is only offering it at one Inland location on Wednesday, April 15. The San Bernardino Processing and Distribution Center, 1900 W. Redlands Blvd., San Bernardino, will accept mail until midnight on Wednesday. 800-275-8777 Check the time: Check the collection time posted on mail drops to verify your envelopes will be collected and postmarked on time. Postage: The first ounce, about three sheets of paper, on a letter-sized envelope is 49 cents. The first ounce on envelopes bigger than 6 1/8 inch by 11 1/2 inches is 98 cents. Additional ounces are 21 cents each for both sizes. Special services: Customers who want certified mail or receipt services shouldn't wait until midnight to mail their receipts. Retail services at the San Bernardino distribution center will close at 7:30 p.m. Source: U.S. Postal Service INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE Where: 290 N. D St., San Bernardino Services provided: Account inquiries, basic tax law assistance, assistance with Affordable Care Act tax provision questions, tax payments by check, cash or money order; payment arrangements; multilanguage assistance; tax forms based on availability. Hours: 8:30 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday. Phone number: 909-388-8108 Website: irs.gov

The procrastinators’ ritual of trying to get an April 15 postmark on a midnight envelope to the Internal Revenue Service has been largely abolished by technology.

According to the IRS, almost all of the 96,992,000 individual income tax returns it received by April 3 of this year were by electronic filing, either through a professional tax preparer or self-prepared.

But if U.S. Postal Service workers are getting a break, taxpayers who need help from the IRS are not.

People are flocking to the IRS office in San Bernardino, where on Monday there was a line stretching half a block, from the building to the corner of D and Third streets.

At 11:30 a.m., Ryan Fernandez of Rancho Cucamonga said it had taken him since 9 a.m. to get to the front door, and there were more lines inside.

He said staff members came out two or three times every hour to keep people informed how things are going.

In the wake of budget and staffing cuts, the IRS has fewer people available to assist taxpayers with their questions.

The IRS is not providing live phone assistance at this location. Instead, it has a phone message with instructions on how to find information at the IRS website.

Taxpayers don’t need appointments to visit the office but are at the mercy of the line. To get assistance, they should bring a photo ID and their Social Security number.

Taxpayers who need help but don’t have time to get it should consider requesting a six-month extension at the IRS’s Free File Web page. An extension would make the last day to file Oct. 15, 2015.

Even with an extension, taxpayers who owe money to the IRS have to pay up by one second before midnight on April 15.

If taxpayers can’t pay all that they owe, they should make a partial payment. The IRS points out that penalties for failing to file can be 10 times higher than late-payment penalties.

Contact the writer: fbuck@pe.com or 951-368-9551.