Lamar Odom is still recovering after an overdose at a brothel in Nevada nearly claimed his life, and new details about his condition have now surfaced. According to TMZ, Lamar suffered 12 strokes leaving his ability to walk and talk altered. Fortunately, the strokes didn't affect any of his vital organs. However, despite the small piece of good news, Odom has quite a few other health issues to deal with -- including (but not limited to) kidney failure.

"Doctors performed a series of brain scans on Lamar and discovered the strokes. Lamar's medical team isn't saying if the impairment is permanent. He'll undergo months of physical therapy and doctors don't know the extent to which his motor skills and speech will be restored," reports TMZ.

Lamar Odom has been undergoing dialysis, and may need a kidney transplant. The athlete recently needed two emergency surgeries for "chest issues," according to Us Weekly. He is currently in the ICU at Cedars-Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles where he was airlifted last week.

Sources say that his wife (the two have officially called off their divorce), Khloe Kardashian, has not left his side, and that she even sleeps in the intensive care unit with him every night. The 31-year-old reality star is reportedly the only person currently allowed to see Lamar. That may change if his condition is upgraded, or if he is moved out of the ICU.

Although he is off of life support and is breathing on his own, sources say that Lamar has a long road ahead of him, and his prognosis is unclear.

"Lamar is not out of the woods. I think it’s still really touch and go," a source told Us Weekly.

Fans have been hoping for the best, but it's clear that Lamar still needs thoughts and prayers at this time.

As previously reported by Starpulse, Khloe Kardashian released a statement on her website, thanking everyone for the love and support over the past couple of weeks.

"This past week has been incredibly difficult. I’m so thankful to my family, friends and fans, who have send nothing but prayers and well wishes to Lamar," Khloe wrote in part. You can read her full statement here.