The Virginia Chamber of Commerce is reaching out to small businesses to create a private health insurance marketplace for their employees.

The chamber today announced the creation of the Virginia Benefits Market, an insurance exchange through which employers with little buying power can offer a menu of health benefits to their employees.

The market is a partnership between the state chamber and ChamberSolutions, a 22-year-old cooperative among 60 local chambers that currently provides insurance benefits for 20,000 employees in Virginia.

The partners have selected CieloStar, a 26-year-old Minneapolis-based company, to administer the new marketplace for private and public employers, especially those with relatively small work forces.

“Small employers historically have not been able to provide the same level of benefits as large employers,” said William P. Mehuse, executive chairman of CieloStar, just before the chamber announcement at its fourth annual health care conference today in Richmond.

Barry DuVal, president and chief executive officer of the Virginia Chamber, said the new marketplace will allow employers to select a health insurance carrier and a range of other benefits from which employees can select, using a “defined contribution” by their employers.

“It moves from employer driven to employee driven,” he said.

The program also will rely on private insurance brokers to bring employers into the Virginia Benefits Market, DuVal said. “Brokers are the delivery mechanism. They’re the ones who advise small businesses.”

Health care has become a dominant issue for the Virginia Chamber, which is unique among other state chambers of commerce for devoting an annual conference to the subject from both health industry and political viewpoints.

The Virginia Chamber has taken a stand in favor of reforming and expanding the state’s Medicaid program, preferably through the private insurance marketplace advocated by the state Senate in its ongoing battle over the issue with Republicans in the House of Delegates.

Gov. Terry McAuliffe and Secretary of Health and Human Resources Bill Hazel delivered a one-two punch in keynote speeches to more than 500 people at the conference today.

McAuliffe emphasized the business and financial case for expanding health coverage to hundreds of thousands of uninsured Virginians in the so-called “coverage gap.”

People in the coverage gap don’t qualify for Medicaid under the state’s current, stringent standards but also aren’t eligible for federal subsidies to buy insurance in the new federally operated marketplace created under the Affordable Care Act.

“We have a first-class health care system, but if our citizens don’t have access to it, what good is it?” McAuliffe asked.

The governor again called for House Republicans to compromise on coverage so that Virginia can recover $20 billion in additional taxes that state residents and businesses will pay over the next eight years under the health care law to finance expansion of Medicaid eligibility in states that choose to do so.

“We’re talking about leaving $20 billion of taxpayer money on the table,” he said, noting that Virginia already has forfeited an estimated $767 million of federal money this year by not expanding coverage.

McAuliffe vowed to prevail on the issue, despite determined opposition from House Republicans. He has not ruled out expanding coverage by executive action, but wants the General Assembly to reach a compromise.

“We’re going to get this done, folks,” he said. “I promise you that.”

While McAuliffe focused on the business reasons for expanding coverage, Hazel talked about the importance to improving health care delivery and controlling costs.

“This is money that needs to come back because we have needs here,” said Hazel, a former orthopedic surgeon who served as secretary under then-Gov. Bob McDonnell before being reappointed by McAuliffe this year.

Hazel said the United States spends too much of its gross domestic product on health care while failing to cover a big portion of the population.

“We can’t fix that without finding a rational way to take care of these people in the gap,” he said.