Contribution

Wayne Allyn Root is a bestselling author. His latest book is: “ The Power of RELENTLESS! ” Dubbed by the media as “the Capitalist Evangelist,” Wayne is a former Libertarian Vice Presidential nominee, international business speaker, serial entrepreneur and conservative media personality – appearing on over 5,000 interviews in the past five years. Wayne’s web site: ROOTforAmerica.com .

President Barack Obama is going rogue. By every metric the Obama economy is melting down. We are seeing the beginning stages of another recession at best, or a total economic meltdown at worst.

At the moment there are no decent paying jobs in America. Obama has opened the border and given amnesty to at least 5 million illegal aliens already in the country, thereby putting them in competition with working class and middle class Americans.

Think I’m wrong? Did you know the government is giving businesses a $3,000 incentive to hire illegal’s over native-born Americans?

If Obama doesn’t like your business, he will “choke off” your ability to stay in business. Share:

Did you know cities are hiring non-citizens (and even illegal aliens given amnesty by Obama) as policemen? All you need is a work permit. Someone in America illegally can wear a badge and enforce the law against you. Don’t believe me? Ask USA Today.

Did you think the border crisis was over? Obama’s amnesty has encouraged a new wave of poverty-stricken illegals at the border.

And, in a bankrupt nation with over $18 trillion in debt, Obama has used amnesty to give illegals access to food stamps, free healthcare, Medicaid, Medicare, Social Security, and earned income tax credits. And by issuing drivers licenses and Social Security cards they will be able to vote immediately (because states don’t have the technology to tell the difference between a legal citizen or a noncitizen, legal or not).

The Obamacare fiasco gets worse by the day. The middle class is being bankrupted by skyrocketing increases in their health insurance premiums; hospitals are being bankrupted by the flood of illegal aliens accessing services;and the economy will drown in the new debt caused by Obamacare.

Obama’s claim that Islamic State is on the run is a proven fraud, ripped bare by America’s embarrassing military withdrawl from Yemen.

Obama is going nuclear in his hatred for Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Israel, force-feeding the world a weak nuclear agreement with Iran that is so bad, even France is fighting for stringer sanctions. Meanwhile Obama threatens to become the first president in history to abandon Israel at the United Nations.

But, I haven’t gotten to the bad part yet.

Is it possible the terrible news about the economy, the border, Islamic State and Israel is all just a distraction? Because the really important news is that Obama has created a modern-day version of “the Gestapo.”

The Obama administration is using an initiative called “Operation Chokepoint” to force legal businesses it doesn’t like out of business, by threatening and intimidating banks and credit card processors.

At the same time, the Obama government is urging banks to call the police to report citizens who withdraw $5,000 or more from their own bank accounts. Yes, I said banks are urged to call the police, when you withdraw your own money.

This comes at the same time that Federal Emergency Management Agency announced it will no longer provide FEMA disaster relief funds to states whose governors deny “climate change.”

And let’s not forget Obama used an Federal Communications Commission party-line vote to take over the Internet and institute sweeping new changes to a system that is working perfectly as the form of communication for most Americans.

Obama’s first goal is clearly massive new taxes on Internet usage, just another way to destroy the middle class and redistribute income. But is his real goal controlling communications on the Internet – specifically the anti-Obama criticism and anti-government message so prevalent on the Internet.

But let’s circle back to the most Gestapo-like Obama initiative ever. It’s called “Operation Chokepoint.” This is your government’s attempt to put morality controls (just like those in Iran) on the American public by shutting down gun stores, precious metals companies, casinos, tobacco distributors, telemarketers, and short-term money lenders.

How can they close legal businesses you ask?

By threatening and intimidating banks and credit card processors to close accounts for businesses the government doesn’t like. Just like an Iranian Ayatollah, if Obama doesn’t like your business, he will “choke off” your ability to stay in business. Hence the name, “Operation Chokepoint.”

Never forget Obama has been on a six-year long relentless crusade to raise our taxes and take away our tax deduction for charitable donations, choking off contributions to churches. Yes, Obama is trying to “choke off” the funding that keeps churches in business too.

Why is this happening?

First, because Obama despises capitalism. He needs to put prosperous businesses out of business. By murdering the middle class’s ability to prosper, he creates his utopia of equality (“shared misery”), making everyone dependent on government in a classless, socialist society. Think Cuba and Venezuela.

Second, there is an obvious reason Obama hates these particular industries. The subtitle of my 2009 book, “The Conscience of a Libertarian” says it all. The subtitle was “Empowering the Citizen Revolution with God, Guns, Gold, Gambling & Tax Cuts.” Is it a coincidence that virtually every item I mentioned is under attack?

The businesses on the list of “Operation Chokepoint” are all dominated by people that Obama would describe as capitalists, patriots, conservatives, Tea Partiers and supporters of the Constitution. Not coincidently, those are the same groups targeted by Obama in the IRS scandal.

And then of course, if Obama can’t close your business, or “choke off” your ability to prosper, he can force banks to call the police if you dare to withdraw money from your own account.

Folks this is eerily reminiscent of The Gestapo, or the Soviet KGB, or the East German Stasi.

Is this the America you want?

The NSA spying on your every move; the federal government in charge of your healthcare and now your free speech on the Internet; the IRS auditing enemies and critics of the government; government forcing legal businesses they deem “unacceptable” out of business; and banks spying on their own customers and being forced to call the police when customers withdraw too much of their own money.

Yes, under Barack Hussein Obama the Gestapo is alive and well in the former “Land of the Free.”

–

TheBlaze contributor channel supports an open discourse on a range of views. The opinions expressed in this channel are solely those of each individual author.