As we all know, the Internet is a series of tubes, and it seems to be the week of thinking about how those tubes work. On Wednesday, European Union technology boss Neelie Kroes said Internet governance, such as assigning domain names, shouldn’t be in the hands of the United Nations. And on Thursday the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg decided not to make the entire Web as we know it grind to a screeching halt, something we can all be thankful for.

SCREEN BLURS INTO FLASHBACK: Read this 1993 article about how hyperlinks were invented, it’s great. Includes Al Gore, the information superhighway and 56k dial-up connections galore. Here’s a soundtrack. And a video Troy McClure* would be proud of. Oh God, that vest … I miss you 1996! NOSTALGIA RUSH OVER

Fast-forward to the modern day when inserting hyperlinks in a blog** is a super-easy way to direct people to relevant information, and arguably makes the Internet as we know it function. But in Case C-466/12, Nils Svensson and others vs. Retriever Sverige AB, Europe’s highest court had to consider whether linking to an article would require the permission of the copyright holder. Here’s the issue:

Press articles written by several Swedish journalists were published on a freely accessible basis on the website of the Göteborgs-Posten. Retriever Sverige, a Swedish company, operates a website that provides its clients with clickable internet links (hyperlinks) to articles published on other websites, including the site of the Göteborgs-Posten. Retriever Sverige did not, however, ask the journalists concerned for authorisation to establish hyperlinks to the articles published on the site of the Göteborgs-Posten. The Svea hovrätt (Svea Court of Appeal, Sweden) brought the matter before the Court of Justice to ascertain whether the provision of such links constitutes an act of communication to the public within the meaning of EU law. If so, the establishment of hyperlinks would not be possible without the authorisation of the copyright holders. EU law provides that authors have the exclusive right to authorise or prohibit any communication to the public of their works.

You can read the opinion of the European Copyright Society here, but basically, common sense prevailed. Imagine if every time you wanted to link to one of the high-quality informative blog posts on Real Time Brussels you had to ask us? Or every time you wanted to tweet a link you had to get permission?

Happily for the Internet, the legal eagles of Luxembourg concluded that “The owner of a website may, without the authorisation of the copyright holders, redirect Internet users, via hyperlinks, to protected works available on a freely accessible basis on another site.”

The only exception is sneaking things round a paywall — or, as the court pithily puts it:

“… a situation where the hyperlink permits users of the site on which that link appears to circumvent restrictions put in place by the site on which the protected work appears in order to restrict public access to that work to the latter site’s subscribers only, since in that situation, the users would not have been taken into account as potential public by the copyright holders when they authorised the initial communication.”

So … carry on linking!

Follow @FMR_Brussels

*You may remember him from ‘The Simpsons’

**Yes, they’re all LOLcats. It’s been a long week.