Colorado’s mountain resorts didn’t have to break a sweat to reach a new record for lodging revenues this summer.

Tamer weather and a rebounding economy should push lodging revenues at the state’s mountain resorts up 7 percent this summer compared with last summer, predicts DestiMetrics, a Denver-based travel research firm.

“The summer season is continuing to grow and generate higher revenues,” said Ralf Garrison, a senior analyst with the firm.

Through July 31, Colorado resort-lodging revenues are up 14 percent, reflecting more early-season bookings than seen during the previous two years, when wildfires acted as a deterrent.

Because so many bookings were front-loaded this season, DestiMetrics expects overall revenues actually will end up 7 percent in the May-October period it defines as summer.

Cooler temperatures, depending on how they influence last-minute bookings in September and October, could temper those final results.

Garrison said his firm, per its contract with the resorts that share their reservation data, isn’t allowed to disclose publicly how specific areas performed.

But not unexpectedly, the communities that have focused the most on recruiting summer business are the ones enjoying the strongest gains in revenues, he said.

A surge in festivals and special events has boosted summer destination visits, along with the growing popularity of people heading to the mountains for weddings, anniversaries and other celebrations, Garrison said.

After bottoming out in 2009, summer-lodging revenues at Colorado’s resorts consistently have moved higher because of rising occupancy rates and, in the past few years, because of higher room rates.

Leisure spending during the summer is growing at a faster rate than winter revenues, but the warmer months still account for only 30 percent to 40 percent of overall lodging revenues at Colorado’s resorts.

That’s because lodging rates in the summer are only 60 percent of what visitors are willing to pay in the winter, when they can ski.

Colorado’s summer gains are lining up with the expected 6.9 percent increase projected for resorts through the Mountain West, where DestiMetrics tracks 290 properties with 27,500 rooms in Colorado, Utah, California, Nevada, Oregon and Wyoming.

Aldo Svaldi: 303-954-1410, asvaldi@denverpost.com or twitter.com/aldosvaldi