Pelosi insists she is more interested in passing legislation than winning elections. Pelosi's play for women

House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi is trying to make the midterm elections all about women.

Armed with Democratic polling, the California Democrat has for months been touting a “women’s economic agenda” in more than two dozen events across the country, with more planned soon.

Story Continued Below

The agenda is “good politics if it changes the minds [of] our colleagues,” Pelosi told POLITICO in an interview. “What are elections about? To raise the awareness of issues.”

( QUIZ: Do you know Nancy Pelosi?)

The strategy is aimed squarely at a demographic Democrats need to win: women — especially single women who tend to vote for them, and who often stay home during midterm elections. Getting women to the ballot box in higher numbers may be the only hope for Pelosi, who last wielded the speaker’s gavel in 2010, and who most political observers believe is a long shot — at the very best — in 2014 to reclaim it.

In a bid to win the House majority and retain the Senate, national Democrats seem intent on remaking the midterm electorate to resemble the one that came out to support President Barack Obama in 2008 and 2012. Traditionally, turnout in midterm elections has declined steeply.

Observers say it’s an uphill slog for congressional Democrats, who would need to reverse a historical trend going back to 1832 — Andrew Jackson was president — as the last time the midterms saw more voters than a presidential contest.

( PHOTOS: Nancy Pelosi’s career)

“History is against them,” said Michael McDonald, associate professor of government and politics at George Mason University who has studied turnout trends. “You can never say never … but I think the evidence is still against the Democrats on this.”

There’s no question the Democratic agenda is an extension of the “war on women” narrative that Democrats have been using to slam Republicans, quite effectively, in recent elections. But now, it’s been broadened to include economic issues that Democrats argue Republicans have been ignoring.

As House Democrats start their annual retreat on Wednesday in Cambridge, Md., Pelosi argues that they should focus intensely on issues of pay equity, preventing women from being fired or demoted while pregnant or on maternity leave, and extending scholarships for single women who want to further their education. The retreat will include a presentation titled “Unmarried Women: They Will Elect You if You Get it Right,” led by Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D-Conn.).

( WATCH: Nancy Pelosi and her daughter at 'Women Rule' event)

In an interview, Pelosi insisted she is more interested in passing legislation than winning elections. Yet Pelosi also knows that turning out women is critical to any chance of winning in swing districts this year, including in New York, New Jersey, California and New Mexico. The Voter Participation Center, which seeks to increase the number of unmarried women voters, estimates that 22 million fewer female, minority and young voters will go to the polls this year than in 2012, a staggering drop-off. One-third of those will be unmarried women, the VPC suggests.

“I say it all the time — we’d rather [Republicans] pass a minimum wage and pay-equity act and consider that our victory,” Pelosi added. “If they would just listen and not have it be invisible to them, which it is right now … then we believe we can change some of the votes here.”

Pelosi is convinced that these issues would pass the House easily if Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) simply allowed them to get a vote.

( WATCH: O'Reilly reporter confronts Pelosi)

“We know that we would pass a minimum wage [increase] if it were allowed to come to the floor. We would,” Pelosi said. “We know that we would pass universal pre-K, if we could get it to the floor.”

Pelosi has done more than two dozen events across the country to talk up her six-part agenda, with more planned soon. And rank-and-file House Democrats, including some male Democrats facing women challengers, are playing it up as well, hoping to exploit the “gender gap” between the GOP and Democrats.

“This economic agenda not only unites our party and motivates our base, it contrasts our fight for the middle class with Republicans’ reckless and irresponsible agenda that robs women of their health care rights and ignores their struggle for equal pay,” said Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee Chairman Steve Israel.

Slammed by pro-Republican outside groups, Senate Democrats are focusing on mobilizing women, younger voters and minority groups. Obama got huge applause from House Democrats when he mentioned pay equity for women as part of his State of the Union address, and the Labor Department has launched its own women’s agenda, focusing heavily on a minimum wage boost.

Republicans, for their part, aren’t convinced the tactics being employed by Pelosi or other Democratic leaders will have any benefit come Election Day. GOP leaders look at the polling on Obamacare, as well as Obama’s own weakness on economic issues, and the traditional “six-year itch” facing incumbent presidents, and they see a big opportunity to expand their majority.

“This is clearly a defensive maneuver by Democrats since they are losing support from women who are feeling firsthand the devastating effects of Obamacare,” said Liesl Hickey, executive director of the National Republican Congressional Committee.

Yet House Republicans can read the polls too, and they know they’ve got a problem with women. POLITICO reported in early December, the leadership has begun efforts to teach the GOP rank and file how to speak to women voters. The NRCC has held similar events for both incumbents and challengers.

The NRCC also has recruited a record number of female candidates this election cycle. Currently, there are at least 14 Republican women running in competitive races this year, according to NRCC officials.

A December memo from Democracy Corps, Women’s Voices Women Vote Action Fund and VPC argued that highlighting positions such as raising the minimum wage and other pocketbook issues are key to driving up support among women for Democrats.

CORRECTION: Corrected by: Kourtney Geers @ 02/13/2014 09:32 AM Correction: The Voter Participation Center estimates that 22 million fewer female, minority and young voters will go to the polls in 2014, not 30 million as was originally reported.