The ridesharing service Uber and the Pima County Attorney's Office are teaming up to provide a safe transportation alternative for people during the holidays.

"It’s holiday time, a time for joy and celebration. Some of the most dangerous days of the year on our roads are between Thanksgiving and New Year’s Day. This year, in a new and unique collaboration, the Pima County Attorney’s Office is partnering with Uber to give a gift of a free ride to folks so they can put safety first and celebrate the holidays responsibly," Pima County Attorney Barbara LaWall said in a news release.

According to a release from the Pima County Attorney's Office, Uber is offering first-time riders $20 off their first ride, which for many may make the first ride free.

"The Pima County Attorney’s Office is relentless in our pursuit to stop the carnage and to eradicate drinking and driving on our streets and highways. We are proud to partner with Uber in this effort to provide a free ride to keep our streets safe this holiday season," LaWall said. She said she hopes "people will enjoy their holiday celebrations and also be responsible and take a free ride."

New users can access the free $20 ride credit by downloading the Uber app, setting up an account, and entering the promo code FREETRIP. Existing users can qualify to win $100 in Uber Credits on New Year’s Eve by entering the promo code EGGNOGAZ. For every new user who signs up with the promo code and takes a ride, Uber will donate $5 to the Arizona Chapter of Mothers Against Drunk Driving. This free ride opportunity ends after Jan. 1, 2016. http://t.uber.com/dontdui

Steve Thompson, Uber Arizona General Manager, said “Uber is thrilled to partner with the Pima County Attorney's Office and MADD AZ to help reduce DUIs in Arizona. Uber is dedicated to providing reliable transportation options to individuals across Pima County to ensure riders get home safely this holiday season.”

“With so many reliable and accessible options at people’s fingertips, like Uber, there is no excuse for anyone to drink and drive. We encourage Arizona residents to use the Uber new user promo code FREETRIP to get a safe ride home this holiday season,” said Jason Frazier, MADD Arizona Program Director. “MADD thanks Uber and Pima County Attorney's Office for their continued efforts for safer roads in Arizona.”

For more information on how to stop Impaired Driving visit http://www.madd.org/.

Copyright 2015 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.