It's a busy Monday in presidential politics. Gov. Bobby Jindal took another formal step toward announcing his long-expected candidacy, Sen. Lindsey Graham announced his intention to seek the Republican nomination, and Jon Karl of ABC News is reporting that Ohio Gov. John Kasich is "virtually certain" to throw his hat into the ring:





John Kasich is “virtually certain” to jump into the race for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination, sources close to the Ohio governor tell ABC News. Kasich has said his wife and daughters have given him a green light to run and in recent days Kasich has told his political advisors to begin preparing for a likely campaign. Kasich travels to New Hampshire in early June and recently did a fundraising trip to California. If he makes the final decision to run, he will make the announcement in late June or July.

By and large, Kasich remains the deeply conservative politician he has always been: the government-slashing deficit obsessive who drove Democrats bonkers as chairman of the House Budget Committee in the 1990s. "He was Paul Ryan before Paul Ryan," praises antitax crusader Grover Norquist. As Ohio's chief executive, Kasich has eliminated the estate tax, cut income-tax rates, tightened food-stamp requirements, cut school funding, and championed business deregulation. He signed into law new restrictions on both abortion rights and voting rights, and, during his first year in office, launched a (failed) crusade to geld public-sector unions—similar to the one that Scott Walker led in Wisconsin. Three months ago, Kasich set his sights beyond Ohio, embarking on a national tour lobbying state lawmakers to call a constitutional convention aimed at ratifying a balanced-budget amendment.

But the governor is also prone to jabbing his finger in the eye of his base with moves like raising infrastructure spending, increasing tax breaks for low-income residents, championing a fracking tax on oil and gas producers, pushing to hike cigarette taxes, making education funding more redistributive, increasing spending on mental-health care, mandating insurance coverage for autism, or commuting death sentences. And of course there's the granddaddy of betrayals: Medicaid expansion, which Kasich rammed through over opposition from Ohio's Republican-controlled Legislature.