HOUSE returns with no budget fix on docket -- RAUNER accused of having ‘imaginary friends’ -- CHICAGO crime crisis goes national

By Natasha Korecki (nkorecki@politico.com; @natashakorecki) with Manuela Tobias (mtobias@politico.com; @manuelatobiasm)

Good Monday morning, Illinois. After a lengthy break, lawmakers in the Illinois House are back in session today and, with the primary behind them, after 10 months of not having a budget, upon facing a human services crisis and threats of higher ed closures and repeated credit rating downgrades, lawmakers are finally prepared to … take up fantasy sports betting.

Story Continued Below

To be fair, also on the list for action today: banning drones that could deliver prison contraband.

According to the AP, there is a long list of potential legislation for committee action on the docket, but solving the budget crisis is not among them.

AP: “The Illinois House returns to action Monday with a long list of legislation slated for committee hearings — but none about the unsettled budget that should have taken effect last July. Bills up for consideration include regulation of daily fantasy sports betting and easing access to police video under the Freedom of Information Act. There is a bill requiring warning labels on medicinal marijuana to provide buyers information about side effects of marijuana use. Other legislation would criminalize cyberbullying by parents, ban drone flights when they could potentially deliver prison contraband. A little over eight weeks remains in the scheduled spring session, and Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner and Democrats who control the Legislature remain deadlocked on spending priorities and how to close a massive deficit.” http://bit.ly/1Ya0BeN

THEY’RE BAAAAAACK -- “Statehouse Insider: Nice to see you again, let's have a chat," by State Journal-Register’s Doug Finke: “Both the House and Senate will be back in Springfield this week after taking some time off to rest up from the furious pace of the first couple of months of 2016. The Senate is coming back from a two-week break, while the House will return from a month off that’s been the subject of a fair amount of criticism from Gov. Bruce Rauner and Republicans in the legislature.” http://bit.ly/233Zy71

Some of the latest issues to come to light:

STATE’S ARMORED CAR ‘FOUL-UP’ RAISES SECURITY, MONEY ISSUES -- “Ill. budget mess implicates safety with armored-pickup halt,” by AP's John O'Connor: "After four months hauling cash from Illinois driver’s facilities without payment from the state, an armored-truck company walked last fall, leaving the job to police officers who work for the secretary of state. Montreal-based GardaWorld's trucks started rolling again after the state paid the overdue $79,000 amid a record budget standoff. But that only covered work through last Friday, so almost as quickly as the mess was resolved, the state could find itself in the same predicament again. While the state's 10-month deadlock has forced deep spending cuts on human services and education programs, the armored car foul-up has raised security and efficiency implications for the state's handling of many thousands of dollars.” http://bit.ly/1PPYYgi

NO MONEY TO PAY FOR BIG CHANGES AT DCFS -- “Troubled DCFS outlines major overhaul, but budget crisis could hurt plans," by Chicago Tribune's Duaa Eldeib: "In an ambitious effort to repair Illinois' beleaguered child welfare system, state officials have laid out a wide-ranging reform plan that includes extensive worker retraining, expanded access to mental health services and a substantial reduction in the number of juvenile wards in residential treatment centers. The plan by the state Department of Children and Family Services comes at the behest of a federal judge and a court-appointed panel of experts who concluded that an urgent, sweeping transformation of the embattled agency is necessary — an effort the state’s lingering budget stalemate could undermine, even with a court order protecting the agency's funding.” http://trib.in/1PQ24Rr

SPEAKER SPOX ACCUSES RAUNER OF HAVING ‘IMAGINARY FRIENDS’ -- “Bernard Schoenburg: Rauner: 'Dozens' of businesses on way, if only,” State Journal-Register: “Gov. Bruce Rauner apparently knows of a bunch of companies ready to come to Illinois, if only the majority party in the General Assembly would give him some of what he wants. 'I’ve been traveling the nation, lookin’ for companies to come,' Republican Rauner said last week at the AutoZone distribution center in Danville. ‘I’ve got dozens of ’em ready to come. They said, ‘Governor, can you change the regulations and get the government so it stops running these deficits and is actually workin’ for the people of this state? If you could do that, I’ll come.’ …

Questions about recruiting trips -- “Rauner often speaks ill of the big city’s political pull, though he has a couple of condos in a building there. He also lives in the Executive Mansion in Springfield, and his Winnetka home remains his voting address. ‘He seems to be talking about recruiting trips,’ said Madigan spokesman STEVE BROWN, of the governor’s Danville comments. ‘I’m not aware of any of those, are you? That sounds like another instance of the governor and his imaginary friends at work.’” http://bit.ly/1RWl6gv

KEEP PEOPLE IN DARK, MAKE MONEY -- “Illinois Late License Plate Fees Near $5M Without Reminders,” NBC Chicago: “Thanks to the cash-strapped state’s decision to stop mailing renewal reminders, Illinois motorists have paid nearly $5 million this year for failing to renew vehicle license plates on time, more than double the amount collected in the same three-month span last year. Fines reached $1.9 million in March alone, according to the latest figures provided to The Associated Press on Friday by the secretary of state's office. In March 2015, the state collected just more than $818,000 in fines.” http://bit.ly/25Fv8GM

RAUNER, RAHM TARGETS IN CTU WALKOUT -- “CTU ends one-day strike with downtown rally," by Catalyst Chicago: “Thousands of Chicago Teachers Union members took to the streets today for a one-day strike that sought to connect the financial troubles at Chicago Public Schools with the broader impacts of the state-wide budget impasse on low-income families, particularly in regards to higher education. The strike — which CPS officials have asked a state labor board to declare illegal — effectively shut down the school system, forcing parents to find alternative care for their children for the second Friday in a row. A week ago the cash-strapped district cancelled school in order to furlough workers and save money." http://bit.ly/1pYsYkW

RAUNER CALLS WALKOUT ‘HEIGHT OF ARROGANCE’ -- Chicago Tribune: “Rauner — a primary target of hours of protests throughout the city — denounced the CTU's strike as the 'height of arrogance.' CPS and CTU agree on a need for help from Springfield. But so far there has been no consensus, publicly anyway, on legislation that would increase funding to the district. The dispute is less about whether to spend more money on education — Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel, Rauner and state lawmakers generally agree that schools should be better funded — than it is about how to achieve a funding increase.” http://trib.in/1SLX0lq

Welcome to the POLITICO Illinois Playbook. Have a tip, event, announcement, endorsement? Send to nkorecki@politico.com or @natashakorecki

SUBSCRIBE to Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1NTMQid

MEDICAL POT CAUTION -- “Bill seeks warning labels on medical pot products," by The Associated Press' Ivan Moreno: “Medical marijuana in Illinois would be required to carry warning labels about possible side effects under a bill proposed by a Republican lawmaker. Rep. Dwight Kay said the goal is to treat medical marijuana like other prescription drugs that warn patients about possible adverse effects. His bill, which is up for a House committee vote Monday, doesn't specify what warnings should be on the products, leaving it to the state health department to decide. But Kay said he would like to see warnings about how marijuana can cause drowsiness and impaired driving, and that it can affect pregnancies.” http://bit.ly/239It81

MEDICAL POT TRIUMPH -- “Marijuana extract reduced seizures in kids with epilepsy: study,” by Chicago Tribune’s Robert McCoppin: “A marijuana extract significantly reduced seizures in severely epileptic children, according to a landmark study conducted in part at Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago. Supporters said the results greatly improve the chances for the drug, called Epidiolex, to win eventual approval by federal regulators for prescription use to treat Dravet syndrome, a debilitating type of epilepsy that strikes in early childhood. The drug would be the first derived from the marijuana plant to win such approval …

100 days without a seizure: “In the case of one patient in the trial at Lurie, 5-year-old Caleb Yunk, the disease has not been as severe but caused chronic seizures that led to difficulties with skills such as running, jumping and balancing … In the trial, Caleb swallowed about 3 milligrams of a strawberry-flavored syrup twice a day. Once he started treatment, his parents said, the Milwaukee-area boy went 100 days without a seizure, and those he did have lasted less than half as long. Because Caleb's seizures can be triggered by overheating, his parents had kept him indoors on hot days but on the drug, he showed enough progress to go swimming with his friends.” http://trib.in/1PQcDE1

CITY

HOW THE MAYOR SPENDS HIS TIME -- “Rahm’s meeting skeds show juggling act in, out of City Hall,” by Chicago Sun-Times' Fran Spielman: “In the three-week run-up to his stunning selection of a new police superintendent, Mayor Rahm Emanuel juggled Chicago’s pension, policing and school funding crises with a heavy dose of image building. Mayoral schedules, released in response to a Freedom of Information request by the Chicago Sun-Times, show the daily balancing act that factors into how the mayor chooses to spend his time, whom he spends that time with and even the restaurants where he chooses to dine with ‘a friend,’ as the records put it."

Where Rahm dines, with ‘a friend’: “Lunches, dinners and drinks ‘with a friend’ were held at an array of restaurants that included Cochon Volant, Chicago Cut, Vivo, Coco Pazzo, Picolo Sogno Due, Beatrix, Swift and Sons, The Gage, Cherry Circle at the Chicago Athletic Club, the Standard Club, and at the Allium Bar at the Four Seasons Hotel. In an apparent attempt to rehabilitate Emanuel’s public image, the three-week schedule is sprinkled with loads of media interviews and meetings with unidentified reporters labeled ‘OTR’ or off the record.”http://bit.ly/1qifRf8

BESIDES NOT OWNING A CAR? -- “How to get out of a ticket in Chicago,” by Time Out Chicago’s Clayton Guse: “Owning a car in Chicago can be a pretty expensive luxury. Between the cost of a city sticker, high gas prices and annual maintenance to fix the damage that comes with winter, driving in Chicago can cost an arm and a leg. When you tack on hundreds of dollars in parking and red light camera tickets, you're probably better off selling your vehicle." http://bit.ly/1RyH4UP

CHICAGO’S CRISIS OF VIOLENCE

CHICAGO JUMP IN KILLINGS ‘EXTREME’ COMPARED TO OTHER CITIES -- “Chicago’s staggering rise in gun violence and killings,” by Washington Post's Mark Berman: Violence is occurring at levels unseen for years. In the first quarter of 2016, 141 people were killed, up from 82 last year ... shootings surged to 677 from 359 a year earlier … The department says most of the increase in violence stems from gang members using illegally acquired guns and is largely geographically clustered around the city’s southern and western portions. (The city has also reported spikes in other crime categories across the board, including sexual assaults, robberies, batteries and thefts.) ...

Other cities not as extreme; NYC murders down -- “This year is on track to far outpace the city’s number of killings in 2015, which is a particularly worrisome fact considering that Chicago had more murders that year than any other city in the United States, according to the Brennan Center for Justice. Other large cities that saw increases in killings last year have not seen jumps as extreme as Chicago’s this year. The Los Angeles Police Department said that as of last week, there had been 67 homicides, up from 54 last year. Philadelphia said it had 63 homicide victims through Thursday, up from 62 a year ago. In New York, police reported a decrease — 60 murders as of March 20, down from 75 a year earlier.” http://wapo.st/1ZXTCah

DID SELFIE VIDEO RECORD MAN’S OWN SHOOTING? -- “Does a Video Glimpse Into Chicago’s Year of Violence?" by New York Times' Monica Davey: “As the video begins, a man in a baseball cap and sweatshirt is on a street, moving in a circle as he talks into a camera he seems to be holding. Suddenly the sounds of pops, one after the next, interrupt. The camera flips to different views, then lands face up, pointed to the sky, as a gunman steps into clear view, still shooting. It is a jarring, disturbing, highly cinematic video, and the police are trying to determine whether it really is what it looks like: a selfie video that inadvertently recorded the man’s own shooting. Since it emerged Thursday night, the video has taken off on social media." http://nyti.ms/1SLUuvM

THOSE WHO TAUGHT CHICAGO’S FINEST -- “WATCHDOGS: 2 Koschman cops led training while under investigation,” by Chicago Sun-Times' Tim Novak and Chris Fusco: “Sgt. Samuel Cirone is fighting a one-year suspension from the Chicago Police Department over his role in the creation of a bogus police report that shielded former Mayor Richard M. Daley’s nephew from criminal charges in the death of David Koschman. Lt. Denis P. Walsh — who was once accused of sexually assaulting a gas station clerk in Michigan and ended up pleading guilty to lesser charges — admitted stashing Koschman case files at his Northwest Side bungalow. That blunder led him to retire in February rather than be fired.” http://bit.ly/1M977S5

MURDER, SHOOTING HORRIFY ‘QUIET’ IRVING PARK -- “Weekend Violence Rocks Irving Park; Stabbing, Shooting Were Targeted: Cops,” by DNAinfo's Patty Wetli: “A fatal stabbing on Friday that left one man dead and a shooting on Saturday that left another man in critical condition stunned residents of the normally quiet community of Old Irving Park over the weekend. As word of the incidents spread via social media, neighbors called the violence ‘horrifying’ and ‘out of control’ and expressed fear for how much worse things might get during the warmer summer months.” http://dnain.fo/1UCiLaP

NATION

2 OF 5 FEMALE MANAGERS DON’T SEE ROOM TO GROW IN THEIR JOBS -- “Best places to work for women,” by Crain's Cassi Walker Burke and Sabrina Gasulla: "A new survey commissioned by Crain's and executive women's group the Chicago Network reveals a startling statistic: Of the 1,000-plus women who took the survey, 42 percent voluntarily left positions within the past five years because they didn’t feel recognized and didn’t see opportunities for advancement. That's 2 women for every 5 across a breadth of industries who are highly concentrated in management, upper management and the C-suite." http://bit.ly/239IEAl

NOT LOVIN IT - -“‘Fight for 15' campaign to target McDonald's stores April 14," Chicago Tribune: "McDonald's customers stopping in for a Big Mac on the eve of Tax Day may be greeted by demonstrators calling for pay of $15 an hour and a union. Labor organizers say they're planning another day of strikes and protests exclusively targeting McDonald's stores in dozens of cities on April 14, following similar demonstrations outside a variety of fast-food restaurants a year ago. The move is intended to build on a campaign to lift wages and revitalize union enrollment by spotlighting working conditions at the world's biggest hamburger chain. Already, a wave of demonstrations that began in New York City in late 2012 has made low pay a major political issue and helped spur the passage of higher local minimum wages around the country." http://trib.in/1UOzgRA

TRUMP’s NATO VETO -- “Donald Trump Defends Proposals to Deconstruct U.S. Military Treaty With Europe," by Wall Street Journal's Reid J. Epstein: "A relatively subdued Donald Trump on Saturday offered a lengthy defense of his proposals to deconstruct the American military treaty with European allies. The Republican presidential front-runner offered his critique of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization as part of a broadside against Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, who leads him in polling ahead of Tuesday’s Wisconsin primary. Mr. Trump said he would ask European nations for retroactive compensation for American contributions to the alliance." http://on.wsj.com/1PQ1TWe

45% OF THOSE ELIGIBLE DON’T VOTE -- “Sanders, Trump, and the Rise of the Non-Voters,” by The New Yorker's Benjamin Wallace-Wells: "In the past three Presidential elections, about forty-five per cent of those eligible to vote chose not to. And although this fact has been the subject of some public-spirited anxiety, it has generally not troubled political scientists too much, because it seemed as if non-voters had more or less the same view of the parties as voters did. Stretch the electorate to two-thirds of those eligible, or three-quarters, or make voting mandatory, and it has long seemed that the votes would be distributed in roughly equivalent proportions: about half the vote for Democrats, half for Republicans, with some variability reserved for the shape of current events.” http://bit.ly/239ITva

TRUMP’s ‘REVEALING’ WAPO INTERVIEW -- “In a revealing interview, Trump predicts a ‘massive recession’ but intends to eliminate the national debt in 8 years,” by The Washington Post's Bob Woodward and Robert Costa: "Donald Trump said in an interview that economic conditions are so perilous that the country is headed for a ‘very massive recession’ and that 'it’s a terrible time right now' to invest in the stock market, embracing a distinctly gloomy view of the economy that counters mainstream economic forecasts. The New York billionaire dismissed concern that his comments — which are exceedingly unusual, if not unprecedented, for a major party front-runner — could potentially affect financial markets. 'I know the Wall Street people probably better than anybody knows them,' said Trump, who has misfired on such predictions in the past. 'I don’t need them.'" http://wapo.st/1VooWyh

PALIN ‘BOMBED’ IN WISCONSIN -- “Rambling Sarah Palin confuses GOP dinner in Milwaukee,” by Philly.com's Thomas Fitzgerald: "The more Sarah Palin talked, the more frequently Republicans seated at long banquet tables in Serb Hall checked their phones. There were eye rolls, titters and some laughter – though not the good kind. Palin bombed Friday night. Four days before the pivotal Wisconsin primary, she was a surrogate for Donald J. Trump at the annual fish-fry fundraiser for the Milwaukee GOP, attended by 750 Republicans. Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, who polls suggest could crush Trump on Tuesday, was there, as was Ohio Gov. John Kasich. Both were well-received, especially Cruz, with his Constitution-thumping sermon and a joke that it was “not fair to train wrecks” to compare Trump to one." http://bit.ly/1S0yPgb

GOP ‘SIDESHOW’ -- “The Republicans’ Gay Freakout," by The New York Times' Frank Bruni: "Our infrastructure is inexcusable, much of our public education is miserable and one of our leading presidential candidates is a know-nothing, say-anything egomaniac who yanks harder every day at the tattered fabric of civil discourse and fundamental decency in this country. But let’s by all means worry about the gays! Let’s make sure they know their place. Keep them in check and all else falls into line, or at least America notches one victory amid so many defeats. That must be the thinking behind Republican efforts to push through so-called religious liberty laws and other legislation — most egregiously in North Carolina — that excuse and legitimize anti-gay discrimination. They’re cynical distractions. Politically opportunistic sideshows.” http://nyti.ms/1RTvP8p

BUST MY BUFFERS! -- “Thomas the Tank Engine is becoming more diverse and Daily Mail readers are furious," by Indy 100's Ellen Stewart in offbeat: "Thomas The Tank Engine creators, Mattel, has announced that 14 new and diverse trains will be introduced to the show and merchandise range. The cartoon locomotives will apparently, as the Daily Mail reports ‘give the show a multicultural edge’ and are a ‘far cry from the original set’.

New international cast: Carlos from Mexico, Ashima of India, Yong Bao of China and Raul from Brazil. The move has been met with criticism... First from researcher in social justice and pop culture, Tracy Van Slyke who has previously criticised the show for having a 'little white boss' dictate what tasks the engines do. She told The Telegraph: I applaud the idea, but am concerned about execution. There is a danger in reducing very complex countries and peoples to singular characteristics. If the trains are only defined by cultural stereotypes, the result will be a calculated, and destructive, nod to diversity and inclusivity. And secondly, by Daily Mail readers, who have completely lost it: Because why would they do this to a British institution?" http://bit.ly/1Xau5J9

GNR AT SOLDIER FIELD -- “Guns N' Roses Coming To Chicago's Soldier Field This Summer,” by DNAinfo's David Matthews: “Guns N' Roses has new tour dates, including one this summer in Chicago. The legendary rock band will play July 1 at Soldier Field. Tickets to the general public will go on sale at 10 a.m. Friday, April 8. The band is touring again this year after a long hiatus, and posted its tour dates to its website Friday. Check out the Guns N' Roses website for more details.” http://dnain.fo/1PQ2h73

HAPPY HAWKS -- Patrick Kane with a hat trick, Coach Q notches 800th win: http://bit.ly/1SLVIHm

‘DYNASTIC LOSERS’ -- “The Chicago Cubs and the New Baseball," by The Atlantic's Robert O'Connell: ".. Everyone has hope, but the types of hope differ, and they hurt in different ways if unfulfilled. The Chicago Cubs hope in just about every way you can think of. Most obviously, they are dynastic losers, having failed to win a World Series in the last 107 years or even to appear in one in the last 71. They serve as shorthand for every malady from bad luck to institutional backwardness to supernatural curses. So the team and its fans alike, judging by press conferences and conversations, seem to be wishing for a change in fortune in that guarded way that allows for maximum protection from disappointment while leaving the possibility of euphoria just open." http://theatln.tc/1qifRMi

WBBM IN MOURNING -- A WBBM Newsradio anchor died Sunday morning in a single-vehicle crash on Interstate 65 in Merrillville, Indiana. David L. Mitchell, 60, was at the wheel ... when the vehicle veered off to the left and crashed into a concrete median ... There were no signs of the vehicle braking before the crash ... Investigators think Mitchell might have had a medical incident before the crash ... Mitchell had worked for WBBM since 1992 as a traffic reporter, anchor and a weekend sports reporter … 'Dave Mitchell was a bright, thoughtful and eager veteran journalist; a consummate professional. He was one of the good guys, dedicated to his craft whether in studio or overlooking the Chicago Air and Water Show where he thrived. We loved him, and will miss him greatly,' said WBBM Newsradio Managing Editor Julie Mann in an article on the WBBM/CBS Chicago website."http://bit.ly/1PQdbtr

TODAY -- City Club of Chicago: James R. Reilly, Senior Fellow, Metropolitan Planning Council: “The Third Deficit: Illinois' Transportation Crisis. 11:30 a.m. reception, noon luncheon.

THIS WEEK: ADVERTISING LAW & POLICY CONFERENCE -- April 6-7: "Top lawyers and regulators will be tackling pressing issues on data security, tax reform, ad blocking and ethics. The conference will include keynotes by Illinois Attorney General Lisa Madigan and Director of the Federal Trade Commission’s Bureau of Consumer Protection Jessica L. Rich. Panel discussions will include conversations with the counsel of leading brands like Google, Fiat Chrysler, Oracle, General Electric, Dunkin’ Brands and Liberty Mutual." Westin Chicago River North. Register here: http://bit.ly/1ou0y14

OTHER EVENTS (courtesy of Intelligent Events, @CHI_IntellEvent)

MONDAY - Medicaid Expansion and the Affordable Care Act: A Fiscal Checkup - Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago - “This panel will explore the experience of states that have chosen to expand coverage like Illinois, states that have chosen not to fully expand like Wisconsin and states like Indiana and Michigan that have waivers from the federal government to implement special versions of ACA Medicaid expansion. How has expanding or not expanding Medicaid affected budgets and health outcomes in these states?”

TUESDAY - Leanne Redden, Executive Director, Regional Transportation Authority - City Club of Chicago - “Leanne Redden is the RTA executive director. Prior to her position, she served as the RTA’s acting executive director and was also the senior deputy executive director of planning, managing the RTA’s planning department. Crumbling infrastructure, rusted through "el" supports, and corroding overpass supports should be addressed in this talk.”

- The Fight to Vote - “Michael Waldman, President of the Brennan Center for Justice and author of The Fight to Vote, will focus in on voting, money in politics, redistricting, electoral dysfunction – and how the very integrity of our democracy is on the ballot in 2016.”

- Legacy Cities: What are They and Why Do We Care? - Institute of Politics - “This talk will lay out how legacy cities developed: the critical industrial sectors that were their economic engines and the natural resources that attracted industry and remain assets today; these cities’ physical and political development; and how and when their decline began.”

WEDNESDAY - A Crisis In Confidence: Police, Chicago Public Schools, Finances, Mayor's Ability To Lead - City Club of Chicago - “Dan Mihalopoulos, Mary Mitchell, and Fran Spielman discuss the multiple problems besetting Chicago, Rahm, and city governance.”

-- From Berlusconi to Trump: Tycoons in Contemporary Politics - “Institute of Politics - In a series of five seminars, award-winning Italian journalist Maria Latella will cover how former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's rise to power is a blueprint for Donald Trump's popularity. Explore the tycoon-turned-politician model from its beginnings in America with Ross Perot, to Berlusconi, to French businessman Bernard Tapie, through to today’s successes of Donald Trump.”

THURSDAY - How the Immigration Debate Affects U.S. Presidential Elections - 7pm - Wheaton College - “Is immigration a win for the Democrats or Republicans? Ana Navarro is a CNN and ABC News Contributor and GOP strategist. Navarro served as Jeb Bush's first Director of Immigration Policy in the Executive Office of the Governor. Ruben Navarrette, Jr. is a syndicated journalist who has written extensively on immigration for CNN, Washington Post and NPR.”

UPCOMING

ILLINOIS BUDGET TALK -- April 11: 10 a.m. Defining the Essential Priorities; Illinois Campaign for Political Reform http://bit.ly/25fIREc

POLITICS OF TWITTER -- “Political Communication In The Age Of Twitter: How Social Media Is Changing Campaigns And Political Journalism” -- April 12, 5:15 p.m. at DePaul University, moderated by Christopher Bury: http://bit.ly/1MTXWzH

CHICAGO CHEF WEEK -- April 17-22: Celebrates Chicago’s chefs and the city’s dynamic culinary scene, more than 100 restaurants will participate by offering a three-course prix-fixe menu for lunch or a four-course prix-fixe for dinner. Click here for reservations.

SPOTLIGHT IN CHICAGO -- The real reporters featured in the movie “Spotlight” are attending the Better Government Association May 16 awards event. For more info: http://bit.ly/1TgRNFy

Where’s Rahm? No public events.

Where’s Rauner? In the morning, visiting St. Charles East High School Career Day at the Norris Cultural Arts Center. Talking funding and education reforms.

** A message from Nuclear Matters: Some of America’s existing nuclear energy plants face early closure due to current economic and policy conditions. Providing more than 62% of America’s carbon-free electricity, existing, state-of-the-art nuclear energy plants play a vital role in achieving our clean-energy and carbon reduction goals.

In Illinois, our nuclear energy plants provide 48 percent of the state’s electricity and 90 percent of our carbon-free electricity. The existing nuclear energy plants also contribute nearly $9 billion to the economy and support approximately 28,000 direct and indirect jobs.

But today Illinois doesn’t properly value these plants for their carbon-free contributions, placing them in economic jeopardy. Without support from Illinois policymakers for the Next Generation Energy Plan to close this gap, two plants – Clinton and Quad Cities – could be forced to close, jeopardizing thousands of jobs along with many other economic and environmental benefits. Learn more at NuclearMatters.com **

FOR MORE political and policy news from POLITICO Illinois, visit: http://politi.co/1Ln6sIF

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw

NOW AVAILABLE: HARD TO ACCESS CAMPAIGN DETAILS - POLITICO Pro, POLITICO’s premium solution for policy professionals offers Campaign Pro. Get breaking news and analysis about this season’s unconventional presidential race, as well as developments about this year’s most competitive House, Senate and gubernatorial races. You’ll also have access to the Campaign Pro Race Dashboard, giving you all of the facts about specific races in one, convenient place. The dashboard provides campaign details such as: current consultant rosters, the latest polling numbers and race summaries written by Pro’s Campaign Pro reporters. Beyond the 2016 cycle, you’ll continue to receive coverage that provides you with a behind-the-curtain look at potential races, including insight about candidate/consulting firm partnerships forming behind the scenes, and about all fundraising efforts. Request your Campaign Pro demo today.