Nicky at the International Orangutan Center at the Indianapolis Zoo. The eight orangutans got to meet the local media Thursday morning at the zoo. The official opening of the center will be on Memorial Day weekend. (Photo: Matt Kryger / The Star)

We came to see them, but they were just as interested to see us.

The Indianapolis Zoo invited media representatives last week to take a sneak peek at its International Orangutan Center, scheduled to open to the public on Memorial Day weekend.

Katy, Knobi and Rocky moseyed right up to the window and peered intently into visitors' eyes. Their noses formed condensation on the glass, the only thing that separated the two species.

Such close encounters with the center's auburn occupants are just part of what will make a visit to the $26 million center so special.

"I can't think of another facility that rivals this one," said Rob Shumaker, vice president of conservation and life sciences for the zoo. "This is truly an exceptional facility." Shumaker has worked with orangutans for three decades.

The space houses eight orangutans, but not all will necessarily be visible to the public at all times. The exhibit space, which is larger than two NFL football fields, also features areas where the animals can go when they desire some privacy.

For the past few weeks, the orangutans have been getting to know their new home. The first time they were in it, they were predictably cautious, with Azy, the oldest of the crew, leading the way, Shumaker said.

They climbed ladders to reach perches. They swung from side to side on large hoses. They could amble above the visitor space on an enclosed bridge that takes them to another exhibit space. They even ascended to hang from the atrium's ceiling, their forms silhouetted against the morning light.

Azy, the 36-year-old male with hair that resembles dreadlocks, even showed off his vocal talents, hooting as he ascended a ladder to let his compatriots know where he was heading.

Once construction is complete, they will be able to traverse the Myrta Pulliam Hutan Trail — an outdoor network of cables, platforms and bridges that reaches 80 feet into the sky and is visible from various points Downtown.

When the exhibit opens, it will include The Skyline, an aerial cable ride that will allow visitors to get off the ground as well.

But don't expect it to look much like the rainforest, the habitat of orangutans in the wild in places such as Borneo or Sumatra.

The zoo's orangutans all were born in captivity or into the entertainment industry and would not be comfortable living deep in the rainforest.

"What we wanted to do was provide them all with a space that functions perfectly for their bodies," Shumaker said. "To me, the issue is not, 'Does it look like the forest?' but 'Does it function like it?' "

Stimulating the orangutans' minds is also key at the zoo.

The exhibit center includes rooms where scientists can work with orangutans, researching their cognitive abilities as the public watches.

Some orangutans enjoy finger painting or playing with computers, showing their number recognition or symbol recognition skills.

Orangutans eventually will control the lights on the Nina Mason Pulliam Beacon of Hope, a decorative 150-foot-high flourish on the center.

"The important thing is to keep them mentally challenged and healthy," Goodwin said.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1gfHyNe