Seattle has recently relinquished its status as America’s fastest-growing city — Austin, Texas takes the top spot — but the latest unemployment figures show that populous King and Snohomish counties are the economic engines driving Washington.

Unemployment in April was just 3.3 percent in King County and 3.6 percent in Snohomish County, according to figures from the state Employment Security Department. The rates are not seasonally adjusted, meaning there will be a rise as high school and college students complete their studies.

King County has reached its lowest jobless rate since April 2008, at the onset of the Great Recession. The county’s unemployment in April 2014 stood at 4.1 percent.

The preliminary statewide rate, seasonally adjusted, is 5.5 percent — one-tenth of a percentage point above the national average. It was well above 6 percent earlier this year.

During recent Seattle City Council candidate forums, questioning has centered on a single issue above all others: The rising cost of housing in a city that is booming and where people want to live. The housing task force named by Mayor Ed Murray is due to deliver its recommendations next month.

King and Snohomish are the state’s only counties with unemployment below 4 percent. Neighboring Pierce County is at 6.2 percent.

Three of the state’s 39 counties — Whitman, Asotin and San Juan — have jobless rates lower than 5 percent. Other areas at or below the national average include Whatcom and Walla Walla counties, both at 5.4 percent.

The technology economy is driving the state’s most prosperous areas.

By contrast, the state’s highest jobless figures come from counties dependent on the traditional resource economy, particularly timber harvesting.

The northeast corner of Washington remains its pocket of highest unemployment. With a jobless rate of 9.7 percent, Ferry County leads the state, with 8.6 percent unemployed in nearby Stevens and Pend Oreille counties.

In Southwest Washington, the unemployment rate in Grays Harbor County is 8.8 percent, with 8.4 percent jobless in Pacific County and 8.2 percent in Lewis County.

If the April figures are any indication, none of the economic calamities predicted by opponents of the $15-an-hour wage plans adopted by Seattle and SeaTac have come true.

Several of the state’s most prosperous counties — King, Snohomish, Whatcom, San Juan and Thurston — are among its most liberal voting areas. But conservative wheat-growing counties in Southeast Washington also have low unemployment.

The three hard-hit counties in Northeast Washington — Ferry, Stevens and Pend Oreille — have shown a higher-than-average dependence on social services. Yet, these areas are represented by the state’s most conservative U.S. House member, Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, R-Wash., who has voted for deep cuts in social programs and vocally demanded repeal of the Affordable Care Act.