When it comes to health care, most politicians claim to want the doctor-patient relationship to be at the forefront of decision-making. But doctors and patients are looking increasingly small next to the federal government and insurance companies that have grown and consolidated well beyond the status of "too big to fail."

Headlines this week about really, really big health insurers moving toward buying up somewhat smaller ones alarmed me. I pictured myself in my doctor's office, trying to talk to her while two colossal gorillas (the government and Anthem/Blue Cross) fight over how my cholesterol-rich blood is extracted, tested and fixed.

But maybe that's unfair. Maybe I really shouldn't characterize big insurance and big government as separate entities. Maybe there is just one gorilla in the room with me and my doctor. After all, my big insurance company is so very close to being a government entity already. Government tells my insurer how to do business (through extensive laws and regulations) and subsidizes it through numerous federal programs – namely, Medicare, Medicaid and Obamacare's individual subsidies.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

Unless we are uninsured (which is now prohibited, so, hey, we'd better be insured), none of us walk into the doctor's office alone. We are carried in, by the scruff of our neck, by our 800-pound gorilla of an insurance company. They are going to pay the doctor, so they have the power. I'm not crazy about that arrangement, but it's how the world works.

There are a few things we, and our doctors, can still control in this situation; one of which is whether we choose to use the language of the Obamacare-industrial complex. ( I'm using Obamacare here as a catch-all that covers the merging of government and big insurance.)

To highlight the creepiness of government and insurance companies ruling the examination room, I'd like to see patients, doctors and politicians engage in a more honest conversation about health care, starting with changing the words we use to talk about it.



[READ: Defying Gravity]

We can start with the term "health care" itself – a made up word that is intentionally misleading. It's misleading because the words "health" and "care," taken together, used to refer to medical treatment. Nowadays it's a substitute for health insurance. So "health care reform" and "health care policy" actually refer to health insurance regulation, not the practice of medicine.

In the interest of clarity and understanding – and to show the gorilla that I'm on to his power play – I'm ready to ditch the now-meaningless "health care" and "health insurance" altogether. When the receptionist at the doctor's office asks for my insurance card, I might say "Here is proof that a government-sponsored financial entity will pay for today's visit."

When I complain about the cost of my monthly health insurance premiums, I might say: "The monthly tax payment I'm making to a government-sponsored medical bill-pay company is really high; I'm struggling to afford it."



[READ: The Power of Prevention]