New store on Barberry Place will sell antique and refurbished furniture, collectibles and more

Annie Schoen, right, Jill Brunner and Sadie the dog pose Thursday outside Schoen's new store, Anna Bananas, which sells vintage, antique, consignment items at 146 Barberry Place in Loveland. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Annie Schoen, "top banana" at the new Anna Bananas shop in south Loveland, wants to emphasize community in her business.

"I'm very interested in involving the community in all we do," she said Tuesday, a few days before Anna Bananas' soft opening on July 4.

So in addition to selling antique and refurbished furniture, jewelry, lamps, tea sets, art and collectibles, the shop at 146 Barberry Place off Southwest 14th Street will host monthly gatherings.

The first such get-together will start at 8 p.m. July 24, right after closing time, when Schoen hosts her first bunco night.

She said bunco, a simple game played with dice, was popular with ranch women more than 100 years ago, who used monthly games to get to know neighbors and socialize.

Anna Bananas also will host tea parties and other events to involve members of the community, she said.

Schoen said she has been "collecting and being creative with whatever I find" for a long time. Before she decided to open her own shop, she sold her treasures at a booth at Treasure Cove Consignment in downtown Loveland.

Her merchandise comes from "here, there and everywhere," she said. She is selling some things on consignment as well.

Schoen lives with her family in a rural area near Carter Lake, and her two daughters ride horses, she said. A section of her store will focus on equine-related items such as Western and English riding boots, helmets, crops, saddles, clothing and more.

Advertisement

She said youngsters getting started in 4-H can face steep costs getting outfitted, and she wants to help out with reasonably priced clothing and supplies.

Schoen, who moved from Hawaii several years ago, also will feature the art of Hawaiian nature artist Patrick Ching.

"We're going to be doing so many different things," she said.

"I'm a firm believer in refurbishing and recycling, so I want to offer that type of a business to the community," she said. "You don't have to throw things out."

The store will be open noon to 6 p.m. Wednesday, noon to 8 p.m. Thursday, noon to 6 p.m. Friday and 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. Saturday.

For more information, call 970-775-7018 or go to https://facebook.com/pages/Anna-Bananas/1433840726885116" title="facebook.com">facebook.com/pages/Anna-Bananas/1433840726885116.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Craig Young at 970-635-3634 or cyoung@reporter-herald.com. Follow him at twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.