F iguring out how to make all Americans happy with their health care coverage is the modern-day equivalent of figuring out how to split the atom.

The difference is, somebody eventually did split the atom.

However, nobody seems that close to coming up with a universally accepted health care insurance system.

As it stands, health care coverage in the U.S. remains a mix of individual and company-sponsored plans, government programs, public-private partnerships and, for some Americans, none of the above.

Steve Neeleman and Jon Kessler don't claim to know how to please everyone. But they do say that there's a good, cost-effective option for most working Americans: health savings accounts, or HSAs.

Neeleman is the founder and vice-chairman ofHealthEquity ( HQY ), one of the leading HSA administrators in the country. Kessler is its president and CEO.

The company offers HSA products through a network of health plan and employer partnerships, including 20 of the 50 largest domestic health plans. As of Jan. 31, it had 1.4 million HSA members and around $2.4 billion in assets under management (AUM).

HSAs are tax-advantaged savings accounts available to people enrolled in high-deductible health plans. Because of the high deductibles, such plans paired with HSAs are less expensive for employers than traditional HMO or PPO plans.

Allure Of The HSA

The advantages to employees are that they can contribute money tax-free to HSAs, determining where and when the money should be spent, and then build up savings over time.

HSAs provide "a higher quality benefit at a lower price point," Kessler told IBD. "Both the employer and employee benefit from that."

He likens HSAs to auto insurance policies, in which consumers "tend to opt for the amount of insurance they need, but are also careful about how much they spend and how they handle the vehicle."

Similarly, people enrolled in HSA plans can save money by avoiding doctor visits for every little nick and sniffle. They might also be motivated to take better care of themselves if they have a finite number of dollars to spend before high deductibles kick in.

HSA plans have become increasingly popular among both employees and employers, says Neeleman -- who is a board-certified physician and former general and trauma surgeon.

"Employees have this unique, long-term benefit of being able to put money into an HSA and keep it there forever," Neeleman told IBD. "It grows tax-free, and they can spend it like a 401(k). Employers have this ability to say, 'I can save money but still offer a very high-quality benefit to attract the best workers.'"

HealthEquity estimates that around 17.5 million Americans are enrolled in HSA plans, and that number is growing about 20% a year. The figure is expected to reach around 50 million by 2020.

The Affordable Care Act (ACA), aka ObamaCare, has played a big role in that growth. Kessler says that key provisions in the ACA will drive HSAs "from being something that a lot have to something that is expected and part of virtually every employer's benefit program."

One of the ACA's provisions is a requirement that employers offer health insurance premiums that workers can afford. It makes HSAs more attractive to employees.

Another key provision is the so-called "Cadillac tax" due to take effect in 2018. It is a 40% excise tax on employers that provide high-cost health packages to workers -- something that employers can avoid with lower-cost HSA plans.

To help meet demand for HSAs, HealthEquity provides a variety of solutions to employers, individuals and health plans.

Its products and services include a cloud-based platform for members to make health saving and spending decisions, pay health care bills, compare treatment options and prices, receive personalized benefit and clinical information, earn wellness incentives, grow their savings and make investment choices.

HealthEquity also offers online-only investment advisory services through its Web-based HealthEquity Advisor tool, as well as programs that provide members with the ability to earn financial incentives for participating in wellness programs.

It earns account fees from employers, individuals and insurance companies, with employers providing the lion's share of revenue.

The company has posted eight straight quarters of 30%-or-better revenue growth.

In a report, Barrington Research analyst Alexander Paris noted that HealthEquity's "strong growth in both HSA members and in AUM demonstrates that employers continue to embrace the HSA model."

A Wide Playing Field

HealthEquity operates in a fragmented market that includes more than 2,200 banks offering HSAs. It mainly competes against state or federally chartered banks, insurance companies and non-bank trustees approved by the Treasury Department.

In SEC filings, HealthEquity said that it had a market share around 9% as of the end of the 2014 calendar year and is among the five largest HSA custodians by market share. The others are Webster Bank, owned byWebster Financial ( WBS ); Optum Bank; the BenefitWallet product byXerox ( XRX ) HR Solutions; andWells Fargo Bank ( WFC ).

HealthEquity had its initial public offering on July 31 at an IPO price of 14. The stock now trades near 26. HealthEquity has an IBD Composite Rating of 90 (out of a possible 99) and is in the Commercial Services-Healthcare group, which ranks No. 125 of 197 industries tracked. Other leaders, though not as high in Composite Rating, areTeam Health Holdings ( TMH ) andPremier (PINC).

In March, HealthEquity posted earnings of 4 cents a share for its fiscal fourth quarter of 2015, ended Jan. 31. It beat consensus estimates by a penny. Revenue rose 45% to $24.9 million, above views. Account fees contributed over half of overall revenue. The rest came mostly from custodial fees and card fees.

Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters expect year-over-year EPS to increase 43% in fiscal 2016 and another 40% in fiscal 2017.

HealthEquity execs expect ongoing demand for traditional HSA products and services to drive near-term growth. Longer-term, they seen an opportunity to provide HSA products and services to Medicare recipients.

Medicare HSAs are not currently available, though legislation is being considered that would put them into the market.

"About 10,000 baby boomers a day are now becoming Medicare eligible," Neeleman said. "There's a growing chorus of people saying, 'I'm turning 65, I'm still working, I still want to put money into an HSA account even after I'm eligible for Medicare.' Our research has shown that there would be tremendous savings (in overall health care costs) if people could be allowed to enroll in a Medicare HSA."