CINCINNATI — Troy Tulowitzki and Carlos Gonzalez — veteran pillars propping up the Rockies’ hopes after they returned from injuries in 2014 — did not make starts together Monday for the first time this season.

The Rockies still managed to produce 11 hits and five runs for a third consecutive victory.

“Everyone did their part,” said third baseman Nolan Arenado. “We came in with some energy after a long night and a quick turnaround. Guys came ready to play and wanted to contribute.”

Tulowitzki was rested most of Monday’s game after going 1-for-4 in a long rain-delayed game Sunday against the Giants in Denver. He pinch hit in the ninth inning against the Reds and struck out.

Gonzalez was a late scratch from Monday’s lineup because of stomach flu, according to manager Walt Weiss. CarGo looked healthier after the game than he did before it and probably won’t be out long.

“He’s not as green now,” Weiss said after the Rockies beat the Reds 5-4 and improved to 18-25.

The Rockies were bolstered by Arenado going 3-for-4 with a home run and three RBIs and Charlie Blackmon’s three stolen bases and two runs scored. Ben Paulsen and DJ LeMahieu had two hits apiece. Nick Hundley hit safely for the 20th time in his past 24 games.

“We have to get three, four, five guys hot at a time to get on a roll,” said Weiss, whose team ended an 11-game losing streak May 14. “We’ve been scuffling a little bit. But I see us turning it around. I see us pitching better, taking better at-bats. Just playing better.”

Lyles update. Jordan Lyles is with the Rockies on this road trip, but his next start remains in doubt because of a toe injury. The right-hander was scheduled to throw a side session before determining whether he will pitch Saturday at Philadelphia.

Footnotes. First baseman Justin Morneau did not travel with the Rockies. He strained his neck during a game two weeks ago and has had concussionlike symptoms. His neck has healed, Weiss said, but the concussionlike symptoms will keep him out longer. … Jason Marquis, a former Rockies pitcher who made a start for Cincinnati on Monday, batted in the No. 8 slot in the Reds’ lineup. It was the first time a Cincinnati pitcher batted in that slot since 1933. Marquis hit a double and finished 1-for-2.

Looking ahead

Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (1-2, 6.51 ERA) at Reds’ Michael Lorenzen (1-1, 3.79), 5:10 p.m. Tuesday, ROOT; 850 AM

De La Rosa became the Rockies’ career leader in strikeouts last week when he struck out five against the Philadelphia Phillies and passed Ubaldo Jimenez with 774. De La Rosa has a 2.31 ERA in his past two starts. But against the Phillies, he lasted just 4 innings with three earned runs allowed. The Rockies, though, won that game. They’re 2-4 this year when De La Rosa starts. The left-hander is 3-2 against Cincinnati. He has won his past two starts against the Reds, in 2013 and 2014. Lorenzen, a rookie, will be making his fourth start and his first against the Rockies.

Wednesday: Rockies’ Kyle Kendrick (1-6, 6.58 ERA) at Reds’ Mike Leake (2-3, 4.14), 10:35 a.m., MLB

Thursday: Off

Friday: Rockies’ TBA at Phillies’ Cole Hamels (5-3, 2.98), 5:05 p.m., ROOT

Nick Groke, The Denver Post