People link arms and chant, “We believe in the power of the people, because the power of the people don’t stop” during an “Arms Around Us” event organized by various central city groups. Hundreds attended the event, which featured residents, police and community leaders. Credit: Gary Porter

By of the

Residents, police and community leaders Saturday marched down North Ave. near N. 35th St. as speakers with bullhorns shouted "We stand together. We walk together...This is our community. Let's take it back."

At one point, several hundred residents stopped, held hands and stood in a long line that stretched along N.35th. "We believe in the power of people, because the power of people don't stop," they chanted.

Called Arms Around Us, the event started and ended at the Fitzsimmons Boys & Girls Club. It was organized by the Building Neighborhood Capacity Program, a federal and locally funded effort that works to help revitalize poor neighborhoods, particularly the Amani and Metcalfe neighborhoods.

Saturday's event also included residents from Washington Park and residents from other city neighborhoods.

"We wanted to have people come out and show that we all need to come together in a visual display of unity and cooperation," said Danell Cross, the site coordinator for the Building Neighborhood Capacity Program in Metcalfe Park who helped organize the event.

For too long, the neighborhood has been struggling and disconnected from other neighborhoods, she said. The goal is for residents, politicians, community groups and foundations to work together to improve the community, Cross said.

Milwaukee Police Capt. Jason Smith attended the event and said that police are now working more closely with the neighborhoods on issues of housing, health, education and safety because "these are our ...customers."

The Police Department received a $225,000 federal Building Neighborhoods Capacity Program grant as part of a White House Neighborhood Revitalization Initiative. Other groups assisting in the neighborhood initiative here are the Greater Milwaukee Foundation, Northwestern Mutual Foundation and Children's Hospital of Wisconsin.

The grant is being used to provide training and technical assistance to community organizations. Cross said the program has been working to assess the needs of youth in Metcalfe Park and understand some of the needs and challenges people who live there face.

"This is our community, and we need to take it back," said Charles Carmickle, who lives in the Washington Park neighborhood. "We need to stand together and work together."

After the march, there were hot dogs and hamburgers, face painting, and colored pencils and notebooks for the kids.

Ald. Russell Stamper II wore an orange "Arms Around Us" T-shirt and marched with the crowd leading the chanting.

"This event promotes unity, safety, love and peace in the community," he said. "It's a great way to kick off the school year."