A rising economy (Credit: AP / Pablo Martinez Monsivais) With the economy finally on the upswing, expect Obama to focus attention on how things have improved on his watch. One important barometer, the unemployment rate -- 5.6 percent in December -- is now the lowest it's been since 2008. Specifically, Obama has said his speech will focus on what the nation needs to do to capitalize on recent economic gains in his remaining time in office. The president has recently adopted an upbeat tone on the economy, saying "American resurgence is real." But he'll need to balance that, allies say, with an acknowledgment that many people are still struggling -- five and a half years after the recession ended. Here Obama speaks about the economy at Lake Harriet Band Shell in Minneapolis, Minn., on June 27, 2014. OPINION: Economic facts get in the way

Cybersecurity (Credit: AP / Mel Evans) In the wake of the high-profile hacks of Sony Pictures Entertainment and even U.S. Central Command's Twitter and YouTube sites, cybersecurity is likely to get some attention on Tuesday. Obama has been pushing legislation that includes a proposal that encourages companies to share threat information with the government -- and offers them protection from potential lawsuits if they do that. Above, United States Military Academy cadet Kiefer Ragay stands in a projection of data results as he talks to fellow cadets at the Cyber Research Center at the United States Military Academy in West Point, N.Y. on April 9, 2014. The cadets were fending off cyber attacks in an exercise involving all of the service academies. OPINION: 5 lessons learned from 'The Interview'

The auto industry's comeback (Credit: AP / Carolyn Kaster) One stop Obama made on his pre-State of the Union tour was at a Ford assembly plant in Wayne, Michigan, on Jan. 7, 2015, where he touted the auto industry's resurgence, saying that his 2009 federal bailout of Chrysler and General Motors was key to making that happen. The leader of Michigan's Republican Party differed, crediting "the hardworking men and women who design, build and sell cars" for the state's auto revival. Above, Ford president and CEO Mark Fields, left, Obama and Bill Ford look at a new Mustang at the plant in Wayne.

ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISE HERE

Free community college (Credit: AP / Mark Humphrey) On the education front, Obama is pitching a plan to make community college free -- one that would cost the federal government $60 billion over 10 years and participating states $20 billion. "Community college should be free for those willing to work for it because, in America, a quality education should not be a privilege that is reserved for a few," Obama said as he unveiled his plan Jan. 9, 2015, at Pellissippi State Community College in Knoxville, Tenn. Called America's College Promise, is modeled after Tennessee Promise, a popular program that the Volunteer State's Republican governor, Bill Haslam, signed into law in 2014. It will provide two years of free tuition to Tennessee community and technical colleges beginning this fall. Above, Obama greets people as he arrives to speak in Knoxville on Jan. 9. OPINION: Obama's college plan empowers the same old elites

High-speed Internet access (Credit: EPA / Colby Fossey) Obama is expected to discuss how the United States can expand high-speed Internet access, on the heels of a Wednesday, Jan. 14, 2015, trip to Iowa where he called fast broadband "a necessity.” Obama spoke from a storage area at Cedar Falls Utilities, in Cedar Falls, Iowa, a city that he said has one of the fastest broadband networks in the world. He called for laws to be repealed that prevent communities from creating their own such networks, and said his administration would help cities and towns that want to improve Internet service. "In too many places across America, some big companies are doing everything they can to keep out competitors,” Obama said. "Today, I'm saying we're going to change that. Enough's enough.” It's the second time in recent months the president has taken a stance at odds with major Internet providers; in November, he said he supported the Federal Communications Commission regulating broadband like a public utility. The agency is expected to vote on net neutrality rules in February.