Employers providing mental health benefits must offer cost-sharing and treatment options equal to other medical benefits they offer their employees, under the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act.

The Labor, Treasury and Health and Human Services departments handed down final rules this month to clarify and update 2010 interim regulations, as well as consolidate guidance on the law's intersection with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

One issue benefits attorneys said their employer clients are grateful to have resolved is the law's omission of provisions addressing medical and mental health benefit plan designs that include multiple provider network tiers.

“We have a number of clients that are moving towards plan designs with preferred provider networks based on their performance and quality of care, so the clarification on network tiers was very helpful,” said Nicole Bogard, an Atlanta-based partner at Seyfarth Shaw L.L.P.

Effective July 1, 2014, the final rules delineate six service classifications in which quantitative parity is required for mental health and medical benefits: in-network and out-of-network inpatient and outpatient care, emergency treatment and prescription drug services.

The final rules also update parity protections for nonquantitative limits on the scope or duration of treatment, such as prior authorization requirements, evidentiary standards and other utilization management techniques.

%%BREAK%%

While large employers defined under the mental health parity law as firms with more than 50 full-time workers are not required to provide mental health benefits under federal law, the final regulations require those that do provide mental health and addiction treatment to apply co-payments, deductibles, out-of-pocket maximums, utilization caps and other limitations equally with other medical benefits.

However, mental health benefits provided through an employee assistance program are not subject to the parity requirements, as long as those benefits do not include clinical care or treatment.

“One of the Obama Administration's biggest jobs here was coordinating (mental health parity) with all of the new requirements ... ushered in under the Affordable Care Act,” said Steven Wojcik, vice president of public policy at the Washington-based National Business Group on Health.

Though the finalization of the mental health parity regulations substantively ends more than three years of uncertainty regarding the law's application, attorneys and benefits consultants said employers are not especially worried about the rules' effects on their benefits programs.

“Employers have been inundated these past few years with health care reform, and quite frankly, a lot of them are exhausted,” said George Katsoudas, a senior vice president at Gallagher Benefits Service Inc., the employee benefits consulting arm of Itasca, Ill.-based Arthur J. Gallagher & Co. “That doesn't mean they won't be able to meet their compliance obligations; it's just that there's a fair amount of regulatory fatigue out there.”

Most employers already meet the mental health parity rules, experts say. A study by the Health and Human Services Department published alongside the final rules found that as of 2011, the vast majority of employers providing mental health benefits do treat them on par with the medical benefits they provide.

%%BREAK%%

“Employers have already adopted most of these standards since they were published in the interim regulations in 2010,” said Amy Gordon, a Chicago-based partner in McDermott Will & Emery L.L.P.'s benefits compliance practice. “Financially, it doesn't seem to have become something that's too onerous from a compliance standpoint, so I don't anticipate that these new final regulations will have too much of an impact.”

The final rules contain numerous provisions addressing the law's cross-applicability with the health care reform law.

Most significantly, small employers were exempted from the parity requirements under the 2010 interim rules. That exemption is nullified for fully insured employers under the final rules, due to the essential health benefits coverage mandate for small-group health plans under the health reform law.

“The regulations do still include that exception for small employers, but because of the essential health benefit regulations under the ACA, fully insured small employers aren't going to be able to go to an insurer and purchase coverage for their employees that doesn't contain mental health benefits,” Ms. Gordon said.