WALLINGFORD >> The Board of Education has approved a two-year deal with the Wallingford Education Association, the union that represents the district’s 580 teachers.

Seven of the eight board members present at Monday’s meeting voted in favor of the deal, Superintendent of Schools Salvatore Menzo said. Christopher Shortell abstained from voting because someone in his family works for the district.

The contract must now be approved by the Town Council before it can take effect.

Menzo said the board and the union agreed not to seek a third year on this contract because in 2018, a 40 percent excise tax will be imposed on the value of health insurance benefits exceeding a certain threshold under the Affordable Care Act.

Advertisement

“We wanted to stay away from that,” Menzo said.

The contract calls for teachers’ stipends for coaching and other activities to increase by 1 percent.

Wallingford Education Association President Louis Faiella has an unlisted phone number and was not immediately available for comment.

Menzo said the board was able to achieve $500,000 in savings by reducing the amount that teachers are paid if they waive taking health insurance from the district.

Currently, teachers get a payout equal to 35 percent of the value of the benefits for waving insurance coverage, he said. They will see the payout reduced to 25 percent if the new contract is approved by the council.

The new contract also will eliminate “double dipping,” which Menzo described as the ability of a married couple who both work for the district to have one spouse take advantage of the waiver while both are fully covered by the health insurance policy of the other.

The new deal also stipulates that teachers hired after July 1, 2015, no longer will be offered the health insurance waiver payout, Menzo said.

The new contract also includes a move to health savings accounts for teachers, which are medical savings accounts in which the funds contributed are not subject to federal income tax at the time of deposit. Teachers who want to have health insurance under the preferred provider option will have to pay the difference in cost between the two accounts under the new contract, according to Menzo.

Call Luther Turmelle at 203-680-9388. Have questions, feedback or ideas about our news coverage? Connect directly with the editors of the New Haven Register at AskTheRegister.com.