Hillary Clinton, the Democrats’ most formidable potential nominee for President, has a number of problems going into 2016, if she decides to run.

There will be the standard “Clinton baggage,” which most millennials don’t care about — they have their own, much cooler scandals to obsess over — and upon which most baby boomers have already wrought their judgments.

There are complex domestic issues that she’ll have to address — does she think Obamacare is the best way to solve health insurance inadequacies? And does she think President Obama’s policies have effectively addressed income inequality and unemployment?

There will be her sudden strangeness in her own party — Democrats no longer hold the same affinity for the banks and corporate America that she once did (and maybe still does). Will progressives Sen. Elizabeth Warren and Mayor de Blasio pull her leftward or cast her out as a ’90s-era moderate Democrat who’s out of touch with the party’s newly ascendant wing?

And there will be the inevitable questions from Republicans about her handling of Benghazi. Of course, as former secretary of state, she will also have to defend Obama’s policies on Syria, drones, the NSA spying program and Iran, in all of which she had direct involvement.

Clinton will most certainly want to run away from some of Obama’s missteps and prove she would have done things differently, which will make things difficult for the sitting President and the Democratic narrative. As former John McCain adviser Michael Goldfarb put it: “Cutting the Army by 20%? Leaving Syria to the slaughter? Letting Iran go nuclear? . . . I think Hillary will want to show she’s made of sterner stuff.”

And now, a new front is brewing that may bring Clinton’s strategic judgment more directly into question: Russia.

The Russian “reset” that she oversaw early in her State Department career was immediately called a bust, thanks partly to a botched translation mission and a mockable prop that overly simplified the situation with the U.S.’ Cold War foe.

After both Mitt Romney and Sarah Palin — two of the voices most readily dismissed by Democrats — pointed out years ago how seriously the United States needed to take Russia and Vladimir Putin, it seems as though Obama and his secretary of state systematically underestimated our Russian opponent.

Since the “reset,” Russia has enjoyed a number of boons that have emboldened a country with otherwise very little leverage, other than natural gas. The UN helped make Russia central in the nuclear negotiations with Iran. The U.S. has made Russia important in brokering a farcical chemical weapons deal with Syria. And the international community has elevated Russia by allowing it to buy — through corruption — a successful 2014 Sochi Olympics.

Putin is on top of the world.

Our failed reset, which Clinton oversaw, and our continued overestimating of Russia’s good faith have put us in the precarious position of having to capitulate to Putin’s every whim.

And if Clinton thinks she’s going to get off the hook for it, she’s sadly mistaken. While she might not have to answer for Obama’s actions now, she’ll certainly have to answer for mistakes she and he made earlier.

As Clinton watcher Maggie Haberman writes in Politico, “. . . the conflict is another instance in which Clinton is tethered to the administration’s decisions heading into 2016.”

But it’s not only the baggage of two Presidents potentially dragging her down; on the long walk to 1600 Pennsylvania Ave., she is carrying plenty of her own.

Contact Cupp at www.thesecupp.com