Animal welfare world confronts inefficiencies, with Boulder and Longmont leading by example

One afternoon in early March, a van rolled into the parking lot of the Humane Society of Boulder Valley, carrying five dogs who had spent the previous weeks unadopted in Adams County.

The dogs were trotted one by one out of the van and into the area of the Boulder shelter where new admissions, transferred in from elsewhere, are held for a few days before being put out on the adoption floor.

The idea behind adding this group of transfer dogs was simple: They weren't getting adopted at the public Adams County Animal Shelter, but maybe they'd have a better shot at Boulder's privately run and resource-flush branch, so effective in pairing pets with owners that dogs spend an average of just six days in the kennel before finding homes.

Within two days of being placed on the adoption floor, a silky terrier named Ryder and two mixed breeds named Happy and Casper had all been found owners. The remaining pair, Pee Wee and Princess, followed shortly thereafter.

In Boulder County communities, where animal welfare is a priority, these scenarios play out on a daily basis.

"When I adopted my second rescue dog, they told me she'd been in the kennel for about a day," said Cris Boston, of Longmont. "When I found out she'd been brought in from another shelter where she'd spent seven weeks, I just felt lucky she landed where she did."

Advertisement

The transfers symbolize a changing tide in animal welfare, in which shelter directors are starting to evaluate their successes and failures through a more comprehensive system than ever before, collaborating on a regional and state level more efficiently.

Lessons from the 'no-kill' practice

The rise in the kinds of positive outcomes found by the Adams County crew has coincided directly with the waning of the roughly decade-long cultural moment enjoyed by the "no-kill" animal shelter movement.

Amanda Boerman encourages a dog transferring from Adams County to Boulder on March 5. (David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer)

No-kill shelters, generally speaking, qualify as such by rejecting euthanasia for healthy or treatable animals, even at full kennel capacity. Proponents tout the practice as a recognition and protection of the basic right to life of animals, and 70 percent of American pet owners say they support the practice. Critics, including People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, say no-kill operations distort statistics and employ agreeable rhetoric — who wants to be pro-kill, anyway? — to conceal an unpleasant and inhumane reality.

Count Liz Smokowski and Lisa Pedersen, honchos at the humane societies of Longmont and Boulder Valley, respectively, among the dissenting minority.

Longmont Humane Society (Daily Camera graphic)

"It would just be ultimately impossible for us to be totally no-kill," Smokowski said. "You'd have to have an endless amount of space and resources, and I just don't feel it's acceptable when there's an animal that's ill and in need of a humane euthanasia."

Last year, Boulder Valley euthanized 462 animals for health and behavioral reasons. Pedersen believes that's not necessarily a bad thing.

"If I'm no-kill," she said, "what's the opposite of that? For me, the words don't define the problem, and simplify what's happening in shelters too much. And I think it changes the conversation from being around what are we doing for animals in the holistic sense and drives it down to euthanasia, and that's just one piece of the whole pie."

Humane Society of Boulder Valley (Daily Camera graphic)

There's a growing consensus among experts that focusing solely on euthanasia, at the expense of numerous other factors, can be detrimental to both the animals and their shelters, as well as the communities those shelters serve.

By limiting admission to avoid euthanizing pets, Pedersen says, no-kills resist the kind of regional cooperation that helps less privileged shelters do the most good they can.

There are several ways shelters such as the Humane Society of Boulder Valley maximize positive outcomes. All agree that spaying and neutering is a good place to start, and support programs that keep pets and owners together are the best way to keep animals out of shelters in the first place.

Locally, though, the most notable shift is in the degree to which operations based in more affluent and pet-friendly communities such as Boulder and Longmont are taking in "transfer" animals. Instead of standing by as dogs and cats, usually from southeastern Colorado and the Western Slope, go unadopted for weeks or months, Pedersen and others are taking in more and more pets from outside their own jurisdictions.

Last year, the Humane Society of Boulder Valley transferred in 2,356 animals, including about 2,000 dogs. That's about double its transfer total a decade ago. The Longmont Humane Society, with 534 transfers in 2014, doubled its efforts in just five years.

Bill Fredergill, executive director of the Logan County Humane Society, said that for his and other shelters in areas that serve populations less prone to pet adoption, transfers are invaluable.

"Just to be able to get those animals into a place for adoption as an actual option is key because when we transfer an animal out, that allows us to bring another animal in and get them into a system where they have a chance for a happy home," Fredergill said. "We have some animals that stay here quite a long time. Months. Others, because of transfer programs, are out of here in less than two weeks."

Roger Haston, executive director of the Lakewood nonprofit Animal Assistance Foundation — which gave more than $1 million last year to Colorado shelters and transfer programs — also doubles as a nationally renowned shelter metrics guru who believes transfers have become an increasingly crucial option.

"They allow us to start to have a way to bring some high-level services to these rural communities in a way that they can start to buy into," he said. "Not only does it move some animals, but it starts to encourage the communities to get more involved. It's moving resources, and it's moving knowledge."

Misleading figure

Fifteen years ago, at a conference of animal shelter directors from around the U.S., it was decided that the world of pet welfare needed a common language to evaluate its own success.

A new metric was born that week, with a simple enough goal: Of the total number of animals a shelter admits in a given year, how many experience an outcome other than death? By that measure, adoption, reunion with an owner and mere stasis were all considered wins. Unnecessary euthanasia was to be avoided at all costs.

They called it "live release rate," and, at the time, it was a huge advance. Shelters could aspire to a common goal and modify their practices accordingly.

But placing emphasis on live release rate meant that shelters could let dogs and cats remain for months in kennels without taking an image hit. Unintentionally, the advent of the statistic enabled shelters to tell vastly distorted tales of asterisked triumph, Haston said, as it was suddenly possible for an individual site to look great on paper without being held accountable for actually doing the most good for the most animals.

In 2013, the Boston Globe published a profile of a no-kill shelter in Brockton, Mass., where just 10 dogs had been euthanized over a period when as many as 2,000 found homes. Buried in that glowing portrait, however, is a telling line: "The average dog stays about three months, but others stay a year or longer before they are adopted."

Haston was an early champion of the school of thought that espouses the need to look beyond a singular figure.

"Often, people use live release rate when they're actually trying to measure lives saved," Haston said. "There's no scale to it, so you can't tell how many lives were saved. We know that animals deteriorate the longer they're in shelters because it's a very stressful environment for them."

Study upon study have confirmed that animals left for months on end in shelters are prone to repetitive action behaviors such as spinning and bounding off of walls, self-mutilation in the form of excessive licking and toenail degradation from pacing and chewing, depression and uncharacteristic displays of aggression, among other things.

"To remove euthanasia as a service is inhumane," said Holly Tarry, a spokeswoman for the Colorado Federation of Animal Welfare Agencies. "The only way you can really have a no-kill situation is if you allow suffering of animals that should be euthanized, or if you send them away. So it's not a concept that can be applied humanely to a community."

Measuring lengths of stay

Pedersen, by all accounts, runs a nationally praised operation. The Boulder shelter takes in between 7,000 and 9,000 animals every year and places them into homes at an unusually high rate: dogs in six days and cats in 17.

"Colorado is a leader in animal welfare and animal sheltering, absolutely," said Jodi Buckman, senior director of community outreach for the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, "and the Humane Society of Boulder Valley is an incredibly strong organization."

Boulder Valley's live release rate, by the way, stands at 93 percent, but Pedersen readily admits the figure means very little if not paired with another crucial statistic: average length of stay.

"When you have that individual animal in front of you, how quickly can you get it adopted?" Pedersen said. "And, if you can't, can you provide treatment? Then, if you do that, what's the outcome going to be? If you have an animal you're going to attempt to place, I don't want to house that animal for two months and then end up with euthanasia. That's not OK."

The consideration of treatment options ties in closely with the success of transfer programs. The Humane Society of the Pikes Peak Region, for example, regularly takes in dogs needing thorough medical care that they would not have gotten elsewhere.

Earlier this year, a mutt named Oliver who had a nagging leg injury was transferred in to the Pikes Peak shelter, where he underwent surgery for his femur and neck. After staring down the possibility of euthanasia at his previous shelter, Oliver was adopted by a Colorado Springs family following the surgery.

The sort of strategic placement that benefitted Oliver had been somewhat rare, even in pet-friendly Colorado. In fact, the Pet Animal Care and Facilities Act, the program tasked with licensing and inspecting Colorado animal shelters, has never asked its members to submit length-of-stay figures.

This year, for the first time, those numbers will be required.

Tarry celebrated that change as a signal that the state is no longer content "blindly ignoring" everything but outflow statistics.

"The evolution there," Tarry said, "has really come from the progress of us needing to say, 'Just because we might be able to have the room or the time or the money, are we being humane to this animal?' We need to consider how long they should linger in the shelters, which, everyone agrees, is not where they should be."

Community support

Candace Harris owns three rescue dogs, one of which was transferred from Kansas to Colorado, and said she was mulling adding another from Boulder.

She moved to Colorado from northwest Arkansas — where one shelter was recently reported to have euthanized three-quarters of its animals. She sees a big difference in community support for animals here.

"The difference between the education about the animal population and animal needs and homeless animals is hugely, hugely different," Harris said.

Unlike some shelters that are municipally run, the Boulder and Longmont humane societies are private nonprofit organizations that rely on donations.

More educated, wealthy communities tend to be more supportive of animals because they can afford to be. Boulder is so flush with animal lovers, in fact, that Pedersen says she has a surplus of dog-walking volunteers and has had to carve out extra naptime for the pooches, just to give their legs a break.

In 2010, the ASPCA announced a new initiative, with the basic premise of challenging shelters to save more animals than they had the previous year. Boulder Valley won first place, out of more than 50 shelters across the country.

"So there's an organization," Buckman said, "that has been successful for a long time, and yet, in joining the contest, they still were able to push themselves far enough beyond their own success. Now they share lessons learned and programs that work with other shelters. Other shelters look to them as consultants, almost."

Longmont, with an ever-growing transfer program and a live release rate of 95 percent, is similarly blessed. Sarah Clusman, director of operations, said that has empowered the shelter to extend its hand.

"Requests for transfers here, they're coming in through the phone, through email, from all over, all the time. Our first obligation is to our community, but we have kennel space beyond that, and we want to be able to help the animals from places like Sterling and Ouray and Colorado Springs, where there are dogs, specifically, who just simply need a new venue."

While transfers between the "haves" and the relative "have-nots" are certainly on the upswing in Colorado, the concept of collaboration among shelters is hardly a new one. And that's a tribute, according to Buckman, to leaders like Pedersen.

"The thing that's very consistent about these individual organizations," she said, "is that whether it be the Humane Society of Boulder Valley or the regional coalitions like the Metro Denver Shelter Alliance, they have a focus and desire to continually challenge themselves to do more and do better."

Haston believes that with the addition of sharper metrics, the outlook is brighter than ever.

"When you have a really good community, you get to reach out," he said. "And that's why there's got to be an understanding of the key number there being the total number of animals you can adopt and move into better situations. Colorado's success has really had nothing to do with no-kills. It has everything to do with how shelters work together and report community metrics."

Alex Burness: burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness