City's proposal to ease occupancy limits for seniors hit 'raw nerve'

Malcolm McLean, left, Margaret Pevec, Ren Feldman and Cedar Barstow help each other prepare dinner Friday at their home on Sumac Avenue in Boulder. Barstow, 69, wants to see the city ease occupancy limits. More than 60 people have lived under her roof over three decades. ( Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera )

Related Stories Senior occupancy proposal stymied amid Boulder housing debate

If you go What: Boulder City Council special study session on planning policies When: 5 to 7 p.m. Tuesday; a regular City Council meeting follows Where: Boulder Municipal Building, 1777 Broadway

On its face, it seemed like a simple idea. Some older people in Boulder live in large homes with plenty of bedrooms. Other older people want to stay in Boulder but can't afford their homes anymore.

City planners put an ordinance before the Boulder City Council as a possible "early win" in the evolving comprehensive housing strategy:

Why not allow an exemption from Boulder's occupancy limits — which say that no more than three or four unrelated people can live together, depending on the zoning — and allow up to six people aged 62 or older to live together?

Several dozen people showed up before the City Council earlier this month to say why not.

It could lead to exploitative rental situations, would add more density to neighborhoods and would leave the door wide open for discarding the occupancy limit entirely, they said.

"There's so much abuse already, and this just opens the door to so much more abuse," said Carole Driver, a resident of Boulder's Whittier neighborhood, as she listed off vacation rentals, Airbnb.com, overoccupied student rentals and difficulty parking on what should be quiet residential streets.

Advertisement

And the issue extends beyond code enforcement, she said.

Driver is 66 and expects that the day will come when she has to move away from Boulder. That's part of the cycle of a community. Implementing changes that allow for group living for seniors in single-family homes is a "structural change" to many Boulder neighborhoods that could limit the ability of neighborhoods to turn over, Driver said.

"I want this to be a community for young people and families," she said. "That is the source of our vibrancy."

To the disappointment of advocates for the idea, and in a move that is indicative of how challenging housing and development issues can be in Boulder, the City Council tabled the idea.

Aging in place

The notion will still be considered along with other ideas in the comprehensive housing strategy.

"People have misconstrued it," said Neshama Abraham, a Boulder activist who works with Our Home Colorado on senior issues. "They have misunderstood the simplicity of the idea. The idea is that people who already know each other, who are friends, live together in a home that one of them already owns, that has the room."

Abraham is one of many people in Boulder, including city planners, who anticipate more and more older people living in Boulder. One of the city's housing goals is to help seniors age in place, and Abraham said the group living proposal did just that.

"There are a lot of homes that have more than two or three bedrooms," she said. "It's a long-range, good sustainable solution for senior housing. It allows people to age in place. People do not want to end up in some institution."

Abraham is working on a set of proposals — including that any seniors living in such a group setting agree to a transportation management plan limiting the number of cars they can have — that she hopes will ease neighborhood concerns about the measure.

Ren Feldman sets the table for dinner with his wife, Cedar Barstow, left, at their home in Boulder. Now it is legal for four people to live in her home, but Barstow said she can imagine reaching a point where she can't take care of her home, and she thinks the occupancy limits should be eased. (Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera)

"When people talk about impact to neighborhoods, it's cars, pets, trash, noise," she said. "If there are six seniors living together, they aren't going to be up at 3 a.m. listening to rap or something."

City hypocrisy?

Opponents of the proposal said they aren't the ones who have misunderstood the implications.

Beth Helgans, a neighbor of Driver in the Whittier area, said the neighborhood is already relatively dense, due to an upzoning in the 1980s that led to many lots being subdivided and second and third homes built on the back portions. Parking can be challenging, and many rentals already are overoccupied.

City officials say proving overoccupancy by a preponderance of evidence is difficult. How much more difficult would it be to prove when some kinds of overoccupancy are legal and some are not?

Helgans and Driver also see hypocrisy in a city government that makes owners of historic homes comply with strict regulations, to the point that Helgans cannot convert a barn on her property into a mother-in-law apartment, but then allows developers to fulfill their affordable housing requirements off-site and asks already-dense residential neighborhoods to do more to address the cost of housing.

"We already have a lot of density in our supposedly low-density neighborhood," she said.

Cedar Barstow, 69, wants to see the city ease the occupancy limits, but not just for seniors. She has lived "in community" for more than 30 years. She bought her north Boulder home with two friends and eventually became the sole owner. But she never stopped living with other people. More than 60 people have lived under her roof in all those years.

"For 25 of these years, I was single, and it was a much happier way to be single, to have some other people in the house and share meals but also have independence," she said.

The occupancy limit is ultimately arbitrary, she said. She got married when she was in her 60s. Now it is legal for four people to live in her home, when before they were just three.

Barstow said she can imagine reaching a point where she can't take care of her home as well as she does now.

"It is big enough that we could have a couple come and stay and part of their pay would be to help cook and clean and take care of the yard," she said.

Using whether people are related or not to determine occupancy is ultimately discriminatory, she said. A family with four young kids might be noisy. A family with three teenagers might have a lot of cars. But city ordinance has nothing to say about them.

The best solution, she said, would be to determine occupancy based on either square footage or the number of bedrooms in a home.

'Exaggerated fear'

Abraham also would like to see more than the "simple" solution. Cooperative housing starts to generate a lot more savings for people once eight or 10 people are living together.

She said there are older people with homes and lots that could accommodate additions to house that many people, and those homes could become a great alternative, especially with a concierge service to deal with repairs and other emergencies.

Concerns that single-family housing would be lost could be addressed with a permit system under which there could only be so many cooperative homes in a given area.

"Every time we raise the idea of changing the occupancy ordinance, there seems to be this fear that the neighborhood would suddenly be full of elders and cars and look like a parking lot," Barstow said. "I just don't think people would flock to Boulder to age in place or live in group housing."

Barstow said she feels discouraged because the cooperative housing issue has come up again and again in her years in Boulder, but nothing changes.

Boulder's commitment to open space, its height limit, its many parks are all good things, but those same values can leave people with an outsized concern about density, she said.

"I don't think changing the occupancy ordinance by a few people or by permits is going to result in a change in quality of life in Boulder. I think that is an exaggerated fear."

A 'raw nerve' in Boulder

For her part, Driver looks at the mid-rise developments going up around Boulder and wonders where the discussion of housing for seniors was when those projects were approved.

"We want some awareness and involvement from the neighborhoods in the vision for Boulder," she said. "Where is the concern for senior housing, for affordable housing, in all the high-density development? Why are they pushing it into the low-density neighborhoods?"

That high-density development has fueled its own concerns, with PLAN-Boulder County calling for a moratorium on new development until the City Council re-examines its planning policies.

The City Council is holding a study session at 5 p.m. Tuesday to have an open-ended discussion about those planning concerns.

Councilman Sam Weaver said he would likely support some version of the senior exemption to the occupancy limit and sees the upzoning of Whittier, where he also lives, as an example of how to get more affordable housing and density without changing neighborhood character. But he said whatever policies the city adopts will need a lot more community engagement.

"What I think made some people upset is a perception of not involving the neighborhood in decisions that affect them," he said.

Councilman Andrew Shoemaker, who has repeatedly expressed concern that Boulder is losing its single-family housing to more profitable high-occupancy rentals, said "there is a raw nerve" in Boulder around development and lack of code enforcement.

"There is a lot going on that people feel threatened," he said.

Looking for "early wins," as with the senior occupancy ordinance, may not be the best route for long-term solutions.

"Instead of going in for a quick victory, we need to develop a comprehensive plan," he said.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355 or meltzere@dailycamera.com.