Ok, last we heard from Miss Suzanne Somers, she was writing a crazy, very easily debunk-able op-ed for the Wall Street Journal about how “The Affordable Care Act is a Socialist Ponzi Scheme” (her words not mine). Now, it seems, she has gone full-on “Sunset Boulevard” and wants to resurrect her career by revisiting the specter of Christmas “Chrissy” Snow in the sitcom world of “Three’s Company.” Not only that, but she wants the son of her deceased co-star, John Ritter, to play her son on the show.

Via E! Online:

“I said to my husband the other day, ‘You know what would make a great sitcom? If Chrissy Snow’s son was Jason Ritter!’ It would mean that ultimately, Jack [John Ritter’s character] and Chrissy got married and they had Jason. It is the first acting idea I’ve had that has made my heart flutter.”

First of all, no. That totally didn’t happen, Suzanne. Chrissy left in Season 5 because you, Suzanne Somers, were apparently demanding way more money than everyone else– after which she was replaced by her cousin Cindy, and then by another blonde chick. Then, in the spinoff of “Three’s Company,” “Three’s a Crowd,” Jack moved in romantically with some lady named Vicky Bradford. So there’s that.

Even if you just want to ignore sacred “Three’s Company” canon, it doesn’t seem like Jason Ritter is too hot on the idea.

Also via E! Online:

“I did just hear that,” Jason told us last night at the TV Guide Hot List party in Hollywood. “It’s so wild. It’s very sweet.”

When asked if he thinks it’s something that will ever happen with him, he dished, “I have no idea.” “To be honest, there are probably actors who are much better,” the humble 33-year-old actor said. “It sounds weird, it sounds like I’m not telling the truth, but I think there would be actors better suited to do that, who are funnier and better. I would feel like I was just getting the part for a stupid reason.” “Maybe a new person,” he added. “Discover someone incredible.”‘

He’s very polite. In fact, I am probably going to use these lines the next time some weird dude asks me out and I feel badly about saying no.

It’s kind of rude, in my opinion, that she did not include Miss Joyce Dewitt in her brilliant fever dream revitalization of “Three’s Company.” After all, at least she was on the show through the whole run– not to mention that everyone sitting within five feet of me right now is Team Janet all the way. I took a survey.