This article is a collaboration between MedPage Today® and:

More than 10% of patients with pancreatic cancer had preceding episodes of acute pancreatitis in the 2 years before cancer diagnosis, data from a large retrospective analysis showed.

The association between pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer was strongest in the first year and then declined steadily thereafter. The risk was concentrated in patients ≥40 and was negligible in younger patients, reported Banke Agarwal, MD, of St. Louis University, and colleagues in Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology online.

The results suggest that patients with acute pancreatitis might benefit from a diagnostic workup that includes an imaging study to look for pancreatic cancer.

"Acute pancreatitis serves as an index event and also helps identify a population enriched with pancreatic cancer," the authors concluded. "Evaluation of these patients with endoscopic ultrasound for underlying pancreatic cancer could potentially help timely cancer diagnosis.

"Endoscopic ultrasound exam carries about same costs and risk of complications as esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy, which are both used routinely for Barrett's surveillance and colon cancer screening."

Acute pancreatitis is a known risk factor for pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Whether workup of each case would lead to early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer has been unclear, in part because of a lack of published studies documenting the incidence of pancreatic cancer after acute pancreatitis, the authors noted.

A pooled analysis of data from seven published studies of pancreatitis etiology suggested a mean average of 2.03% among almost 2,945 patients. However, the studies were cross-sectional, precluding discernment of the temporal relationship between the acute pancreatitis episode and subsequent pancreatic cancer, the authors explained.

In an effort to quantify the relationship between acute pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer, Agarwal and colleagues reviewed inpatient and outpatient records for 495,504 patients who received care through the Veterans Health Administration from 2000 through 2007. The authors identified 5,720 patients who had one or more episodes of acute pancreatitis, 710 of whom subsequently had diagnoses of pancreatic cancer.

Median follow-up was 60 months for the entire cohort, 26 months for patients who developed pancreatic cancer, and 60 months for patients who did not develop pancreatic cancer.

The patient cohort was predominately male (89%). A third of the patients smoked, a fourth had a history of heavy alcohol use, and 3% had a history of gallstones.

The 710 patients included 86 who had one or more episodes of acute pancreatitis prior to cancer diagnosis. The authors found that 76 of the 86 patients had a least one episode of acute pancreatitis within 2 years of cancer diagnosis.

In 69 of the 76 cases, the preceding pancreatitis occurred within a year of pancreatic cancer diagnosis. In fewer than half of the cases (N=34), acute pancreatitis preceded pancreatic cancer diagnosis by 2 months or less.

Patients who had one or more episodes of acute pancreatitis had a mean age of 57, and those who developed pancreatic cancer had a mean age of 64.

No patient ≤40 developed acute pancreatitis or pancreatic cancer.

The risk of pancreatic cancer increased with each decade of age thereafter, beginning at 7.69 per 1,000 patient-years in patients 41 to 50 and reached a high point of 28.67 per 1,000 patient years in men older than 70.

Men older than 70 had the highest absolute risk of pancreatic cancer; the highest relative risk occurred in men 41 to 50.

Among the patients with acute pancreatitis, neither smoking nor a history of gallstones had a significant relationship with pancreatic cancer. Heavy alcohol use was associated with a significantly lower risk of pancreatic cancer (relative risk 0.37, 95% CI 0.22-0.62).

"Pancreatic cancer is believed to cause acute pancreatitis by obstructing the pancreatic duct, and an increase in the likelihood of pancreatic cancer diagnosis after acute pancreatitis is therefore not unexpected," the authors said.

"Thus, it is likely that pancreatic cancer diagnosed within 2 years after an acute pancreatitis episode caused acute pancreatitis by obstructing the pancreatic duct."

The authors cited the temporal association between acute pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer as justification to consider a workup with endoscopic ultrasound to rule out pancreatic cancer in patients who have acute pancreatitis.

The study provides additional evidence of the association between acute pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer, according to David Ryan, MD, of Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.

"It's not really suggesting a causation link between acute pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer," Ryan, who was not involved in the study, told MedPage Today. "It is suggesting that patients who develop acute pancreatitis may have an underlying pancreatic cancer as the cause of their acute pancreatitis.

"That's not particularly new news, but they looked at it in a broad and rigorous fashion."

The authors disclosed no relevant conflicts of interest.