Topics: Music, songs, Video, Entertainment News

As we do every year, we’re heading from January into February, and on toward spring and tax time and other seasonal repetitive annoyances. The passage of time is inevitable, but you can distract yourself from its depredations by cycling through the songs below, one for each month of the year you’re going to have to get through like every other.

Avett Brothers, “January Wedding”

The Avett Brothers have kicked around alt country circles for a while, gamely hovering on the verge of next-big-thing. “January Wedding” is from their 2009 Rick Rubin-produced major label debut “I And Love and You.” This live performance, complete with true believers in the audience letting loose with pig-calling yodels, nicely captures their charm. They’re ragged hillbillies twanging away at sensitive indie pop, or maybe sensitive indie geniuses knee-deep in country. Either way, it’s a good, simple marriage to start off the year.

Ritsu Katsumata, “Robot Dance/February”

Ritsu Katsumata was a childhood classical violin prodigy, but as an adult she decided she wanted to rock. So she entered the Seattle Bumbershoot Festival Jimi Hendrix Guitar Competition only to be disqualified in the finals for playing the wrong instrument. Undeterred, she formed her own power trio. You can hear Hendrix’s psychedelic fire squalling through this 2004 track from Katsumata’s album “February,” both in the swaggering thrash of the very non-robotic “Robot Dance,” and in the lyrical “February.” As a bonus, this live electric violin tribute to Hendrix and Jimmy Page is pretty spectacular. Bleeding ears will be your Valentine.

Carter Family, “March Winds Gonna Blow My Blues Away”

A great classic Carter Family track, with the famous Carter harmonies and the even more famous rhythmically dexterous strum of Maybelle’s guitar. The band seems indifferent to the exigencies of weather; a harsh March blast might trouble some, but the Carters trundle on with the same jaunty drone as ever, celebrating dour exuberance at the turning of the season. Keep on the sunny side, March.

Thelonious Monk, “April in Paris”

There are lots of famous versions of this one, including the expansively cheesy 1955 Count Basie recording, a glorious take by Sarah Vaughan and Clifford Brown and Monk’s own 1940s small group setting. But I think his solo piano version is my favorite. I’m not sure when this recording is from, but Monk sounds great; the smooth standard turned into a kind of strolling, staggering lurch through the streets, as if nostalgic recollection keeps getting interrupted by sudden downpours or sharp blows to the head. At a couple of points you can hear Monk muttering to himself as he thumps along, all spaces and hesitations and rhythmic confoundment, spring as vertigo.

Malfunkshun, “Rains of May”

Sometimes referred to as the grandfathers of grunge, Malfunkshun are best known as the band of Andrew Wood, who went on to form Mother Love Bone. This is a latter-day single from 2012, long after their ’80s heyday, with singer Jeff Loftis replacing the sadly deceased Wood on vocals. “Rains of May” doesn’t have the mud-slogging cool of the original line-up. Instead, it’s as much hair-metal as grunge; decadent riff-heavy retro-rawk. Hold up your lighters and enjoy the fact that Malfunkshun appears to think that August is the month that comes after May.

Mr. Del and Holy South, “Memphis in June”

Del was originally in Three 6 Mafia before he got religion; this one is from his 2007 album “Holy South: Kingdom Crunk.” The sample voice repeating “Memphis in June” is sped up till it sounds like it’s being sung by the Chipmunks, but I think it’s from Nina Simone’s famous performance of the Hoagy Carmichael tune, also titled “Memphis in June.” That song’s evocation of a pastoral, sleepy Southern summer is largely abandoned. Instead, lines about “Sweet oleander blowing perfume in the air everywhere” in the idiom of jazz-pop are replaced with name-checking of Al Green, Isaac Hayes and Martin Luther King in the idiom of crunked-out Christian hip-hop. Out with the old nostalgia, in with the new nostalgia, delivered with some righteous Southern summer sweat.