Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

In a new survey, teachers say they’re feeling more confident about using the Common Core State Standards in their classrooms—an optimistic finding that comes even as recent polls suggest dwindling public support for the initiative. This is the most recent installment of the “Primary Sources” survey conducted by Scholastic Inc. and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (a key Common Core supporter), and it focuses on the new English language arts and math standards, which most states have adopted and are now implementing. The organizations’ larger survey of public school teachers took place in July 2013, on a broad range of educational topics. A year later, Scholastic followed up with nearly 1,700 of the surveyed teachers at the elementary, middle, and high school levels in states where the Common Core is being implemented. Among the highlights: The percentage of teachers who say they feel prepared to teach the Common Core climbed to 79 percent, up from 71 percent in 2013.

More teachers described the implementation as challenging: 81 percent compared with 73 percent last year.

Enthusiasm for the Common Core declined to 68 percent from 73 percent last year. However, among teachers who have worked with the standards for at least a year, 86 percent described themselves as enthusiastic about the implementation. The last finding is consistent with recent surveys of other educators, suggesting that confidence in the Common Core is higher among educators in states that were early adopters.

Here are a few of the takeaways that struck me: This is not a theoretical debate: Of the teachers surveyed, two-thirds said implementation of the new standards is either mostly or fully complete in their districts. That’s compared to less than half—45 percent—of survey respondents in 2013. In other words, while the political fighting continues outside the classroom, Common Core is already the daily reality for millions of public school students in more than 40 states. Margery Mayer, the president of Scholastic Education, told me she was encouraged that when it comes to the day-to-day work of the new standards, the outlook among the surveyed teachers is more positive than might be gleaned from many of the media reports. “If you actually talk to the teachers, more of them feel it’s going well,” Mayer said. “They’re seeing their students do better work … there’s more critical thinking and discourse in the classroom. That’s the Common Core becoming established.” The higher the grade level, the harder the transition: Compared with their peers at middle and high school level, elementary school teachers were significantly more likely to say they’ve seen positive changes in their students’ abilities since the new standards were added: Percentage of Teachers Who Have Seen a Positive Change in Their Students’ Abilities as a Result of Implementing Common Core State Standards Scholastic

The Common Core is predicated on the expectation that students will develop skills and knowledge that grow and deepen with each successive year of instruction. It makes sense that the progress could be easier in lower grades. Here’s another way to think about it: Many high school teachers are, in theory, being asked to build a house without a foundation, since their students were presumably not taught a curriculum aligned with the Common Core for most of their prior academic career. Robert Pondiscio, a vice president at the conservative-leaning Thomas B. Fordham Institute, worded it nicely in a piece on the challenge of teaching students to engage in the “close reading” Common Core requires: “Background knowledge is intended to be built systematically over time and across subjects—neither disregarded or backfilled in the minutes before students begin reading a complex text.”