Two of the Virginia Senate’s most senior members, who are among the chamber’s last remaining centrists, are calling it quits.

Sens. Charles J. Colgan (D-Prince William) and John C. Watkins (R-Powhatan) have announced that they will not seek reelection next year. With more than 30 years apiece in the legislature, Colgan and Watkins hail from a time when moderates ruled Richmond’s upper chamber. Now they are a rare breed.

“It’s become more politics than policy,” Watkins said. “I think we have ‘Washingtonized’ Richmond, and that is to the detriment of every Virginian.”

The increasingly partisan nature of the Senate is part of why Watkins announced last month that he will not run again. That is not so much the case for Colgan, 88, who has been trying to retire for three election cycles, only to have fellow Democrats talk him into staying each time.

Both men are known to value problem-solving over politics and to buck their parties on occasion. Whatever the impetus, their departures could intensify the chamber’s polarization if their replacements are in the vein of more recent Senate arrivals.

“These two are exceptional in their ability to vote on issues based on the merits rather than partisanship,” said Sen. Janet D. Howell (D-Fairfax), who described their exit as “a double tragedy for the state.”

Colgan and Watkins have independent streaks that were vividly on display in this year’s General Assembly session. While most Republicans opposed expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, Watkins created a compromise plan, although it ultimately failed. When a standoff over Medicaid threatened to shut down state government last summer, Colgan joined Republicans in calling lawmakers back into session to pass a budget.

The lawmakers come from districts where party loyalties have shifted since they first took office, surviving by dint of their personal popularity and moderate reputations. Colgan has held on in his increasingly red Prince William County district, as Watkins has in his now blue-leaning suburban Richmond turf.

The nature of their districts could mean that voters will pick moderates to replace them.

“Realistically, I don’t think you can run a super-right Republican in John Watkins’s district. . . . We can’t take a guy like Bob Marshall and run him in that seat and expect to win,” said Sen. Bryce E. Reeves (R-Spotsylvania), referring to one of the most conservative members of the House, Del. Robert G. Marshall (R-Prince William).

At the same time, Reeves predicted that races for the two open seats will be fierce, given the closely divided Senate. Republicans have a 21-19 majority.

“It’s going to just be a knock-down, drag-out [fight],” he said.

For many years, the chief power struggle in Richmond was not between Republicans and Democrats, but between the House and Senate — both led by the GOP. House Republicans were more conservative than their Senate counterparts, who in 1998 fought then-Republican Gov. James S. Gilmore III’s car-tax repeal and in 2004 supported Democratic Gov. Mark R. Warner’s then-record tax increase. After leaving office, some of those Senate Republicans have endorsed Democrats, including Terry McAuliffe last year in his successful run for governor.

Colgan and Watkins were “part of a very different era in the Senate than what we’re seeing today,” said Bob Holsworth, a former Virginia Commonwealth University political scientist. “Politics in Virginia was not defined primarily by political partisanship, but you had two institutional bodies, the House and the Senate, that had substantially different perspectives.”

More recently, many of the Senate moderates have left, and control of the chamber has switched back and forth between Republicans and Democrats. And upon taking power, both parties started playing hardball, revamping committees and redrawing district lines to take maximum advantage. Protracted ideological battles have become more common within the chamber, with Colgan and Watkins sometimes bucking their parties to try to resolve the fights.

A World War II pilot who founded the regional air carrier Colgan Air, Colgan joined the Senate in 1976. A Catholic, he has usually sided with the GOP on abortion issues. In 2012, Colgan shocked fellow Democrats by siding with Republicans to pass a two-year $85 billion budget. Democrats had been refusing to pass the spending plan as they sought more power in the chamber and $300 million for the extension of Metrorail to Dulles International Airport. Colgan said he wanted to avert a potential government shutdown.

Watkins, 67, is a nurseryman and chairman of Essex Bank who has represented his suburban Richmond district in the Senate since 1998. He served in the House for 16 years before that.

He has opposed Medicaid-funded abortions except in cases of rape, incest, gross fetal abnormalities or when the life of the mother is at risk. But he sided with Democrats against a highly controversial 2012 bill that, before it was amended, would have required most women to undergo a vaginal ultrasound before an abortion. Further bucking Republicans, he also opposed the amended version that wound up mandating a medically useless test. (It requires an abdominal ultrasound, which is less invasive but will not yield an image in the early stages of pregnancy, when most abortions take place, because the fetus is too small.)

Conservative on most business issues, Watkins tried early this year to find a compromise between Democrats’ desire to provide health care to 400,000 uninsured Virginians and Republican opposition to expand what they contended was a deeply flawed entitlement program. Watkins came up with “Marketplace Virginia,” which would have tapped $2 billion a year in federal Medicaid funds and used it to buy private insurance. The plan had just three Republican takers in the Senate and died in the House.

“Watkins came up with what he felt was a compromise very similar to the kind of compromise they would have found 10 or 12 years ago, only to find it really doesn’t go anywhere,” Holsworth said.

Colgan’s plans to retire were no surprise, but the Watkins announcement caught many off guard. It upset some Democrats, who counted him as an ally in the Medicaid fight.

“It’s extremely unfortunate,” said Senate Minority Leader Richard L. Saslaw (D-Fairfax). “This is a very bright, talented guy who just essentially got fed up. . . . There is no room in that party at all for people who think like John, no room at all.”

Watkins said the highly partisan atmosphere contributed to his decision, which also stems from a desire to spend more time with his family. Watkins put the blame on both parties. He criticized fellow Republicans for refusing to consider his “private-option” Medicaid plan and accused Democrats of hyping some issues, such as a requirement that voters show identification at the polls, for political effect.

“We have to show identification to register to stay in a hotel now, so what’s wrong with having to show ID when you vote? What’s more important?” he said. “I’m very concerned about the partisanship on the part of both parties. Both of them have gotten too extreme.”