All events must be received two weeks before the event date and will be reviewed for consideration. Events cannot be reviewed unless all information is provided.

Event Name:

Event Date and Time:

Event Location:

Event Description:

Contact Info:

Email Address:

Image File:

Images should be in .jpeg or .gif format. Recommended image size is 640x480 and file size should be less than 2mb per photo.







All events are reviewed and subject to editing and verification. By submitting the form you agree to our Website Term of Use which can be read



All fields are required! A valid email address is necessary if we need to follow up with you to get more details or verify any details of the event you have submitted.All events are reviewed and subject to editing and verification. By submitting the form you agree to our Website Term of Use which can be read HERE

By submitting a photograph or video (the "Work") through this web page, I certify that I am the sole owner of the Work being submitted, that no other approval is required, and that I have the full right, without restriction, to license the Work. I grant to Gray Television Group, Inc., its licensees, and assigns (collectively, “Company”) a world-wide, payment and royalty free, perpetual, irrevocable and non-exclusive right to use, reproduce, modify, adapt, publish, create derivative works from, distribute, promote, market, advertise, and display the Work, for any purpose including in connection with any program, posting or other use by Company, in any form, media or technology now known or later developed. I expressly release Company from any and all claims arising out of the use of the Work by Company, including but not limited to claims f or blurring, distortion, or editing. I also agree to waive any equitable remedies against Company for its use of the Work. I am over the age of 18. I have read Gray Television Group, Inc.’ss Terms of Use, and agree to those terms in full.

I have read Gray Television Group, Inc.’s Terms of Use and agree to those terms in full

I am 13 years of age or older.