Photo

CHICAGO — The city that was once known as the patronage capital of the world may no longer live up to the title.

On Monday, a federal judge liberated Chicago from the federal oversight that was intended to prevent politically motivated hirings, firings and harassment of government employees, once a common practice of the city’s political machine. The judge said at a court hearing that the administration of Mayor Rahm Emanuel has taken proper steps to prove that it has complied with a decades-old accord, known as the Shakman decrees, named after the lawyer, Michael Shakman, who successfully took a stand against the Chicago political machine in a lawsuit in 1969.

Mr. Shakman sued the Democratic Organization of Cook County, charging that the use of government jobs to build political armies excluded qualified people without connections and frittered away taxpayer money.

But Magistrate Judge Sidney I. Schenkier also warned on Monday that the system was not immune from corruption and would still have to be watched to ensure that the old ways would not return. The city inspector general will have the power to monitor hiring.

Substantial compliance with the decree “does not mean the city has achieved a state of perfection,” the judge said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Historians say that under former Mayor Richard J. Daley, who held the job from 1955 to 1976, elected officials freely hired or dismissed workers based on their party loyalty.

Mr. Shakman, now 71, supported the lifting of the decree and said in an interview on Monday that he had not anticipated how long it would take.

“Patronage is a cultural problem, and cultural reform is difficult,” he said. “I think it reflects the progress that’s been made.”

The decision was gleefully welcomed by Mr. Emanuel, who is eager for Chicago to shed its image as a place where political favoritism rules. Mr. Emanuel testified on Monday, telling the judge that the end of the Shakman decrees would point “the way to Chicago’s future.”

“For decades, city jobs that were supposed to be awarded based on merit were instead based on political clout — it was who you know instead of what you know,” Mr. Emanuel said. “In many cases, the people of Chicago suffered the consequences, through unqualified workers, no-show jobs and abuse of taxpayer resources.”

Elizabeth Taylor, the literary editor of The Chicago Tribune and a co-author of “American Pharaoh,” a renowned biography of Mr. Daley, acknowledged that the armies of patronage workers were gone, but expressed some skepticism over whether the city was free of favoritism in hiring.

“Now it’s gone more pinstripe,” she said. “It’s more subtle. It might be happening on a higher and bigger level.”

The Emanuel administration has taken pains to cooperate with the court-appointed monitor, Noelle Brennan, who said in a report released in May that she believed oversight was no longer necessary, since the city had diligently enforced fair policies on hiring. “These policies have resulted in a more professional and efficient hiring process, and a more transparent and fair set of employment rules,” she wrote.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Shakman decrees have been enormously expensive for Chicago. In 2005, a federal judge put a monitor in place to oversee compliance, and that oversight along with legal fees and compensation to wronged employees, has cost Chicago $22.8 million, the city says.

Andy Shaw, the president and chief executive of the Better Government Association, a watchdog group, called the ruling “an important milestone for the city.”

“Corruption still flourishes in many ways in Chicago and in the suburbs and downstate, but probably not as openly and as brazenly as it has in the past,” Mr. Shaw said. “But as Mayor Emanuel himself said recently, patronage is never dead in a city like this.”