Presidential candidate Dr. Ben Carson recently lost a tooth while eating during a campaign stop in South Carolina.

According to TMZ, The Republican candidate was eating at Tommy's Country Ham House in Greenville, South Carolina when his front tooth fell on his plate of scrambled eggs, grits, ham, and biscuits.

He pocketed the fallen tooth in his front shirt, and the continued on eating.

Later on the presidential hopeful delivered a speech, with a front tooth missing.

Dr. Ben Carson only recently announced that he was running for president. The retired neurosurgeon, also only became a Republican as of late, after years being an independent.

To introduce himself to the American public, Carson and his team will be airing their self-sponsored documentary. Titled "A Breath of Fresh Air: A New Prescription for America," the 40-minute TV special will revolve around his life.

It will include his poor childhood, being raised by a single mother, to his acceptance at the prestigious Johns Hopkins department of pediatric neurosurgery, where he eventually became its director for 40 years.

The documentary will also include the landmark case that made Dr. Carson famous -- the first successful operation to separate twins conjoined at the head in 1987.

The famous neurosurgeon was first noticed in political circles when he made a speech at the National Prayer Breakfast. He talked about political correctness, health care, and taxes to an audience that included President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden.

Carson also called for private health care savings plans and a flat tax in a speech that was widely shared and went viral. After this, he wrote an editorial piece for the Wall Street Journal which was titled, "Ben Carson for President."

He is also known as an outspoken opponent of the president's health care law known as Obamacare. In fact, he has been quoted as saying that Obamacare is "the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery" and, in fact, "is slavery, in a way."