Even doctors sometimes defer to grandma's kitchen-cupboard cures. As a medical school student, DeJarra Sims contracted a sinus infection during pediatric rounds. Her aunt suggested a longtime, family cure: chicken broth containing half an onion and a clove of garlic. Sims was pleasantly surprised to find it immediately helped. “Some of these old wives' tales and old-world treatments have real validity, but time just forgot about them,” says Sims. She eventually redirected her studies from allopathic to naturopathic medicine and is now an assistant professor at Bastyr University, which focuses on alternative medicine. She later learned the science behind why it worked. Onions and garlic contain antiviral and antibacterial proprieties that actively help fight colds and flus. “A lot of times, home remedies can be cost effective, less caustic and less invasive,” Sims says. “A lot of home remedies are now backed by science and we know what works and why.” Home remedy advice is plentiful, especially from the Internet, but all of it should be taken with caution. Health consumers are advised to seek professional advice, especially before using a first-time treatment. Supplements are exempt from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's strict oversight regarding safety and effectiveness – so just because a product is on store shelves doesn't guarantee it is legitimate and safe. A 2015 investigation by the New York State attorney general's office concluded that four out of five supplement products at GNC, Target, Walgreens and Walmart did not contain any of the herbs listed on the labels. “Some complementary medicinal options, like acupuncture and various herbal remedies, are great,” says Dr. Richard Kwun, medical director at Swedish's Mill Creek Emergency Department. “Consult with someone, though, who has attended a program and has a verifiable degree or training. That's a better option than trying to just research it on your own.” FACT: Honey for sore throats and coughs A spoonful of plain honey or honey added to a mug of tea is an effective treatment for sore throats and coughs. “Honey is a demulcent, which means it soothes irritated mucous membranes. It also offers antimicrobial benefits, a broad term describing substances that help fight bacteria and viruses,” says Kiran Khaira, first-year naturopathic medical resident at Bastyr Center for Natural Health. Children under one year old should not ingest honey, however, due to the risk of botulism. However, it is particularly effective for older children. “Children under five years old shouldn't take decongestants, such as Sudafed or NyQuil, due to cardiovascular risks. Honey is a great alternative,” says Dr. Sarah Bergman Lewis, pediatrician at The Everett Clinic. A second option for sore throats is gargling with warm salt water. “The salt pulls the water out of your cells, which starves the virus or whatever other germ is aggravating your throat. I personally do it every four hours as long as I have symptoms,” says Neal Malik, assistant professor at Bastyr University. FICTION: Krazy Glue for cuts Professionals sometimes use medical adhesives to seal cuts, but it's not a do-it-yourself remedy. “It's a very bad idea. Krazy Glue and others (at-home adhesives) are not designed to be used on organic material such as the body. Putting it on exposed, soft tissue can potentially be toxic,” Kwun says. According to Kwun, even medical-grade adhesives are not appropriate for all cuts. For example, facial wounds may require extra care to avoid scarring, and bite wounds are sometimes kept open to decrease the risk of infection. FACT & FICTION: Toothpaste for pimples It's affordable, readily accessible and you may see some initial success, but toothpaste is still best used for teeth rather than skin. “Toothpaste contains ingredients like baking soda and hydrogen peroxide that can help dry out acne,” Sims says. “However, there are also other chemicals in toothpaste, like alcohol and menthol, that can cause over drying, irritation and possibly burning of the skin.” If you prefer a home remedy rather than an over-the-counter treatment, Sims recommends using the raw materials in many toothpastes that do work. Make a paste from baking soda and hydrogen peroxide and apply directly to dry out pimples. FICTION: Spicy foods cause ulcers Feel free to dig into the salsa. Peptic ulcers are caused by the H. pylori bacteria and not spicy foods or stress as was previously believed. Antibiotics are now used to often successfully treat ulcers. If you already have digestive problems, such as irritable bowel syndrome or ulcerated colitis, it could aggravate it. However, spicy foods do not give ulcers,” Malik says. “Actually, there is a lot of research that shows spicy food can be beneficial. They have powerful antioxidants and some studies are finding certain spices improve blood circulation, which potentially decreases the risk of heart attacks and strokes.” FACT & FICTION: Wear a hat and coat or you'll catch a cold Feeling cold isn't the same as catching a cold. Viruses cause colds. Someone must come into contact with germs – common culprits are doorknobs, phones and computer keyboards – which infect their system, often entering through the eyes, nose or mouth. “Theoretically, extreme temperatures can weaken the immune system,” Kwun says. “If you go outside wearing shorts and a T-shirt when it's snowing, the act itself doesn't give you a cold. However, if you then come into contact with someone who's sick, you might have a greater potential of catching it.” Bundling up does remain good advice, though, particularly for children. “It's been shown that kids are more susceptible to getting sick when they're tired and cold,” says Bergman Lewis. “Especially with babies, dress them in the same amount of clothing as you would need to feel comfortably warm as an adult.” FICTION: Feed a cold, starve a fever Medical historians date this common health adage to the Middle Ages. The rationale was that fasting drops body temperature, which reduces fevers. With his trademark humor, even Mark Twain wrote about unsuccessfully trying the remedy. “We would never prescribe starving an illness,” says Bergman Lewis. “A person may not feel like eating, but try to get nutrients in different ways other than maybe a large meal. Fluids are always a good idea because you tend to lose them when you're sick through congestion, vomiting and diarrhea.” The best path to recovery is a strong immune system, which needs fuel in the form of food and liquids. FACT: Cranberry juice for urinary tract infections According to the Mayo Clinic, more conclusive research is needed to pinpoint the degree of its effectiveness, but cranberry juice is useful in preventing urinary tract infections in women and helpful in treating existing infections in conjunction with antibiotics. “Cranberry juice helps prevent the bacteria, E. coli, that causes most UTIs from multiplying and adhering to the walls of the urinary tract,” Khaira says. “Something that's important, though, is to make sure you're drinking cranberry juice with no sugar added. Sugar can actually make it worse.” Some people find straight cranberry juice unpalatable due to its tartness. Khaira suggests cranberry concentrate in capsules as an alternative. FACT & FICTION: Chicken soup is a cure-all Chicken soup is arguably the most commonly prescribed at-home treatment. There is no conclusive evidence that it's a silver bullet cure, but it provides many overall benefits. “In general, hot liquids help you stay hydrated and any salt may make a sore throat feel better,” Malik says. “When we're sick, we need protein to help us heal more quickly and chicken provides that.” For a protein boost, Natasha Clarke, herbalist and host of The Herb Hunter on Snohomish County's KSER radio, advises that lamb broth or other sources can be equally beneficial. “Any bones that have been boiled for a long time are extremely nourishing. If you want to make your soup more powerful, add a tablespoon of vinegar. It helps leech more minerals, such as potassium, from the bones.” Deanna Duff covers diverse news and lifestyle topics with a special interest in health writing. Follow her on Twitter @DeannaDuff1.