BULLHEAD CITY — There were almost as many reasons to celebrate as there were trout released Saturday morning at Welcome Back the Trout.

Hundreds of hopeful fisher folk cast their lines as 7,000 rainbow trout were released into Davis Camp’s south beach waters.

“This is terrific,” said Mohave County Sup. Hildy Angius. “Welcome Back the Trout is our annual event to show the community that fishing is alive and well in Bullhead City and Mohave County. I’m going to go out on a limb and say this program offers the best fishing in Arizona — maybe even the entire west coast.”

The second year for the stocking event and fishing clinic was organized by Arizona Game and Fish Department to commemorate the return of the popular sport fish to the waters south of Davis Dam.

During the clinic hours, entrance to the county park was free and people could fish without a license.

Alex Felix brought his kids, and an optimistic attitude.

“We moved here two years ago and haven’t caught a fish yet,” he said. “Maybe today will be our lucky day.”

“We’ve got the gear,” said 13-year old Alexis Felix. “It’s worth a try.”

Walmart and Riviera Marina donated raffle items for the event.

“It’s a good thing for the community,” said Rusty Braun of Riviera Marina. “You can see by how many people have shown up how much support there is for trout fishing.”

Marci Alderman, Game and Fish sport fishing education coordinator, believes in encouraging families to get outdoors to fish.

“This program educates people around the state about fishing in Arizona, with a focus on letting kids have a good time,” she said. “Fishing is an opportunity for the whole family to have fun. We’re pleased there’s such a good turnout today, people were here 2 hours early.”

The stocking program is possible because of the partnership between Mohave County and AGFD, said Sup. Angius.

“Any time agencies partner, more gets done,” said Matt Chmiel, AGFD fisheries program manager. “In this case, Mohave County provided $50,000 to buy the fish to use to stock south beach. Fishing contributes greatly to this area’s economy, so stocking fish and providing people with the opportunity to catch fish benefits everyone.”

More than 3,800 pounds of rainbow trout were released Saturday morning, said Lonell Crowther, owner of Crowther’s Fresh Water Trout fishery of La Jara, Colorado. The fishery owner recently marked his 300th delivery of fish to Arizona waters over a 20-year period.

“I think it’s a great thing to stock the Colorado from Colorado,” Crowther said. “Since this is a special day for the fish, I groomed each one, brushed their teeth, and polished them up so they look great.”

In addition to the recreational and economic benefit of rainbow trout restocking, it is hoped that a regular stocking program will help bring the Colorado River’s booming caddisfly population under control, said Don Hendron, Bullhead City pest abatement district president.

“It’s not a fast solution, but it is the long-term solution,” he said. “Spraying programs are not effective against caddisflies, and without the trout, they have few natural enemies.”

Trout stocking south of Davis Dam went on hiatus for nearly a year after the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service announced that it was terminating the rainbow trout propagation program at the Willow Beach facility in Nov. 2013 due to insufficient funds to repair a broken water line that delivers water from Lake Mohave to the trout ponds at the hatchery.

An agreement was reached in March between AGFD, Mohave County, and the USFWS to restore rainbow trout stocking at Willow Beach National Fish Hatchery, located along the Colorado River south of the Hoover Dam.

“I attended a meeting recently where we learned that the decision to stop stocking trout in 2013 led to the growth in the caddisfly population,” Hendron said. “Trout will eat caddis fly larvae, and the more trout we get into the river, the faster the problem will come under control.”

The goal is to re-stock the trout two more times before June, he said.

“Hildy Angius has done an incredible job getting the trout returned to the area,” Hendron said. “Everyone involved in the program has been terrific, from AGFD to individuals like Nathan Michaels of Desert Recreation, who donated $5,000 towards getting more trout to reduce the caddisfly population.”

While it has been a tough year, Sup. Angius said, she’s pleased with the progress that has been made.

“AGFD has been a terrific partner,” she said. “I hope to have an announcement soon regarding Willow Beach and the fish hatchery.