TRENTON — U.S. Sen. Rand Paul has taken yet another swing at Gov. Chris Christie — this time over Obamacare.

Paul, a Republican from Kentucky, was asked during an interview on CNN on Tuesday whether Christie and former Gov. Jeb Bush are conservatives. All three are possible rivals for the Republican nomination for president in 2016.

"I don't think any one person gets to decide what is or what isn't conservative,” Paul told host Erin Burnett. "On the case of the New Jersey governor, I think embracing Obamacare, expanding Medicaid in his state is very expensive and not fiscally conservative."

Christie chose to expand the government health care program under President Obama's Affordable Care Act — making New Jersey one of the few states with a Republican governor to do so.

"Many Republican governors I would say are conservative did resist expanding and accepting Obamacare in their states," Paul said. "That fact, I would say, would lead towards you making the conclusion that it is not a very conservative proposal."

During his state budget address in February, Christie stressed that he is "no fan of the Affordable Care Act" but added that expanding Medicaid was "the smart thing to do for our fiscal and public health."

He said the move is expected to save the state $227 million a year by enrolling 104,000 low-income people into Medicaid, beginning in January.

Christie and Paul traded words through the media in an ongoing argument earlier this year — about government spying, federal aid, and more.

Paul has stepped up his attacks since Christie was re-elected in a landslide Nov. 5, increasing speculation that the governor is a strong presidential contender. But Christie has not responded.

The two represent the increasingly divided factions of the national Republican party — Christie being more moderate and Paul leaning toward more conservative views.

A spokesman for Christie's office did not respond immediately to a message seeking comment today.

RELATED COVERAGE

• Rand Paul continues his anti-Christie rampage

• More Politics