Bacon might be giving you more than just high cholesterol. (iStockPhoto)

We all knew bacon contained unhealthy amounts of fat, plenty of salt and lots of cholesterol. But now the World Health Organization is saying that it – and other processed meats, like hot dogs – will even cause cancer.

The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), an arm of the WHO, said Monday that evidence suggests processed meats are far worse for us than we initially believed. The agency also determined that, based on limited evidence, the consumption of red meat was “probably carcinogenic to humans.”

According to experts, each 50 gram portion of processed meat eaten daily can increase the risk of cancer by 18 percent.



“For an individual, the risk of developing colorectal cancer because of their consumption of processed meat remains small, but the risk increases with the amount of meat consumed,” said Dr. Kurt Straif, head of the IARC Monographs Program. “In view of the large number of people who consume processed meat, the global impact on cancer incidence is of public health importance.”

While consumption of meat varies widely from country to country, Dr. Christopher Wild, Director of IARC, said that the findings from over 800 studies in the last 20 years analyzing the association of processed meats with cancer back up assertions that people should limit meat consumption.

“At the same time, red meat has nutritional value,” Wild said. “Therefore, these results are important in enabling governments and international regulatory agencies to conduct risk assessments, in order to balance the risks and benefits of eating red meat and processed meat.”

The $95 billion beef industry in the U.S. saw the conclusion coming and prepared for the findings with a response of its own.

“We simply don’t think the evidence support any causal link between any red meat and any type of cancer,” Shalene McNeill, executive director of human nutrition at the National Cattlemen’s Beef Association, told The Washington Post.

Complicating things further, the American Cancer Society has noted that many studies find “a link” between cancer and consumption of red meat, but they’re not sure.