The 25 cents per hour that workers made under the country’s first minimum wage law, enacted in 1938, was low, even by modern standards. It would be about $4.13 an hour today, 3 bucks less than the current federal minimum of $7.25 an hour.

But by 1950, the 75-cent-per-hour wage floor was on par with the current minimum wage, though it only covered workers engaged in interstate commerce. By 1968, when it was expanded to cover virtually all workers, the $1.15 an hour that was the lowest rate companies could pay employees would be worth $7.70 today.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Even though Missouri just had its second minimum wage increase in as many years, the 15-cent increase from $7.35 to $7.50 is still not where it was, in real terms, almost 50 years ago.

Whether that matters or not, or whether the minimum wage should be a “living wage,” is, like most things these days, a matter of hot contention between free-market proponents and those with a more egalitarian bent.

President Barack Obama called for a $9 minimum wage in his 2013 State of the Union address, and Senate Democrats are making noise about pushing a bill to hike the wage floor to more than $10 an hour.

In Jefferson City, Democrats in the Missouri House have filed a bill that would raise the state minimum wage again, to $8.25 an hour. And across the country, including in Columbia, fast-food workers have staged demonstrations seeking higher wages and less obstruction to unionization efforts. They have been aided by union representatives as well as faith-based organizations.

Republicans are likely to make passage of a higher minimum wage difficult at both the state and national level. But that doesn’t mean it won’t be debated, as Democrats seek to make the November elections about rising inequality rather than Obamacare.

It might look like political posturing unlikely to gain enough traction to become law, but that doesn’t mean some business owners aren’t paying attention.

“I would definitely take that seriously,” said Harsh Ghai, whose family owns nearly 50 Burger Kings, including three in Columbia and two others in Mid-Missouri. “The state of politics in D.C., the way that they are right now, I would take that very seriously.”

■

Economists are divided on the minimum wage. For decades, the consensus was that although some workers would see higher pay, there would be a reduction in employment, especially among teenagers. Many studies focused on teenage employment because the young, part-time, entry-level workers tend to be the lowest-paid.

Indeed, they make up the highest proportion of minimum wage earners: The U.S. Department of Labor estimated that in 2011, about half of the workers paid the minimum wage were younger than 25. One of the most cited studies, from the early 1980s, estimated that a 10 percent increase in the minimum wage would reduce teenage employment by 0.5 percent to 3 percent.

But in 1995, the debate changed with a paper by David Card and Alan Krueger, who later was appointed by Obama to lead the White House Council of Economic Advisors. The paper examined minimum wage increases in New Jersey, which in 1992 gave the state the highest minimum wage in the country. The economists found that there was no correlation between a higher minimum wage and a reduction of employment at fast-food restaurants in the state. Much of the higher cost, it found, was passed onto consumers.

After that paper, there was heated debate among neoclassical economists and progressive economists over wage floor hikes. It’s far from settled, even within the same organizations. A 2010 paper by Richard Sutch published by the National Bureau of Economic Research said that “there seems to be no discernable evidence of an impact on employment overall.”

But last year, also in a paper published by the National Bureau of Economic Research, David Neumark of the University of California at Irvine and William Wascher of the Federal Reserve Board found that the evidence overall “still shows that minimum wages pose a tradeoff of higher wages for some against job losses for others, and that policymakers need to bear this tradeoff in mind when making decisions about increasing the minimum wage.”

■

It’s fair to say that how business owners would react to a higher minimum would vary by industry and location. In Columbia, where unemployment is less than 4 percent, some business owners said the tight labor market means they have to pay above minimum wage, even in entry-level jobs.

“All of our starting wages at all of our stores have been above minimum wage for many years,” said Jeff Offutt, who owns 45 Subway franchises and five Five Guys Burgers and Fries restaurants. “To retain some good-quality folks, you have to be above minimum wage, anyway.”

If the wage floor is increased beyond the starting wages of his entry-level workers, the answer would almost certainly be price increases, especially at Subway, which is about as efficient as it can be labor-wise.

“The reality is we can’t absorb that kind of increase, so we have to pass on to customers one way or another,” he said. “The reality is, we’re already running fairly lean.”

At the other big sandwich franchise in town, Jimmy John’s, owner Mike Monahan said there would “absolutely” be an increase in food prices if there was a hike of more than $1 in the minimum wage. But he also said there could be some effect on the employment side.

“We’d run more efficiently,” he said. “The people that were more efficient would get the hours, and the others wouldn’t.”

But Ghai, the Burger King franchisee, said price increases haven’t worked out as well for his restaurants. As restaurant owners in Missouri speculate about the effect a quick rise of $1 or $2 would have on business, Ghai has already experienced it.

Many of his Burger King stores are in California, which is set to see its minimum wage rise from $8 to $9 in July. In March, a new local minimum wage law in San Jose, Calif., already raised the lowest hourly rate from $8 to $10, affecting several stores.

“That was our initial thought process, ‘Hey, we’re just going to raise prices and pass the increases onto consumers,’ ” Ghai said.

But it didn’t work, he said, because people weren’t willing to change their mindset overnight and pay more than they were used to for a Whopper. It was too fast of an increase. As a result, they’ve reduced employees.

Missouri’s minimum wage increase this year hasn’t had too much of an effect, even though Ghai said many of the employees here begin at minimum wage. It’s the large jumps on the West Coast that have been hard to deal with.

“That’s also a big reason that we’ve expanded into Missouri, because we feel there’s a better opportunity for growth out there.”

■

Missouri’s state minimum wage is tied to the cost of living, so in the past two years it has risen from $7.25 to $7.50. It’s only since 2006, when Missouri voters overwhelmingly approved an increase in the minimum wage from $5.15 to $6.50 and indexed it to the cost of living, that the state has had a higher minimum than the federal rate. Because Republicans don’t appear to be losing strength anytime soon in Jefferson City, a larger jump than the cost-of-living index seems unlikely in Missouri.

The national conversation, though, has heated up again, with protests and the president and Congress citing the minimum wage’s loss of real value over the past 50 years.

“One of the things the movement has really done well is raising awareness and conversation,” said the Rev. Molly Housh Gordon, the minister at Columbia’s Unitarian Universalist Church who has joined fast-food workers during local demonstrations. Her church’s national body supports a higher minimum wage. “I see a lot more people talking about it right now. In that way, the various folks who have been trying to get this conversation started have been really successful.”

Although a big jump in the federal minimum wage would need to clear the Republican-controlled U.S. House, franchise owners are still taking the possibility seriously.

“Absolutely, I watch it closely,” said Monahan, the Jimmy John’s franchisee. “When they started all this $15-an-hour picketing across the country. ... What people need to understand is that’s just gonna raise the price of everything, and then we’ll be in the same boat.”

Others aren’t too worried. Eric Cole owns Freddy’s Frozen Custard and Steakburgers in Columbia and several others in the state, and he said his workers make more than minimum wage, anyway, even outside of Columbia.

“We honestly don’t pay attention to the current minimum wage rates at all,” he said. “I don’t have anybody at or near that rate on my payroll.”

Cole said he has got other stuff to think about right now. “I think it’s one of those situations where there’s so much else to worry about, you worry about it when you have to.”

Whether the debate goes anywhere or not, Offutt, the Subway and Five Guys franchisee, said there are better ways to raise low-income workers’ standard of living. Long term, minimum wage is repealed by inflation, and that inflation could be accelerated by a higher wage floor, he said.