As the deadline for the Affordable Care Act’s health insurance exchanges looms, Jill Biden visited the Dallas area Tuesday to help launch a new initiative aimed at mothers.

The campaign, spearheaded by MomsRising, involves mothers hosting “house parties” in their communities to provide information to their friends and family about the coverage options under the ACA. At Tuesday’s house party in DeSoto, 15 Dallas-area moms shared with Biden their personal stories about the importance of healthcare coverage. The house party campaign is the latest phase in MomsRising’s ongoing Wellness Wonder Teams campaign.

The vice president’s wife shared a story about a good friend in New Jersey who’s dealing with cancer. Her insurance company dropped her in the middle of treatment, but she signed up with the ACA’s insurance exchanges and received coverage.

“It’s a big deal about the preexisting condition because, you know, my friend, your friend, would never have been able to get insurance,” Biden said. “I think we probably all know somebody who this has happened to. I push my students to sign up.

“They need to realize, accidents happen,” Biden said, holding up her cast-encased left hand, which broke in a fall in late January.

While the event and initiative are focused on women, Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins—a staunch supporter of the law and its efforts—was also in attendance.

“We’re finding healthcare decisions in family units are made by women,” he said. “People listen more to women. So empowering other women to talk to people they love should really help.”

MomsRising provides tool kits that include information on coverage options and enrollment. Open enrollment for healthcare through the marketplaces for this year closes on March 31. About 1 in 4 people in Texas—or 6.4 million residents—is uninsured, and the number is even higher in Dallas.

Veronica Moore, regional outreach specialist with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, said 506,000 Dallas County residents are eligible for some type of financial assistance for their coverage.

“When people think about the ACA they think this is another government program, and I have to be really low-income to qualify, that’s just not the case,” Moore said. “We’ve had a case where a family of four that makes up to $90,000 a year and can still get some kind of financial assistance.”

Parties can be hosted at homes, community centers, schools, or anywhere, MomsRising officials emphasized. The group provides a “Healthcare Gathering Toolkit” pamphlet, which includes info on how to plan a gathering, a sample agenda, sample questions and activities, a flowchart with coverage options, and information about women’s preventative services in the ACA.

White House pool reports were used in this story.