NEW YORK--(BUSINESS WIRE)--BDO USA, LLP, one of the nation’s leading professional services organizations, today announced the addition of E. Venson Wallin, Jr., as a Managing Director with BDO Consulting. Mr. Wallin expands the firm’s regulatory and compliance capabilities for its Healthcare Advisory practice and The BDO Center for Healthcare Excellence & Innovation.

Mr. Wallin joins Patrick Pilch, National Leader of BDO’s Healthcare Advisory practice, counseling organizations on enhancements to financial and operational systems, including guidance on compliance measures related to financial performance improvement and internal controls.

“Understanding the complex nature of the healthcare regulatory environment, Venson brings a depth of regulatory experience and financial acumen, which combined, further expand our ability to deliver transformative services to our clients,” said Carl W. Pergola, Executive Director of BDO Consulting.

“Our Healthcare Advisory practice includes seasoned industry leaders with clinical, financial regulatory and data analysis backgrounds that enable us to best serve the evolving needs of our clients,” said Mr. Pilch. “Venson has an impressive track record of successfully leading healthcare organizations through a range of regulatory and financial challenges, and we are delighted that he has joined BDO.”

“I am pleased to be a member of BDO’s exemplary team of healthcare professionals,” said Mr. Wallin. “The firm’s range of services and innovative approaches to solving clients’ needs are well aligned with my passion for helping healthcare organizations position themselves for success.”

Mr. Wallin brings a wealth of experience that includes advising hospitals and health systems, continuing care retirement communities, nursing homes, academic medical centers and physician groups. He has a proven ability to manage teams through audits, bond financings, due diligence projects and the adoption of new regulatory accounting provisions.

Prior to joining BDO, Mr. Wallin served as an executive in the Healthcare practice at EY and as the Project Management Officer for its National Healthcare Reform Taskforce. He has advised healthcare clients on a range of issues including Affordable Care Act impact modeling and education, ICD-10 implementation, federal and state compliance issues, debt capacity and feasibility studies, service line assessments, government reimbursement and chargemaster pricing. He has also served as a Board Member and Treasurer of the Memorial Child Guidance Clinic in Richmond, Va. Mr. Wallin holds a B.B.A. in Accounting from the College of William and Mary and is a member of the Healthcare Financial Management Association (HFMA).

About BDO Consulting

BDO Consulting, a division of BDO USA, LLP, provides clients with Financial Advisory, Business Advisory and Technology Services in the U.S. and around the world, leveraging BDO’s global network of over 55,000 professionals. Having a depth of industry expertise, we provide rapid, strategic guidance in the most challenging of environments to achieve exceptional client service. For more information, please visit www.bdoconsulting.com.

About BDO

BDO is the brand name for BDO USA, LLP, a U.S. professional services firm providing assurance, tax, financial advisory and consulting services to a wide range of publicly traded and privately held companies. For more than 100 years, BDO has provided quality service through the active involvement of experienced and committed professionals. The firm serves clients through 52 offices and more than 400 independent alliance firm locations nationwide. As an independent Member Firm of BDO International Limited, BDO serves multi-national clients through a global network of 1,264 offices in 144 countries.

BDO USA, LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership, is the U.S. member of BDO International Limited, a UK company limited by guarantee, and forms part of the international BDO network of independent member firms. BDO is the brand name for the BDO network and for each of the BDO Member Firms. For more information, please visit www.bdo.com.