All these plans are largely for individuals who cannot get group insurance through their employers. Consumers can start shopping online Nov. 1 for 2016 plans at www.healthcare.gov.

"Exchange insurers are learning the natural price points for every market and modifying their plan designs to get to that premium," said Mark Cherry, principal analyst for Florida and Pennsylvania at Decision Resources Group, a health-care-data firm.

Cherry said Independence Blue Cross, which owns Keystone Health Plan East, and Aetna seemed to be setting prices in response to UnitedHealthcare, which entered the market last year with a lower-priced plan.

In other parts of the state, the same 40-year-old nonsmoker will see increases as high as 28 percent - to $289.23 from $226 for a Geisinger Health plan available in certain western counties, the insurance data showed. Double-digit increases are common across the state.

The biggest decrease for an HMO plan was 10 percent for a UnitedHealthcare plan available in the center of the state.

Final New Jersey rates for 2016 Affordable Care Act Plans are expected to be released next week.

The monthly premiums are just part of the cost for consumers. Premiums do not include out-of-pocket expenses, such as deductibles and co-pays.

There's a reason for the volatility in pricing, Pennsylvania Insurance Commissioner Teresa Miller said. When insurers set prices for their plans under the Affordable Care Act in 2014 and this year, they didn't know what to expect from the influx of people who might have been uninsured before, she said.

Now, the insurers are adjusting higher or lower.

"That is in many cases because they just took different approaches. Some of them may have overpriced and not meant to. Some may have underpriced," Miller said.

"This is the first year," she said, "where companies actually have a year's worth of claims experience to base their rates on for next year."

Insurers also continue tweaking their offerings in response to competitors.

Aetna, for example, is introducing Aetna Leap next year in the Philadelphia market, said Cherry. It offers a tiered network similar to Independence's tiered Proactive plans, offering patients higher costs for certain hospitals. But, Cherry said, it has two tiers instead of three.

hbrubaker@phillynews.com

215-854-4651

@InqBrubaker