SAGINAW, MI — Transportation can be a major barrier to seeking healthcare, according to Jeff Reinarz.

That's why Health Delivery, Inc. decided to open a new facility in Old Town Saginaw, said Reinarz, Health Delivery's director of communications and development.

The new clinic, Old Town Saginaw Community Health Center, opened Wednesday, Dec. 9, inside the building at 804 S. Hamilton. The facility, which Reinarz said essentially serves as a family practice clinic, is now accepting patients.

"It's open to everybody," Reinarz said.

Health Delivery received a $1,083,333 New Access Point grant from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services earlier this year, which has helped to fund the creation of the new health center. The grant was a part of an additional $169 million in Affordable Care Act funding used to support 266 new health center sites in 46 states across the country.

While Health Delivery does have a focus on providing care to the underserved and uninsured, Reinarz said it is important for the public to understand their facilities are open to everyone, including those with private insurance.

For those currently without health insurance, Reinarz said Health Delivery is happy to help those individuals navigate the Affordable Care Act online marketplace.

"If you don't have insurance, we will help you get insurance or get Medicaid, if you qualify," he said.

Those who do not want to obtain insurance also are welcome. Fees for those patients are paid on a sliding income scale available at the Health Delivery website.

Services available directly at the Old Town clinic include primary care, lab work, acute care and well-child visits. Reinarz explained that patients in need of additional health services not provided at the new facility will receive referrals to other Health Delivery facilities in the region.

Based in Saginaw, Health Delivery has more than 25 facilities throughout the Great Lakes Bay Region, in areas including Bay City, Owosso, Imlay City and West Branch.

"We like to say we are the best kept secret in the Great Lakes Bay Region and we don't want to be a secret anymore."

One of the healthcare provider's most well-known facilities, according to Reinarz, is Janes Street Academic Community Health Center, located at 1522 Janes in Saginaw. The new facility is similar, but on a smaller scale.

New patients can contact the clinic at 989-921-5372.

"Call the clinic or stop by and become a patient," Reinarz said. "We go from there."

According a statement from Reinarz, part of the mission of Health Delivery is to deal with poor health outcomes in the local population. Those outcomes can include high infant mortality, low levels of immunization compliance, untreated instances of mental health and high rates of death linked to preventable causes.

"We truly want quality healthcare for everyone," the statement reads.

For more information visit healthdelivery.org or the Health Delivery Facebook page.

— Jessica Shepherd is a reporter with MLive/The Saginaw News. Contact her at 989-996-0687, email her at jessica_shepherd@mlive.com or follow her on Twitter.