Kale has become a popular green

hello

The leaves of kale can be curled or flat.

Lacinato kale has blue-green foliage and grows 2 to 3 feet tall and about 2 feet wide. Photos Courtesy of The Planter's Palette

Kale is a nutritional dynamo. It is packed with vitamins, minerals, antioxidants and glucosinolates, believed to help combat many types of cancer, alleviate allergies and inflammation, fight heart disease, promote digestive health, and prevent premature aging of the skin.

With all the health benefits kale has to offer, why not grow some this year and have access to fresh kale every day? It is so easy to grow. Start it from seed or purchase small plants at your local garden center to transplant in your garden.

Growing kale

Start seed either indoors about eight weeks before the expected last frost date, or outdoors directly in the garden a month before the expected last frost date. Plant seeds one-quarter to one-half inch deep and a few inches apart. As seedlings emerge, thin plants to at least a foot apart.

Plant transplants a month before the anticipated last frost date. Set them at the same depth they were growing in their pots, and space them about 18 inches apart. The more distance between plants, the larger the leaves. In containers, plant kale as snug as 8 inches apart. I tuck my plants in a little tighter because I prefer smaller, tenderer leaves.

Kale grows best in full sun, but performs satisfactorily in part shade. It requires fertile soil amended with organic matter. Work nitrogen-rich amendments like blood meal, cottonseed meal, peat moss or leaf mold in the soil before planting.

Consistent moisture is vital for best growth. The quality and flavor of leaves is compromised in drought conditions. Applying a layer of mulch keeps the soil moist longer.

As summer heat sets in, plants begin to produce flower stalks topped with small yellow flowers. Remove these before they develop and plants continue to produce new leaves.

Harvesting and storing kale

Begin harvesting kale soon after plants begin producing leaves about the size of your hand. Gather a few leaves from the outside of plants at each harvest. Avoid cutting center buds -- these are needed to keep leaves growing.

I favor the lighter taste of kale and pick leaves when they are quite young. If you prefer the bold, zesty flavor of kale, wait to harvest until leaves are larger and more mature. In hot weather, leaves may become bitter.

Thoroughly wash leaves, put them in a plastic bag and store in the refrigerator. They should last at least a week.

Cooking with kale

Kale has garnered the attention of many chefs, and there are thousands of kale recipes online. My favorite ways to eat kale is fresh in salads and baked into kale chips. Most people prefer kale served hot -- boiled, steamed just long enough to make it tender, or stir-fried with other vegetables.

Use kale in soups or saute it in a pan with garlic and onions, sprinkled with extra-virgin olive oil. No matter how you fancy it, remove the stalks and leaf ribs before cooking.

Recipe for Kale Chips

Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Use parchment paper to cover a baking sheet.

Wash and dry kale leaves thoroughly.

Using a knife, remove the stems and leaf ribs from kale leaves.

Chop or tear leaves into snack-sized pieces.

Drizzle leaves with extra-virgin olive oil and season with salt.

Bake until edges just start to brown (about 10 minutes).

Enjoy!

• Diana Stoll is a horticulturist and the garden center manager at The Planter's Palette, 28W571 Roosevelt Road, Winfield. Call (630) 293-1040, ext. 2, or visit planterspalette.com.