The Pedestrian Council wants police to crackdown on people talking and texting on their mobile phones. Picture: Picture Campbell Brodie.

TEXTING, tweeting and talking — it can all be done on the mobile phone, but don’t do it while crossing the road.

Police are fining wayward pedestrians who are putting themselves and other road users in danger because they can’t take their eyes off their mobile phones or are listening to music.

And one road safety expert has called for tougher penalties and a crackdown on people walking, talking and texting saying pedestrians have become “disconnected from their brains”.

Under the Road Traffic Act a person “must not walk without due care or attention or without reasonable consideration for other persons using the road” or face a $105 fine.

SA Police fined and cautioned 62 people in the 18 months to July this year for breaking the law.

But Pedestrian Council chairman Harold Scruby said walking while using a mobile phone was dangerous and called for increased enforcement and penalties.

Mr Scruby said the cost of medical assistance for a pedestrian involved in a crash was double that of someone inside a motor vehicle, totalling $20 million for lifetime care.

“This is a new phenomenon like an epidemic. It’s out of control and it’s costly,” he said.

“Sometimes up to one in three people crossing the road is using some kind of mobile device.

“They are disconnected from their brains. It’s not just them at risk but other people too.”

The Sunday Mail observed dozens of pedestrians walking across King William St at the intersection of Hindley St and Rundle Mall in a 30-minute period on Wednesday lunchtime.

None of the people spoken to by the Sunday Mail were aware of the $105 fine they may have received and some were even unperturbed.

Several people said they knew what they were doing was potentially dangerous while others said they would stop doing it upon learning of the penalty.

Traffic Support Branch Superintendent Bob Fauser said pedestrians needed to use the road with care and be respectful of other people’s rights.

“Regardless of any lawful rights or obligations, pedestrians must understand that they will always come off second best when they are involved in a collision with a motor vehicle,” he said.

“Therefore, even if you have right of way, make sure that other road users are doing the right thing before walking on to the road.”