The number of people enrolling in health plans through Massachusetts' new health insurance exchange has fallen far short of expectations, as glitches with the health connector website have forced state officials to process applications by hand.

As of Dec. 30, only 497 people had successfully enrolled in new subsidized health plans through Massachusetts' health connector.

State officials have put another 22,000 people on temporary insurance plans, paid for by the state, while the connector processes coverage applications.

The Massachusetts Health Connector blames its problems on its information technology vendor, CGI, which developed the state's new website.

"We continue to work closely with the vendor and put a lot of pressure on them to fix the problems and deliver the intended functionality," said Jason Lefferts, a spokesman for the Commonwealth Health Connector.

CGI did not return a call.

Josh Archambault, director of health care policy for the conservative-leaning Pioneer Institute, said the state is at fault as well. "CGI deserves some of the blame, but if you're the project manager, you have a deadline and plenty of taxpayer money to go about redoing a website, and you missed your deadline."

No one is going without coverage because of the glitches. Many of those currently enrolled in the state's health connector are seeing their current plans extended for another three months.

As of Dec. 30, a day before the deadline to enroll in the state's new health insurance exchange, established under the Affordable Care Act, 58,864 people had completed their applications for coverage through the exchange.

Of those, 24,256 are newly enrolled, according to data provided by the Health Connector. "We're encouraged by the fact that 24,000 people have subsidized coverage who didn’t have it before," Lefferts said.

Amy Whitcomb Slemmer, executive director of Health Care for All, which supports the health care reform law, said the number of newly enrolled could include people who are new to the state, who are newly insured or who did not previously qualify for subsidies, since the federal law gives subsidies to people with higher incomes than the state did.

"The exciting news is the almost 25,000 new folks who have enrolled, who have coverage," Whitcomb Slemmer said."We know that will have a positive impact on their lives and their ability to navigate the health care system they may not have had access to before they enrolled."

However, due to technological problems, the state has been unable to enroll those people in permanent health plans.

"There are some parts of the new system that we've been unable to get into place because the vendor hasn’t completed them yet," Lefferts said. Lefferts said one of those problems is with the automated determination process, through which the connector figures out what subsidy someone is eligible for and what insurance program they should be in.

There have also been recurring problems in account creation log-in, slow performance, time-outs and random and sporadic error messages, according to the Health Connector.

So instead of using a computer system to determine eligibility, the state is doing it by mail. Once a person fills out an application online, a state official runs the person through a program to determine their eligibility, then mails them a letter with plan options. Lefferts said the state sent out 2,000 to 3,000 letters. The customer must then call or fill out a form to pick a plan.

So far, 497 people have selected and been enrolled in a new plan. Another 1,388 have been found eligible for and enrolled in MassHealth, the state's Medicaid program for low-income individuals.

The remaining 22,371 new enrollees, however, are enrolled in temporary coverage. The coverage is a joint effort by the Health Connector and MassHealth, and is paid for by the state. According to a sample letter sent to enrollees, individuals do not have to pay for the temporary coverage. They can obtain health care services from all providers that participate in the MassHealth program. The benefits cover doctor and clinic visits, hospital stays, prescription medicines, mental health, family planning and laboratory services. Co-pays for most medications are $3.65 – the same co-pay available to MassHealth enrollees.

It is a fee-for-service program, so payments are made by the state only for services used by enrollees. Lefferts said no cost estimate is available since officials do not know the usage habits of people using the temporary coverage. The temporary coverage will be discontinued as soon as their applications are processed.

Archambault said he has logistical questions about the temporary coverage – whether people will have problems due to doctors being in-network for one of Massachusetts' health insurance plans but not others; whether the state will end up paying for people who would otherwise not be eligible for subsidies; and whether the federal government will chip in. "These are hopefully short-term issues, but they could have budgetary implications they didn’t anticipate," Archambault said.

"It certainly speaks to the failure of both the contractors and the connector to manage the transition to the Affordable Care Act well," Archambault said. "As a result, they’ve had to come up with stopgap measures to prevent people from going uncovered."

For people already enrolled in Commonwealth Care, the fix was simpler: letting people extend their current plans.

According to the state, there are 124,000 people enrolled in Commonwealth Care or two smaller plans, one tied to small businesses and one for those who are unemployed, whose plans were supposed to expire Dec. 31. Because the national enrollment period for the Affordable Care Act runs through March 31, the state received a federal waiver that allows people to keep their current plans through March, by which point they will need to sign up for a new plan.

Among that group, 33,450 have applied for a new plan through the health insurance exchange. None of those applications have been processed, so those people remain on their old plans.

There are another 130,000 people who were enrolled in Commonwealth Care who have been automatically moved to MassHealth, due to an expansion of Medicaid allowed under the Affordable Care Act.

Another 3,262 people have successfully enrolled in unsubsidized plans through the exchange.

Whitcomb Slemmer said the numbers are "a real success." "There were technological barriers that we managed, all of us, to work around and make sure folks had continuing coverage," she said. Her group runs a hotline that helps people understand the new system.

Paul Craney, executive director of the conservative Massachusetts Fiscal Alliance, said it is "incredibly staggering how bad" the numbers are. He pointed out that Massachusetts already had health care reform in place. "Due to a top down strategy of mandating certain new rules (under the Affordable Care Act), now we're seeing that all these states are having massive problems," Craney said. "Massachusetts was the model for how it should work. This is a failure in leadership. Massachusetts should have been left alone. The leadership in the state should have demanded that."

Lefferts said the Health Connector has a board meeting next Thursday, at which it will present a plan of action for moving forward and will discuss accountability for the website problems.