What was the original purpose of President Obama's Healthcare initiative, also known as Obamacare? We were told by the President that Obamacare would provide health insurance to those who could not afford regular health insurance, and it would provide insurance for people that could not get access to regular health insurance like people who are self-employed.

This all sounded great when Obamacare was first introduced. However, once it went into effect promises that were made by the President were broken. For example, we were told that people would be able to choose their own doctors and that premiums would be subsidized to make them more affordable. This was not entirely the truth.

To address the issue of the premiums we must first understand that even with the subsidies, health insurance premiums were and still are very high. Last year it was estimated that Obamacare premiums would increase up to 40 percent, and they did. And again next year they are expected to go up again. Already health insurance premiums through the marketplace are higher than most COBRA plans, again even with the subsidy and most people can't afford these premiums.

Insurance companies are suffering also if they offer insurance through the marketplace. It has become so bad that some insurance companies are dropping out of the marketplace and will not be offering insurance to people through Obamacare next year. United Healthcare is one of those insurance companies that is withdrawing from Obamacare. And last year Cigna dropped out of plan.

As for choosing your own doctor, well we all know how that turned out. You can choose your own doctor, as long as they participate in Obamacare. If they don't then you have to find a new doctor. What we were not told is that not all insurance companies would be participating in marketplace and not all doctors would accept Obamacare. Perhaps we should have read the fine print.

There have also been issues with the marketplace website. The marketplace website is where you go to sign up for Obamacare. But have you ever tried to maneuver on the website? It is cumber some and very slow, especially on the deadline day to sign up for Obamacare. The first year Obamacare became available and last year the website was down on the deadline date. And again, how much money did we spend willy nilly for this website? Way too much.

So, with issue after issue and broken promises, is Obamacare really going to be seen as part of President Obama's legacy or will it be seen as a disaster in need of a major overhaul? Most people would agree Obamacare is not what it was promised it would be. Perhaps the only bright spot in all of this is that before Obamacare most insurance companies would not insure you if you had a pre-existing condition, or they would insure you but your pre-existing condition would not be covered. Now insurance companies can not hold pre-existing conditions against you. So perhaps the President did do one good thing with this initiative.