Mount St. Mary's Hospital in Lewiston. | Twitter Contract talks continuing with nurses at Buffalo-area hospitals

ALBANY — About 220 registered nurses at Sisters of Charity Hospital, St. Joseph Campus, in Cheektowaga have been working without a contract since the end of August as their union continues negotiations with Catholic Health System.

“A lot of the main issues that are still out there that we can’t seem to agree on are staffing, [and the] recruitment and retention of nurses,” said Cori Gambini, a registered nurse and president of Communication Workers of America Local 1168, the union representing nurses at St. Joseph Campus.

Story Continued Below

Within the next year, CWA's contracts with nurses at Mount St. Mary's Hospital in Lewiston, Kenmore Mercy Hospital in Buffalo and Mercy Hospital of Buffalo are due to expire. Talks are underway at Mount St. Mary's and have just begun at Kenmore.

Giambini said that as the health care industry moves toward reducing hospitalizations and readmissions, more staffing will allow nurses to spend more time with patients, resulting in better overall quality of care.

“If nurses have less patients to care for, you’re going to increase the quality of care," she said. "You’re going to decrease admissions, you’re going to decrease mistakes, you’re going to decrease hospital acquired infections, which always makes everything more costly.”

The health system doesn’t see it that way.

Strapped for cash and evolving to changes in health care delivery, Catholic Health says it simply cannot afford additional staffing.

“Health care is in the midst of tremendous changes due to the Affordable Care Act and other healthcare reform,” the health system said in a statement. “Like other healthcare employers, Catholic Health is grappling with millions of dollars in reimbursement cuts and other changes in health care delivery, as we continue to pursue a fair contract for our registered nurses at St. Joseph Campus. For Catholic Health, these cuts will total more than $330 million over the next 10 years.”

But the union claims that making a monetary commitment to staffing will help mitigate costs in the future.

“Maybe they’ll realize that the cost up front to hire the nurses might initially be a cost incurred by the hospitals, but at the end they’ll end up just saving a ton of money and people would be healthier and have a better quality of life,” Gambini said.

Staffing has also been on the forefront for the New York State Nurses Association, the state’s largest registered nurses union, which has made the issue the focal point of its negotiations.

During the most recent legislative session, NYSNA and the CWA unsuccessfully pushed lawmakers to approve a “safe staffing” bill that would require hospitals to keep a minimum number of nurses on staff at all times and set mandatory nurse-to-patient ratios.

Though the two sides remain far apart, and Catholic Health has accused the union of “exhibiting a pattern of bad-faith bargaining,” a strike has not been discussed.

“We always tell our members, a strike is literally the last resort, Gambini said. "You have no other avenues ... It's not good for the company and it’s very stressful for the workers.”

Authors: