A Logan County man is arrested for kidnapping and abusing a 4-year-old girl and her mother.

Deputies say the two were beaten and held hostage by the woman's live-in boyfriend.

The 4-year-old had to be rushed to the hospital but will recover from her injuries, and the man accused of abusing her and her mother is in jail on $250,000 bond.

Court documents show 30-year-old Jonathan Lee Goodman abused both the mother and child inside a home on South Western in rural Logan County, and the injuries the little girl endured are horrible.

“Her face was injured to a point that we were concerned she might have an orbit fracture of her skull,” said Chief Deputy Richard Stephens with the Logan County Sheriff's Office. “Thank goodness she did not have an orbit fracture. She just happened to have a pretty beat up face and head.”

Court papers state Goodman grabbed that little girl by the hair and threw her across the room. It says he also grabbed her by the throat and choked her with his hands.

8/11/2014 Related Story: Logan Co. Man Accused Of Abusing, Kidnapping Woman And Her Child

Despite all that, the little girl was able to be treated and released from a local hospital the same day she was admitted.

Chief Deputy Richard Stephens says Goodman also threw a sword and a pipe wrench at the little girl's mother, but missed.

Court papers state Goodman also forced the mother to get a gun out of his vehicle, then shot at her two times.

That's when the mother and daughter were able to escape by running down the gravel road.

Stephens says Goodman has been in jail before but only for misdemeanor crimes.

He says that this was the first time deputies had been called out for a domestic related call, even though it is believed this is not the first time he had abused the mother and daughter.

“In interviewing the adult female, there is a history of domestic violence on at least one prior occasion that was not reported,” Stephens said.

Goodman faces several felony charges including child abuse, kidnapping and assault with a dangerous weapon.