MISHAWAKA — After five years as CEO of Saint Joseph Health System, Al Gutierrez is retiring.

He will step down Dec. 31.

“My time at Saint Joseph Health System has been very rewarding,” Gutierrez said today in a press release. “We have worked hard to establish an incredible team of committed professionals and top-of-the-line resources and protocols to ensure we are doing everything possible to provide the best care to the communities we serve."

Gutierrez will continue to lead Saint Joseph’s pursuit of its People-Centered 2020 strategic plan, while the board searches for his replacement.

"Al takes a lot of pride in everything he does," said Abe Marcus, chairman of the board for Saint Joseph Health System. "He strives for excellence. He's involved in the community and in all of Saint Joseph Health System."

Marcus will lead the eight-person search committee, which will involve physicians and other stakeholders. The organization hopes to hire someone by December and plans to consider internal candidates first. Since Saint Joseph's parent company, Trinity Health, has hospitals in 21 states, the internal search will be nearly nationwide.

If the committee doesn't find someone internally, Marcus added, it will hire a search firm for a national search.

"The company has changed a lot since Al was hired," he said. "It's much different today than it was when it was just Saint Joseph hospital in South Bend or Plymouth. We are not looking for a hospital administrator; we're looking for a CEO of a health system."

He doesn't think it will be difficult to attract good candidates though.

"We have a new six-year-old building and a quality staff," he said. "He (Gutierrez) hired an excellent executive team. There are a lot of reasons for someone to want to come to South Bend-Mishakawa."

After Gutierrez retires, Trinity Health, Saint Joseph's parent company, plans to look at ways to use his expertise in some of its future projects for the health care system.

Gutierrez, who has been in the health care industry for more than 40 years, joined Saint Joseph in 2010. He arrived two years after the hospital — which had spent more than a century near downtown South Bend — moved to Holy Cross Parkway and Douglas Road in Mishawaka.

Under his leadership, Saint Joseph received national recognition several times. He also engineered an agreement with St. Vincent's Hospital in Indianapolis, which expanded available maternity and child services, and another with Loyola University Medical Center for stroke care. In 2012, Modern Healthcare named Gutierrez as one of the nation’s top 25 minority executives.

In May of last year, Gutierrez oversaw the health care system's change in branding from Saint Joseph Regional Medical Center to Saint Joseph Health System. The rebranding was part of a move to merge all of Trinity Health's local entities into one community-based system of care. In addition to the Mishawaka Medical Center, the system today includes Plymouth Medical Center; Rehabilitation Institute; outpatient services of the Elm Road Medical Campus; Health Insurance Services; Saint Joseph Physician Network; VNA Home Care; and the Sanctuary Senior Living Communities at St. Paul's, Holy Cross and Trinity Tower.

Before moving to the South Bend area, Gutierrez served as president and CEO at Shore Memorial Health System in Somers Point, N.J. While there, he worked with lawmakers from the New Jersey delegation in Washington, D.C., to help shape a bill on health care reform which later became the Affordable Care Act.

The law, which passed in 2010, led the health care system to implement a number of changes, which Gutierrez has navigated Saint Joseph through, including starting education sites to help people enroll in health insurance under the law.

While the law will take a long time for health care professionals to fully decipher, he told The Tribune in June of 2015, it's caused more people to focus on preventive care and health systems to focus more on the consumer view of quality.

He added, "We believe that health care is a basic human right and maintaining access for all is both a moral and practical imperative."

aculp@sbtinfo.com

574-235-6343

@AliceCulpSBT