It’s never a good day when a young man is killed in the streets or when a police officer is forced to use his service revolver, and it’s never, ever a good day when riots take place in cites across America.

We’ve had some very bad days recently.

Just because you’ve had a bad day, or you didn’t get your way, or somebody tells you what to do or say (rhyming hat tip to Al Sharpton) doesn’t give you the right to go into the streets destroying property and lives along the way. We are witnessing a mass temper tantrum, bringing out the worst of human nature.

As a writer and a talk show host I have a special kinship with the First Amendment, which gives us all the right to freedom of speech. We all have the right to go in the street and say what we want in an attempt to change the minds of men (yes, and women, too). But when that rhetoric moves from the mind to the physical the line has been crossed, and it is there where we the people must accept the responsibility to stop it.

You do not have the right to do what Louis Head, stepfather of Michael Brown, did.

After the Ferguson grand jury findings were read, with all eyes glued on his wife, he repeatedly yelled, “Burn this bi$@# down, Burn this bi$@# down!” He didn’t just say it once; it was over and over and over, making his point and giving orders.

The people listened, stimulating the Mob in Missouri to carry out its purpose. Riot! Not just in Ferguson, but in scores of cites across the country.

The chants of “Hands up - don’t shoot,” like the cries of the villagers with torches and pitchforks against Dr. Frankenstein have spread, as if Michael Brown was just an innocent bystander, with no record, no motive or no means of attack — all of which have been proven false.

The idea that no matter what evidence is presented, no matter how open the process, how many witnesses testified, how many hours of careful examination or even a videotaped robbery with the suspect easily identified, all mean nothing when it comes to race or left-wing politics.

Some rioters protest because of the untimely death of Michael Brown.

Others, insidiously, seek to promote their liberal pet causes and are taking to the streets for their 15 minuets of fame. Groups such as SEIU (unions), the communists, LGBT’ers (homosexual groups), environmentalists, pro-amnesty, pro-Palestinian, Planned Parenthood and plenty more, clamor for their time in the spotlight. These are usually the first people to hypocritically quote Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. spouting words of non-violence while attacking the Tea Party when they march and protest the government through non-violent ways.

Murder, mayhem, looting, vandalism and other attacks on the safety and security of the American citizen continue, for what, the Rev. Jesse Jackson to remain relevant? Mr. Sharpton to earn more dollars he won’t not to pay taxes on or for Planned Parenthood to promote more abortions?

The crimes of “The Gentle Giant” Michael Brown, the reported 72 percent of African-Americans born out of wedlock, the breakdown of the black community, the lack of respect for both the police and parents from all areas of today’s youth culture, those are the things that should be targeted — not the small businesses and people of Ferguson. This is madness and serves no one but the agitators.

So, for your lack of truthfulness when is comes to the facts in this crime. For the abuse of the police, the law, your fellow citizens and for your overwhelming attitude of victimhood, you the “Mob in Missouri,” are the Liberal Bully of the week!