“Cheers” star George Wendt posed for photos, and Capitol Hill veterans, journalists and lobbyists schmoozed and boozed at GOP strategist Ron Bonjean’s annual — and outrageous — holiday bash.

Bonjean, a partner at Singer Bonjean Strategies, and wife Sara are known for their legendary annual fete at their Alexandria, Va., home, which traditionally includes a secret celebrity guest. After offering a series of clues to ITK readers, Bonjean welcomed Wendt, known as Norm on the hit 1980’s comedy, to his packed soiree on Saturday.

ADVERTISEMENT

The low-key Wendt appeared to do his best Santa Claus-at-the-mall impression, as he took his place on a chair and guests lined up for a snapshot with him. “No one has sat on my lap yet though,” Wendt, — also known for starring in the famed Chicago superfan (lover of “Da Bears”) sketch on “Saturday Night Live” — said after a partygoer likened him to Saint Nick.

Bonjean donned an eye-popping, floral-patterned metallic green jacket that he had custom-made at a local fabric store. Costumed characters, including Abraham Lincoln, Darth Vader from “Star Wars,” (who was following around Singer Bonjean Strategies partner Brian Walsh as part of a recurring party gag) and a pair of Las Vegas-style showgirls roamed the shindig, chatting up some of D.C.’s power players as Danish music blasted from Bonjean’s iPod into a sound system.

Among those eyed in the eclectic scene: Republican consultant (and official celeb guest greeter) Doug Heye; Rep. John Boehner's (R-Ohio) spokesman Michael Steel and wife Mary Kathryn; CNN’s Sam Feist, Matt Dornic, Alexandra Jaffe, Brianna Keilar, Brooke Baldwin, and Mark Preston; Sen. Marco Rubio's (R-Fla.) spokesman Alex Conant, Republican National Committee spokesman Sean Spicer and his wife, National Beer Wholesalers Association’s Rebecca Spicer; media consultant Tammy Haddad; Rick Klein, Jonathan Karl and Ali Weinberg of ABC News; Fox News Channel’s Shannon Bream; Bloomberg’s Josh Rogin; The Texas Tribune’s Abby Livingston; The Hill’s Justin Sink and Scott Wong; Susan G. Komen’s Kiki Burger and VICE contributor Tim Burger; Janet Donovan of Hollywood on the Potomac; U.S. News and World Report’s Nikki Schwab; Fox 5/WTTG-TV’s Sarah Simmons; PBS’s Nick Masella; lawyer Ben Ginsberg; National Republican Senatorial Committee executive director Rob Collins, Shockey Scofield Solutions’ John Scofield; and many more.

This story has been updated.