Stepping back: Darius Boyd is among Knights players who haven't been paid. Photo: Ryan Osland

Newcastle's star fullback Darius Boyd is refusing to fulfil his off-field obligations as the club's payment woes threaten to derail the Knights' season.

It is understood that Boyd is one of a host of high profile players, plus coach Wayne Bennett, who did not receive their monthly salaries, which are due on the 15th of every month. The NRL issued a furious statement taking aim at Nathan Tinkler, whose ownership of the club is now in severe doubt.

At least 20 club employees had not received their salaries, with the NRL labelling the developments as ''completely unacceptable'' conduct from Newcastle management.

A club insider described the non-payments as ''tough''. Payments to staff and players are paid late quite regularly, normally four to five days behind. Some officials were paid on Friday, one day after the scheduled pay date. Superannuation payments have also fallen behind.

Advertisement

Boyd is one of the most affected, and reports have surfaced that he is up to $200,000 out of pocket for unpaid third party payments. It is understood that while Boyd has maintained all his on-field commitments, he has been left furious with his contractual wrangle. It is understood he has skipped club functions and is refusing to sign club jerseys, which players do after most training sessions. Boyd did not attend the club's season launch in February, with the club citing ''personal reasons'' behind his no-show.

Tinkler may look to split his ownership of the club into three with the Wests Group and the Knights Members Club potential contributors. Tinkler's ownership woes came to a head this month when the members club looked to enforce the $1 buy-back option to purchase the club.

It has been in jeopardy since he was unable to secure a mandatory $10.52 million bank guarantee by March 31, which was a key element of Tinkler's takeover deal in 2011.

That breach allowed the members club to purchase the Knights and allowed access to Tinkler's $10 million bank guarantee.

The Knights are languishing towards the bottom of the premiership ladder and statistics revealed recently point to Boyd being in career worse form. Fairfax Media documented earlier this month that Boyd is ranked the 17th-best fullback in the NRL this season in terms of his average match contribution, as he makes his way back from a hamstring injury,

Last year he was seventh.

His contribution value rating (CVR) game score of 197.76 is well down on his tallies of last season (358.75) and 2012 (370.90), and less than half his career-high average of 427.73 at St George Illawarra in 2010 – the year he won the Clive Churchill Medal as man of the match in the grand final.

Newcastle's assistant coach Kevin Walters said the NRL had guaranteed payments.

''The club had a meeting with players and staff about a month ago,'' Walters told Triple M. ''If any of the situation like this was going to arise, everyone was going to be safe knowing that their payments were going to be secured and supported by the NRL.

''There is no major reason for concern. I know there is a lot of speculation around [but] Tinkler has been paying his bills since he took over. There is no reason to suggest that he won't do it in the foreseable future.

''It doesn't bother me. I don't feel like I'm not going to get paid. I assume it wouldn't be that unsettling for the players.

''Darius has been a little bit off with his form, but I don't think it'll have too much to do with what he is being paid.''