Megyn Kelly grabbed her racial pitchfork last night and called up Fox News contributor Allen West to enlist in Fox News’ race war on Oprah Winfrey. This was at least the sixth Fox News attack on Oprah for having had the (racial) audacity to opine that she believes some of the attacks on President Obama are based on his race. Just as with her co-workers, Kelly inadvertently proved Oprah’s point for her.

Kelly toned down her usual outrage into scorn for the discussion. I guess that was her way of showing her sensitivity about the delicacy of the subject. She said:

It’s amazing to see someone as successful as Oprah Winfrey, I mean a billionaire, thanks in large part to American viewers loving her - white, black, brown, you name it, loving her - talking about racist Americans.

Her guest to give her cover and help attack Oprah discuss this all-important issue was Fox News contributor Allen West. Or, as I usually refer to these kinds of discussions, West was the Kelly File’s designated African American black attacker.

Sure enough, West’s opening words were that it was “absolutely appalling and unconscionable” for Winfrey to “continually to try to use the race card.” For good invite-me-back measure, he lumped President Obama in with the smear. After all, Winfrey was talking about Obama (sort of), she’s friends with him, they’re both black, they share the same liberal views, they must both be on the same racial page.

You may recall how Kelly excused her repeated interruptions of Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel, as he tried to defend the Affordable Care Act, by saying that it had to be a “back and forth” kind of discussion. If so, you’ll note how she had no such criteria for West. She listened attentively, a half smile of approval on her face, as West echoed Kelly’s suggestion that Winfrey was not grateful enough for her success (I guess nobody dared use the word “uppity”) and then complained that Winfrey and other black liberals are hypocrites who “are setting race relations back in the United States of America.” Where were they, the two talking heads wondered, when Joe Biden and Harry Reid made racially suspect comments about Obama?

We could turn it around and ask where “fair and balanced” Kelly and West were when Glenn Beck made far more explicitly hostile racial attacks on President Obama on the Fox News airways. But that’s too much to ask, apparently. So is challenging West’s over-the-top assertion that Winfrey and Obama are “setting race relations back.” During the 6th (that I know of) FNC discussion using race to attack Oprah and Obama.

Kelly merely added to the one-sided opinionating: She called it “amazing” that “the only example (Winfrey) offered of disrespect based on race” was Rep. Joe Wilson calling out “You lie” to President Obama during his State of the Union address. “Now, in a court of law, that would not fly,” Kelly announced. “There is nothing in that exchange to suggest it based on race.”

If Kelly bothered to pay attention to what Oprah said, instead of just dismissing it in lockstep with everyone else on Fox, she might have noted that Oprah was talking about how the level of disrespect is higher against President Obama, at least somewhat because of his race. She was not saying that particular remark was race-based. The fact that Kelly was grasping at straws to smear Oprah (and using race to do so) spoke volumes about Kelly.

“Where is the evidence that the president’s critics …are basing their upset on race?” Kelly asked.

Well, you need look no further than Megyn Kelly, herself, to answer that. She may want to forget – but we can’t – her prolonged crusade to paint the Obama administration as deiberately enabling black voter intimidation against whites. Kelly even went so far as to suggest that radical black thugs would be coming to a voting precinct near you, thanks to the Obama Department of Justice. Until Kirsten Powers called her out on the air about it. And then Kelly’s story – bogus from the start – fell apart completely.

If that wasn’t a race-based attack, then why did Kelly put so much focus on a falsehood? If it was really valid, why did she drop it like a hot potato once it was no longer of political service?

The answer is obvious. We can chalk Megyn Kelly up as another Fox News host who, while eager to use race to smear Oprah Winfrey and President Obama, is in reality a textbook case of exactly what Oprah was talking about.