A tiny park in the Longborough development, which includes this dock, is at the center of a dispute involving a verbal agreement now being argued in court about public access to the waterfront.

Charleston Mayor Joe Riley has vowed to urge City Council to use its power of eminent domain if the city loses a court fight and the public is denied access to a tiny waterfront park on the Ashley River in the upscale Longborough neighborhood.

The lawsuit, which has been simmering for years, involves the Longborough Homeowners Association, the city of Charleston and the Beach Co., one of the region's largest real estate investment companies. The company developed Longborough, which sits in the Wagener Terrace neighborhood on the upper peninsula.

Court documents show that the homeowners association originally filed the lawsuit in 2006 because it thinks the park should be private.

But the city of Charleston claims that in 2001, as a condition of allowing the development to move forward, it had a verbal agreement with the Beach Co. to provide public access to the park, which includes a fishing dock.

It's not the first dispute over public access to waterfront property. The developer of Poplar Grove in Charleston County attempted in June to limit public access to the Bulow Boat Landing because he said it attracts crime and trash-dumping.

The city last month lost the first of two legal rounds in the Longborough case, but Riley said he's undeterred and is willing to use eminent domain to acquire the property if it comes to that.

Using the power of eminent domain, or condemnation, governments can force a property owner to sell land for the greater good after a fair market value is determined. The power is often used when roads pass through private land and the owner refuses to sell.

Riley said it would be wrong to have a little park in Wagener Terrace and deny residents access to it. Longborough is part of the larger neighborhood, and the streets that run through it are public. A private park in the neighborhood, Riley continued, "would be an affront to the residents in that part of the city."

A verbal agreement

Longborough is a neighborhood largely comprised of single-family homes on the peninsula north of Hampton Park. The Beach Co. began developing it in 2001. To do that, the company demolished Shoreview Apartments, a large low-income housing project with Ashley River views. Single-family homes there can sell for prices in the high six figures.

The city of Charleston's approval of the Longborough project included a requirement that it include a small amount of low-income housing, which it did. But some in the city's black community remain resentful over the loss of affordable housing on the peninsula.

A lesser publicized part of the deal between the city and the Beach Co. included an arrangement for public access to the park. But the details of the arrangement never were written down.

Riley said the city wanted the Beach Co. to quickly turn over the park property to the city. But company representatives wanted to hold off a while and have a more open-ended arrangement. The Beach Co. wanted the option to eventually donate the land to the city.

That deal would have benefitted the city because it would have received the park for free. And the Beach Co. could have used the donation as a tax deduction, Riley said.

Legal wrangling

Court documents show all three parties tried to settle the dispute through mediation, but they reached an impasse in January. Circuit Court Judge Carmen Mullen subsequently decided to hear the case in two parts.

City attorney Frances Cantwell said the judge decided to first settle issues around the verbal agreement between the city and the Beach Co.

The city's understanding was that the Beach Co. was supposed to turn over the park to the city with no strings attached, Cantwell said.

But Trenholm Walker, a lawyer for the Beach Co., said the company always had planned to include conditions, such as some restrictions on public access.

"The park is adjacent to a neighborhood," Walker said. "There have been some problems there" in the past, he said, and the company simply wanted "reasonable rules and regulations."

Cantwell said the city last month lost the first round because Mullen ruled that there was "no meeting of the minds" between the city and the Beach Co. on exactly what the arrangement included.

The case now moves on to round two, Walker said, but he's not sure when a ruling is expected in the dispute between the Beach Co. and the homeowners association.

The judge likely will turn over the park to the homeowners association, he said. But it's unclear whether she will require the association to permit public access.

The Beach Co. was "unable to broker the peace," Walker said. "They wanted to do right by both sides."

James Wegmann, a lawyer who represents the Longborough Homeowners Association, was out of town and could not be reached by email Thursday or Friday.

But last spring, Wegmann said homeowners purchased expensive property in Longborough with the understanding that the park was private, and they are willing to fight for that.

The development's covenants and restrictions since 2003 have made clear that the park is private, he said. And the initial plat in 2003, and three other plats after that, also indicate the park is private.

The Beach Co. originally controlled the homeowners association, Wegmann has said. When it turned over control to the homeowners in 2006, he said, it turned over other open spaces in the development, but not the park.

Public access

While the legal dispute drags on, there's confusion about who is in charge of the park.

Chad Washington grew up around Charleston and knows some good out-of-the-way places to fish and crab. The Longborough park and dock are on his list. He's been dropping a line in the water there every now and then for years.

But last month, when he got back to his car after some peaceful fishing in the middle of the day, someone had taped an index card to his car window that carried a hand-written message telling him he was trespassing, the property was privately owned, and that his car and its tag had been photographed and the information recorded.

It's unclear who currently is in charge of the park, and whether the homeowners group has any authority to shoo away people using it.

The Beach Co. owns the land, but Walker said he simply isn't going to weigh in on the issue of control. And Riley said the matter is simply confusing.

Charles Shine, president of the Wagener Terrace Neighborhood Association said the association agreed to support the Longborough development based on there being public access to the park. "It's disheartening," he said of the possibility that the community won't be able to use it.

He hopes the city soon will provide some information to the association on the status of the case, he said.

State Sen. Marlon Kimpson, D-Charleston, who lives in Longborough, said not all of the residents of the development want the park to be private. He supports public access, he said, and so do some of his neighbors.

City Councilman William Dudley Gregorie, who represents the area, said he hopes the city, the Beach Co. and the homeowners association come up with a compromise that includes public access.

"We're going to wait and see what happens," he said. "But we're not going to just give up on this. There are people that have been going to that place for many years, long before Longborough was there."

Reach Diane Knich at 843-937-5491 or on Twitter at @dianeknich.