Hmmm...

As we know, Rick Perry likes to party like its 1860 (the year South Carolina became the first to secede in the "War Between the States"). Of course, Perry wanted to secede based on Obamacare and federal debt, not one of the great moral crimes in American history, but we all have our own cause celebre.

Well, now, other secession movements are beginning to follow Rick's rhetorical lead. There is a secession movement to create Northern Colorado, Western Maryland, apparently the Upper Peninsula ("Yoopers") want to join Scott Walker's Wisconsin, and Northern California counties want to form a new state called Jefferson (not very original, but it's got heritage).

As the Washington Post notes, none of these efforts are likely to succeed:

Secession is a difficult political fight to win. The U.S. Constitution allows regions to separate only with the approval of the state legislature and Congress, and over the years there have been hundreds of quixotic and unsuccessful efforts, according to Michael J. Trinklein, the author of "Lost States: True Stories of Texlahoma, Transylvania, and Other States that Never Made It."

While the stories don't touch on it, or blame it on an urban-rural divide, make no mistake, this is a tea party infused phenomenon. One West Maryland secessionist is quoted as:

Olden's views are generally not the same as those that dominate Maryland's urban centers. She is against gay marriage. She is against what she describes as "the horrible encroachment on Second Amendment rights." She opposes abortion. She is fed up with taxes and was particularly galled by the "rain tax" -- a stormwater management fee -- approved last year. "Taxing the friggin' rain?" she says. "The next thing they tax will be the air we breathe."

Yes, the government making sure that a coastal state has the infrastructure to deal with excess storm water is taxing the "friggin' rain."

But this person fits the tea party cohort to a tee: older, white, college-educated (at least more likely to be), and very socially conservative. If politics is a war of attrition, at least we can hope that the tea party is the last gasps of the movement conservatives who got their start with Barry Goldwater/Richard Nixon/Ronald Reagan.