Less than 24 hours after a game in which Danilo Gallinari thought he might have turned a corner toward playing consistently high-level basketball, all the high hopes were put on an abrupt hold.

An MRI revealed torn meniscus in his right knee. The forward will have surgery soon and sit out a minimum of three weeks.

It is another blow to Gallinari, who has had a tough time staying on the court this season. It is his first action back after missing 19 months because of a torn left ACL, which required two surgeries. The most recent injury is not related to the previous one, on the other knee, in any way, the team said.

Gallinari played his most effective game this season Saturday night, scoring a team-high 19 points in the Nuggets’ 76-73 win over Indiana. The point total was a season high for Gallinari and was the third consecutive game in which he scored in double figures.

And in that game, he looked as strong and confident as he had all season, driving repeatedly to the basket to finish shots and draw fouls.

“That’s what I try to work on,” Gallinari said. “I try to get back to my game, not just being a 3-point shooter, but doing things like going to the basket, getting fouled, going to the free-throw line. And then the 3-pointer is another option. I was able to do it. I was glad I was able to do it, and now I’ve got to do it every game.”

Gallinari leaves the Nuggets on a hot streak, averaging 15.0 points per game in his last three. In that stretch, he shot 52 percent from the field, 46.6 percent from the 3-point line and 85.7 percent from the free-throw line. Things were really coming together for him in his new role off the bench.

“As he starts stringing these games together, it will build his confidence,” Nuggets coach Brian Shaw said after Saturday’s game. “And then we’ll see the Gallo that we’ve been accustomed to seeing in the past, and we’ll start winning some of these games that we’re losing and start playing better on a consistent basis.”

But now, there is a setback.

Injuries have lingered with Gallinari much of this season. His right knee had been bothering him for some time, and it forced him to take some time off a little more than week ago. He pledged to play through the pain and returned to the team Wednesday against Houston to start this run of good games.

If the Nuggets don’t get Darrell Arthur — who can play some small forward — back from a lower left leg injury (and he is questionable for the game), then expect to see more of Alonzo Gee in the rotation.

The Nuggets are also without center JaVale McGee (leg strain) and shooting guard Randy Foye (quadriceps).

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost

DENVER AT CHARLOTTE

5 p.m. Monday, ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Kemba Walker: Of late, few point guards in the NBA have been as hot as Kemba Walker to start the season. And because he has doing it for the struggling Hornets, he’s toiling in relative obscurity. In his last seven games, he has averaged 22.6 points, 5.9 assists and 1.7 steals. The former UConn star is shooting 47.6 percent from the field, including a sizzling 48.5 percent from 3-point range.

NOTEBOOK

Nuggets: They were swept by Charlotte last season, losing both games, one at home and one on the road. “It’s still fresh in my mind, even if our guys haven’t remembered that,” said coach Brian Shaw. Added guard Arron Afflalo, “Before Christmas, we have a decent road trip against some teams that are still trying to compete. Hopefully we take care of those.”

Hornets: Lance Stephenson won’t play Monday because of a pelvic sprain. He has already missed two games with the injury. … No team takes better care of the ball than the Hornets, who average an NBA-low 10.9 turnovers per game this season. They have given up the ball seven or fewer times in nine of their past 16 games.



Christopher Dempsey, The Denver Post