Topics: Boston, Boston Marathon, Life stories, Runner's Culture, Running, Writers and Writing, Writing, Life News

Before the starter’s pistol, I knew I was unprepared to run my first marathon in August 2013. It didn’t hit me that I was potentially worse off than I’d thought until about the seven-mile mark. I found myself panting and gnashing my way up a trio of killer hills, and that with nearly 20 miles left to power through somehow.

A male runner—who’d passed me going up the second of three steep hills that opened the course—lost speed on a downhill stretch, allowing me to draw alongside him. To engage or not to engage? At first, I thought not. He was the kind of guy I normally would have steered clear of – slightly shorter than me, which can be an issue for men, perfectly fit, and outfitted in the perfect workout gear. But I was about a quarter of the way into what was going to be a long morning, and I let the male runner, Michael, strike up a conversation with me. I told him I was trying to qualify to run the Boston Marathon in 2014, and he looked at me doubtfully.

“That’s really fast,” he said.

He’d qualified for – and run – Boston several times, as he was well into his personal goal to run a marathon in every state. He’d also flown himself to a marathon in Drakes Well, Pennsylvania, in his own private plane, a detail that has no bearing on this story but says a lot about why I love runners. They’ve got a self-reliant stubborn streak I admire, except when I’m dealing with the situations my own stubbornness gets me into – like this marathon.

Michael asked about my training history.

“I ran 20,” I said. “That’s the most I’ve done.”

“When was that?” he asked.

“Around the fourth of July.”

“What’s the most you’ve run since then?”

“Sixteen.”

He just nodded, his face expressionless. I’d meant to run more, train harder. I really had. I’d been a daily runner for 14 years. But when I impulsively chose to try for Boston in a show of solidarity with my former hometown in the wake of the bombing, I’d never run more than eight miles at a time.

I was living in Brooklyn, and I hadn’t counted on how much I would struggle against the heat and humidity in my training that summer. I’d wake up at 6 a.m. to run. It was 80 degrees. I’d wait until 9 p.m. to run, straining my eyes as I panted through the streets of my neighborhood, trying to avoid catching my foot on a bubbled stretch of pavement, and it was still 80 degrees.

I was also pushing myself hard to finish a first draft of the memoir I’d sold earlier in the year. Finally, it hit me one day. In order to make the qualifying time, which for my age group, they were estimating at three hours and 20 minutes that year, I was going to have to train much harder.

I can either finish this book or qualify for Boston, I thought.

I tried to be proud that I would finish my first marathon and write my first book of my own in the same year, but I’m far too competitive and too much of a perfectionist to fall for soggy pep talks like that. Still, I was determined to do both. I kept writing. I kept running.

It was a hard spring and summer. My memoir was about my painful relationship with my dad, and how it had played out in my relationships with men over the years, and in order to write it, I’d had to pick off each and every scab of my life, one by one. And I’d done so without the luxury of my former vices to distract me. In the past, I’d salved both the wounds themselves and my exploration of such painful subjects – whether in therapy or in prose – with a drink. Or a fling. Or my favorite drug of all – a staggering load of professional deadlines and self-imposed personal writing goals. Now, all I had was my book.

I was sticking with mineral water and tea for the duration of the writing. I’d just had my heart broken, so I was skirting the neighborhood bars and cafes where I might meet someone new. And as far as my writing went, there was nothing but my book, which was really just me, and my relationship with my dad, laid bare on the page. Every time I wanted to look away, I had no choice but to look, and to keep looking until I untangled whatever emotional mystery had plagued me and put it into some kind of order – and story – that would hopefully be resonant to readers.

By late August, I’d finished a draft of my memoir that came in at a whopping 1,058 pages. I was elated. And completely overwhelmed. My agent forbade me to hand in the draft to my publisher until I got it down to 400 pages, ideally below. I’d been hired to ghostwrite a book for a new client based in L.A., which meant packing up once again, and at least temporarily, leaving behind my new life in Brooklyn, the site of the heartbreak, as well as the scene of the memoir immersion. Honestly, I was glad to go. All I had to do first was run one little marathon.

Back on the trail, my new runner friend, Michael, had no idea what this marathon meant to me. We’d just hit mile eight when he pulled out a small package of the jellies long-distance runners consume mid-race to counteract glycogen depletion.

“You want some?” he asked.

“No, thank you, I’m good,” I said. “I’ve got a GU for later.”

He looked at me from the corner of his eye, moving as little as possible, every inch of his body intent on conserving precious energy for his race and his time.

“You want some,” he said. “Believe me. I always eat them at mile eight to keep from bonking. Keep your GU for later. I’ve got plenty.”

“Thanks,” I said.

Even stubborn me knew enough to be grateful for his kindness. I extended my hand. He shook out a half-dozen bright red jellies. I ate one, and then another, saving a few for later, even though they were heating up and squishing out nearly flat in my sweaty palm.

Michael and I talked as we ran together for several more miles, passing the 10-mile marker, where my friend Cathy had strategically placed herself to cheer me on. I could tell she hadn’t expected me to reach her so quickly and was impressed by my time. My dreams of Boston momentarily bloomed again, and I ran with renewed vigor. But then, somewhere in the next mile, it became clear my pace was beginning to flag, and Michael had to leave me behind in order to reach his own race goal.