When people start to take control of their finances, two of the very first steps that people always recommend are paying down debt and setting up an emergency fund.

SEE ALSO: Nuts and bolts — 13 basic personal finance questions you need answers to

The idea behind the emergency fund is to be a cash reserve in case you lose a job or have a medical emergency.

How to calculate an emergency fund — and how long it should last — are somewhat contested subjects.

How long? | How to calculate | How to save | Where to save

LENGTH

Let’s start with the famous, if problematic, financial gurus: Suze Orman says 8 months. (And she says it everywhere.) Dave Ramsey says 3-6 months.

When I talked to folks locally, I got answers on either side of those. Pam Dumonceau, president and CEO, Consistent Values, Inc., an independent Denver Registered Investment Advisor, was on the long side, saying she recommends an emergency fund of six to 24 months.

“We have to think about how long it can take to replace one’s job, one’s income. Often times now, that’s six months to a year,” Dumonceau said.

Amy Fidelis, marketing and education director at mpowered, a financial literacy nonprofit, said that when you’re just starting out, you might as well start with one month.

“You could do a budget and figure out what your monthly expenses are and start to build toward however many months of expenses you want to be able to cover,” she says. “Or the more gradual way would be to make sure you’ve got a month’s rent or mortgage, and add in your car. Then take whatever you’ve got for one month, and multiply.”

OK, so, somewhere between one month and two years, right?

Fine, fine, let’s get a little more concrete. Here’s the premise: If you lost your job, how long would it take to replace your income? It depends a little on your industry. Here’s a rule of thumb I found by Googling, and which I find equal parts hilarious and terrifying:

The rule of thumb is that it will take one month of job searching for every $10,000 of salary that you were earning; if you were making $30,000 it will take three months, $60,000 six months. It’s hard for most people to imagine a job search taking that long and it may become a challenge to focus on the day to day search. A job search for a salary of over $50,000 will involve meeting about 100 people. You can choose to do that level of work over four or five months, or over eight to 10 months.

Really? Is that a thing people use?

Anyway, apparently most people think they’ll find a job in six months or less. So let’s say you’re calculating for six months.

But you also have some kind of bad thing happen while you’re searching for a job. Like you need to replace a timing belt. And you’re mad about it, so you try to karate-chop your car, breaking your arm. That’s gonna be maybe $1,000 worth of damage between you and the car, so we’ll add that to whatever your six-month total is.

CALCULATING IT

What does your life cost each month? Not everything — cut out the saving for retirement, the income tax, the fancy cocktails you buy yourself every evening to celebrate surviving another day. Just the essentials, like food, housing and your various insurances.

Pro tip: Figuring out your bare-essentials monthly cost of living may make you a little woozy, because it’s probably a lot lower than what you’re actually spending every month. Have a fancy cocktail at the ready when making the calculations, just in case.

Now, multiply your bare-essentials monthly cost of living by six, the number we sort of arbitrarily decided above. And add $2,000 or so for your timing belt and/or broken arm.

Now you’ve got your emergency fund target. Have a cocktail.

(Is this too much in the way of words and not enough in the way of numbers? Here’s an overly sophisticated emergency fund calculator.)

SAVING IT

“I’ve got to put in a plug for automatic savings,” says Fidelis. “The fastest, easiest way to save.”

She’s talking about an automatic transfer from your paycheck — or the account where your paycheck goes — to your savings account. Set it to happen a couple of days after your paycheck gets deposited and you’ll never miss the money, because it won’t have touched your filthy, spendy hands.

Do as much as you can monthly, and soon you’ll be at your target.

WHERE TO SAVE IT

You need your emergency fund to be liquid — that is, accessible. This means not investing it in stocks or even less liquid things. So you’ll want to seek out what passes for a high-yield savings account these days. At the time of this writing, if you can find 1 percent APY, you’re lucky.

There are other options, but most don’t beat that 1 percent number by much, and sacrifice liquidity for it — not ideal if you’re dealing with a car that won’t be road-ready until you fork over a thousand clams. The options that do beat 1 percent are a little gimmicky and may be most suited to the kind of person who gets a real kick out of playing credit card rewards points games — in other words, more work than it’s worth to the majority of people.