SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 14, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- A little-known expansion of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in 2016 will require millions of overweight Americans with other health risks to receive periodic nutritional counseling—a preventive service that must be covered by health plans.

Zipongo, the digital health company that makes it easy to eat well, will host a webinar on how the new requirement affects self-insured employers and health plans, and how some innovative solutions can help them meet the requirements, Wednesday, January 20 at 1:00 PM ET.

"Skyrocketing obesity—with its accompanying comorbidities—is a problem the federal government is determined to address," said Sheila Viswanathan, EdD, MPH, RD, Zipongo's director of nutrition research, who will co-host the webinar. "So it comes as no surprise that, among its many provisions, the ACA now targets preventive nutritional services to help individuals manage weight. If implemented well, these services could make a real contribution to warding off chronic disease. If done poorly, they could prove expensive for health plans and ineffective for members."

Intended for health plan executives and employers, the free 30-minute webinar will review the new regulatory requirements and their implications for businesses and health plans. It will also explore:

Steps organizations can take to prepare for the new regulations

Innovative solutions for delivering nutritional counseling services and engaging health plan members

Webinar presenters include two industry experts: Susan Nash, JD, Partner, McDermott Will & Emery LLP, and Viswanathan from Zipongo.

Please join the session by registering here.

About Zipongo

Zipongo is a San Francisco-based digital health company that makes it easy to eat well. We work with employers, health plans and other wellness partners looking for an easy way to engage their members in healthy and sustainable eating habits that drive positive results. Zipongo's proprietary MealRx™ personalization engine delivers individualized recommendations tied to convenient, real-time actions that enable healthy eating at home and at work, including healthy recipes, meal planning tools and discounts and incentives to healthy groceries. We provide a HIPAA-secure, easy-to-implement software-as-a-service platform that runs on web, mobile and tablet. Learn more at www.zipongo.com.

Media Contact

Todd Stein

Amendola Communications for Zipongo

916.346.4213

tstein@acmarketingpr.com

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20151014/277177LOGO

SOURCE Zipongo