Urban Center Alex Runner’s blog was part of our Purple Wisconsin project. A former city policy advisor, Runner is an advocate of pragmatic government innovation that cuts through ideological divisions. SHARE

By

Today's Sunday Driver is an MPS school head who is driving Milwaukee toward higher academic standards. She works tirelessly to foster a dynamic, nurturing and high-achieving culture that equips students to thrive in a global economy:

Gina Bianchi.

You're the assistant principal in charge (APIC) at a high-achieving foreign language immersion school. Can you briefly explain how Milwaukee French Immersion School came about and why it has been successful?

The Milwaukee French Immersion School has a 35-year history of providing an excellent education through which students become bilingual in a very natural way. The school serves a multicultural student population that is immersed in French starting in four-year-old kindergarten and continuing through grade five.

It began in 1978 as part of desegregation efforts. MPS had the foresight to research and develop the immersion schools in Milwaukee as an alternative to forced busing. The immersion schools proved to be very successful; therefore, after the court order for desegregation expired, MPS continued to fund immersion schools, drawing students from throughout the city and surrounding suburbs.

The success of the program can be attributed in part to the fact that students are immersed in French for approximately 5,200 hours by the time they complete fifth grade. Research indicates that students who attend language immersion programs have advantages over monolingual students, such as:

Development of native-like proficiency in the target language (French)

Improved native language (English) skills

Increased brain development

Higher overall test scores

A broader view of the world

Greater confidence and flexibility in thinking

Expanded opportunities for college and careers

The commitment level of the parents and staff enhances the overall of success of the students. In addition, the central mission and vision is shared by all and contributes to the success of the school.



Common Core standards have been in the news a lot lately. Do you have an opinion about Common Core? How do these standards play out at a school with a foreign language focus?

At MFIS, we teach to these standards. They set a clear, high bar for what students must master at each grade level to achieve college and career success – just as they do for any other school. The difference is that we teach them in French, so we have to realign some of the materials and resources, but many schools are in that very same situation. This is a great opportunity for us to review and revise our curriculum. Students at MFIS have already begun to rise to the challenge of the new, more rigorous Common Core state standards. One significant advantage is that they set the stage for our school to collaborate and share resources with other immersion programs throughout the country – now that so many states adhere to the same Common Core standards.



One criticism of MPS is that the principals, assistant principals and school leads don't really get to shape their staffs – because central office makes the personnel decisions about which teachers are at which schools. Is that the case at MFIS? Would it be wise to give principals more authority?

The system actually works pretty well. Milwaukee French Immersion School, as with all district schools, uses a school-based interview process. This allows a team from each school – comprised of teachers, support staff, and parents – to interview candidates and recommend teachers that would be the best fit for their school.



This year marks the 35th anniversary of MFIS. Do you have anything special planned?

Milwaukee French Immersion School, our Parent Teacher Association (PTA) and the Milwaukee French Immersion Foundation (MFIF), which some dedicated parents spearheaded, have created a weeklong celebration of the school’s 35th anniversary. Activities include “spirit days” and a student pep rally featuring special guests Milwaukee Admirals mascot Roscoe and our school’s own mascot, Cocorico. The week of activities will culminate with an evening open house and celebration.

The 35th Anniversary Open House will take place at MFIS (2360 N. 52nd Street) from 5:30 - 8 p.m. and is open to the public. I hope people will stop in and join us – regardless of whether they have current or prospective students.

We’ll have food available for purchase, a special presentation from Superintendent Dr. Gregory Thornton, door prizes, self-guided tours, interactive classroom demonstrations, games and more! This is a great way to come and learn more information about our program and meet members of the school community!



Let's pretend that a lot of people throughout the state read this blog. Is there anything you'd like to convey to Wisconsinites about your MPS school or about public education in our city?

I am a passionate advocate for public schools. The public school system in Wisconsin is in the best position to provide high-quality instruction to the state’s students, particularly in the city of Milwaukee. I believe MPS has a variety of high-quality programs that are not offered elsewhere in the city of Milwaukee. In our school district, you find dedicated, passionate teachers who are fully committed to improving student achievement and the lives of their students. MPS also has the best capacity to offer superior professional development for teachers and innovation to support students. I send my own children to MPS, and I would not have it any other way. The majority of current and former staff members at French Immersion over the past 30 years continually choose to send their own children to MPS schools, too. That says a lot.



Editor's Note: Purple Wisconsin is a collection of community bloggers with views from across the political spectrum. The Journal Sentinel hosts these blogs as a way to encourage thoughtful debate about the important issues facing Wisconsin and the Milwaukee region. The opinions voiced here are those of the individual bloggers alone; they are responsible for their posts. The Journal Sentinel does not edit or direct the bloggers in any fashion.