A matter of free speech vs. copyright law is being tested in Louisiana, where the state is suing the left-leaning political action group, MoveOn.org, over billboard and TV ads that cleverly incorporate the state’s tourism slogan.

Only these ads turn the slogan around to tout Obamacare and attack Republican Gov. Bobby Jindal, a major Obamacare critic and possible 2016 presidential candidate.

"We have invested millions of dollars in identifying the Louisiana: Pick Your Passion brand with all that is good about Louisiana. No group should be allowed to use the brand for its own purposes, especially if it is for partisan political posturing," Republican Lt. Gov. Jay Dardenne said in a statement announcing the suit.

In the ads, MoveOn.org cites the Pick Your Passion slogan, but then adds: “But hope you don’t love your health. Gov. Jindal is denying Medicaid to 242,000 people.”



All of this comes via a report by our sister website, NOLA.com in New Orleans.

"MoveOn.org has every right to attack Gov. Jindal, the state's refusal to accept Medicaid or, for that matter, me personally,” Dardenne said. “But they do not have the right to use our protected service mark, which is used solely for the purpose of promoting and marketing Louisiana. We own the mark and its use is under the direction of my office, not the Office of the Governor."

Background according to NOLA.com: In response to the suit, MoveOn.org Civic Action's Executive Direct Anna Galland said the organization hasn't yet received notice of the complaint, but, "if press reports are accurate, it is very sad to see the state spend taxpayer money on a frivolous lawsuit instead of providing health care to the people of Louisiana.

"Once our lawyers receive and have a chance to fully review the complaint we will have more to say. In the meantime, we strongly urge Governor Jindal to do the right thing and allow 242,000 Louisianans to access Medicaid."

So is this a case of MoveOn.org’s free speech being violated?



Or does Louisiana have a copyright case?

Sort it out for us in the comments.