Nonprofit dental clinic opens in Dover

A ribbon-cutting ceremony was held at Westside Family Healthcare in Dover on Monday to celebrate the completion of its new dental clinic. In attendance were from left, Kevin M. Baird, Beryl Barmore, Sen. Bethany Hall-Long, D-Middletown, Dover Mayor Robin Christiansen, Sen. Brian Bushweller, D-Dover, Rep. John Carney, D-Del., Lolita Lopez, Sen. Tom Carper, D-Del., Sen. Chris Coons, D-Del., Tom Stephens, Daniel Hawkins and Donna Goodman. (Delaware State News photo by Ashton Brown)

DOVER –– Elected officials, health care professionals and members of the community gathered at Westside Family Healthcare in Dover on Monday to celebrate the opening of its new dental clinic.

Westside’s Dover location is one of six across the state and opened in August 2011. Westside President and Chief Executive Officer Lolita A. Lopez said that the addition of a dental clinic has been part of the plan since the location’s opening.

“We’ve always known that dental care is integral to primary care and it was only a matter of time until we would be able to add it to the services we already offer,” she said.

Of the six Westside clinics statewide, Dover is only the second to provide dental services, the other is in Wilmington. Westside hopes that the Dover dental clinic will serve residents of both Kent County and northern Sussex who do not have access to affordable dental care, and may not have for years.

“We anticipate the vast majority of patients that come in will not have had professional oral care in many years and may be facing serious problems, so we will be prepared for that,” Mrs. Lopez said.

The dental clinic will be staffed by 10 employees and at least two Delaware-licensed dentists.

“When I was first elected, one of the first things I learned was that the most important and difficult thing to do is bring down the climbing cost of health care,” said Rep. John Carney, D-Del. “It’s great to see affordable care becoming available to those who need it.”

Westside Family Healthcare is a non-profit organization and served more than 26,000 Delawareans and provided more than 95,000 visits in 2013 and the additional of the dental clinic should increase the number of patients reached. Westside provides care for all patients, regardless of their ability to pay for the services.

About one-third of Westside’s budget is comprised of federal funds and it provides services ranging from family medical to pre-natal to behavioral health services and even chronic disease management.

Westside received more than $1 million in capital funds from the Affordable Care Act to build the Dover dental clinic.

“I am so pleased to have Westside Dental in my community,” Dover Mayor Robin Christiansen said. “It’s so important for our citizens to have access to affordable health care.”

Additional funds were donated by the Longwood Foundation, Highmark Delaware BluePrints for the Community, Laffey McHugh Foundation, Potter Charity Trust and the M&T Charitable Foundation.

“I am overwhelmed by the support we’ve received,” Mrs. Lopez said. “A project like this really does take a village.”

To remind the Delaware delegation of the support that community health centers receive, Senators Chris Coons, Tom Carper and Rep. Carney were each given a 500-page compilation of signatures and letters of support that Mrs. Lopez received during the campaign for Westside’s expansion.

The new dental office is at 1020 Forrest Ave. in Dover, in the Gateway West Shopping Center. The dental clinic is set to open full-time in early September.

For more information about Westside, visit westsidehealth.org or and to schedule an appointment at a Kent or Sussex county office, call 678-4622 and call 224-6800 for an appointment in New Castle County.

Staff writer Ashton Brown can be reached at abrown@newszap.com or 741-8272. Follow @AshtonReports on Twitter.