Earlier this week the American Board of Internal Medicine (ABIM) released an apology statement on its maintenance of certification (MOC) program and proposed changes to language and requirements. The move earned praise from some physicians, while others were more skeptical.

We reached out to physicians by email to ask:

"What changes would you like to see to MOC in its revamped version?"

The participants this week:

Robert Centor, MD, internist at the University of Alabama School of Medicine at Birmingham

Westby Fisher, MD, director of cardiac electrophysiology, NorthShore Medical Group, Evanston, Ill.

Val Jones, MD, President and CEO of Better Health

Danielle Ofri, MD, PhD, internist at Bellevue Hospital in New York City, co-founder of the Bellevue Literary Review, and New York Times contributor

Kevin Pho, MD, internist in Nashua, N.H., founder of KevinMD, and USA Today contributor

Mark Pochapin, MD, director of Division of Gastroenterology at NYU Langone Medical Center, New York City

Paul Teirstein, MD, chief of cardiology and director of interventional cardiology at Scripps Clinic in San Diego, president of the National Board of Physicians and Surgeons, and creator of two online anti-MOC petitions

Make Modules Clinically Relevant

Danielle Ofri, MD, PhD: "[W]hile I'm a strong believer in the importance of communication and interpersonal skills, there isn't a realistic way to evaluate this, so MOC modules should focus only on relevant clinical knowledge; everything else should be scrapped."

Mark Pochapin, MD: "In my view, the recertification process should focus on physician education, particularly in the area of current evidence-based practice and clinical guidelines. In this way, physicians would be able to spend their time maintaining relevant practice-based clinical knowledge and quality measures, rather than on improvement modules that may not reflect or serve the clinical needs of their patients."

Val Jones, MD: "[T]he busy-work that is required by MOC is often redundant with current hospital patient satisfaction initiatives and performance evaluations."

Kevin Pho, MD: "Permanently remove the Practice Assessment, Patient Voice, and Patient Safety requirements. More doctors are practicing in integrated health systems where quality metrics are already being measured as part of their jobs. Duplicating this process is time-consuming busywork that doesn't improve patient care."

Robert Centor, MD: "In order to answer the question we should define maintenance of certification. Maintenance refers to the process of preserving something, in this case our clinical knowledge. Therefore, I would like MOC to focus on helping internal medicine specialists and subspecialists preserve their expertise. Medical knowledge advances rapidly. Our challenge comes from knowing what the important advances are. I would like to see MOC focus on helping us define a curriculum, give credit for studying that curriculum, and then use a formative test to certify that we are maintaining our knowledge.

"This differs from standard [continuing medical education] in that it would be more prescriptive. I would like to see an open process for setting the curriculum and then encourage medical societies, medical schools, and others to offer courses to help us learn that curriculum."

Convert Exams to Open Book

Jones: "I believe that board certification should be like graduating from medical school -- you only do it once. After that, remaining up-to-date requires continuing medical education (CME). CME is a smart way to keep physicians current because it allows them the freedom to select courses and topics that are relevant to their unique practices. Being forced to study for an exam that tests knowledge of diseases, treatments, or procedures that you never see/offer/perform is a big waste of time."

Ofri: "MOC should simply be the open-book modules that already exist. The act of searching for answers and learning in the process is what constitutes 'certification.' Memorizing material for a sit-down test is not a good use of time and doesn't reflect how medicine is practiced today."

Pochapin: "[C]onsideration needs to be given to revision of the recertification exam. As physicians, we don't practice medicine in a vacuum and shouldn't be tested in a vacuum. Rather, the exam should be an open-book, practice-based exam that reflects both the art and science of clinical medicine today."

Pho: "Make the examination open-book, with access to an online medical reference. Doctors today have mobile phones and tablets in their pockets with access to comprehensive medical texts like UpToDate. If I don't know the answer when I'm with a patient in the exam room, I look it up, or ask someone who does. In this era of patient safety and emphasis on reducing medical errors, it doesn't make sense to rely on rote memory to practice medicine.

"Instead of sitting in a testing room, doctors should be evaluated on how well they can find the necessary information -- not how well they can recall something they memorized. Board certification tests should be open-book, or, at least, provide the resources ready for physicians if they can't recall an obscure medical fact. Just like real life.

"If patient safety is truly valued, the ability to find the correct information supersedes how well a doctor can memorize it."

Better Target Exam Content

Pho: "Target the MOC exam specifically to hospitalists or ambulatory-based physicians. General internists increasingly practice in one of two areas: in hospitals as hospitalists or in ambulatory settings as primary care physicians. The days where internists see patients both in the hospital and clinic will soon be extinct. The MOC exam should reflect this change. Targeted recertification exams will have more clinical value to internists who exclusively see patients in the hospital or in the clinic."

Show Financial Transparency

Ofri: "While they're at it, the specialty boards need to make their finances transparent, otherwise there will be no confidence in the process. Staying up to date with medical knowledge is a moving target, and our patients have a right to expect their doctors to keep up in a rigorous way (something more than the typical watered-down CME)."

Westby Fisher, MD: "With the ABIM's recent announcement to temporary changes to the MOC program, they blinked, but in no way appear to be ready to abandon their proprietary MOC product in lieu of CME. My work unraveling the financial mismanagement of this organization, its well-designed propaganda campaign, and it's ties to the ACA law should shine a bright light on the fact that the MOC product has been less about assuring quality physicians than assuring a well-paid revolving door employment opportunity to insurance companies or the National Quality Forum. The financials expose the real reason for MOC: the ABIM was in a financial death spiral thanks to high salaries, $2.3 million condo purchases, and the like."

Abandon MOC Altogether

Jones: "[T]here is no good evidence to suggest that the MOC process improves physician performance or healthcare quality. ABIM's apology is nice, but irrelevant. MOC should be rejected in its totality and removed from the Affordable Care Act. It is expensive, ineffective, and is adding to physician burnout."

Go Another Recertification Route

Paul Teirstein, MD: "ABIM's changes are a step in the right direction. But the onerous modules, re-testing, and high prices are still problematic for the majority of physicians. NBPAS.org addresses this by providing an alternative that replaces the medical knowledge modules and re-testing with [Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education]-accredited CME, and much lower fees."

You may also be interested in these recent Friday Feedbacks:

Medicare's New Way to Pay

When Grief Turns Violent

How Much Is Too Much Aspirin?

Fat but Fit Revisited

First, Do No Harm?

Friday Feedback is a feature that presents a sampling of opinions solicited by MedPage Today in response to a healthcare issue, clinical controversy, or new finding reported that week. We always welcome new, thoughtful voices. If you'd like to participate in a Friday Feedback, or suggest a topic, drop us a line or two.