Protesters in favor of the Affordable Care Act hold signs showing what they say are the number of people in certain states who could lose affordable health care. REUTERS

Any day now, the U.S. Supreme Court will issue its third ruling on the Affordable Care Act.

The previous two were easy reduce to a sentence: Can the government make people buy health insurance? (Yes, sort of.) Can the government make company owners pay for employee insurance coverage of contraceptives, even if the owners’ religion forbids the use of contraceptives? (No.)

The latest case defies simple reduction. But let’s start with why this case maters: The outcome will determine whether low-income residents are entitled to subsidized health insurance in more than two thirds of the states.

Why wouldn’t they be? Well, the law says the subsidies are available to low-income Americans for insurance purchased on marketplaces “established by the state.” But most of the states never set up their own insurance marketplaces, in a show of defiance. Their residents have made do with a marketplace established by the federal government.

Federal agencies often draft regulations to flesh it out major pieces of legislation, for better or for worse (but that’s a debate for another day). The IRS drafted a regulation that extended the subsidies for insurance bought in the federal marketplace.

So, the real question facing the Supreme Court is whether the IRS was within its rights to do so.

What could happen if the justices rule that the text of the law precludes subsidies in states without their own marketplaces?

Subsidies in states that rely on the federal marketplace, HealthCare.gov, would disappear, unless or until the states established their own marketplaces.

In all, more than six million people already have received tax credits for 2015 through the federal exchange. A group of Republicans is considering a short-term extension of financial assistance, in the event the Supreme Court strikes down the subsidies.

It’s unclear how many of those who currently receive subsidies would continue to pay for insurance without the tax credits, but if a significant number fled, experts say, the price of insurance could increase, driving even more Americans out of the program.

Many would face no penalty for failing to purchase health insurance; the so-called individual mandate applies only if affordable insurance relative to income is available.

Many legal experts believe that eschewing subsidies in states that depend on HealthCare.gov would also weaken the so-called employer mandate, which requires businesses with 50 or more employees to provide them with health insurance or face a monthly penalty.

Here’s why: The penalty is triggered only when an employee gets a tax credit for health insurance acquired on one of the exchanges. If the subsidies disappeared, so too would the penalty trigger, the thinking goes.