California, Connecticut, Maryland, Nevada, Rhode Island, Vermont, Washington indicate - only 79 percent of signups come with checks attached

Many people are taking a cautious wait and see attitude with Obamacare. While it's keeping the official tally under tightly guarded wraps, there has only been a 4.2 million goal of successful signups to date just 60 percent of the total goal.

The president appears a little nonplussed with the lack of enthusiasm for his health care plan. Highlights By Catholic Online (NEWS CONSORTIUM) Catholic Online (www.catholic.org) 3/13/2014 (2 years ago) Published in Politics & Policy Keywords: Obamacare, enrollees, signups, paid

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - As of March 1, about 4.2 million Americans signed up for medical insurance coverage through the Affordable Care Act. It's not yet known how many people have actually PAID for the privilege.



Figures as published by Obamacare marketplaces in California, Connecticut, Maryland, Nevada, Rhode Island, Vermont and Washington indicate that just 79 percent of signups in those states have come with money.



WISH POPE FRANCIS A HAPPY ANNIVERSARY!



If these figures are applied nationally, it would mean that about 1.1 million Obamacare enrollees have selected insurance plans without paying for them - bringing the actual total of Obamacare-insured Americans down to 3.3 million.



February brought 943,000 new people into the Obamacare fold, bringing the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid services 60 percent of the way to the Department of Health and Human Services' original goal of enrolling seven million Americans by the end of March.



The administration expects a March surge to close the gap, HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius told reporters on a conference call this week.



She recanted the prediction she made last month seven million new insurance customers, saying the new target was six million. The 4.2 million total is 70 percent of that lower benchmark number.



A confused and chronically troubled beginning for Obamacare was marked by widespread confusion, Web site outages and an implementation cost that has exceeded two-thirds of one trillion dollars.



About one-quarter of the enrollees since the program's October 1 launch have been adults in the 18-35 age range. These mostly healthy people were originally expected to be one-third of the total, paying into the system to offset the mounting costs of treating older, sicker Americans.



As the March 31 deadline ending the open-enrollment season approaches, the White House has yet to release any statistics showing how many people have paid the first month's premium for their new insurance policies.



All together, the seven states where both enrollment and payment numbers have been published have signed up 1.05 million people, but reported that just 835,000 have paid premiums.

---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.