Buy Photo Buy Photo

Natividad staff saves son’s life

We recently spent almost eight weeks in Salinas while our son was in the Natividad hospital ICU and Medical/Surgical units after being air-lifted from a serious accident on Highway 1 near Big Sur. This letter is to express our appreciation for the excellent care he received from the trauma physicians and assistants, nurses, respiratory, physical and occupational therapists, and housekeepers and technicians. He had three major surgeries and his life was saved more than once. The skill and determination of the medical staff along with our son’s inner strength produced an outcome that finally allowed us to have him come home, which is four hours away, to continue his journey to a full recovery. Thank you, Natividad!

Glenn and Lynda Van Patter

Teacher wants 1-mile pesticide buffer zone

As a teacher, I want a one-mile pesticide-free buffer zone around schools as well as a one-week notice to spray. Speakers at the Department of Pesticide Regulation meeting on June 2 in Salinas explained why the Safe Strawberry coalition is calling for one-mile pesticide-free buffer zones around schools. 350 feet isn’t enough, as chloropicrin was tested at cancer-risk levels in the air at a Watsonville home not far from a field application. 940 feet isn’t enough, as 11 local elementary students and their teacher were poisoned by drifting pesticides from a spinach farm at that distance in 2009. One-quarter mile isn’t enough, as the state’s regulatory levels of concern were exceeded at the Salinas airport air-monitoring site for chloropicrin (2013) and the carcinogen 1,3-dichloropropene (2011) at least that far from fields. Half a mile isn’t enough, as the Pesticide Research Institute has documented many hazardous pesticide exposures from drifts of that distance. Even at one mile, University of California researchers have found elevated levels of brain-harming chlorpyrifos in Salinas Valley women and children.

Department of Pesticide Regulation, please agree and enforce the one-mile buffer zone and one-week notice. It is more than reasonable.

Kim Saldavia

Santa Cruz

Pesticide industry sounds like tobacco industry

Why does the pesticide industry and its supporters sound more and more like the tobacco industry apologists of yesteryear? Dupont once had a commercial jingle with smiling children and animals singing, “DDT is good for me!” Methyl bromide was just fine … until it was condemned by the scientific community and banned by international treaty. Now we hear there are “acceptable levels” for carcinogens and brain-harming pesticides. Well, we’ve listened to these guys before, to our peril. European scientists advised the European Union to ban a good many of the pesticides that we apply near our schools in Monterey County. In fact, seven of the 10 most applied pesticides near Monterey County schools are banned in the European Union. The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American Congress on Obstetricians and Gynecologists urge a reduction in hazardous pesticides to protect children. So, hmm, to whom should we listen?

Everett P. Sivils

Salinas

Cheddar cheese wafers a hit

I simply had to email and gush over the success of Joe Truskot’s cheddar cheese wafers that came to him by way of Virginia Stanton. The recipe was published in The Californian a week or so ago. I attended a retirement party last night and brought them to serve as hors d’oeuvres. Interestingly, people avoided them, thinking they were cookies (despite them being on the cheese table), until I seized the basket and took them around. Once I explained that they were savory and not sweet, the gobbling commenced. Everyone raved about them, and several of my friends demanded the recipe, as a happy result.

Thank you so much for sharing such a ridiculously easy and wildly popular treat.

Nancy Bernhard

Salinas

Trade pact a bad idea

I am very suspicious of a trade deal that will limit the ability for citizens to have any control over their own destiny. It is rumored that language lingers in TPP which would allow corporations to sue countries over legislation that has been passed that would negatively impact their pursuit of profits.

For instance, under NAFTA, the US company called Ethyl made a gasoline additive called MMT. Canada banned imports of MMT because of air pollution concerns. Ethyl then filed a complaint stating Canada was infringing on their rights to make a profit. This complaint was settled out of court. Because the owner of Ethyl was from the United States they were allowed to file a complaint, while the Canadian oil companies had to cease production. This is just one example.

We should be frightened that a law can be passed by a country to protect their citizens and then a foreign country can sue through a tribunal to override the law and seek damages.

I become very suspicious of deals that are negotiated in secret, behind closed doors, and later when it does become public cannot be amended but only voted up or down by Congress. I have asked Congressman Farr to vote no, you can, too.

Patty Cramer

Marina

Read or Share this story: http://bit.ly/1IE4cOl