2016 Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton took several subliminal swipes at former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush while delivering a speech at the National Urban League conference in Fort Lauderdale on Friday.

Clinton received a standing ovation after she addressed the majority African-American audience at the NUL conference, where she talked about the importance of combating racial inequality and injustice in America. The Democratic front-runner also seized the opportunity to take a few jabs at Bush.

"I don't think you can credibly say that everyone has a right to rise and then say you are for phasing out Medicare and repealing Obamacare," Clinton said, referring to Bush's "Right to Rise" super PAC name, reports CNN.

"They can't rise if the minimum wage is too low to live on. You cannot seriously talk about the right to rise and support laws that deny the right to vote," she said.

"The real test of a candidates' commitment is not whether we come to speak," Clinton said, "it is whether we are still around after the cameras are gone and the votes are counted. It is whether our positions live up to our rhetoric and too often we see a mismatch between what some candidates say in venues like this and what they actually do when they are elected."

The former secretary of state also talked about the federal government's failed response to Hurricane Katrina in 2005, and brought up the deaths of Trayvon Martin and others in her speech.

"Race still plays a significant role in determining who gets ahead in America and who gets left behind," Clinton said, reports CBS Miami. "And yes, while that's partly a legacy of discrimination that stretches back to the start of our nation, it is also because of discrimination that is still ongoing."

She went on to say, "I'm planning to be president, and anybody who seeks that office has a responsibility to say it, and more than that, to grapple with the systemic inequities. I want you to know I see it and I hear you, and the racial disparities you work hard every day to overcome go against everything I believe in and everything I want to help America achieve."

Bush, on the other hand, chose not to respond to Clinton's comments, and instead delivered a speech before the same audience that focused on his record as the governor of Florida. He also talked about his economic plan to help the country grow at 4 percent.

At other points during his speech, Bush said that as governor he ordered the removal of the Confederate battle flag from the state capitol, increased the number of black judges and tripled the state's hiring of minority-owned businesses. Bush also touted his work in eduction reform in Florida.

In addition to Clinton and Bush, other 2016 candidates including Ben Carson, Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont and former Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley, also spoke at the event.