In an interview with NBC News, Mitt Romney showed that he can’t stop being bitter about losing the 2012 election to the president by claiming that Vladimir Putin has out performed President Obama.

Video:

Visit NBCNews.com for breaking news, world news, and news about the economy

Romney said, “Well, I think Putin has outperformed our president time and time again on the world stage. We are, as I’ve said before, geopolitical adversaries, not enemies, but adversaries, geopolitically, and Putin lines up with Assad, and gave Assad the cover that he needed and won a diplomatic battle with regards to Syria. He likewise keeps Edward Snowden as a bit of a stick in the eye at America, and I think most observers of the international political suggest that Russia has elevated itself in stature, and America has been diminished.”

Romney is literally oozing bitterness and jealousy. It was also clear from the video clip that Romney considers the successful diplomacy in Syria a failure. His clip confirms what many Americans suspected in 2012. If Romney would have won the election, his foreign policy would have been more and expanded war. The fact that he thinks that the president’s diplomatic efforts have failed suggests that he supports the military intervention alternative.

Mitt won’t let it go. He lost, and the election wasn’t even close. Contrary to Republican mythology, Romney never led. The polls weren’t skewed, and the GOP never had a chance of defeating President Obama in 2012. Obamacare wouldn’t have saved them. Benghazi wasn’t their path to victory, and neither was the IRS “scandal.”

Mitt Romney was one of the worst nominees in modern presidential campaign history. At a time of historic income inequality, he was a Wall Street/Big Business villain straight out of central casting. Romney was secretive, vague, and a compulsive liar on the campaign trail. He is a man who was clearly never meant to be president. This obvious fact is understood by everyone not named Mitt Romney.

Romney is quickly inching into that Sarah Palin territory, where he just needs pack up his bitter sideshow and get off our televisions. The campaign’s over. You lost, Mitt. Please take your binder full of excuses and go away.