The number of Medicare patients going under the knife to fix droopy eyelids has skyrocketed and so has the cost to you.

Watch report

Tens of millions of dollars and still climbing.

But not everyone sees eye-to-eye on whether taxpayers should fund every single procedure.

Last year, Chalmette businessman Al Tinney set his sights on improved vision.

“Just sitting down in bed looking at television or looking at something at night, it would be if I do like this, I wouldn't be able to see the rest of whatever was going on up there,” said Tinney.

The 77-year-old gun enthusiast had trouble seeing because of heavy folds of skin on his eyelids, so he went to see a specialist Dr. Kevin Kirschner.

“A lot of patients come in and say my mom or my dad had this, or my mom and dad needed this surgery. So certainly there is a little bit of a genetic component to that, but as we get older the collagen in the skin starts to break down and certainly gravity starts to work on us too,” Kirschner said.

Kirschner specializes in eyelid lifts or blepharoplasty.

With 200 procedures a year, it's the bulk of his practice.

"Medicare covers this procedure but most insurance carriers do as well. However there are certain requirements that we look at when evaluating patients for these procedures,” said Kirschner.

Private insurance companies require Kirschner and other doctors to submit for authorization of the procedure. They evaluate the medical benefits before giving the OK, but that's not how it works with Medicare, which Kirchner explains has no pre-authorization requirement for eyelid lifts.

He makes every candidate undergo a comprehensive eye exam, a visual field test and submit to photographs, and he says he turns patients away.

It's most important to rule in who's right for the surgery and rule out who's wrong for the surgery,” Kirschner said.

“I took the test, and he said, ‘You're in good shape. You're a good candidate.’”

On average, the surgery costs about $3,000. Tinney paid just $50, because he's enrolled in Medicare.

“I'm glad I done it,” he said.

Last year, the Center for Public Integrity raised concerns about the way the procedures were being handled from 2001 to 2011. The report notes eyelid lifts paid for by Medicare more than tripled. 136,000 people now get the procedure annually with an $80 million taxpayer price tag.

“It's breathtaking that you can go from $20 million to $80 million in a 10-year period. That's an amazing amount of taxpayer dollars,” said State Rep. Cameron Henry.

Henry is one of the more conservative members of the Louisiana Legislature, and he's been a watchdog when it comes to any kind of government spending that may be under-regulated. Henry understands there is a medical need for the procedure, but when nationwide statistics show some doctors performing thousands of eyelid lifts per year, he feels more monitoring is needed.

“You just have to make sure the people who need it are getting the surgery and the people that don't need it are not getting the surgery. That's it. It's just making sure nobody is taking advantage of the system. It seems like some doctors at 2,200 surgeries in a year have found a loophole and are taking advantage of the system, and that penalizes everyone,” Henry said.

WDSU reached out to the government agency, and they issued the following statement:

"The Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services takes seriously allegations of any abuse of Medicare benefits, and we have in place a series of tools to spot and stop fraud. We believe these tools, including sophisticated data analytics and stronger enrollment and screening requirements for health care providers, made possible by provisions of the affordable care act, will protect the Medicare trust fund."

Lawmakers say with Medicare on life support and set to go bankrupt in just over 10 years, reforms can't happen fast enough.

“If this continues, eventually you run out of money, and that's kind of where we're headed,” said Henry.

These eyelid surgeries are performed all over the country, yet according to the center for public integrity, 11 of the 20 highest billers in 2008 were in Florida, a haven for seniors and also a place under the microscope for questionable Medicare billing.

This follows a trend in terms of the use of Medicare. In 2007, 925,000 doctors billed Medicare for their services.

In 2011, that number jumped to 1.25 million.

Sign up for our email newsletters to get breaking news right in your inbox. Click here to sign up!

When you see breaking news happen, email your photos to ulocal@wdsu.com -- or post them (and your videos) to http://ulocal.wdsu.com.