The Republican Party has caught a break in the early stages of the 2016 election's Battle Royale over immigration, with a 12-year-old audio clip that shows Hillary Clinton sounding like today's Ted Cruz.

'I am, you know, adamantly against illegal immigrants,' Clinton told the John Gambling Radio Show in February 2003, when she was in her third year as a U.S. senator.

'Certainly we’ve got to do more at our borders,' she added. 'And people have to stop employing illegal immigrants.'

On Tuesday in Las Vegas, however, Hillary told a room full of high school-age illegal immigrants that if she becomes America's next president, 'I will fight for comprehensive immigration reform and a path to citizenship.'

SCROLL DOWN FOR AUDIO AND VIDEO

THAT WAS THEN: In 2003 then-Senator Clinton spoke forcefully against illegal immigration in the US

THIS IS NOW: Clinton outlined an immigration policy on Tuesday that includes a 'path to citizenship' for millions of illegal border-crossers

READY FOR HILLARY? Hillary Clinton Former sec. of state Age: 67 Religion: United Methodist Base: Liberals Résumé: Secretary of state, US senator, US first lady, Arkansas first lady, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville law faculty Education: B.A. Wellesley College. J.D. Yale Law School. Family: Clinton's husband Bill was the 42nd President of the United States. Their daughter Chelsea is marreid to investment banker Marc Mezvinsky, whose mother was a one-term Pennsylvania congresswoman in the 1990s. Claim to fame: Clinton was the first US first lady with a postgraduate degree and presaged Obamacare with a failed attempt at health care reform in the 1990s. Achilles heel: A long series of financial and ethical scandals has dogged Clinton, including recent allegations that her husband and their family foundation benefited financially from decisions she made as secretary of state. And her performance surrounding the 2012 terror attack on a State Department facility in Benghazi, Libya, has been catnip for conservative Republicans.

'For me,' she said, 'this is about what kind of people we all are and what kind of country we have. And I am absolutely convinced that this is in our economic interest, it’s in the interest of our values and it’s even in the interest of our long term security as a nation.'

'So you know where I stand and there can be no question about it because I will do everything I can as president and during this campaign to make this case.'

The Republican National Committee gleefully distributed a 30-second audio clip on Thursday that it said were Hillary's comments from 2003. A spokesman said the party did not have a more complete recording of the radio interview.

'That’s all the audio I have,' RNC deputy press secretary James Hewitt said in an email. 'You'll have to reach out to John Gambling to see if he has more information.'

But the GOP was quick to pile on Mrs. Clinton with accusations of flip-floppery.

'Hillary Clinton’s hypocrisy knows no bounds,' RNC national press secretary Allison Moore said.

'As a presidential candidate Hillary will say anything to get elected,' Moore claimed, 'but as a senator she was singing a different tune and voted to essentially kill immigration reform.'

'This is just another example of why the American people cannot trust Hillary Clinton to care about the issues important to them, as she only really cares about what is most beneficial to her politically.'

Clinton's campaign did not respond to a request for comment.

TOOK OUR JEEERRRBBBBS! Back in 2003 Hillary, like the animated show South Park's angry unionized mob, complained that illegal immigrants had employment when many Americans didn't

President Barack Obama famously said his views on same-sex marriage had 'evolved' when he announced in 2012 that he favored their legal recognition.

That move brought similar catcalls of hypocrisy, especially from evangelical Christians who see state-sanctioned gay unions as an affront to their religion.

It's unclear whether Clinton's political strategists will position Thursday's revelation in the same vein, descibing her change of heart as the result of years of soul-searching.

But in 2003 she sounded like a rock-ribbed conservative of today, railing against illegal immigrants with all the fervor of the famous South Park 'They took our jerrrbs' cartoon.

She even listed jobs that illegal immigrants were taking from Americans at the time, with each example sounding more bitter-tongued than the last.

''Come up to Westchester, go to Suffolk and Nassau counties, stand in the street corners in Brooklyn or the Bronx,' she griped.

'You’re going to see loads of people waiting to get picked up to go do yard work and construction work and domestic work.'

SI, SE PUEDE: Immigration activists have swayer Hillary Clinton into building on President Barack Obama's policies with even more far-reaching ones that could mainstream millions of illegal immigrants

Obama's two main executive actions on immigration have set the stage for future Democratic candidates, including Clinton, to expand on a system that now gives millions a promise that they won't be deported even though they live in the U.S. illegally.

The 'Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals' (DACA) program protects people who were brought across the border as children. A later addition, 'Deferred Action for Parents of Americans' (DAPA), added illegal-immigrant parents whose children are U.S. citizens because they weer born inside America's borders.

Clinton, sounding like a different thinker from her 2003 self, said Tuesday that those decrees were 'just the beginning.' She proposed adding a stay of deportation for adults who brought their DACA-protected children into the U.S. in the first place.

'I want to do everything we can to defend the president's executive orders,' she said, adding separately that 'as president I would do everything possible under the law to go even further.'

'We should put into place a simple, straightforward and accessible way for parents of DREAMers ... to make their case,' Clinton added, 'and to be eligible for the same deferred action as their children.'

'But that's just the beginning.'

Clinton said no one on the Republican side of the 2016 presidential contest had a plan to put illegal immigrants on a path to citizenship.

'When they talk about "legal status"' instead of 'citizenship,' she insisted, 'that is code for second-class status.'

Clinton, a former American first lady, senator and secretary of state, is far and away the Democratic Party's most viable presidential candidate

FLOOD: Tens of thousands of illegal immigrants continue to pour across America's southern border with Mexico every month, and US Boarder Patrol can't keep up

Conservatives, including many in Congress, see a sharp legal distinction between immigrants who have entered the U.S. legally with work permits and those who have snuck across the country's border with Mexico.

They have so far managed to block attempts to legislate the kind of amnesty the Obama White House has demanded.

Among the presidential field, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz is the most staunch opponent. Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, who has not yet formally entered the race, has taken a softer approach – saying border-crossing is at times 'an act of love' for families that would otherwise be disjointed or separated by national borders.

Clinton's Nevada stop, 24 days into her presidential campaign, marks the first sign of her staking out a position on a hot-button issue.

'I'm ready to have this discussion with anybody, anywhere, at any time,' she said, echoing Obama's call for immigration policy that is 'more humane, more targeted and more effective.'

'It's foolish to talk as though we're going to deport 11 or 12 million people. That is not going to happen,' Clinton said. 'It's beyond absurd.'

Many Republicans have opposed a comprehensive approach to immigration reform that includes a path to citizenship, saying any changes must be made incrementally – beginning with stronger border security.