Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee, another Jerry Seinfeld project that has made him a fortune, is back with new episodes.

The guest opening the new round is none other than president Barack Obama, the friendliest president ever, who usually goes on popular shows to promote the Obamacare. Last summer, he even joined comedian Mark Maron on his WTF podcast where they had an honest conversation about life, goals and being the president.

For the president, Seinfeld chose a 1963 silver blue Corvette Stingray Split Window Coupe silver blue. "It's stubborn, it's stubby, it's perfectly proportioned with just the right amount of detail." With it, he entered the White House garden and arrived at the president's door. Well, he lurked outside his window first.

The car was right the president's ally as a friend of his father's used to have one when he was a child and he had always wanted to buy one as an adult. However, the two couldn't actually go for a real ride so Jerry just drove around the White House until they went to get coffee in the WH cafeteria.

What we've learned is that Obama exercises in the morning, wears blue and grey suits which he picks himself and eats nachos with guacamole until someone takes it away from him. "I'll have guacamole coming out of my eyeballs." Also, he plays gold with Larry David.

"Did I tell you I played golf with Larry David?" he asks Jerry.

"No, cause you and I don't talk that much," comes the smartass reply.

The tidbit of serious conversation has to do with politics being like a game of football (a question Obama likes) and Jerry talking about having stayed a decent human being despite the huge amount of money he makes because he loves the job he does.

The show ends with Obama bringing up the Obamacare and telling Jerry that he doesn't have to mention anything if he doesn't want his show to be sullied. Jerry, of course, tries to reassure the president that he doesn't mind.

I think Jerry was nervous about this whole get together, but really now, who wouldn't?