Benita Zahn

Updated: 05/26/2016 2:48 PM

Created: 05/25/2016 6:26 AM

Health insurers in New York recently proposed premium increases averaging 12 to 17 percent for next year. If history plays out, the Department of Financial Services will reduce those requests. We'll know in early August.

Insurance experts say higher premiums are necessary for their financial stability. That's because a key part of their rate hike request is tied to the ever increasing cost of pharmaceutical products. When those costs squeeze the insurer, you the consumer pay, just like Sandy Schanck.

“That was my first reaction. Was what? To stop the drug ‘cause I can't afford this,” admitted Schanck.

Rituxan is the drug and it's keeping Schanck's blood cancer in remission. She gets it via infusion every three months.

In 2015, a $20 office visit co-pay, covered it. Since the first of this year she's been socked with a wallet busting co-insurance charge.

“It's going to cost me $1,188 every three months,” she explained.

That's because her insurer, CDPHP joined the ranks of other health insurers requiring subscribers to cough up co-insurance for expensive drugs, generally about 20 percent of the drug's price tag.

It's about trying to stay solvent because the sky rocketing cost of pharmaceuticals is pushing insurers to the brink.

“Crazier than they've been in my 35 years as a pharmacist,” acknowledged Eileen Wood, RPh, CDPHP’s pharmacy director.

WEB EXTRA: Eileen Wood

She explains, it's not feasible to raise premiums high enough to cover soaring drug costs.

“Do you put it on the premium and then every family who has to pay premiums pay a higher price? Every employer? Or do you put it on cost share when you actually utilize the benefit, you pay more?”

It's a conundrum Paul Macielak, CEO and President for the NYS Health Plans Association sees all the time.

He says pharmaceutical costs in New York rose double digits last three years and they're still climbing.

He points to costly specialty drugs, increasing costs for diabetes drugs and the many drugs about to go off patent, meaning generic, less expensive versions of those drugs will hit the market.

“So they try and collect as much as they can in that short a period of time and there's really no control over what they can charge in terms of prices unlike the health industry that has strict price control mechanisms,” explained Macielak.

WEB EXTRA: Paul Macielak

So we have to sharpen our consumer savvy. Know your policy and be aware of out of pocket costs. The least expensive premium is not always the best buy. If you think co-insurance charges or other benefits changes that can affect your health, are not correct file an appeal with your insurer.

Ongoing problems may be settled by filing a complaint with the State Department of Financial Services.

Seek out drug discount cards, private foundations that may help.

“I submitted hardship papers,” noted Schanck.

That's another route to getting financial help.

Schanck started hitting roadblocks because a payment code for her diagnosis and the Rituxan changed when the Feds adopted a new system of classifying drugs.

She reached out to NewsChannel 13’s Benita Zahn who did some digging. She contacted the feds and working with her insurer CDPHP and her cancer treatment facility, NYOH, along with drug maker, Genentech.

Working with NYOH, Genentech revisited Schanck's case and found she did, in fact, qualify for what's called replacement drug. They provide the Rituxan, free of charge to NYOH who agrees not to charge for their services.

“If it's exceptional that can work. If it becomes an increasing burden it's going to destabilize how healthcare is delivered,” pointed out Dr. Ira Zackon with New York Oncology Hematology.

WEB EXTRA: Dr. Ira Zackon

Requests for replacement drugs are increasing. Zackon says 50 percent of their patients are on the hook for a 20 percent drug co insurance. Five years ago there were few. So Schanck's got a lot of company needing help to pay for lifesaving treatment.

“We are seeing twice what we used to. And we've anticipated it may go triple,” noted Zackon.

As for Schanck, she hopes her story can empower others.

Now she's focusing on staying well and enjoying her grandchildren.

“Oh yeah. I plan on being around a while,” she admitted.

Because drug costs are such a big part of health care costs Assemblyman John McDonald and Senator Kemp Hannon are sponsoring legislation to make the drug makers costs more transparent.

Right now, it's almost impossible to know their true costs. Assemblyman McDonald doesn't expect it to become law this year but says the work to get it passed will continue.

Consumers have to be tenacious when it comes to getting help.

More information

Health costs: New York State Department of Financial Services

Health insurance: Understanding policy terminology

Health insurance: Out-of-pocket limit