News Release — Steve Law PLC

June 17, 2015

Contact:

Steve Atherton, Esq.

(802) 485-5595

NORTHFIELD FALLS, VT – Steven H. Atherton is pleased to announce that attorney David L. Sterrett, Esq. has joined Atherton Law PLC, “Of Counsel”. Attorney Sterrett is a 1999 magna cum laude graduate of Middlebury College who has spent most of the last sixteen years of his professional life in Washington, DC and Boston as a lawyer and government relations professional.

“After falling in love with Vermont as a college student, I had hoped to one day permanently move back to Vermont” said Sterrett. “After representing multi-national companies, high-net-worth individuals, and national non-profits in Washington, DC and Boston, I’m thrilled to deliver the highest-value legal services to Vermonters at a fraction of what the cost would be in a large city.”

“Dave is a great fit for our firm” said firm owner, Steve Atherton. “Dave brings the same sense of down to earth, high quality service to clients that I value so highly and our clients have come to expect”

Attorney Sterrett is a 2004 cum laude graduate of Boston College Law School who has developed a special expertise in real estate, land use, civil litigation and health care law. In addition to practicing real estate law, Dave is a licensed realtor, real estate investor, and former landlord and property manager. He notes, “I know the practical problems that real estate investors deal with because I’ve dealt with them as an investor myself.”

As a former court clerk and litigator for the City of Boston, Dave loves to mix it up in the court room. Moreover, his background in real estate, landlord/tenant, land use, health care, government and business provide a natural fit for many of the firm’s clients.

In the health care realm, Dave represented health care clients on Capitol Hill and at the White House during the Affordable Care Act (“ACA”) debate. Drawing on that experience, he counsels health care clients as they navigate the new environment created by the ACA.

Dave has been profiled in the Burlington Free Press and interviewed on WCAX, Radio France Internationale, and the Bill Press Show. His work has been published in the Vermont Bar Journal, American University College of Law Health Law & Policy Brief, and the New Haven Register. Dave is fluent in French and he is admitted to practice law in Massachusetts and Vermont.