Buy Photo A police officer installs a child seat in this 2012 photo. (Photo: Gannett)Buy Photo

April has been a busy month for Lacey Township Police. Here’s just three of the top incidents they responded to between April 8 and April 14.

1) Child seat heroin stash — Lacey Police found 36 bags of heroin inside an empty child safety seat during an April 8 arrest of four people involved in an alleged drug deal.

Raymond Sleeper, 29, of Forked River tried hiding bags of heroin inside the child seat when police approached the vehicle in the Beach Plaza Parking lot, according to Lacey Police.

Police charged Sleeper with possession of heroin and intent to distribute. His bail was set at $50,000. In addition, Sleeper was processed for a no-bail warrant issued by the Ocean County Sheriff’s Department after he allegedly failed to adhere to probation requirements. He was transported to the Ocean County Jail, Toms River.

Many jobs, one big government pension

Three other people in the vehicle were also charged with drug offenses. Police charged Kayla Garcia, 25, of Beachwood with possession of heroin, distribution of heroin, and possession of a hypodermic syringe. Garcia was transferred to the Ocean County Jail in default of $25,000 bail.

Police charged a third passenger — Devin Durow, 31, of Forked River — with criminal attempt to possess heroin.

The driver — Ashley Cornelius, 24, of Toms River — was charged with possession of heroin and possessing a controlled dangerous substance in a motor vehicle, according to Lacey Police.

Durow and Cornelius were released pending a future court appearance.

You owe Trenton $29K and counting

2) Shotgun injury — Robert C. Bishop, 67, of Pennington was injured April 14 when he fired a shotgun at the Ground Swipers Rod and Gun Club on Lacey Road and the gun broke into several pieces, police said. Pieces of the broken shotgun struck the man’s inner left arm, according to Lacey Police. Lacey EMS took Bishop to Community Medical Center in Toms River for treatment.

3)Assault of a police officer — Justin Bennett, 25, of Forked River kicked Sgt. Paul Sullivan Jr. during an arrest on April 8, Lacey Police said. Bennett allegedly fled from officers after they responded to a dispute on Devon Street. Police Officer Kymberly Gudgeon found Bennett later walking along Arlington Avenue and Tappan Street, and that is where police said he assaulted Sullivan.

Lacey Police charged Bennett with aggravated assault on a police officer, resisting arrest and obstructing the administration of law. Bennett was lodged in Ocean County Jail after his bail was set at $25,000 with no 10 percent option, according to Lacey Police.

Want more crime news? Click here.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1z8W05p