By CARRIE SEIDMAN

Staff writer

As the practice miles for the Susan Komen Tampa Bay breast cancer walk creep upwards of 30 a weekend, I’ve discovered what “Pit Crew” means on the training schedule.

During the 60-mile event the last weekend in October, we will enjoy regularly provided water, food and cheering stops — so the Walking in Sunshine team organizes at least two former teammates to trail us on long training walks, offering everything from frozen grapes to well-being checks. (“Have you peed yet?” is an obsessive point of inquiry.)

Last Saturday the schedule called for 17 miles, but when only two of 10 members said they’d be able to make it, I fired off an email to the team captain.

I think it’s ridiculous to make a pit crew hang around five hours for just the two of us, I petulantly wrote. We can carry our own food and water.

I immediately heard back from Lisa Weisbrod-Amira.

Doing the pit crew and cheering each other on has just been part of our team’s history; it is second nature, she wrote. When I did not walk last year I crewed because it gave me a chance to still be part of the team. I have past members asking when they can volunteer each week. I know it may seem silly but these ladies really do want to be there.

Appropriately chastised, I acquiesced. (I told you I wasn’t good at this group thing.) So the next morning at 6 a.m., there was a cheery Deb Studebaker, the team’s longtime previous captain and her friend Pam Ater from Orlando, another former walker.

In her pink, separate-toed socks Deb sent us off in the dark with a lit ballcap and “Walking in the Sunshine” blaring on the car CD. She was there at the end of Mile 17, with an ice-cold Bud Light Lime, unsqueamishly accepting a disgustingly sweaty hug. And in between she provided whatever was called for — Propel, ice, bacon.

I started to understand what Lisa was talking about.

Eight years ago, Deb, an art teacher, moved to the home where she now lives and met a neighbor, Margo Dolan, the prior WIS captain. Deb had lost her husband to colon cancer and when Margo urged her to join, she was drawn “like a magnet.”

Her only reservation — mine too — was that part about camping for two nights with a stranger in a pink pup tent between thousands of others.

“Oh, I don’t do that,” Margo scoffed. “I go to the Hilton.”

Replied Deb: “I’m in.”

Deb walked the next seven years. She bought more pink paraphernalia than any one person ought to own. She walked in blazing sun and pre-Hurricane Sandy rain. She endured full foot blisters and sob-filled final ceremonies.

Last year, about mile 30, she decided it would be her last finish line. By then nearly her entire social life centered around the walkers she’d met along the way.

The night of our 17-mile trainer, Deb invited me to her house. I got the address wrong, but I found the house by the parked cars with pink bumper stickers.

Inside, a bunch of really nice women — and a few men — gathered around a kitchen counter laden with hand painted (pink, naturally) wineglasses, pink plastic utensils and a stack of photography books, each labeled with the year of a 3-Day walk. They warmly welcomed a newbie, offering funny stories, happy memories, great tips. (Bless you, Rick Borres, for telling me I could grab a tent and plunk it anywhere, thus avoiding the tenting-with-a-stranger dilemma.)

As I said my thank yous, Deb followed me out.

“I kid you not,” she said with a solemnness out of character with the level of wine consumption.

“This is going to change your life.”

Coming from someone who knows the value of a nice hotel room after a 20-mile tromp, I completely believed her.

Carrie Seidman will report each month in Health+Fitness on Walking on Sunshine’s preparation for the Tampa Bay Susan G. Komen 3-Day, Oct. 25-27. For more information or to make a donation, go to The3Day web site.