This is a recap of Scott Cherry's restaurant review in last week's Weekend section. More reviews are available at tulsaworld.com/weekend

BURNCO BBQ

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

1738 S. Boston Ave.

918-574-2777

Food: Four stars

Atmosphere: 2.5 Stars

Service: order at counter

(on a scale of 0 to 4 stars)

10:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. Tuesday-Saturday; meat deli stays open to 5 p.m.; accepts all major credit cards.

We arrived about 1 p.m., the line was almost to the door, and the kitchen had run out of several food choices, which worked in our favor in a way.

We have had all of the basic items BurnCo has offered over the past three years, and this gave us an opportunity to try some of the dishes that have been added.

The new items were jalapeno-and-cheddar sausages ($5), New York strip steak ($20) and pork chop ($12.99), the latter two served with grilled asparagus and baby yellow Dutch potatoes.

Except for one thin line along the steak, the excess fat had been trimmed from the meats, and both were juicy, tender and flavorful.

Just as good were the asparagus and potatoes. The peppery asparagus could not have been cooked more flawlessly, and the tender little round potatoes were perfect sides to the meats.

The sausages had just enough spiciness for interest but not so much to mask the flavor of the cheese and meat.