– Babson College

How would you answer the question: “Name a successful entrepreneur?” Did you say Bill Gates? Mark Zuckerberg? Steve Jobs? Richard Branson? Or maybe you said Larry Page or Howard Schultz if you like coffee? When I ask a class of students — whether undergraduates, MBA’s or entrepreneurs, U.S. or international – it almost takes about eight names before a woman is named. The good news is that students suggest names like Oprah Winfrey, Melinda Gates, Arianna Huffington, Tory Burch or Sara Blakely.

As a professor of entrepreneurship for more than 30 years, the single most important thing I notice is that the majority of students are much less aware of successful women entrepreneurs. Why?

First, look at our textbooks and business cases. There is a dearth of cases that are about businesses started by women. The Case Centre, a resource for faculty, has a library of more than 50,000 business teaching cases. A quick search shows that approximately 2,000 cases have the words “woman entrepreneur” in the title. Similarly, a quick search of the Harvard Business School Publishing library for educators yielded about 105 cases that have “woman entrepreneur” out of more than 21,143 items.

A second problem has to do with the events and activities on campus. Every school across the country has entrepreneurship events, forums, case competitions and networking events. Do the organizers of these events pay attention to the gender balance of these panels? I’ll bet that many times there is only one woman entrepreneur involved. How many of the business plan competitions –for which there are more than 250 each year all with multiple screening events — have women judges? I would guess that less than 10% of the judges are women.

This lack of case material and women entrepreneurs featured in events and forums is problematic and to a large degree quite surprising! In general, women entrepreneurs are majority owners of an estimated ten million businesses, or, as currently reported by the Small Business Administration (SBA), 36% of all businesses in the United States.

Given the participation of women entrepreneurs in the U.S. economy, there just doesn’t seem to be a good explanation for the lack of case examples and participation of women entrepreneurs at campus events. Perhaps our educational institutions, faculty and staff need to work harder to create materials and textbooks that feature women entrepreneurs, and to intentionally plan gender-balanced forums and events. The lack of visibility of women entrepreneurs across materials and in the classrooms contributes to the stereotype that only men can be successful entrepreneurs. This must change.

At Babson College, we are working to make these changes. Our Arthur M. Blank Center for Entrepreneurship will not sponsor student events unless the participants include women on panels and as keynote speakers. For two years in a row, Babson has hosted a fully gender-balanced student run entrepreneurship forum. Our Center for Women’s Entrepreneurial Leadership sponsors events for faculty to increase awareness of gender balance in entrepreneurship. Finally, our faculty is writing case examples that feature women entrepreneurs as successful entrepreneurs for inclusion in textbooks.

In order to change perceptions about who is a successful entrepreneur, we have to work a little harder to intentionally include the names of successful women.

Ms. Brush is the chair of entrepreneurship and research director of the Arthur M. Blank Center for Entrepreneurship at Babson College.

Follow @cbrush03



Follow @WSJstartup