Paul Pate (Photo: Special to the Register)

I was greatly disappointed in the misguided criticism of online voter registration in Wednesday’s Des Moines Register [Don't exclude 145,600 from online registration]. They did not bother to gather all the facts, ask relevant questions or even examine the system they are criticizing. The Register did a great disservice to its readers. The facts are, the online system that launched Jan. 1 is a smart, effective service that promotes voter registration and electoral participation.

I want all eligible citizens to participate in the electoral process. Iowans already had numerous ways to register to vote: by mail; at drivers’ license stations and other government agencies; through voter registration drives, and at the polls on Election Day. Not every option is relevant to every Iowan, but together, the range of options covers all Iowans. Adding online voter registration does not take away any option and does not prevent any eligible Iowan from registering. It does increase the range of options and makes it easier for many people.

When we decided to pursue online registration, we wanted to work closely with the Iowa Department of Transportation because there is a long, existing link between drivers’ licenses, IDs and voter registration. Under the federal Motor Voter Act, the Iowa DOT offers voter registration when issuing drivers’ licenses and IDs. Under the Help America Vote Act, the DOT verifies registrants’ names, dates of birth, and drivers’ license or ID numbers. The Iowa DOT’s existing structure allowed us to develop a system that insures security and integrity at no extra cost to Iowa taxpayers.

We dispute the notion that the online system discriminates against the disabled. From a functional standpoint, the website is designed to comply with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards. To assure continued best access for persons with disabilities, the Iowa DOT will contract with an ADA-compliance consultant to review its online services portal, including the electronic voter registration system, and make appropriate adjustments if recommended.

From a policy standpoint, the Register’s criticism seems based on the unfounded concept that the online system discriminates against the elderly and disabled because they do not drive and cannot get drivers’ licenses or IDs. There is no age or disability-related reason a person is not eligible for a state-issued I.D.

Does every person in Iowa hold a driver’s license or ID? No. But if that renders the online system discriminatory, then it renders offering voter registration in driver’s license or ID transactions at DOT offices discriminatory as well. That is a ridiculous notion, and again, that process is mandatory under the Motor Voter Act. In fact, if you examine the law in its entirety, it mandates a wide variety of access points for various populations to register to vote.

Iowa is already a national leader in voter accessibility. We offer no-excuse absentee voting, Election Day registration, a 40-day early voting period (one of the nation’s longest) and 14-hour long Election Day, second only to New York. Now we are one of the only states offering true online registration. Many states boast about online registration, but most still mail a paper form the voter signs and returns. Iowa’s true online system is a model for the nation.

I am going to encourage every county auditor in Iowa, the Republican and Democratic parties, and anyone who wants to help Iowans gain access to the polls to link the DOT’s voter registration portal on their own website. This new system is good for the state of Iowa and its citizens, and we are proud to have partnered with another state agency to create it.

Paul D. Pate is Iowa secretary of state. Contact: Paul.Pate@sos.iowa.gov

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1ODUf0Q