This column is about several topics. A follow-up on the Kaiser Pharmacy column, “Obamacare” at Kaiser, food and the passing of a friend.

Let’s start with the passing of Roger Williams.

Roger was one of the founders of the Sunset McDonald’s Morning Coffee Group some 20 years ago. He was a good human being. He was also an avid reader. One time, on his Kindle, he read all 1,360 pages of Edgar Allen Poe.

He was outspoken with colorful language. He had a great sense of humor and lots of stories. He was married to a German girl for more than 60 years. He was the reason I joined the coffee group.

People loved him. He is missed.

Frequently, I write about food when something is unusual and I have been impressed.

This time it’s about the Italian dessert, tiramisu. Tiramisu has a lot of versions. The usual ingredients are ladyfingers or cake dipped in coffee, topped with a rich pudding, which is topped with chocolate or cocoa and baked briefly. That’s not a recipe, it’s just how it looks to me.

The best tiramisu I have ever tasted is the homemade version made by Theresa at Pietro’s No. 2 in Vacaville. All the food on the menu is good, but I would go just for Theresa’s homemade tiramisu. It’s that good.

Next are a couple of Kaiser Permanente items.

I received several responses to my column about Kaiser Pharmacy. Some talked about the federal health care law being good because of the high-quality service received at Kaiser. I know that to be true.

What folks don’t understand is that Kaiser is unique. It is not-for-profit. Its doctors and nurses are employees on salary. Everything is self-contained: hospitals clinics, all labs, pretty much everything. They even avoid the big insurance premiums paid by independents.

Obamacare works with the Kaiser HMO system when it doesn’t work anywhere else. Not because Obamacare is a good program, but because Kaiser is designed in a way that it can absorb the extra costs others can’t.

I received a pleasant call from the head of Kaiser pharmacies in Napa-Solano, Dr. Alfonso Becerra, after I wrote about my own personal, unpleasant experiences at Kaiser Pharmacy. He inquired about the problems I had with the Fairfield pharmacy.

Kaiser, in fact, was adopting a new national computer program which would enable a Kaiser member to order a prescription and have it filled anywhere there is a Kaiser pharmacy.

The Kaiser Fairfield Clinic was the first trial installation in Northern California. They are working out the bugs before installing it in other facilities. He said not to worry; they would soon have it worked out so that my prescription would be ready in the usual 15 minutes. My experience was still unpleasant.

I told him that I am happy with the service I receive from Kaiser, and how pleased I am with David Danzeisen, or “Dr. D.,” and his staff. Dr. D. actually made a house call when my late wife, Zella, couldn’t make it to his office.

So there you have it. Explanations and compliments to Kaiser, a word about Theresa’s outstanding tiramisu at Pietro’s No. 2 and, finally, a few words about Roger Williams. He will always have a place in my heart.

Murray Bass of Suisun City can be reached at 720-5139 or [email protected].