Topics: 2014 elections, amnesty, Editor's Picks, GOP, Immigration, Immigration Reform, Iowa, Joni Ernst, Mitt Romney, primaries, Senate, The Right, Politics News

Remember Mitt Romney on immigration in the 2012 Republican presidential primaries? That was a sight. Lots of railing against Rick Perry, Newt Gingrich and pretty much every other candidate for supporting “amnesty” and “magnets” for “illegals,” while supporting “self-deportation” — aka starving undocumented immigrants until they returned home — himself. Oh, and fencing — lots and lots of fencing. Primary-Mitt was one tough cookie when it came to immigration.

He was, of course, bullshitting, and just saying that to get through the primary. Within about four seconds of sealing the nomination, Romney was trying to change his tune, proposing “amnesty” — which in the lexicon of GOP primary politics refers to anything short of roundin’ ’em up and throwin’ ’em back over the danged fence — for certain undocumented immigrants and, all in all, attempting to sound like a real swell, understanding guy.

This obviously didn’t work out for poor old Mittens, in the end. Boo hoo. But there’s little reason to doubt that his general-election stance of “not giving a shit” about a path to citizenship was closer to his true beliefs. If Mitt Romney can be characterized as anything — and he tries really hard to avoid characterization! — it’s as a business Republican. He’s not a culture warrior. He cares about cutting taxes and eliminating regulations and lowering the cost of labor. He’s the perfect avatar for Chamber of Commerce Republicanism.

So it’s no surprise that he and the chamber have more or less supported the same batch of candidates this primary season. Both, for example, have supported Joni Ernst in the Iowa Republican Senate primary on Tuesday. Romney even starred in a pro-Ernst ad for the Chamber of Commerce. And on Friday, following a campaign stop with Ernst, Romney told reporters that he believes the party must take up immigration reform, and soon.

“I do believe it’s important for us, before the presidential contest in 2016, to finally have immigration reform in place,” he said. “I just don’t think it’s healthy for the country to continue to have this issue open and unresolved, particularly with so many families that are waiting for the answers.” Some families have been “waiting for years and years to understand what the status is of those who have come here illegally in the past, and those that want to come here legally to know what their prospects are.” Romney thinks people who have come to the United States illegally “should not be given a special pathway to citizenship or permanent residency.” But, he said with a laugh: “I didn’t get elected, so I’m not sure my view is the one that will carry the day.”