Ever since Gilead Sciences began selling its Sovaldi hepatitis C treatment, there has been controversy over the price. State Medicaid directors have struggled to restrict usage. A Congressional hearing was held. And at one point, the nation’s biggest pharmacy benefit manager urged companies and health plans to switch to medicines by rival companies once those drugs are approved.

But the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority has decided on a different tack. The transit agency, which serves the greater Philadelphia area, last week filed an unusual lawsuit claiming that Gilead is price gouging. The drug maker charges $84,000 for a 12-week regimen, or $1,000 a pill and is not known to have offered a discount in this country, except to the U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs.

In arguing its case, the transit agency claims that, by using “exorbitant pricing,” Gilead has made it difficult for some consumers and government programs to afford its medication and, subsequently, violated antitrust laws. The lawsuit also maintains the drug maker engages in discriminatory pricing, which violates the Affordable Care Act, because hepatitis C sufferers are “disabled.”

“We’re public stewards of the taxpayer’s money and we thought it was an opportunity to get some of that money back, because we’re spending a fair amount of money on this drug,” says Gino Benedetti, the general counsel at the transit agency. The agency has spent more than $2.4 million on Sovaldi through the first 11 months of this year, according to the lawsuit, which seeks class-action status.

A Gilead spokeswoman says the lawsuit is “completely devoid of merit and [the drug maker] will forcefully defend against it.”

Not surprisingly, the lawsuit generated a lot of buzz. With a cure rate exceeding 90%, Sovaldi prompted physicians to write prescriptions to a growing number of the estimated 3.2 million Americans believed to be infected. But while Sovaldi helped transform care for what had been a hard-to-treat chronic disease, the cost has flummoxed some critics who cheered the agency for filing its lawsuit.

The transit agency has “done what a lot of people have talked about doing,” says Matt Salo, executive director at the National Association of Medicaid Directors. “This drug has been a game changer. We deal with expensive drugs all the time, but the number of patients for this drug is growing. This is what gets people on edge and the manufacturer is not budging on price.”

But whether the lawsuit can succeed may be another matter. The law allows a monopoly – and right now, Gilead is the only drug maker to sell such a treatment – to set prices as high as it chooses. A key reason is that, by permitting such behavior, the law offers incentives to companies to enter and develop a market, which can later foster competition.

“Monopolists, themselves, are not unlawful. They are allowed to charge any price they want. It’s only if they take any anticompetitive conduct that a problem may exist,” says Ankur Kapoor, an attorney at the Constantine Cannon law firm who specializes in antitrust law. He notes that antitrust laws do not have price-gouging provisions, “I can’t recall seeing a case like this,” he says.

As a result, the Gilead pricing is unlikely to be considered illegal, experts say. The transit agency is “complaining about high prices. But having a monopoly and setting high prices do not violate antitrust law,” says C. Scott Hemphill, a professor at the Columbia Law School, who specializes in antitrust issues and intellectual property. “Judging from the complaint, the antitrust claim is meritless.”

An attorney for the transit agency, Nicholas Chimicles, responded by saying that “we are confident in the viability of the claims… The rather stark and unusual facts surrounding the excessive and discriminatory pricing of Sovaldi provide a compelling foundation for our lawsuit. And we are confident we will prevail, thereby benefiting many hepatitis C victims across the country.”

He is also reviewing the possibility of amending the lawsuit to include pricing for Harvoni, a newer Gilead treatment that offers more convenience. This drug, which was just launched two months ago, can cost anywhere from $63,000 to $94,500, depending upon the regimen, and Wall Street expects Harvoni to gradually eclipse Sovaldi. In fact, one insurer says this evolution is well under way.

“In our commercial business, Harvoni has quickly become the primary treatment,” says Chris Bradbury, vice president for integrated clinical and specialty drug solutions at Cigna. While he applauds the high cure rate, he sympathizes with the transit agency. These drugs “provide great clinical impact, but the prices are excessive. That will create an undue burden on our customers and society as a whole.”