A reddish moon finally emerged through the cloud cover at 8:35 p.m. Sunday, prompting cheers from the crowd gathered on the lawn in front of Fiske Planetarium at the University of Colorado at Boulder.

Until then, people gathered for the viewing party of the rare celestial event didn't have much to see as the moon stayed hidden behind clouds. But once the moon made an appearance, people began taking pictures and lining up to get a closer view through a high powered telescope.

"It's always really great to come to events like this," said Emily Levis, a senior majoring in astrophysics who works as an usher at the Fiske Planetarium. "There are people with telescopes, and people who can share their knowledge. It's just so much cooler to watch here."

CU astronomy students use a 24-inch telescope to watch the moon. People gathered to see the "blood moon" Sunday night at Fiske Planetarium on the University of Colorado campus. For more photos, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Sunday's "blood moon" was created by a full moon and lunar eclipse occurring at lunar perigee — a trifecta that last occurred in 1982. Lunar perigee is when the moon is at the closest point of its elliptical path around the Earth, giving it the appearance of being larger and brighter.

For most observers, the main event was the moon's crimsoned shade.

Shortly after moonrise, a shadow, called the penumbra, began creeping across the face of the moon. For the next 90 minutes, the moon got darker bit by bit and gradually took on a reddish hue. By 8:10 p.m., when the moon completely enters the Earth's shadow, called the umbra, it was red.

Advertisement

At the CU watch party, cloudy conditions left the process to the imagination. Instead of watching the moon slowly turn red, astronomy enthusiasts chatted about past eclipses and talked about what was happening behind the clouds.

Students in CU's Stars club used foam balls to illustrate how eclipses work.

"I love to see the looks on kids' faces as they learn how things work," said Taydra Low, a freshman astrophysics major. "This eclipse is really cool because it creates a sunset effect on the moon."

Members of the Boulder Astronomy and Space Society, which organized the event in conjunction with the planetarium, brought telescopes and pictures.

"You can see it from anywhere," said society President Steve Hartung. "But whenever there's an astronomical event, Boulder likes to come out."

Society member Stan Jarrett used the time waiting for the moon to explain why it turns red, noting that the popular term blood moon is "mainly advertising."

"The light from the sun gets bent, like a prism," he said. "Only the reds and oranges get through and get reflected back by the moon. It just happens to be closer to the earth right now, so it's just a little bit more vibrant of color."

Janna and Wes Jones brought their kids, 5-year-old Haile and 11-year-old Ellory, in hopes of seeing the eclipse through a telescope. Plus, Janna Jones said, it's more fun to watch with a group.

"It's a rare, special event," she said.

Boulder's Janeen Cain said she liked the watch party's feeling of community.

"We're here for the same purpose, to see something outside our existence," she said. "It's a nice reminder of how small we are, but also how significant we are and how connected we are."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa