PNJ letters to the editor (Photo: Damian Dovarganes, AP)

Lots of promises

As I have been watching and listening to the candidates running for president, I have heard a lot of promises, what they will do if they win.

All these messages were low key which didn’t seem to resonate with the general population. Then “The Donald” came with his plans for America and this thought came to my mind:

At the beginning of World War II, when the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor, a Japanese admiral made this comment “I am afraid we have awakened a sleeping giant.” They did!

Trump’s rallies have awakened a lot of folks who have not been in tune with the presidential speeches, a lot of the unconcerned people across the land. What he says is what all of us need to be concerned about: “our future and our country’s future.”

We have heard promises from candidates over the years about what they will do when they are elected, after elected they turn around and do the opposite. So, we “out here” are leery about their promises but we need to be paying attention and check out their qualifications, do background checks, asking God, who knows all about them, to help us decide.

— Ethel Cook, Pensacola

Steve Irwin

Steve Irwin died on Sept. 4, 2006. Many knew him as the “Crocodile Hunter,” but he was more than that. He was a conservationist, educator and father. Armed with experience in the bush and his infectious enthusiasm, he brought the world of nature to tens of millions of viewers.

Steve convinced people around the world to save the endangered crocodile. Through his efforts and many others, crocodiles not only were saved, but their image was clarified from that of a man-eating killer to that of a beautiful creature, just trying to enjoy life, like us.

Steve’s message extends over all creatures. He came to Florida and helped the Army Rangers at Eglin Air Force Base by relocating venomous snakes the rangers encountered. This episode was “Wildlife in Combat,” if you want to check it out.

There are those who think he was reckless, but take note: He was never bitten by a venomous snake. That speaks for itself. Even his death wasn’t reckless; the freak stingray accident was only the 17th recorded stingray fatality in the last century.

If anything, he was a great conservationist and an even greater father. On the ninth anniversary of his death, remember Steve Irwin.

– Truman Sharp, Pensacola

Sailor’s Creed

Thank you for printing my letter in the 15 August PNJ.

Regarding the capitalizing of the word “Sailor” I offer the following:

... Then-Chief of Naval Operations Adm. Mike Boorda rewrote the Sailor’s Creed in 1994, just a year after it had been introduced. His changes, such as substituting the word “Navy” for “Bluejacket,” were designed to create a creed that applied to all and fostered a sense of unity. A year later, Navy Secretary John Dalton declared “Sailor” to be a proper noun, ordering that it be capitalized in all Navy correspondence.

I think I read it in the News Journal.

— RMC Billy-Ace Baker, USN (Ret.), Pensacola

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1EKz6nf