LEXINGTON, Neb. – Lexington Regional Health Center announced the hiring of a new marketing director during the monthly board of directors meeting on Tuesday night.

Jill Denker, executive director of human resources and physician liaison, announced that Meredith O’Hanlon was hired as the new director of marketing. O’Hanlon will replace former marketing director Laura Robbins.

Nicole Thorell, chief nursing officer with LRHC, said during the nursing service report that staff has received a lot of positive feedback about the patient rooms during community tours. The new comfortable beds and modern call system for patients are very popular, she said.

During his service excellence report, Jim Hain, addressed comments made at two previous forums for candidates for the board of directors about the culture at LRHC.

“Referring to the culture that has changed in the last few years, I’m proud to say it’s been for the better. We are much more open to change, we have more multi-disciplinary teams. This improves our quality and improves relationships. We encourage our staff to come to us with their concerns and resolutions. This administration values our staff,” Hain said.

Board member Amber Ackerson said she was one of the first people to receive treatment from a new operating room in the Outpatient Specialty Clinic.

“It was awesome considering it was just opening. Dr. Bryan Scheer said the new Outpatient Specialty Clinic is hands-down the best he works in and he helped build a new one in Wyoming,” Ackerson said.

She said Scheer told her he could have had his pick of hospital to practice in, and chose LRHC’s new clinic because it’s a strong hospital that is contributing to a strong community.

No quality report was given. Don Young, executive director of ancillary services, gave a brief construction report. Young said construction and renovations had gone well for the East Wing of patient rooms, which would be opened for service next Tuesday.

After the completion of the East Wing of patient rooms, construction would shift to the South Wing of patient rooms, with construction expected to be completed by June 4, Young said.

Denker gave a virtuous organization update. She said the April topic for LRHC’s virtuous organization program was happiness. Denker said the staff training promotes deeper collaboration and the importance of teamwork.

“Morale is stronger than ever,” Denker said.

As a human resources worker, Denker said she is concerned about the shortage of nurses nationally. Two big factors contributing to the shortage of trained nurses are the impact of the Affordable Care Act and the retirement of baby boomer era nurses.

Thorell echoed Denker’s concern about the future pipeline of nurses, but stressed LRHC is well staffed with the needed amount of nurses.

“We are one of the few facilities in the area not using traveling nurses. We have two new RNs and two new LPNs,” Thorell said.

Due to the high demand of nurses nationally and in Nebraska, Thorell said nurses can practice “wherever they want to and ask for whatever they want to.”

The easiest way for hospitals to have a supply of nursing talent is to “grow your own or snatch them up from others,” Thorell said.

Although money is important, having nurses enjoy where they work made a difference in retaining and recruiting nurses, Thorell said.

Wade Eschenbrenner, LRHC’s chief financial officer, gave the board members a financial report for March.

Financial data for March includes: 96 acute patient days, 92 swing bed days, 13 newborn days and an average daily census of 7.65. Average age of plant was 16.55. The average age of plant measures the average accounting age of a hospital’s capital assets.

The days in net accounts receivable for March was 80.88 and days cash on hand was 135. The days in net accounts receivable measures the days that it takes an organization on average to collect its receivables. Days cash on hand measures the number of days an organization could operate if no cash was collected or received.

The operating profit margin for March was 1.97 percent and total profit margin for the month was 1.99 percent. Year-to-date operating profit margin for March was -1.89, with total profit margin for the year-to-date was -0.73 percent.

Tara Naprstek, a LRHC board member with accounting experience, noted that the financials showed a 10 percent increase in operating revenue compared to last year.

Toward the end of the meeting, Leslie Marsh, chief executive officer of LRHC, gave a brief overview PowerPoint presentation about the role and responsibilities of a member on the hospital’s board of directors.

“A board member has a fiduciary duty for and through the hospital, of loyalty to avoid conflict. Every decision you make is for the best interest of the hospital,” Marsh said.

Board members would be expected to support the hospital amidst the growing burden of healthcare regulations and be actively involved in crafting the hospital’s mission, vision and overseeing strategic planning.

Board members also were involved in organizing the hospital’s agenda around the pillars of: people, service, excellence and quality.

An open house with ribbon cutting for the Outpatient Specialty Clinic at LRHC will be held Monday, May 2 from 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. Refreshments will be served. The event is open to the public, with Sen. Matt Williams set to attend.

On Tuesday, May 3, LRHC will host an open house for its Elwood Clinic from 4:30 to 6:30 p.m. The event is open to the public.