EPA A skateboarder and pedestrian walk past a graffiti mural by street artist Bradley Theodore in SoHo on Sunday.

Greater New Yorkers will enjoy one more day of mild weather on Monday before showers and seasonable temperatures return to the region.

The high pressure system responsible for the tri-state area’s weekend warmth heads offshore on Monday, allowing a series of low pressure systems to take control of the weather through mid-week.

The day starts out sunny and very pleasant for January, with temperatures above normal. Highs for this time of year are typically in the upper 30s, with lows in the 20s. Monday’s high will reach 50 degrees in most areas and a gusty southwest wind around 10 mph will keep the day feeling like spring. Clouds increase during the afternoon and evening, helping to keep nighttime lows in the lower 40s in Manhattan and along the coast, and into the middle 30s in the Hudson River Valley.

Unsettled weather begins Monday night as an area of weak low pressure moves eastward through Tuesday while an associated cold front approaches from the west. This frontal system will bring rain, and perhaps a few flurries to areas north and west of New York City, beginning after midnight. Whether snow mixes in with the rain depends on how low temperatures drop overnight, but most places can expect to remain snow-free.

Moderate to heavy rain showers spread over the entire region on Tuesday morning and last through most of the day. Relatively mild and above normal temperatures remain in place, with highs mostly in the upper 40s to near 50 degrees. The chance of rain lingers through Wednesday, and sunny skies and cold temperatures are set to return on Thursday.

Monday’s Greater New York forecast roundup:

WSJ Headquarters in Manhattan:

Actual High: 51; RealFeel High: 40

Actual Low:41; RealFeel Low: 36

Weather: Partly sunny and breezy

Brooklyn: 51/41

Queens: 53/41

Bronx: 51/42

Staten Island: 51/42

Poughkeepsie, N.Y.: 50/36

Trenton, N.J.: 51/41

Islip, Long Island: 49/41

New Haven, Conn.: 48/39

Rebecca Fowler is a science writer at Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory.