Aberdeen, SD

It's been more than a decade since the West Nile virus showed up in South Dakota.

Since its arrival, mosquito spraying programs have increased with the state spending millions of dollars to help communities control the pesky bugs.

When spring and summer arrive in northeastern South Dakota, a person can expect to hear the buzz of mosquito spraying, especially in Aberdeen.

"We simply go off the numbers,” parks superintendent Mark Hoven said. “When the mosquito traps are at a certain level and certain things need to be done, we simply spray and we get them under control. And the city has been very good at saying, 'whatever it takes to get it done.'”

That's been the mentality since about the mid-2000s, Hoven said. By that point West Nile had been in South Dakota a handful of years and Brown County led the state in human cases with 159.

The city opted to spend more money on the bug battle. Mayor Mike Levsen says the decision didn't meet resistance.

"The increase at the time in the council was not opposed. It was just a matter of how it was going to be funded," Levsen said.

Before that, the city spent somewhere around $50,000 and $60,000 a year spraying mosquitoes, Levsen said. That number has jumped to the $250,000 range.

"I am definitely OK with it, yeah. It makes a big difference. I can tell the difference and I like to go outside a lot with my kids and play. I'm not going to do that if they're getting bit up by mosquitoes," Evan Crosby said.

That seems to be the majority opinion. If people are opposed to the city spending hundreds of thousands of dollars battling the bugs, they're staying quiet.

"I have, in the whole time here, never had a person call and say we're spraying too often, not once," Levsen said.

Aberdeen has one of the more aggressive mosquito control programs in the state, but there are others across South Dakota. According to the health department, the state has sent more than $6 million to mosquito control programs since West Nile showed up in South Dakota.

This year more than 180 cities, counties and tribes will receive grants totaling close to a half million dollars. Hoven says leaders from those different programs are in continuous contact to help each other.

"For me personally I make numerous calls each week to different mosquito people just to see what they're hearing, what they're seeing," Hoven said.

It's been an active mosquito year in numerous South Dakota communities, including Aberdeen.

Brown County only has one confirmed human West Nile case so far this year. Still, Mosquito Control found plenty of community support for a decision to spend tens of thousands of dollars to spray an abundance of floodwater mosquitos by air.

"I've often said the pilot could probably run for public office in Aberdeen and win just because he flies over Aberdeen and sprays mosquitoes," Hoven said.

As it was with increasing the program, public health is still a driving force behind continuing mosquito control in Aberdeen. That said, expectations have expanded.

"Citizens here have come to expect that they don't have to deal with those really high numbers, that we're going to kill them right away," Levsen said. "If West Nile went away tomorrow, we would not spend a nickel less on mosquitoes I don't think. You know, there might be some who would think that, but the phone calls would not be pleasant to take if we try to go that route."