The list of GOP candidates scrambling to fill U.S. Rep. Cory Gardner’s soon-to-be vacant congressional seat is growing, with two more candidates announcing Monday they’re in.

Weld County Commissioner Barbara Kirkmeyer and Larimer County resident Steve Laffey join state Sen. Scott Renfoe and District Attorney Ken Buck, both of Weld County, who announced last week they’re seeking the GOP nomination in the 4th. State Reps. Frank McNulty of Highlands Ranch and Tim Dore of Elizabeth also are looking at the race.

Gardner upended Colorado’s political landscape last week when he announced he was dropping his re-election bid and running for the U.S. Senate, a race last year he declined to pursue. Two Senate front-runners, Buck and state Rep. Amy Stephens, dropped their Senate bids and instead backed Gardner.

The winner of the June 24 primary faces Democrat Vic Meyers of Trinidad.

“I got into this race because we the people of the 4th CD weren’t being represented in Congress. Gardner dropping out doesn’t change anything,” Meyers said. “Replacing him with another Tea Party radical doesn’t change anything and won’t get us representation.”

But he faces a tough fight, as the 4th District, which includes the eastern plains and a portion of Douglas County, is overwhelmingly Republican.

Kirkmeyer’s decision came after fellow Weld County Commissioner Sean Conway decided not to run for Gardner’s seat. Kirkmayer praised the work done by Weld County.

“We are the only county in the state to have no long-term debt, no short-term debt, no county sales tax, give a TABOR refund by reducing the mill levy … year after year and we have close to $100 million in contingency reserves,” she said in an e-mail. “I want to take the Weld County model to Washington.”

Laffey, who briefly was in Colorado’s governor’s race, said in a news release he is running to “preserve a dying American dream and American freedoms.”

Laffey lives outside of the 4th Congressional District because his ranch was cut out during the redistricting in 2011, but he said that he, his wife and six kids “live only about three miles as the crow flies from the 4th district line.” And he said he share’s the 4th District’s values of maintaining water rights, property rights and small government.

McNulty also lives outside the 4th, in the 6th Congressional District represented by Republican Mike Coffman.

But there is no constitutional requirement to live in the district to run for Congress. Republican Lang Sias of Arvada lived just outside the 7th District when he ran in 2010 to try to unseat Democratic Congressman Ed Perlmutter of Golden.

Staff writers Lynn Bartels and Kurtis Lee contributed to this report.