While the Affordable Care Act’s employer mandate is receiving substantial attention, proposed 501(r) requirements are also impacting charitable care hospitals and their collection agency vendors.

With the individual and employer mandate aspects of the Affordable Care Act receiving so much scrutiny and attention, it’s easy to set aside thoughts of the Internal Revenue Service’s proposed 501(r) requirements, which will affect charity care hospitals and, in turn, collection of their debt. However, becoming familiar with the requirements being placed on hospitals and the steps they must take before and after the collection process is crucial when collecting hospital accounts.



In the What You Need to Know About IRS 501(r) session at ACA’s Spring Forum Conference, Fred Lucky, president of C2A, Compliance Consulting and Auditing, provided a detailed look at “extraordinary collection activity” as described under 501(r)(6).



The proposed rules specify that charitable hospitals cannot engage in “extraordinary collection activities” before making reasonable efforts to determine whether a patient is eligible for financial assistance. Extraordinary collection activities include any action related to obtaining payment of a bill that involves:

Legal process.

Selling debt.

Reporting adverse information on credit bureaus.

Commencing a civil action.

Garnishments.

Liens, attaching or seizing a bank account or other personal property.

Causing an individual’s arrest (warrant).

Lucky offered several reminders for collection agencies regarding extraordinary collection activities under 501(r):

The rule requires hospitals to have a written agreement with third parties (collection agencies) to abide by the 501(r) requirements.

Hospitals can place accounts with an agency within 120-day notification period if they meet the requirements.

Accounts cannot be sold until after the notification period.

Before the collection agency can initiate extraordinary collection activity, reasonable effort criteria must be met, eligibility must be determined and the patient must be notified. Reasonable effort criteria include: being notified of financial assistance policy upon admission or discharge; three statements; and final notice 30 days before extraordinary collection activity.

Must accept financial assistance policy applications for 240 days after the date of the first billing statement.

“It’s important to know when they sent the bill because of the 120- and 240-day limits,” Lucky said. “Timing is important.”