When is a proposed moratorium on oil and gas drilling really not a moratorium at all but an excuse to ban such operations for a couple of years?

The answer: When the ballot question claims the moratorium would be put in place in order to “fully study the impacts of hydraulic fracturing on property values and human health,” as Question 1 now facing voters in Loveland says.

Obviously Loveland is not equipped to “fully study” the impacts of fracking, and in fact the proposal does nothing to promote or fund the necessary research.

And what does “fully study” mean, anyway? You could study the effects of fracking — or almost any other topic — for the next 10 or 20 years and still not have settled every question, especially to the satisfaction of critics who are already convinced that fracking is dangerous and should be banned.

The measure does mention in passing that state officials have promised a health impact assessment of oil and gas development — one actually began last year — but doesn’t say whether a passing grade by the state would satisfy the goal of fully studying the issue. For committed fracking opponents, the answer is almost certainly no.

After all, it’s not as if the state study, which will be coordinated by the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment and was scheduled to last three years, is being conducted in an information vacuum. Fracking has occurred in Colorado for more than half a century, and the more lurid claims leveled against it have been repeatedly debunked.

Loveland imposed a drilling moratorium in 2012 that enabled the town to develop enhanced regulations — a legitimate use of a development timeout. But Question 1 on the current ballot appears to be more of a stall than another genuine pause for information-gathering.

If Loveland voters do approve the two-year ban, however, it will provide yet more evidence of the risks associated with likely statewide ballot measures this fall to crack down on drilling. In the absence of a legislative compromise in response to the conflict over fracking, voters may end up taking matters into their own hands.