Topics: AlterNet, Barack Obama, Fox News, Neil Cavuto, Russell Brand, Sarah Silverman, Entertainment News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

Many Republicans brutally criticized President Barack Obama in 2014 after he appeared on Zack Galifianakis’ “Between Two Ferns” to pitch Obamacare to young people. Fox Business’ Neil Cavuto, however, saw the move as brilliant and encouraged his partymates to expand their comfort zone into the world of comedy. “Maybe Republicans dismissing these type of venues is very dangerous,” he said. “I say, Republicans, ignore these venues at your own peril. Laugh all you want about Michelle Obama hawking fitness with Jimmy Fallon. Or her husband yucking it up with that guy before Fallon. A lot of people who don’t watch news shows watch these shows. So why are you dismissing these shows?”

For once, Cavuto had a point. Despite several attempts to launch conservative comedy as a thing (a new attempt is beginning as I type), comedy has remained the province of liberals, and they have expertly deployed its subversive and disarming effects to counter the awful effects of Fox News and conservative media. Look no further than Russell Brand, a comedian-turned-actor-turned political prankster who has used his YouTube series “The Trews” to wage a one-man war on Fox News, bedeviling much of its staff in the process.

Brand has become a sort of freelance ombudsman of Bill O’Reilly and Sean Hannity, smacking them down on everything from Beyonce to immigration to ISIS to Ferguson. The videos, which gather millions of views, aren’t just partisan hectoring. In fact, Brand openly says he likes O’Reilly. Instead Brand uses comedy to deflate the pugnacious hosts before asking them to widen their worldviews.

Just this week Brand took to his show to issue a line-by-line rebuttal of Sean Hannity’s woeful interview with a witness to the McKinney pool party incident. Brand turned the tables on Hannity, saying, “Sean Hannity is laughable, Fox News is ridiculous, but the problems upon which they’re reporting are serious.” Needless to say, Fox does not care about Brand’s brand of dissent. After months of back and forth, Brand actually secured a guest spot on Hannity’s show, only to have the nighttime host cancel. When Brand showed up in front of 1211 Avenue of the Americas to film a bit for “The Trews,” the security guards were having none of it, booting the actor from the premises. “We’ll run this building one day,” Brand promised them. “And then, you know, we’ll share it.” (Brand’s invitation for Hannity to appear on “The Trews” has thus far gone unaccepted.)

Brand isn’t the only comedian to get booted from Fox headquarters. Comedian Lee Camp inaugurated the tradition in 2008 when he concluded a segment on “Fox & Friends Weekend” with a dressing down of the entire network. Camp had been asked on to quip about the 2008 Democratic primary, and used his humor as a cover before sabotaging the segment.

“Could I just ask a question? What is Fox News?” Camp asked host Clayton Morris. “It’s just a parade of propaganda, isn’t it? It’s just a festival of ignorance. A million people are dead in Iraq. Come on. This is ridiculous. What’s the point of this?”

“Um,” said Morris.

Camp turned to the camera and addressed the audience. “This is insane,” he said. “Go out! Leave your home. Go outside! Go hug your children! Love your family, you know? Do something with your life.”

The sardonic comedian Sarah Silverman uses her foul-mouthed comedic aesthetic, disarmingly couched in a baby voice, to tell uncomfortable truths about conservatives’ attempts to destroy female autonomy. Silverman also uses YouTube to battle right-wing rhetoric. Where Brand’s videos resemble Jon Stewart’s in their call and response with conservative rhetoric, Silverman’s might be seen as precursors to John Oliver’s lengthier discursions, in which a single issue is simultaneously satirized and dissected.