Molly Dubin, curator for the “Chasing Dreams” exhibit at the Jewish Museum Milwaukee, discusses the impact of Jewish baseball players. Credit: Katie Klann

By of the

Baseball has long been called "America's pastime." And the United States is known as a "melting pot" because of its immigrant influence.

The Jewish Museum Milwaukee is combining both of those ideas into a summerlong exhibit called "Chasing Dreams," which celebrates diversity in professional baseball. The exhibit, sponsored by the Milwaukee Brewers, runs until Sept. 7.

"It is a way to be able to explore how baseball influenced immigrant culture," curator Molly Dubin said.

The exhibit has displays featuring Jackie Robinson and Hank Aaron, collections from the All-American Girls Professional League and Jewish players who have influenced the game, such as Hank "the Hebrew Hammer" Greenberg and Sandy Koufax.

Dubin said the sport and assimilation go hand in hand, because not only did baseball beat a lot of other institutions to integration, but it also gave immigrant and minority youths people to look up to.

"Baseball really was where the exportation of civil rights and American values are woven into this sport," Dubin said. "It gave people heroes and role models."

The museum, at 1360 N. Prospect Ave., came up with the idea for "Chasing Dreams" about a year ago in an effort to engage a younger audience as well as entice more males into the facility.

The National Museum of American Jewish History in Philadelphia had a similar display, and Dubin worked closely with it to gather loaned artifacts and find out how to fully optimize the display in Milwaukee. Archivist Jay Hyland interacted with collectors from around the country to gather additional memorabilia.

Jewish Museum Milwaukee then reached out to the Brewers, and the city's major-league representative hopped on board. The exhibit celebrates Milwaukee baseball heritage, as well.

Former Commissioner Bud Selig, along with his wife, Sue, and current Brewers' owner Mark Attanasio and his wife, Debbie, are honorary chairs on the exhibit's committee.

Notable names will be at the museum this summer for baseball-related panels, showing the support the exhibit has gotten. There will be a question-and-answer session July 8 with the Attanasios, moderated by Fox Sports Wisconsin's and Brewers' play-by-play announcer Brian Anderson.

"It's just an exciting exhibit to get behind because it shows how to fit in and belong and succeed," executive director Patti Sherman-Cisler said.

Mark Attanasio introduced Selig as a keynote speaker at the exhibit's preview on June 10.