Humana Lets Customers 'Check Out' Premiums at CVS

A partnership with the pharmacy's new bill pay program gives policyholders a retail outlet to make premium payments.

Showing that the omnichannel push among insurers isn't just taking place online, Humana and CVS/Pharmacy announced a partnership yesterday through which customers of the health insurer can pay their bill in the CVS checkout line.

Humana members with individual, non-Medicare plans purchased on the individual market from exchanges or humana.com can use Bill Pay at CVS/Pharmacy, launched this year by the pharmacy chain and InComm, a retail software systems company, to pay their premiums by cash, credit, or debit. Customers bring their bill, which includes a barcode, to the store, but the system works in any checkout line.

"Our partnership with CVS/pharmacy reflects our focus on bringing simplicity to today's complex health care environment," Bruce Broussard, president and CEO of Humana, said in a press release.

That sentiment echoed what Humana enterprise vice president Ajoy Kodali said this month in his opening keynote address at the Insurance & Technology's Executive Summit. His address focused heavily on the insurer's goals around simplifying the healthcare and health insurance system. In addition, closing keynoter Christopher Watkins of Direct General said the ability to pay premiums in cash was important in increasing adoption of the company's point-of-sale kiosks.

The new bill pay arrangement extends the relationship between Humana and CVS around the Affordable Care Act. Humana representatives are appearing at 285 CVS stores in states where the insurer is on the state's health insurance exchange to answer consumer questions about getting coverage.

Nathan Golia is senior editor of Insurance & Technology. He joined the publication in 2010 as associate editor and covers all aspects of the nexus between insurance and information technology, including mobility, distribution, core systems, customer interaction, and risk ... View Full Bio

Comment |

Email This |

Print |