Bill Clark via Getty Images

Rep. Tim Walberg (R-Mich.) is miffed that congressional Democrats are trying to change the subject from the Affordable Care Act to other policy issues, such as violence against women, according to Michigan Radio.

In a meeting with constituents in Jackson, Michigan on Wednesday, Walberg suggested that recent initiatives on other subjects were intended to distract voters from what he sees as a central issue -- the health law's problematic website roll-out.

“[Democrats would] rather pivot to talking about minimum wage, unemployment insurance, violence against women -- and try to get people’s minds off of [Obamacare]” Walberg said, according to the Michigan radio station.

Advancing a proposal to raise the federal minimum wage has been a top issue for House Democrats, and is expected to remain one throughout this election cycle.

As The New York Times noted Monday, some House Democrats facing tough re-election battles are openly talking about the Affordable Care Act's problems in campaign ads. Reinstating long-term unemployment insurance benefits remains a priority for Democrats after the benefits expired in late December.

But Walberg appears to also have a problem with Democrats talking about the Violence Against Women Act -- which was reauthorized in February 2013 after a drawn-out partisan battle over new protections for Native Americans and LGBT survivors of domestic abuse.

Walberg, a fervent social and fiscal conservative, represents a southern Michigan district which gave President Barack Obama 51 percent of its vote in 2012. He faces a challenge from former state Rep. Pam Byrnes (D).

Also on HuffPost: 113th Congress Facts 113th Congress Facts

1 of 7 The Numbers The House has 233 Republicans and 200 Democrats. Each party should pick up one more seat when two vacancies are filled. Going into the election, the GOP edge was 242-193. Senate Democrats will have a caucus of 55, including two independents, Angus King of Maine and Bernie Sanders of Vermont. Republicans have 45. That's a pickup of two seats for Democrats. (Text via the Associated Press Share this slide:

Getty Images