Shiite militiamen in Iraq hold a captured Islamic State flag Monday. The extremist group's rise is becoming a topic in political campaigns. AP

The Islamic State’s beheading of two American journalists in Syria has brought a conflict halfway around the world home to roost just weeks ahead of the 2014 midterm elections.

In the past, the impact of foreign policy on congressional elections has been marginal at best. Yet strategists on both sides of the aisle say the chilling images of James Foley and Steven Sotloff in orange jumpsuits before their deaths have thrust the Islamic State right into the center of the election cycle.

[READ: Obama May Go to Congress on the Islamic State, But Will Lawmakers Act?]

“This is something so beyond the pale that it really binds the country together,” says David Winston, a Republican pollster.

Even a war-weary public sees the Islamic State as a significant threat. A Pew Research Center poll released after Foley’s death showed that 54 percent of Americans did not believe President Barack Obama was doing enough to “solve the world’s problems.” The survey also revealed that in just a short time, Americans have become nearly as worried about the Islamic State as they are about al-Qaida.

After Obama said the White House did not "have a strategy yet” for defeating the Islamic State, Republicans quickly seized on the chance to tie vulnerable Democrats to a president shaky on foreign policy.

“As Obama appears more indecisive, it begins to have a snowball effect,” Democratic strategist Hank Sheinkopf says. “He said we don’t have a strategy, which is exactly what the public does not want to hear.”

When they return from recess, Congress is expected to discuss a resolution that would give Obama more authority to act against the extremist group in the Middle East, which could change the 2014 cycle from a race about the economy and Obamacare to a contest about how best to stop terror.

But the shift is already underway: Republicans are painting the president as weak on foreign policy and hinting that he lacks the ability to protect the U.S.

Former Massachusetts Sen. Scott Brown, a Republican running for the Senate in New Hampshire this cycle, released an eerie Web ad this week featuring Vice President Joe Biden explaining why Iraq would be one of the “great achievements” of the Obama administration. Meanwhile, images of terrorists and violence splash across the screen, before the ad ends with incumbent Democratic Sen. Jeanne Shaheen embracing Obama.

As Republicans turn the rhetorical tide to attack Obama's response to the Islamic State, Democrats are taking their own shots at the unpopular administration.

[ALSO: Senate Candidates Tread Carefully on ISIS Intervention]

On the North Carolina Senate debate stage Wednesday night, Democratic Sen. Kay Hagan promised she would take some kind of action in Washington, although she avoided specifics. Still, the assertion gave her a chance to hit the administration.

“I think one of the issues here is that the president should have weaponized the moderate Syrian rebels earlier,” Hagan said. “The president needs to bring a resolution. He needs to bring a plan to Congress and I am at the point where yes, I want him to do that, I want to look at it and I want to take action.”

Her Republican opponent, meanwhile, spoke more generally about how he would handle the extremists,

"The U.S. needs to take more actions to protect American citizens and freedom-loving people everywhere," said Thom Tillis, the North Carolina state House speaker.

But pressuring Obama to work with Congress on a response to the Islamic State presents a political risk for vulnerable Democrats. A return to Washington will mean sitting lawmakers have the chance to look bold and act.

If they don't, it could undermine their messaging.