Goodyear, Ariz. — Carlos Gonzalez is starting to feel like CarGo again.

He hit an opposite-field, ground-rule double in the first inning against the Reds on Saturday afternoon.

“I feel good, better than I expected after I didn’t play for, what, six months?” said Gonzalez, who’s coming off left knee surgery last August. “You always have your doubts when coming off a long break, but I’m seeing the ball really, really well. And I’m making good contact, which is important for spring training.”

The Rockies shut out the Reds 1-0, with six pitchers holding the Reds to only three hits.

“It was good all the way around,” manager Walt Weiss said. “We’ve been good this spring. We have guys working on things, but at the same time they have been able to go out there and perform on the mound.”

The Rockies got only seven hits, but CarGo had two of them. He was especially pleased with his double to left.

“That was a big at-bat for me,” he said. “That was one of the things that I set on my mind before the game. Just try to hit the ball the other way and get some bat speed and hit the ball in the air. All of the contact that I made before was groundballs. The timing is going to come back the more I play, and I feel good.”

Starter Jordan Lyles, showing good late movement, pitched three scoreless innings. He wriggled out of trouble in the third after giving up a leadoff triple to Rugenio Suarez. Lyles struck out Brandon Phillips to end the inning on a changeup. In fact, he struck out out Phillips twice on changeups, a pitch he’s been emphasizing since last season.

Lyles’ final line for his third Cactus League game: no runs, one hits, two walks, three strikeouts. He came into the game focused on honing his curveball (see video).

Hits

* Lefty John Lannan, who provides some depth at the back end of the rotation, struck out three in his two innings of work. He allowed two hits and a walk.

* Back-up first base candidate Ben Paulsen smashed a double off the center-field wall in the sixth, but the Rockies were unable to bring him home.

* Reliever Tommy Kahnle closed out the game in the ninth, setting the Reds down 1-2-3.

“Even though it’s spring training, you like to see that — see what a guys does out there finishing the game. It adds a little bit to the moment,” Weiss said, adding that Kahnle’s combination of a mid-90s fastball and good changeup can leave batters perplexed.

Misses

* Starting catcher Nick Hundley had a chance to break the game open in the fourth when he came to the plate with the base loaded, but he went down swinging. He made up for it in the seventh, getting a base hit to center and scoring from third on a Reds throwing error to put the Rockies ahead 1-0.

Up Next

The Rockies host the Royals at 2:10 p.m. (MDT) at Salt River Fields. Right-hander Kyle Kendrick starts opposite Kansas City’s Aaron Brooks. Other pitchers scheduled to pitch for the the Rockies are” RHP Jhoulys Chacin, LHP Aaron Laffey and LHP Ken Roberts.

The Rockies also will play an 11 a.m. “B Game” against the Diamondbacks on a practice field at Salt River. Lefty Jorge De La Rosa starts for Colorado and righty Trevor Cahill throws for Arizona. Other Rockies scheduled to pitch in the B game: RHP Eddie Butler, RHP LaTroy Hawkins, LHP Kraig Sitton, RHP Adam Ottavino and RHP John Axford.