America is the world’s largest producer of natural gas, we are on track to soon become the world’s largest crude oil producer, we are a world leader in the development of renewable resources and clean technologies, and we still hold the world’s largest coal reserves. The U.S. is now unquestionably the world’s greatest energy superpower.

As a global energy leader, we hold the power to fuel an American manufacturing renaissance, improve the standard of living for millions of families, and rewrite geopolitical rules to favor America’s global standing and diminish the influence of dangerous regimes. But it’s up to Congress and the administration to seize this opportunity.

ADVERTISEMENT

The Energy and Commerce Committee has spent the last four years examining the stunning changes in our energy landscape and advancing a series of bipartisan solutions to harness America’s energy abundance. Despite our best efforts, many of these bills failed to overcome political gridlock. But America’s New Congress brings renewed focus to maximize our nation’s energy potential.

This Congress, working across the aisle and with our counterparts across the Capitol, the committee will advance a comprehensive energy package designed to build what we call the Architecture of Abundance. Our efforts will focus on four key policy areas: modern infrastructure, a 21st Century energy workforce, energy diplomacy, and efficiency and accountability. By addressing regulatory challenges in these four areas we can begin to fully enjoy the benefits of America’s energy abundance.

The increases in North American energy production can lower prices for consumers, but we need to build a modern and effective infrastructure system to transport our affordable energy supplies to those homes and businesses that need them. The American energy boom offers countless opportunities for good-paying jobs, but aspiring energy workers need the right tools and resources to get a foot in the door. America can leverage its position as an energy superpower to achieve diplomatic goals, but policymakers need to understand how domestic energy decisions affect foreign policy. Cutting-edge energy technologies offer efficient new ways to utilize our abundant resources, but we need to cut red tape and encourage further private sector innovation.

We are incredibly fortunate to be in control of our energy destiny, and it’s time to change the course of America’s policy. Instead of outdated laws that hold on to an era of energy scarcity, we need a comprehensive energy policy that matches today’s era of abundance. This is our moment to make the most of our energy greatness. By building the Architecture of Abundance we can embrace the American energy opportunity before us.

Upton has represented Michigan’s 6th Congressional District since 1987. He is chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee. Whitfield has represented Kentucky’s 1st Congressional Distyrict since 1995. He is chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee’s Subcommittee on Energy and Power.