If you don’t vote, who are you helping to elect?

Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton addresses the crowd during a campaign rally at La Gala in Bowling Green, Kentucky. (Photo: Getty Images)

We hope 30 years of Republican propaganda against the Clintons has not worked on voters. All the investigations, all the hearing have not amounted to a hill of beans.

There is no perfect candidate, only a matter of looking at the big picture and setting priorities. Think about the future, if not for yourself then for your kids and grandkids: Do you want Sarah Palin as secretary of State? We will be the laughing stock of the world. How about Mike Huckabee as secretary of Health and Human Services. Do you think he’ll be an advocate for the least privileged of our country?

How about three new Scalias or other super-conservatives on the Supreme Court? If you do not care about women’s right to equal pay and choice, don’t vote for Hillary.

What about the homeless, the environment, poor folks, domestic violence? Do you really think Donald Trump would do anything about those? He thinks folks on Supplemental Security Income are getting too much and Medicare needs to be cut and privatized. Obamacare will be dismantled. Poor and middle class folks will lose their health care and be back to using emergency rooms.

What do you think about that?

They are also talking about cutting benefits to vets, especially those who were wounded. Have you ever enjoyed our National Parks? They’ll be gone and privatized.

Do think every citizen has the right to vote? You can forget about that in a Trump presidency. We will have even more money in politics, so our representatives can be bought and paid for by the rich.

If you don’t vote, who are you helping to elect?

We care about the most vulnerable in our society. Whoever is elected will not affect our status very much. But our country will be set back at least 30 years. We are thinking of subsequent generations.

If this sounds harsh, it’s because we speak from our hearts and minds.

Hillary is not evil – not the perfect candidate, but not evil. Even if you think she is the lesser of two evils, not voting for her will help elect the greater of two evils.

Ruta Vaskys and Martin Freed live in Quinby.

Read or Share this story: http://www.delmarvanow.com/story/opinion/2016/05/25/things-think-voting/84860042/