Keokuk Area Hospital interim CEO and chief turnaround officer Joseph Whiting, a senior consultant with Fitch Healthcare, Thursday delivered his perspective of health care trends and their effect on the hospital.

Speaking during the Keokuk Rotary Club meeting, Whiting said Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement amounts will continue to decline due in part to the high level of national health care spending that cannot be maintained.

The numbers of insureds will grow when the Affordable Care Act mandated employer health care for workers goes into effect in 2015. Businesses with more than 50 employees must start providing health insurance by 2016. Employers with 100 or more employees must provide health benefits to at least 70 percent of workers by 2015 and 95 percent by 2016.

Also, approximately 1 million more people are on Medicaid than before ACA was made law.

“Insurance companies have had a good run,” he said, but added that the coming decrease in insurance company profits likely will be countered with lower reimbursement to hospitals.

Pressure on premiums will continue to change the lives of doctors and hospitals.

Some doctors will join large medical groups and become affiliated with private health insurers, perhaps no longer accepting Medicare and Medicaid patients.

Hospitals, including KAH, are using strategies to weather reimbursement inequity.

Some of those strategies include cost reduction, better risk management (cutting down on Medicare fraud), better alignment of physicians and growth.

“Government payers and insurance companies want hospitals to demonstrate value,” Whiting said.

Keokuk Area Hospital is working on growing its surgery capabilities – general and orthopedic; growing its mid-level providers; and growing access to primary care physicians.

However, the price tag on family physicians can be $250,000 per year and up.

The hospital has shed departments that are not high performers. The obstetric-gynecological department was closed in 2013, and specialized urology services ceased this year.

Short-term goals are to increase patient volume, meet clinical goals and provide better patient services.

Whiting and others in the Fitch Healthcare Group also are evaluating possible partnerships with University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics – including telemedicine services.

“Clearly our long-term goal is to be sustainable,” he said.