DALLAS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Norton Rose Fulbright today announced that Lisa Atlas Genecov, a prominent healthcare transactions lawyer with 30 years of experience, has joined its Dallas office as a partner.

Genecov comes to Norton Rose Fulbright from Locke Lord, where she was a partner and chair of the firm’s healthcare practice. She will now lead the healthcare transactional practice for Norton Rose Fulbright’s Dallas office. Genecov handles transactional, regulatory and compliance aspects of healthcare law, advising clients on transaction structures, implementation matters, compliance obligations and strategic opportunities under the Affordable Care Act and related health reform laws and regulations.

Recognized by Chambers USA in Texas: Healthcare for the last five years, Genecov counsels hospitals, health systems, medical groups and other healthcare providers in regulatory matters as well as business transactions, including the formation of healthcare networks, hospital/physician/payor alignment strategies, accountable care organizations, joint ventures and management services organizations, and choice of entity and board governance matters.

Linda Addison, US Managing Partner, Norton Rose Fulbright, said:

“I have great respect for Lisa, who is an excellent lawyer and an exceptional person. Her experience in transactions and regulatory work will complement our healthcare practice and benefit our clients.”

Genecov, who was the only private law firm lawyer selected by the Dallas Business Journal for its 2013 “Who’s Who in Health Care,” said:

“I am delighted to be joining a team of respected and accomplished healthcare lawyers. Norton Rose Fulbright has been recognized as having one of the best healthcare practices in the US, and I look forward to contributing to its future successes.”

Jim Wiehl, US Head of Healthcare Transactional, Norton Rose Fulbright, commented:

“Lisa brings with her decades of experience handling complex corporate matters for national healthcare clients. She will strengthen our healthcare team with her extensive background in securities, financings, mergers and acquisitions.”

Genecov received her JD, with honors, from The University of Texas School of Law, and her BA in Human Biology, with distinction, from Stanford University. She is admitted to practice in Texas.

A co-founder of the Center for Women in Law at The University of Texas School of Law, she is also active with the American Bar Association’s Health Law Section, serving as Chair of its Coordinating Committee on Diversity, Vice Chair of its Emerging Issues in Health Care Law Planning Committee and Past Chair of its Business and Transactions Interest Group.

Notes for editors:

Norton Rose Fulbright

Norton Rose Fulbright is a global legal practice. We provide the world’s preeminent corporations and financial institutions with a full business law service. We have more than 3800 lawyers based in over 50 cities across Europe, the United States, Canada, Latin America, Asia, Australia, Africa, the Middle East and Central Asia.

Recognized for our industry focus, we are strong across all the key industry sectors: financial institutions; energy; infrastructure, mining and commodities; transport; technology and innovation; and life sciences and healthcare.

Wherever we are, we operate in accordance with our global business principles of quality, unity and integrity. We aim to provide the highest possible standard of legal service in each of our offices and to maintain that level of quality at every point of contact.

Norton Rose Fulbright LLP, Norton Rose Fulbright Australia, Norton Rose Fulbright Canada LLP, Norton Rose Fulbright South Africa (incorporated as Deneys Reitz Inc) and Fulbright & Jaworski LLP, each of which is a separate legal entity, are members (‘the Norton Rose Fulbright members’) of Norton Rose Fulbright Verein, a Swiss Verein. Norton Rose Fulbright Verein helps coordinate the activities of the Norton Rose Fulbright members but does not itself provide legal services to clients.

Law around the world

nortonrosefulbright.com