People Moves of the Week: Venable, Greenbriar Equity, Barnes & Thornburg

Venable hires two advisers from Baker & McKenzie; Greenbriar taps new managing director; Barnes & Thornburg names David Cornwell, a go-to lawyer for athletes, a partner

Advent International – The Boston private equity firm has Jeremy Rabe as an operating partner and Livia Masnaghetti as industry adviser. Both Rabe and Masnaghetti will advise Advent on deals in the global loyalty and marketing services sectors. Rabe was previously CEO of Premier Loyalty & Marketing, a marketing company. Masnaghetti has worked on Aeroplan's initial public offering and spinoff from Air Canada, and has advised marketing analytics company Aimia on various transactions. The two have already identified several potential acquisitions in Latin America, according to Advent.

Alvarez & Marsal – David Paris joined the New York law firm's global forensic and dispute services group as a senior director. Based in Washington, D.C. , Paris was previously a managing director at investment bank Stout Risius Ross.

Baird Capital – The Chicago investment firm has hired Owen Sullivan as an operating partner for its technology and services team. Sullivan will pursue new investment opportunities. He served most recently as president of specialty brands for ManpowerGroup (NYSE: MAN). He also served as CEO of Right Management, Jefferson Wells and Experis, in addition to leading the ManpowerGroup's sales organization. Before that, he was president of the financial services group at Matavante, which provides technology services to the finance industry.

Barnes & Thornburg LLP – The Indianapolis law firm enlisted sports attorney David Cornwell as a partner in its Atlanta branch. Cornwell will work in the firm's media practice, representing clients in entertainment, music and sports. Previously, Cornwell was a partner at Gordon & Rees LLP. Cornwell began his career as assistant legal counsel with the National Football League, representing former commissioners Pete Rozelle and Paul Tagliabue. After that, Cornwell worked as a sports agent, representing professional athletes such as Howie Long, Warren Moon, Desmond Howard, Greg Anthony, Troy Aikman and Steve Young, who is currently a partner at middle-market private equity firm HGGC. As vice president and general counsel at Upper Deck Co., Cornwell was the principal negotiator for the company's trading card and memorabilia licenses. Recently, he was hired to help lead an appeal for New York Yankees star Alex Rodriguez, who received a 211-game suspension from Major League Baseball for his ties to Biogenesis of America, a Florida clinic owned by Anthony Bosch, who was recently sentenced to four years in federal prison for supplying performance-enhancing drugs to athletes.

Greenbriar Equity Group LLC – The Rye, New York-based private equity firm has tapped Michael Weiss as managing director. Weiss joined Greenbriar in 2004 and has led the structuring and sourcing of investments in transportation, including the rail, logistics and automotive sub-sectors. Previously, Weiss worked at Merrill Lynch & Co, advising private equity clients. He currently serves as a director of engineering company Nordco Holdings LLC.

Mayer Brown LLP – The Chicago law firm brought in L. Kevin Sheridan Jr. as a partner in its corporate and securities practice. Sheridan Jr. will be based in the New York office. Previously, he served as co-leader of Bingham McCutchen’s global corporate group.

Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy LLP – The New York-based law firm brought Arndt Stengel on board to serve as a corporate partner in Frankfurt. Stengel joins from Clifford Chance. Stengel specializes in international mergers, capital markets and general corporate matters, as well as corporate and financial restructurings.

Venable LLP – The New York law firm has hired Philip von Mehren and Michele Maney. Previously with Baker & McKenzie, von Mehren and Maney advise on domestic and cross-border M&A deals, leveraged buyouts, divestitures, and joint ventures.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: