A sidewalk with no curb cut. A doorway that’s too narrow. An out-of-order elevator next to a looming set of stairs. These physical barriers may seem small to some. They did to me, too, until an accident left me paralyzed at the age of 16. From that moment on, I viewed the world through a different lens, my vantage point set from the perspective of a wheelchair.

Restaurants, businesses and public spaces I once loved to visit became inaccessible. Physical obstacles became barriers to opportunity, and the future I envisioned for myself instantly changed.

ADVERTISEMENT

My story is not unique. My challenges are similar to those faced by millions of Americans with disabilities across this country, Americans whose dreams and aspirations are not diminished by their disabilities, physical or otherwise. For the first decade I lived with a disability, I saw minimal progress in making our communities as inclusive, accessible and welcoming as possible. To the contrary, people with disabilities were too often treated as second-class citizens.

But there was already a powerful movement underway, and on July 26, 1990, the tide dramatically shifted.

The United States took a major leap forward in social justice and equal rights when President George H.W. Bush signed the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) into law. In the 25 years since, the ADA has opened doors to education, employment and technology. It has made public transportation more accommodating, established universal design standards, improved voting accessibility and expanded inclusion and justice for millions. As someone who has lived with the challenges of a disability both before and after the enactment of the ADA, I have experienced firsthand the profound changes of this law on our society.

The ADA made a statement about how we treat and value people with disabilities. The law prohibits discrimination against individuals with disabilities, reinforcing the notion that a disability does not disqualify a person from meaningful contributions in the classroom, workplace or community. I have long said that people with disabilities are our nation’s greatest untapped resource. That was true when the ADA was enacted, and it remains true today.

Making it possible for people with disabilities to access opportunity, and empowering them to seize it, are two distinct challenges. Approximately 57 million people in this country have a disability, yet recent data shows 31 percent of disabled individuals live below the poverty line and less than 34 percent are fully employed. We must do more to educate employers about the innate potential of the disability community. Moreover, we must provide people with disabilities the tools they need to pursue their goals and achieve their dreams in the workplace and in their communities.

As a founder and co-chairman of the Bipartisan Disabilities Caucus in Congress since 2001, I know that effectively addressing these challenges requires investing in resources, programs and policies that enable individuals with disabilities to live as independently as possible. Family caregivers are often tasked with providing full-time care for these individuals, which is why I championed the Lifespan Respite Care Act that passed into law in 2006. I continue to push for this program’s reauthorization, and I included it in the Military and Veteran Caregiver Services Improvement Act that I introduced in April to strengthen the support services for family caregivers of injured and disabled veterans.

For the millions of people with disabilities, illnesses and chronic conditions that rely on medical rehabilitation to restore and maintain function, I introduced legislation that would improve rehabilitation research and coordination at the National Institutes of Health. And I continue to advocate for accessible public transportation, an essential gateway to healthcare, employment and community integration for many people with disabilities. I introduced the Transit Accessibility Innovation Act, which would create a competitive grant program to encourage transit systems to make public transportation more accessible and user-friendly. By improving these services, we can improve the quality of life for countless individuals with disabilities and their families.

As we celebrate progress on this 25thanniversary of the ADA, we must also acknowledge the challenges that remain. We must recommit ourselves to paving a path forward that truly achieves equality for all. I am proud to represent many gifted people with disabilities in Rhode Island and across the country. Like them, I look forward to a time when the physical, social and economic barriers we continue to face have been leveled for all. Like them, I am hopeful that the goals of the Americans with Disabilities Act can, someday soon, be fully realized.

Langevin has represented Rhode Island’s 2nd Congressional District since 2001. He sits on the Armed Services and the Homeland Security committees.