Endorsement: Raja Krishnamoorthi for congressional seat Duckworth is leaving

hello

From left, Deborah Bullwinkel, Raja Krishnamoorthi, and Mike Noland are candidates for the Democratic nomination in the 8th Congressional District.

We were torn in Spring 2012 when we had to choose between Schaumburg attorney and businessman Raja Krishnamoorthi and Tammy Duckworth for the Democratic nomination for Congress from the 8th District.

We don't have that problem this time, and we're pleased to recommend Krishnamoorthi to represent his party for the position Duckworth is leaving to run for the U.S. Senate.

Krishnamoorthi brings to this race experience that is broad and deep, both in public service and in the business world.

A former deputy treasurer for the state of Illinois, he has been involved in the state's technology venture capital fund, served as a special assistant attorney general in Attorney General Lisa Madigan's public integrity unit and chaired the audit committee of the Illinois Housing Development Authority. He previously ran unsuccessfully for Illinois comptroller.

In business, he is a Harvard Law School graduate who leads two high-tech companies that serve the national security and renewable energy industries.

In person, he is a passionate and knowledgeable proponent of issues ranging from the Affordable Care Act to immigration and foreign policy, yet he approaches all political issues pragmatically and with an openness that can make him both cooperative and persuasive in conducting the business of a congressman.

This is not to diminish his competition in this campaign.

State Sen. Mike Noland, in particular, presents a serious and sincere candidacy. As a Democrat who has occasionally broken ranks with his leadership -- and who steadfastly argues for term limits for political leadership positions -- he can demonstrate an appealing independence, while maintaining an unwavering but realistic commitment to fundamental values of the Democratic Party.

Villa Park Village President Deborah Bullwinkel portrays herself as "the average person" in the race. Prior to election to her current post in 2013, she served four years on the Villa Park village board and she has been active in the DuPage Mayors and Managers Conference, the Metropolitan Mayors Caucus and other community and regional organizations.

But Krishnamoorthi presents an unusually expansive range of experience that can have special value for the issues likely to dominate Congress in the years ahead.

As a businessman, he has direct experience with the effects of government policy on business, broadly, and with the impacts of the Affordable Care Act, climate change legislation and minimum wage laws, specifically.

The son of immigrant parents, he understands firsthand the difficult challenges and vast opportunities for immigrants in this country. He can add an important dimension to the debate on immigration policy, yet he does not waver in support of policies that protect the American economy or American domestic and foreign policy interests.

The 8th Congressional District covers a large portion of Northwestern Cook County from Elk Grove Village to Hoffman Estates, as well as parts of northern DuPage and eastern Kane counties. All three candidates seeking the seat approach the issues with sincerity, knowledge and passion. But Raja Krishnamoorthi brings additional dimensions of experience that could make him particularly successful. He is endorsed.