Ivan the Terrible, from Big Sky Brewing Co. in Missoula, Mont., is 9.5% ABV. (Photo: Todd Haefer, The (Appleton, Wis.) Post-Crescent)

Beer Man is a weekly profile of beers from across the country and around the world.

This week: Ivan the Terrible

Big Sky Brewing Co., Missoula, Mont.

www.bigskybrew.com

I first became acquainted with Big Sky through its well-made Moose Drool brown ale and Powder Hound winter ale. Nearly all of its beers have an animal theme, such as Trout Slayer, Pigmy Owl, Scape Goat and Slow Elk.

Ivan the Terrible, a limited edition release, breaks away from that tradition by featuring a bearded bald guy on the label. He does not look like the real Ivan the Terrible, the massacre-prone czar of Russia who ruled in the 1500s, who in some portraits bears a striking resemblance to Vincent Price.

However, Ivan the Terrible the beer is a quite good Russian imperial stout, marked by its jet-black body, initial coffee-colored fluffy head and strong flavors of chocolate, caramel and roasted malt.

The aroma was dominated by chocolate, molasses and dark fruit. The head initially looked nice, but disappeared rather quickly, although there was plenty of lacing on the insides of the glass.

The flavor was a nice mix of chocolate-cocoa, caramel and roasted malt. The roast was a nice surprise — it had a full roast flavor without venturing into a bitter coffee flavor, which many imperial stouts tend to do.

There was also some nice molasses flavor in the background and a hint of licorice. The carbonation was medium, the mouthfeel solid without being oily or sticky and there was just enough bitterness at the end to offset the medium sweetness and alcohol content.

Ivan the Terrible falls short in one area, however; it is supposed to be bourbon barrel aged, yet the characteristics of such aging are negligible. There was a hint of vanilla, but no oak or bourbon whiskey flavor.

While it may not live up to its billing, Ivan the Terrible is still a good imperial stout with a great mix of the flavors that highlight that style. While this version had a 9.5% ABV, some previous versions have been as high as 13.8%, which could mean varying flavor profiles for different batches through the years.

Big Sky beers are available from the West Coast to the Midwest; its Beer Finder link is at the top of its home page.

Many beers are available only regionally. Check the brewer's website, which often contains information on product availability by mail. Contact Todd Haefer at beerman@postcrescent.com. To read previous Beer Man columns, click here.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1bY9JjY