The National Rifle Association (NRA) is cheering new Republican legislation that would make it easier for gun owners to obtain firearms in the nation's capitol.

The Second Amendment Enforcement Act introduced Thursday by Sen. Marco Rubio Marco RubioSenate GOP ties Iran sanctions fight to defense bill Analysis: Pa. senator missed most Budget Committee hearings Susana Martinez fires back at Trump MORE (R-Fla.) and Rep. Jim Jordan (R-Ohio) would roll back many of the hurdles to gun ownership in Washington, D.C., and push back against some of the city's strict firearms laws.

"The District of Columbia government has infringed on law-abiding citizens' Second Amendment rights for far too long," NRA spokeswoman Jennifer Baker told The Hill.

The gun legislation would limit the District’s authority to regulate firearms by expanding concealed carry laws and shooting down the city’s gun registry.

“For years, the District of Columbia has infringed on its residents’ Second Amendment rights and rendered them vulnerable to criminals who could care less what the gun laws are,” Rubio said in a statement.

The Supreme Court issued a landmark ruling in 2008, giving Washington, D.C., residents the same Second Amendment rights as people in other places around the country. The gun legislation from Rubio and Jordan would break down some remaining barriers to gun ownership in the District.

The bill paves the way for District residents to more easily obtain concealed carry permits, and also allows out-of-state residents with similar licenses to bring their firearms into the city.

The lawmakers are also looking to strike the city’s firearms registration system.

District residents would also be allowed to obtain guns from licensed dealers in states like Maryland and Virginia that border the city, while companies and organizations would have the authority to decide whether firearms are permitted inside their buildings.

Granting residents greater access to guns would make the city a “safer place” by giving law-abiding citizens a fighting chance against criminals, Jordan argued.

“Washington, D.C., has some of the harshest laws against gun owners in the nation,” Jordan said in a statement.

“By rolling back unnecessary restrictions and protecting the rights of homeowners to protect themselves, this bill will make Washington, D.C., a safer place for law-abiding citizens, and will restore the original intent of the Second Amendment to our nation’s capital,” he added.