Clarke Bill To Give Undocumented Immigrants Health Care

Flatbush Congresswoman Yvette D. Clarke yesterday stated her case for co-sponsoring a measure that would allow millions of undocumented immigrants to purchase health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

Dubbed the Exchange Inclusion for a Healthy America Act of 2015, the measure would eliminate restrictions in the Affordable Care Act that prevent immigrants who currently lack legal status from purchasing health insurance on the state and federal health care exchanges.

“Today, there are millions of people living in the United States who work or attend school, who want comprehensive health care insurance for themselves and their families at a reasonable cost. When our families and children are healthy and have access to high-quality health care, the entire nation benefits. By expanding the Affordable Care Act to include those individuals who are not yet citizens or legal permanent residents, we will increase the number of choices that are available,” said Clarke.

“Unfortunately, Republicans in Congress continue to refuse to allow any debate on the comprehensive immigration reform our nation desperately needs. Until we have achieved comprehensive immigration reform, other initiatives – such as the Exchange Inclusion for a Healthy America Act of 2015 – that allow those without legal status to participate in our civil society are critical,” she added.

Brooklyn Goes Country With First Dairy Queen

Brooklyn Borough President Eric L. Adams today will cut the ribbon at Dairy Queen’s first Brooklyn store.

The 2,300 square foot DQ Grill & Chill in Williamsburg, which has created more than 50 new jobs, also gives the popular restaurant chain a presence in each of New York City’s five boroughs. Dairy Queens are mainstays in rural America and are frequently referenced in country music, which only has one radio station in New York City (disclosure – this writer is a huge country music fan).

Adams will celebrate Brooklyn’s growing stature as a place where international brands want to do business.

The ribbon cutting is slated for 10:30 a.m., today, at 27 Graham Avenue in Williamsburg.

Kingsborough Community College To Fatherhood Academy

Manhattan Beach’s Kingsborough Community College is slated to get one of CUNY’s Fatherhood Academies (CFA), city officials announced yesterday.

The program, which is part of Mayor Bill de Blasio‘s Young Men’s Initiative, will double in size with $2.1 million in new funding. The money will see CFA double in size, including enlarging the current program at LaGuardia Community College and expanding to Kingsborough and Hostos Community College.

The CFA is a comprehensive program designed to promote responsible parenting and foster economic stability for unemployed and underemployed young fathers through education, employment, and personal development.

Increased familial engagement, attaining a High School Equivalency (HSE) diploma and finding gainful employment are all essential goals of the program. It aims to help young fathers prepare for and enroll in college or training programs, with the understanding that earning a college degree is the most effective path toward providing long-term economic sustainability for themselves and their families. The program serves young fathers 18 to 24 years of age throughout New York City.

“As the son of a loving father and the father of two sons myself, I know how much a father’s love affects a child’s self-esteem, independence, emotional responsiveness, and more. CUNY Fatherhood Academy is one of the most important investments we can make as a City. By investing in our fathers, we are investing in our future,” said Deputy Mayor for Strategic Policy Initiatives Richard Buery.

NYC Fair Chance Act Takes Effect

Flatlands City Council Member Jumaane D. Williams and other advocates yesterday celebrated the New York City Fair Chance Act taking effect.

The new law, in which Williams was the prime sponsor, requires employers in New York City to look at job applicants’ qualifications first, and to hold off on background checks and criminal history questions until they’ve found the person they want to hire.

Under the measure, also known as the “ban the box” law, it is illegal to ask about criminal history on job applications and during initial job interviews. Only after a job offer is made may employers ask about criminal convictions and-with the applicant’s permission-run a background check. After reviewing the applicant’s conviction history, employers may withdraw the job offer only if the candidate’s criminal record is directly related to the job or if hiring the individual would pose an unreasonable risk.

“I am proud New York City has joined the ranks of more than 100 cities across the country to give all job applicants a fair chance at employment. Not only does employment strengthen communities and lower recidivism, but employers will have access to a broader range of qualified candidates to consider. This is the strongest ban the box law in the nation, and will ensure that all New Yorkers, including those with convictions for previous mistakes, will have an equal opportunity to compete for jobs they qualify for,” said Williams.

The new law applies to all employers with four or more employees in New York City. It does not apply to some jobs, such as police and peace officers and any job where an existing local, state, or federal law says that people with certain convictions are prohibited from consideration. More detailed information about the Fair Chance Act is available here