No. 4 Wildcats dominate at start and end of game

Fast break What went right: CU got some things going late in the first half to pull within six points at halftime. The Buffs even pulled within four early in the second half. What went wrong: The first 10 minutes were a nightmare for the Buffs. They missed their first 14 shots, got dominated on the boards and fell behind 22-5. Then, in the second half, Arizona poured it on. Star of the game: Josh Scott. He finished with 18 points and eight rebounds and was about the only effective Buff on offense. What's next?: The Buffs will visit Utah on Saturday.

Askia Booker sat in front of the media on Saturday night, something he's done numerous times this season.

This time, Colorado's junior guard sat with his hands in his lap, his shoulders slumped and his head looking to the ground.

"We're all embarrassed, man," he said. "Like, really embarrassed. This is something that, whether we're on the road or at home, this should never happen again."

Moments earlier, Booker and his teammates walked off the Coors Events Center court with perhaps the most disappointing loss in the four seasons Tad Boyle has been CU's coach.

No. 4 Arizona dominated the Buffs at the start and then buried them at the finish, routing them 88-61 with the nation's eyes on Boulder.

Advertisement

ESPN's College GameDay show spent Saturday in Boulder, broadcasting throughout the day from the home of the Buffaloes. As it turned out, the early morning pre-game show from the Coors Events Center was the highlight of the day.

"Our fans were so ready for this game, for this win, and we gave them nothing," Boyle said after his team fell to 16-2 at home this season. "That's a sick feeling to go home with and to live with. I don't know what to say.

"I haven't been embarrassed many times as a coach, but I was embarrassed tonight with the way our team played."

Aaron Gordon had 23 points and Nick Johnson 20 as Arizona (25-2, 12-2 Pac-12) moved a step closer to clinching the regular season conference title. Coupled with UCLA's loss to Stanford, the Wildcats have a two-game lead in the conference.

Josh Scott had 18 points and eight rebounds for the Buffs (20-8, 9-6), who had gone 5-1 in their six games coming in.

With a great deal of recent success and a sell-out crowd of 11,025 in attendance, the Buffs were anticipating a signature type of performance and victory.

But, like they did a month ago in Tucson, the Buffs got off to a horrendous start against the Wildcats.

In that Jan. 23 matchup on the Wildcats' home floor, CU fell behind 18-4 while making just one of their first 10 shots from the floor.

Somehow, Saturday was worse. The Buffs started 0-for-14 from the floor and fell behind 22-5 in the first 10 minutes.

CU didn't make its first field goal until 10:12 into the game, when Jaron Hopkins drained a 3-pointer.

To their credit, the Buffs settled down during the second 10 minutes of the half. They outscored the Wildcats 20-9 during that time to pulled within six, 31-25, at the half.

Scott sparked CU's rally, as he scored 10 points in the final 9:17 of the half. Booker hit a jumper at the buzzer to send the Buffs into the locker room with momentum.

"Just collectively as a team, I don't feel we had the most energy," Booker said of the start. "We were giving up layup after layup. They hit some tough shots but I think we got ourselves back into the game. We cut it to six at halftime and that's not a bad spot to be in at halftime. We just gave it away in the second half."

CU actually pulled within four, 37-33, on a Dustin Thomas layup with 17:08 to play and the Buffs were still within seven with 14:50 to go, but then Arizona put on a clinic the rest of the way.

Arizona made a stunning 84.6 percent of its shots (22 of 26) in the second half and suffocated the CU offense.

T.J. McConnell's steal and pass to Aaron Gordon for a breakaway reverse dunk with 11:03 to go put the emotional nail into the coffin, as it gave Arizona a 16-point lead.

The Arizona lead reached 30 at one point and ultimately the 27-point loss was the worst margin of defeat at home in the Boyle era. CU is 60-9 at home under Boyle.

"My hat goes off to Arizona," Boyle said. "They whipped us tonight every which way you can whip a team. Our fans and our seniors deserve better than they got tonight. For that, I'm truly sorry. I'm disappointed. I'm angry. You name it, every emotion is going through me right now. It was a disappointing performance by our team."

Contact BuffZone.com Writer Brian Howell at howellb@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/brianhowell33.