Victor LeBourgeois, 19, looks over his homework with his adoptive mother, Chris Keller, and her husband, Bill Barber, in the family’s Mukwonago home. When Victor was born, doctors thought he might live two months. Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

Victor LeBourgeois was born into a toilet, three-and-a-half months premature.

It was April 25, 1995. He weighed little more than a pound. His brain, his lungs, his gut were not yet fully developed. His skin was so thin it was translucent.

His biological mother was — back then, almost 20 years ago — a crackhead. She says she had been vaguely aware that she was pregnant. Compared to her addiction, most of the things in her life back then were vague and mostly beside the point.

An ambulance took Victor to what is now the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit at Aurora Sinai Medical Center.

He stayed there three months. His biological mother, who had also been taken by ambulance to Sinai, says she would sit by his isolette at night and wonder what to do. She was a mess. She could not track what people were saying to her.

If he lives, they told her, he will never do this. If he lives, he will never do that. If he lives.

Among the most obvious of Victor's maladies was hydrocephalus. His skull filled with fluids. Surgeries to control the swelling failed. His skin was too delicate to hold the shunts. His forehead grew up and out.

The damage overwhelmed her.

•••

The bus!

Victor lives in Mukwonago with his adoptive mother, Chris Keller, and her husband, Bill Barber. It's a school day, and there is a scramble to get Victor out the front door.

Chris shaves a little fuzz off Victor's lip and chin. She helps him into his coat. She wraps a scarf around his neck. She makes sure his lunch bag is zipped. She makes sure his lunch bag is in his backpack. She makes sure his backpack is zipped. She makes sure his backpack is slung over his shoulders as he heads out the front door.

Victor is 19. He is about 5-foot-6 and weighs about 105 pounds. His stride is speedy but canted a bit forward and to the left. The seat on the bus that he plops into is across the aisle from Ann Marie Nencka.

Ann Marie, who has autism, keeps her head pointed forward. She moves her eyes toward Victor — but not exactly at Victor — and smiles.

"My favorite person on this bus is?" Victor asks.

"Ann Marie Nencka!" she says.

"Nencka. Yes. Very good," Victor says.

"The month is?" he asks.

"November 2014!" she says.

"Yes. That is correct. And next month is?"

"December!"

"Yes, December 2014," Victor says. "What is the holiday we have next week?"

"Thanksgiving!"

"T-h-a-n-k-s-g-i-v-i-n-g," Victor says, signing the letters one by one.

"Thanksgiving. Yes. That is correct. Very good, Ann Marie Nencka."

•••

Chris had been a nurse at Sinai's NICU. She had cared for Victor and had tried to comfort his mother.

After his failed surgeries, Victor's prognosis was grim. His head just got bigger and bigger. At the end of July 1995, Chris brought Victor to her home in Mukwonago, it was to die.

Chris was then a 49-year-old single mother of five. Bill Barber was then just a neighbor. It was so hot that day, over 100 degrees, so Chris waited until the evening to bring Victor home, and Bill helped her. They hoped the house would have cooled down. It hadn't.

Victor weighed just shy of 6 pounds. About half that weight, Chris says, was Victor's head. He was, she says, a fright.

Doctors thought Victor might live two months. When he turned 3, Chris adopted him. She stayed in touch with his biological mother, sending her Christmas cards and Victor's school picture.

Then her letters started to come back. Undelivered. Address unknown.

Today, Chris is 68. Bill is 69.

Bill has Parkinson's disease and is retired. Chris still works a couple of nights a week as an in-home caregiver.

Victor used to be blind, the result of damage to the visual part of his brain. That's improved, though it's hard to imagine how he experiences the world. He doesn't get the ideas of upper, middle or lower. Left and right can be problematic. He can't see in certain planes. For example, he cannot see down the front of his own body. He can't see the buttons on his shirt. He can't see his belt or his zipper. His depth perception is not very good. His small motor skills are just not there.

But he has a red belt in Tae Kwon Do.

And he loves miniature golf. Chris doesn't know how he does it. He gets a lot of holes-in-one. He shouldn't. But the thing is, he does.

•••

One of Victor's tasks is to help staff Jo-2-Go, a coffee shop located in one of Mukwonago High School's special education classrooms. He sees Ann Marie.

"How many days are in November?" he asks.

"Thirty!" she replies.

"Yes." Victor says. "You are correct."

The mood at Jo-2-Go is upbeat. Lots of chatter. Joe Cocker on the stereo. He's singing "Feelin' Alright." A few people start to dance.

"You are an amazing dancer," he tells one girl.

"You are outstanding," he tells another.

That's the way things are to Victor. Amazing. Outstanding. He radiates optimism. He meets you, and you're his best friend. You're his hero. You're funny. You're smart. Your opinion is interesting. Your idea is good. Your puppy is cute. Your class is his favorite.

"Which weighs more," he asks Ann Marie, "an elephant or Victor?"

"An elephant."

"That is exactly right."

Victor has the IQ of a kindergartner. He has the vocabulary of a college freshman. He can read just about anything out loud. He comprehends only a small bit of what he reads. "Malala Yousafzai," he reads without stumbling over the Pakistani activist's name. He does not understand what the Nobel Peace Prize is. He can say "Kaleidoscope — now that is an interesting word." But he can not tell you if the shape of the kaleidoscope in his hand is a cylinder or a cone.

He is fluent. Fluently Victor LeBourgeois.

"Victor 'l-e-b-o-u-r-g-e-o-i-s,'" he says, "is a smart boy."

"In my heart, he is a kind of angel," says his reading teacher, Randi Jensen.

"He brings light to everyone he meets."

•••

Chris didn't plan on this. To be nearly 70 and still working, with a husband whose condition is worsening, with a teenager who will never live independently.

Before Victor, she never dwelled on the idea that the premature babies she cared for in the NICU would — many of them — require special care, and that their needs would extend for years and years and perhaps even beyond the lives of their parents.

Before Victor, there was life and death and no shadowland between the two.

"He is the smartest and the hardest thing I have ever done," Chris says. "He's bright. He's eager. He's unique. But this is not a 'miracle baby,' as people like to say. It is a miracle that is fraught."

Chris is sitting on a couch in her living room. Victor, home from school, is in his room streaming "A Prairie Home Companion." The sky is nearly dark. She's a little weary. A little sad.

She recalls a trip she took maybe 10 years ago. Victor didn't come. She was without him for three solid days.

"I didn't know who I was," she says. "I was bereft."

Thanksgiving. It's complicated, she says. It's not obvious. Few real blessings are unalloyed.

"Thankfulness and gratitude for him living and being as sweet and sincere as he is, doesn't cancel all the sad aspects of the past and of his future," she says.

"It has been hard. It will be hard. The future is scary. I am scared.

"He isn't."