Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com Gov. Scott Walker begins addressing the recently released emails at 6:50

By of the

Gov. Scott Walker declined again Sunday to answer whether he knew of the existence of a secret email system in his Milwaukee County executive office.

Instead, during the appearance on "Fox News Sunday," Walker called the controversy over the release of thousands of emails "old news" and said Democrats were trying to switch the subject from his budget successes.

"If you look at the facts out there, this is old news," Walker said. "This is about a case that was closed last March. A Democratic district attorney in Milwaukee County spent multiple years looking at all this information.

"The 27,000-plus pages of documents that were just released this week have been looked at by a team led by a Democrat from Milwaukee County, and last March he announced the end of that case, plain and simple. It's old news."

His comments echoed those he made Friday while speaking to reporters for the first time since the release of the documents.

Milwaukee County District Attorney John Chisholm's office launched an investigation in May 2010 that lasted nearly three years and led to the convictions of six individuals, including three Walker aides, an appointee and a major campaign contributor.

Documents released Wednesday linked Walker to a secret email system that was used in his county office. The documents also showed close ties between his campaign operation and taxpayer-paid staff members during the months leading to the November 2010 election for governor.

"Fox News Sunday" host Chris Wallace pressed Walker on whether he knew there was a private email account.

Walker responded, "Again, it's one of those where I point out the district attorney looked into every single one of those issues."

Wallace interjected: "But sir, you're not answering my question."

Walker said, "No, because I'm not going to get into 27,000 different pieces of information."

The governor continued, "The bottom line is a Democrat who led the district attorney's office looked at all this, decided not to charge anything other than the individuals you mentioned, who were people who had worked for the county in the past but don't work for me today.

"I think that's pretty straightforward. It's one of those things where they want to keep pushing this issue into the forefront because in the end the folks running against us can't counter our positive message when it comes to the economy and creating budget surpluses."

CNN reported Sunday that it asked Walker whether he regretted ordering a daily conference call between top campaign and county aides during the 2010 governor's race. The network said Walker would not answer the question.

Walker also told CNN that he will not attend the Conservative Political Action Conference in March, saying the "scheduling just doesn't work." The event, held just outside Washington, is normally a key stop for Republicans with national ambitions.

Mike Tate, chair of the Democratic Party of Wisconsin, said there are additional questions that Walker needs to answer.

"What we continue to see is the further erosion of public trust in the governor's judgment," Tate said. "Did he know his staff was breaking the law, and if he didn't, how is that possible with what has come to light? How will his public and campaign staffs interact moving forward? And how do citizens know that their tax dollars won't be misused by mixing private-public staff going into an election year?"