President Barack Obama speaks to employees at DreamWorks studios in Glendale Tuesday, Nov. 26, 2013. In the speech, Obama talked about jobs and the Patient Care and Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. (Photo by David Crane/Los Angeles Daily News)

Closing out a short visit through Los Angeles, President Barack Obama spoke to employees of DreamWorks Animation on Tuesday, and praised the entertainment industry as an economic “bright spot.”

The president toured the company’s Glendale campus before the speech, met with comedian Steve Martin and actor Jim Parsons, two stars of its upcoming movie “Home,” and learned a thing or two about motion-capture technology.

Obama then met privately with DreamWorks Chief Executive Jeffrey Katzenberg, a longtime supporter, and other studio honchos before taking the stage in front of nearly 2,000 employees.

The president hailed the entertainment industry for its role in global diplomacy and economic stability, noting Hollywood’s dominance in the international creative marketplace.

“The thing we do better than anybody else is creativity,” he said. “That is something that can’t be copied. It’s one of the reasons why even with new markets and new technologies, there’s still no better place to make movies and television and music than right here in the United States. The gap between what we can do and what other countries can do is enormous.”

Obama addressed some familiar themes during the speech, such as his commitment to the Affordable Care Act and the resistance of congressional Republicans to his economic agenda.

“Some people have heard me say that on my list of top-five movies, ‘Godfather I” and “II” have to be on it, but it turns out Marlon Brando had it easy, because when it comes to Congress there is no such thing as an offer they can’t refuse,” he said, drawing laughter.

He touched on immigration reform in the approximately 30-minute speech, saying it would allow the country to “attract the best and brightest from around the world.”

“They bring extraordinary talents to the United States,” he said of California’s large immigrant population, “and that’s part of what makes America special. That’s part of what, by the way, makes California special. Because it’s always been this magnet of dreamers and strivers, people coming from every direction, saying to themselves, ‘If I work hard there, I can have my piece of the American dream.”

The appearance was Obama’s last stop in Los Angeles. He arrived at LAX from San Francisco Monday, where he attended two fundraisers in support of congressional Democrats. In L.A., he was honored with a reception at the Beverly Hills home of NBA Hall of Famer Earvin “Magic” Johnson and wife Cookie, before heading to a dinner at the home of billionaire Haim Saban and his philanthropist wife, Cheryl. Earlier Tuesday, he attended a fundraiser at the Hancock Park home of “Friends” co-creator Marta Kauffman, then departed via Marine One helicopter for the trek to Glendale.

Advertisement

He started the West Coast trip Sunday in Seattle, where he attended several fundraisers.