Kayto Sullivan said he has two advantages as a candidate in Arizona’s 1st Congressional District race: He’s Native American and a Democrat.

Those two characteristics play well, he said, for a district where Native Americans make up 23 percent of the population and a Democrat, U.S. Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, has won in the last two elections.

However, Sullivan will have to find other attributes to sell himself on in order to emerge from a crowded primary race that includes three other Democrats, eight Republicans and one independent candidate.

He said the broad range of skills he’s accumulated over the years make him stand out over his opponents, especially since he doesn’t consider himself a “career politician.”

Sullivan, who announced his candidacy in January, is a member of the Navajo Nation and lives in the small community of Kayenta, located in northern Arizona. He’s had many professions over the years that have included working as a park manager for the National Park Service, a church minister and owner of multiple small businesses.

He said one hardship he’s noticed to be most prevalent in the Navajo Nation is unemployment. He attributed part of the problem to the bureaucratic difficulties Native Americans must go through to start small businesses.

Making it easier for Native Americans to be business entrepreneurs would be one of Sullivan’s priorities as a member of Congress. He has a list of other priorities that include improving roads and infrastructure, providing more services to senior citizens and protecting natural resources.

Sullivan has previously worked in the mining industry so he understands how important that industry is to the CD1 economy. But he contends protecting the environment is very important.

His political viewpoints don’t always follow the general Democratic platform. He’s in favor of repealing the Affordable Care Act and supports the rights guaranteed under the Second Amendment, though he thinks background checks are a necessary safeguard.

He also admires the rhetoric expressed by Bernie Sanders on the presidential campaign trail. The Vermont senator’s desire to eliminate corporate interests from politics, Sullivan said, is something he completely advocates.

Sullivan said he did temporarily change his party affiliation at one point from Democrat to independent but quickly moved back over to his party. He said Democrats occupy a large majority of the Navajo Nation, and he doesn’t think it’s an ideology that can be easily swayed.

There are two other members of the Navajo Nation running in the CD1 race. State Sen. Carlyle Begay, a former Democrat, and businessman Shawn Redd are competing for the Republican nomination against six other candidates: Pinal County Sheriff Paul Babeu, Arizona Speaker of the House David Gowan, former Arizona Secretary of State Ken Bennett, businessman Gary Kiehne, engineer Thomas Whipple and retired Air Force Col. Wendy Rogers.

On the Democratic side, Sullivan is running against former state legislator Tom O’Halleran, businessman James Maloney and Coolidge resident Miguel Olivas. Independent Michael Mitchell is a write-in candidate. Kirkpatrick announced last year she would not seek re-election because she will run for a seat in the U.S. Senate.

According to the Federal Election Commission’s most recent campaign finance reports, O’Halleran is leading among Democrats by reporting to have $329,000 cash on hand at the end of the March. Both Sullivan and Olivas reported not having any financial activity so far.

Gathering political capital to run a campaign has been a big hurdle, Sullivan said. He hasn’t been successful raising funds on his home base so he plans to venture off the Navajo Nation to solicit donations.

As the campaign moves into the summer months, Sullivan said he plans to travel to the southern edges of CD1 in Pinal County to increase his name recognition among voters.