Humana (HUM) wasn’t kidding when it hinted last week of big premium hikes for 2017 in those ObamaCare markets where it remains.

This year, the nation’s fifth-largest insurer offers the cheapest bronze and silver plans in Michigan’s largest market, including Detroit. But Humana has filed for a 50% premium hike for its low-cost silver plan.

The unsubsidized cost for a 40-year-old will jump from $210 a month to $315, if approved. On top of that, the maximum out-of-pocket cost for plan members will rise 9%, to $7,150 from $6,300 in 2016.

Meanwhile, Humana wants a 38% premium increase for its lowest-cost bronze plan, from $178 a month to $246.

Rate requests for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, an important player in the state, aren’t yet available. But Humana isn’t the only exchange participant eyeing massive premium hikes. Health Alliance Plan, a subsidiary of the Henry Ford Health System, has requested 30% premium hikes for its least expensive bronze and silver plans.

But one carrier, so far, stands out as an exception. Molina Healthcare (MOH), is seeking just a 2% premium hike for its lowest cost bronze and silver plans. Even so, Molina’s requested premium for its lowest-cost silver plan is 11% higher than Humana’s this year, $234 per month vs. $210 for a 40-year-old. Also, while keeping its bronze premium hike to a minimum, Molina is boosting its deductible by one-third, to $6,650 from $5,000.

Still, it appears that Molina, which was already one of the lowest-priced insurers in the state, may have an opportunity to grow by leaps and bounds in Michigan.

Molina and Centene (CNC), another Medicaid managed care provider that established an individual market presence with the launch of ObamaCare, have seen exchange enrollment surge. Molina said its ObamaCare exchange membership more than doubled to 630,000 in the first quarter from 266,000 a year ago. But Molina’s management said on its first-quarter earnings call that the customer growth was far more than it expected and acknowledged being overwhelmed by customer gains from Medicaid, exchanges and acquisitions. Earnings slipped to 43 cents per share from 56 cents a year ago.

Molina seemed to indicate that its higher-than-expected costs stemmed from Medicaid enrollees, saying that the company expects 2016 exchange customers will tend toward the healthy side based on demographics that are similar to 2015 customers. Still, the recent slip-up and the huge premium hikes being sought by rivals raise a question of whether Molina has a secret sauce that’s letting it deliver care much more efficiently or whether it risks getting swamped by unexpectedly high costs.

Another unknown for Molina is how it will be impacted by ObamaCare’s evolving risk-adjustment program. That program is supposed to balance risk among all insurers by transferring funds from carriers which attract low-cost customers to those that are a magnet for the sick. Risk adjustment hasn’t worked as intended for a variety of reasons, including the failure to consider customer use of prescription drugs in weighing an insurer’s risk, but there seems to be growing recognition that the deck has been stacked against insurers like UnitedHealth (UNH) and nonprofit Blue Cross Blue Shield, with plans which have attracted sicker customers.

UnitedHealth has said it will exit all but a handful of state exchanges for 2017. Humana, which is aiming to close its merger with Aetna (AET) in the second half of 2016, has already declared its intention to pull out of the exchanges in Alabama, Wisconsin, Virginia and Kansas.

So far only Oregon, where insurers are requesting an average 27% premium hike, and Virginia, where insurers want an 18% hike, are the only two states to make all rate filings available.