Grieving father: Azzam Hrouk with a picture of his murdered son, Mahmoud. Photo: Daniel Munoz

Maha Dunia had been searching for her teenage son in darkness when she spotted his abandoned silver and blue mountain bike and screamed.

"Hello… hello…. hello Mahmoud?"

The Fairfield house where the body of Mahmoud Hrouk was found. Photo: Daniel Munoz

"I start yelling again and calling again and I saw the bike, I hold it in my hands and I say this is my son's bike."

Advertisement

One week later she was preparing to visit his grave.

"He was the kindest, he was my baby, he was a beautiful boy," she said shaking her head.

Mahmoud Hrouk's sporting trophies. Photo: Daniel Munoz

"Everyone calls him a smiley face and from my heart I can see his face in front of me.

"He loved me and I love him so much."

Early on Sunday morning Maha and dozens of her family members sat in a light smoke emanating from a coal fire that has been burning since her "beautiful boy" was found beaten to death. The family has spent much of the past week cooking food on the garden barbecue to welcome people who have come to mourn their son.

Police are asking anyone to come forward if they know any of the boys who have been using the house of if anyone saw a group move a couch into the property in recent months. Photo: Daniel Munoz

Some of the relatives sitting with her are the ones that found the bloodied body of the 16-year-old in an empty house used as a local hangout for teens the past three to five months, police said.

On Saturday May 16, the former Granville High School student worked on his uncle's property at Rossmore, even though he missed playing his first game of the season for Fairfield United Junior Rugby League Club.

"Saturday morning he came to my bed and said: 'Mum do you need anything before I leave?'" Maha said.

After finishing work with his uncle he came back to his James Street house and started tinkering on the Prado 4WD his dad was working on in the front yard.

His father Azzam says people he had never met before had spent the past week telling tales of how Mahmoud had helped them, for no reason at all.

"He was a very nice boy, he helped me all the time. He was a very good worker," Mr Hrouk said, as he rested his head on one hand.

"He's a friend to me and my boys. My family are all my friends," he said.

As the sun set last Saturday he asked Mahmoud to come and get some BBQ chicken with him from Granville.

"I said 'Mahmoud, Mahmoud come with me, please come.' He said: 'No, I want to eat McDonalds.'

"I thought, 10, 15 minutes he'll be back."

Mr Hrouk said it was very unusual for his son to go out at night so when he rang him at 7.30pm and asked if he could go to a friend's house, he saw no reason to say no.

When he was not home by nine Mr Hrouk phoned him and asked if he was okay. Mahmoud said he was.

"When he talked to me I swear to god from my heart, my son, [I thought] something has happened."

A chorus of relatives chime in and all swear it was very unusual for Mahmoud to be out late at night.

His mother was the last person to hear his voice and she said her son asked her to pick him up from nearby Mitchell Street about 9.40pm.

"He said: 'Mum I'm over at [my friends] on Mitchell'…And the line cut," she said.

Her car screeched around the streets of Fairfield and Villawood all night and dozens of family members walked the streets yelling his name.

The next morning someone told the family they thought he could possibly be at a house on Belmore Street.

A short time later, several relatives peered into number 85 and saw his unrecognisable body.

His family don't want him to be remembered that way.

They want him recognised as a family boy, who aspired to own his own construction company and play professionally for the Bulldogs.

"All his dream was, to build a company, get some workers to work for him and play for the Bulldogs," his mother said.

"I'm really proud of Mahmoud. He helped me, he do massage for my knees."

He loved joking around with his three sisters and brothers and endlessly thanked his mum when she made his favourite dish of rice covered in vine leaves called Warak Enab﻿.

She was making the dish the night he was taken to the single-story weatherboard house a few kilometres away and killed.

Police are asking anyone to come forward if they know any of the boys who have been using the house of if anyone saw a group move a couch into the property in recent months.

His father trusts police to find out what happened and give his family the answers they desperately need.

"I wish to find out, I wish. I just want the truth," Mr Hrouk said.

His wife nodded in agreement – "I need to know why".

Crime Stoppers, 1800 333 000