Nate Press, Kelly Doherty, Dan Katula and Grace DeWolff (left to right) share a scene in “Eat Me,” one of the short plays making up “Neil’s Dirty Shorts,” now on stage at the Keith Tamsett Theater. Credit: Amanda Schlicher

By ,

In Neil Haven's hilarious "Who Killed Santa?," traditional Christmas characters break free of the stories that have long bound them, killing the old guy and making way for a brave new world.

But what happens after the revolution? Having jettisoned the rituals that once made life meaningful, who and what will we live for? Will we, like the squabbling characters in "Santa," forget how to party together?

Those are the sorts of questions on tap in "Neil's Dirty Shorts," Haven's uneven, only intermittently funny but nevertheless intriguing collection of six adult comedy sketches. Running in repertory with "Santa," "Shorts" leans on the same cast, supplemented by "Santa" puppet designer Dan Katula and "Santa" stage manager Grace DeWolff.

Joined by Kelly Doherty and Nate Press, DeWolff and Katula feature prominently in "Eat Me," which sets the table for the five ensuing sketches.

Adrift on the proverbial lifeboat, our quarreling quartet debates who will become food for the remaining three, which degenerates into a narcissistic discussion of diet fads and food allergies. It's telling that the ultimate survivor is the person who least needs others, having reduced all appetite to a self-consuming need for control, even if that means she'll starve.

Our lone survivor isn't the only "Shorts" outcast on the sea of modern life, in which the ties that anchor us to others have long since come unmoored.

Hence in "Cut or Uncut," the miracle attending new life becomes a clinical debate about how to remake the body. In "Hens to Cocks," the aura surrounding old life gives way to the reality that hired caretakers rather than family now satisfy the needs of our aged. And in "TimeWaster Cable" — the night's funniest sketch — human contact has devolved into an Orwellian phone messaging system, entrapping a poor soul who can't find her way out.

That would be Deidre (Sara Zientek), who tries and fails to fight her way free of her Internet addiction. When we last see her, she is being mercilessly poked with a stick by a sadistic TimeWaster employee (Doherty) — as powerless as we all are, when prodded by pings that give us no joy but which we ultimately can't resist.

In a program filled with young and unhappy professional women, Deidre anticipate Feliciana; in the night's last sketch, Feliciana ultimately chooses to love and hug her own mirror image (the similarly costumed Liz Shipe and Zientek) — staying right where she is rather than risking love's uncertainties with her would-be suitor.

We've seen such arrested development from Haven before; it's even built into the title of his similarly themed "Stuck." In that play and in many of these sketches, characters get trapped in sometimes overly contrived and ultimately hollow structures, unable to move or grow.

Women are also stuck in neutral at the start of "The Campsite Rule," the night's most fully realized sketch, in which one woman (Shipe, in the program's best performance) consoles her recently dumped girlfriend (DeWolff).

What ensues is an unexpectedly tender tribute to friendship — suggesting how love can always help us find a way forward, even within a night's material emphasizing how alone we often are.

IF YOU GO

"Neil's Dirty Shorts" runs in repertory with "Who Killed Santa?" through Dec. 31 at the Keith Tamsett Theater, 3770 S. Pennsylvania Ave., St. Francis. For tickets, go to whokilledsanta.com.