CNBC's Sue Herera and Katy Irwin, a freelance graphic designer, discuss the choices facing younger Americans who will be mandated to pay for health care.

"I just haven't been able to save up the money," she said.

Irwin told CNBC last month she doesn't think she'll be able to afford the new Obamacare plans, either, after looking at a calculator that showed her the cheapest options would cost her about $200 a month.

We asked Irwin and Chadwick to explore the plans on their state's exchange known as New York State of Health, which has not suffered from the technology issues that have plagued the federal marketplace HealthCare.gov.

Dozens of choices

Irwin's search came up with more than 70 plans, with wide variations in monthly premiums, annual out-of-pocket costs and copays. She admitted she was a little overwhelmed by all the numbers, and was thrown off by the monthly tax subsidy calculation.

"I was excited at first because I mistook the tax subsidy that I'd get, which is $65, for how much I'd have to pay. And then I was gut-wrenchingly sad when I saw that the cheapest plan I could get was $307," she said.



(Read more: Obamacare fix puts insurers in a tough spot)

Her most affordable plan option with lower deductibles and dental coverage came with premiums of more than $300 a month, after her tax subsidy.

But because she's under 30, Irwin also has the option to buy a low-premium, high-deductible catastrophic plan for less than $200 a month. She can add dental coverage for another $26 a month.



"With catastrophic, I'm not spending a catastrophic amount of money," she said.

Chadwick's search produced more than five dozen plan options, with premiums ranging from about $200 a month to more than $500 a month, after the tax subsidy. He's leaning toward the cheapest plan, but it comes with higher out-of-pocket costs.



"I hardly ever get sick, I haven't needed to see a doctor in over two years " he said. "The biggest thing for me was MRI coverage."

Experts weigh in

We asked Mike Fortner, a broker at online insurance brokerage Gravie, to look over the young freelancers' plan options, both on the New York exchange and off of it, to see if he thought they had made the best choices.



Fortner found that Irwin's catastrophic plan with a dental supplement would be a cost-effective option for her. She would have to pay as much as $6,300 in out-of-pocket costs if she had a major medical problem, but she gets a little more coverage than meets the eye, if she remains healthy.