House Republican Caucus Chairman Glen Casada, left, proposes having the Legislature appoint the state attorney general’s top assistant while House Majority Leader Gerald McCormick, center, has proposed a new twist in repealing the Tennessee tax on investment income. (AP Photo/Mark Humphrey)

By Tom Humphrey of the Knoxville News Sentinel

NASHVILLE — House Republican Caucus Chairman Glen Casada proposes having the Legislature appoint the state attorney general's top assistant while House Majority Leader Gerald McCormick has proposed a new twist in repealing the Tennessee tax on investment income.

Those two measures, both likely to face opposition from Gov. Bill Haslam's administration and both sponsored in the Senate by Senate Majority Leader Mark Norris, are among 859 new bills filed last week. The deadline for filing general bills in both the House and Senate was Thursday.

The last-week filings come on top of 359 new bills previously filed for first-time consideration in the 2016 session since the 2015 session ended, making a total of 1,215 bills filed for 2016. In 2015, 527 bills were enacted into law. Those that were not approved last year can be taken up again in 2016, the second year of the two-year 109th General Assembly.

The outpouring of late filings means 2,618 bills have now been filed in the House for the 109th General Assembly, compared to 2,555 filed in the 108th, covering the years 2013 and 2014. The Senate total is 2,643, but a bill must be filed in both chambers before it can be enacted. Most representatives can file no more than 15 bills per year under rules adopted at the urging of House Speaker Beth Harwell. There is no limit on bill filings in the Senate.

Hall Income Tax

McCormick acknowledged in an interview that there is some conflict between his Hall income tax repeal bill (HB2118) and a separate bill he is sponsoring for the Haslam administration that would use the Hall tax breaks to encourage "angel investors" putting their money into relatively small and relatively new businesses.

Haslam has repeatedly opposed efforts to repeal the Hall tax — a general 6 percent levy on investment income with several exemptions and exceptions — as they come up every year. While voicing a general dislike for the tax, the governor argues against repeal without some other way of replacing the lost revenue. The tax generated $303 million in total revenue last year — about $189 million for the state with the remaining $114 million distributed to local governments.

The most-publicized repeal bill (SB2, as amended) was introduced last year without ever coming to a vote. Sponsored by Sen. Brian Kelsey, R-Germantown, and Rep. Tilman Goins, R-Morristown, with support from Americans for Prosperity and other conservative lobbying organizations, the bill calls for the state to cover the entire cost, reimbursing local governments for the money they lose from a phased-in repeal over the next three years.

McCormick's bill would not reimburse local governments for the lost revenue, but it would authorize cities and counties to impose a 2.5 percent tax on investment income themselves. Enactment of the local Hall tax would require a two-thirds majority vote of a county commission or city council.

"This gives us another option," said McCormick, adding that measure is not really a priority in his legislative endeavors this year; just an idea he thinks worth considering.

He noted that "most of the complaints" legislators get about repeal of the Hall come from local government officials revolved around the loss of revenue for their city or county. The bill lets them make up for the loss — "It would be between them and their constituents" — without requiring the state to pick up the tab, he said.

McCormick is also sponsor of HB1536, an administration bill inspired by Economic and Community Development Commissioner Randy Boyd. The bill would allow individual investors to take a credit of up to $50,000 on their Hall income tax liability for investments in a Tennessee-based company that is less than 5 years old with gross revenues of less than $3 million.

The idea, Boyd says, is to help entrepreneurs get funding from private investors and is similar to tax breaks already in place in six neighboring states. The state in 2009 put $200 million of taxpayer money into the TNInvestco program that has now been spent — with success of that spending in some dispute. Under the new bill, Boyd says, individuals would have an incentive to put money into startups instead of the state doing so directly.

Thus, the administration bill relies on continuation of the Hall taxto provide an incentive for investment in small companies that would be eliminated by repeal.

Asked if the two measures were in conflict, McCormick replied, "I think so" but declined to state a preference for which should be enacted.

"It'll all come out in the wash," he said.

Solicitor general

Casada's HB2143 calls for the state's solicitor general to be appointed by the Legislature, providing what the GOP caucus chairman says could be considered a legislative watchdog in the state attorney general's office.

As things stand now, the position is filled by the state attorney general as part of his staff and is considered second only to the attorney general himself in the state's legal power structure. Attorney General Herbert Slatery, former legal counsel to Haslam, last year named Andrée Sophia Blumstein to the position.

A veteran Nashville lawyer, Blumstein served as chief justice of a special Supreme Court panel appointed by Haslam in 2014 to review a legal challenge to Tennessee's retention election system for Supreme Court judges and wrote the opinion upholding the system.

There have been repeated unsuccessful efforts in the General Assembly over many years to begin the process for an amendment to the state constitution that would provide for popular election of the attorney general, who is now appointed by the state Supreme Court. Three such proposals are currently filed — one (HJR10) sponsored by a Democrat and two (HJR71, SJR63) by Republicans.

And Sen. Ken Yager, R-Kingston, has filed SJR75, which proposes a constitutional amendment to let the Legislature, instead of the Supreme Court, name the attorney general directly. None of those proposals have made any headway.

In past years, there have also been proposals to bypass the state constitution's current provisions by having a popularly elected solicitor general, who would by statute then assume virtually all of the attorney general's duties. An attorney general would still be appointed by the Supreme Court — avoiding the need for a constitutional revision — but he or she would have very little actual authority.

Casada said he sees his bill as a compromise of sorts between various previous proposals and a step toward resolving conservative legislators' discontent over "too much interference with the legislative branch" of government by the judicial branch of government, headed by the Supreme Court.

"My concern is the judiciary interjects itself too much into the doings of the Legislature," he said, and having a Legislature-appointed solicitor general would provide more balance.

Republican legislators have frequently called on the attorney general to file lawsuits — sometimes successfully, sometimes not — on various matters involving clashes with the federal government over issues ranging from the Affordable Care Act to Environmental Protection Agency rules. A Casada-sponsored bill, filed last year but never brought to a vote, would have authorized the Legislature to order the attorney general to file a lawsuit.

But Casada is not predicting passage of the measure, saying, "It's outside the box."

Presumably, Slatery — a personal friend of the governor since their boyhood days in Knoxville — will be opposed to turning over his most important staff position to legislators. A spokesman for the attorney general declined to comment Friday, a day when state offices were closed because of a winter storm.