Re: “It’s past time for Denver’s Canada geese to fly away home,” Aug. 16 guest commentary.

Jay Gurney wishes that Denver’s Canada geese could just “fly away home.” Denver’s Canada geese (excluding those that migrate here in the winter) are not going anywhere — they are home. Most of these geese didn’t choose our lovely city as their home — they are descendants of those that were relocated here. Canada geese suffered near extinction by the early 20th century from over-hunting and habitat loss. Live decoy Canada geese that had been used by hunters were eventually outlawed in the U.S., so thousands were placed in parks and communities, taken in by farmers, and used by wildlife agencies to build up their numbers and prevent their extinction.

In Colorado, from 1955 through 1988, breeding populations of Canada geese were established throughout western Colorado using geese transplanted from other areas. These geese spread and became resident populations, which now outnumber those that are migratory.

If Gurney wants to keep the bottoms of his running shoes poop-free, he might want to switch to a treadmill since these geese are now a permanent part of Denver’s ecosystem.

Cindy Yeast, Denver

This letter was published in the Aug. 23 edition.

Jay Gurney’s invective against Canada geese at Sloan’s Lake is one of the most hostile diatribes I’ve seen directed at the wonderful parks and open spaces in this great city.

I agree that detritus left by these beautiful birds warrants caution, but it is far more biodegradable than what most folks generate from household trash.

I live only three blocks from Sloan’s Lake, and my fiancée and I love the lake for all its assets: the scenery toward the mountains from the eastern shore, views west to Denver’s majestic skyline, frequent festivals, and tree-shaded, grassy open space. And the geese are a can’t-miss element of wildlife, interesting to many and fascinating to others, especially kids.

Sloan’s Lake and the fabulous park stewards who care for it remain a huge draw for thousands of visitors, boaters, bicyclists, walkers, photographers and athletes every week. If geese intimidate Gurney, maybe they sense his arrogance.

Bill Sontag, Lakewood

This letter was published in the Aug. 23 edition.

I would like to comment on Jay Gurney’s guest commentary complaining about the goose population at Sloan Lake’s in Denver. This is a problem and concern at many of the city’s parks. A major contributing factor to the problem is that visitors do not understand the impact of overfeeding. Several parks post warnings not to feed the geese, as it leads to overpopulation.

When visitors think they are actually helping by tossing bread (and who knows what else) to the geese, they are actually contributing to their overpopulation.

June Jones Paulding, Lakewood

This letter was published in the Aug. 23 edition.

Maybe the U.S. should erect a fence along the Canadian border to keep out all the illegal Canada geese. This would parallel Donald Trump’s promise to do the same fence-building along the Mexican border if elected president.

Martin Allen, Centennial

This letter was published in the Aug. 23 edition.

Submit a letter to the editor via this form or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.