On Thursday morning, the former Alabama congressman, failed gubernatorial candidate, former Democrat, sometimes Republican, Artur Davis announced that he will run for mayor in Montgomery.

Voters there will have to decide for themselves two questions.

First, is Artur Davis a robot?

AL.com Opinion About the writer

Kyle Whitmire writes political commentary for the Alabama Media Group. His work appears regularly in newspapers in Huntsville, Birmingham and Mobile and is online at AL.com all the time. Reach him at kwhitmire@al.com.

Kyle Whitmire writes political commentary for the Alabama Media Group. His work appears regularly in newspapers in Huntsville, Birmingham and Mobile and is online at AL.com all the time. Reach him at kwhitmire@al.com. Read more

The complete archive of Kyle Whitmire's previous columns

And second, if he is, are they OK with that?

The story I'm about to tell, I have told before, but upon further reflection it was the first sign I had that Davis might be an artificial life form.

It was 2000, Bill Clinton was still president, gasoline was even cheaper than it is now, and I was a 23- year old reporter for a little paper in Bessemer covering the city council there. That was when I first met Davis.

Davis introduced himself to the Bessemer City Council as a candidate for Alabama's 7th Congressional District, but he didn't look or sound like what you'd expect from a candidate in that district. There wasn't a lick of country in him. He was a lawyer, but not the kind you see advertise on TV. Instead, he worked for one of the ivory tower firms in downtown Birmingham. Before that, he'd been a federal prosecutor. He was Harvard educated.

The incumbent he faced was Earl Hilliard Sr., and pretty much everyone assumed he was bulletproof. Hilliard was the kind of elected official who integrated the Good Old Boys club. You would buy a used car from him, whether you needed one or not. No one thought Davis stood a chance.

I didn't either. Not after what happened next.

After the meeting, I introduced myself. Davis asked me where I was from. Thomasville, I said.

"Thomasville, Georgia?" he asked.

No, I said, Thomasville, Alabama.

"Where's that?" he asked.

It's in the 7th Congressional District, I said.

It was a mistake he'd never make again. Davis lost that first race, but two years later, he came back to trounce Hilliard, and when I talked later to Congressman Davis, he'd tell me about the last time he'd been to Thomasville, about projects he was working on with Mayor Sheldon Day, about how my high school American History teacher was doing. I learned more about my hometown from Davis than I did from the Thomasville Times. Or from my parents, even.

I realize now why. Davis is a robot. I had exposed a glitch in his programing and the computer inside his head had compensated for it.

And sometimes when he compensates, he does so - like with his gaffe with me - to an extreme.

Five years ago, Davis gave up his seat in Congress to run for governor of Alabama, but he'd already made some mistakes. When Barack Obama first ran for president in 2008, Davis seconded his nomination at the Democratic National Convention, but heading into a political contest in conservative Alabama, that clearly wasn't the sort of thing to put on his campaign literature.

His programming self-corrected again, and Davis voted against Obamacare.

Again, he had overcompensated. While voting against Obamacare might have endeared him to some Alabama conservatives, it enraged many Alabama Democrats, who voted instead for Ron Sparks, who could have been mistaken for the Simpsons' Ned Flanders.

His programming adjusted again, and Davis left the Democratic Party for the GOP. Four years after he'd seconded Obama's nomination in Denver, Davis spoke at the Republican National Convention, blasting the man he'd watched the Super Bowl with in the White House.

But again, he overcompensated, and he left Alabama, too.

As a robot, he is a political machine, and he looked for new opportunities in his new home state of Virginia. There were rumors he might run for Senate or Congress, but he couldn't find the support there to go through with it.

So he has adjusted again, moving back to Alabama and plotting a run for mayor of Montgomery.

Adjusting to new challenges and incorporating new information shouldn't be considered a criticism.

In Alabama, doing the same thing over and over again and expecting a different result isn't the definition of insanity, as Einstein said. It's how we make public policy.

Davis, on the other hand, isn't afraid to try something different. He might have artificial intelligence, but it might be the best anyone in Alabama's got.