This is a paid announcement from Coney Island Hospital (2601 Ocean Parkway) and the NYC Health and Hospitals Corporation:

The New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation (HHC) and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) will host a free public workshop at Coney Island Hospital (2601 Ocean Parkway) to help residents get the most out of their benefits in advance of the new enrollment period.

Health insurance specialists from CMS will conduct a learning session at Coney Island Hospital on October 1 to prepare residents to enroll when Medicare and the Affordable Care Act reopen for enrollment on October 15 and November 15, respectively.

The sessions will offer information about health care reform, the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and how to select and purchase on the online New York State of Health, an exchange set up under the ACA last year to provide subsidized health insurance. Open enrollment for New York State of Health takes place November 15, 2014 through February 15, 2015.

“HHC wants to help people make the most of their health coverage options,” said HHC President Dr. Ram Raju. “The Affordable Care Act and the State’s health insurance exchange offer many people subsidies to make health coverage affordable. Our partnership with CMS will help City residents understand the ACA and maximize their Medicare benefits.”

Workshop participants will learn about:

The benefits of the Medicare program and how to apply;

The parts of Medicare – Part A: hospital insurance; Part B: medical insurance – outpatient visits, lab work, preventive services; Part C: health plans; and Part D: prescription drug coverage;

The Medicare appeals process;

The Medicare programs in place for people with limited income and resources;

Medicare information and resources now available online;

Updates on the New York State of Health;

Enrollment resources for the uninsured.

CMS is the federal agency that provides health coverage for 100 million people through Medicare, Medicaid, and the Children’s Health Insurance Program. Medicare is a health insurance program for people age 65 or older, people younger than 65 with disabilities, and people with end stage renal disease who require dialysis or a transplant.

“Close to a million New Yorkers have signed up for health coverage under the Affordable Care Act and over three million are enrolled in Medicare, yet most are not aware of how to get the most of their health benefits,” said Frank M. Winter, Partnership Manager, CMS New York Regional Office. “Many others need help obtaining coverage. Our Health Insurance Workshops at HHC facilities throughout New York City provide us a unique opportunity to provide our partners and community members information they can use to sign up for health insurance and to use their new benefits. Our goal this year is to help our partners connect those who are insured from coverage to care.”

Workshops take place from 8:30am to 1:00pm. Participants may register by calling (212) 788-3450, or by clicking here to register at Coney Island Hospital.

In addition to Coney Island Hospital, two more workshops are planned at the following dates and locations (click the links to register online):

Thursday, October 16, Kings County Hospital Center, 451 Clarkson Avenue

Thursday, October 23, Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center, 760 Broadway, Brooklyn

The above is a paid announcement by Coney Island Hospital and the NYC Health and Hospitals Corporation. Sheepshead Bites has not verified the claims made in this advertisement. If you own a business and would like to announce a special offer to tens of thousands of locals, e-mail us at advertising [at]sheepsheadbites [dot]com.