Never in his nearly six decades did Craig McCulloch seriously consider entering politics. That is, until Congress passed its massive spending bill in January.

"My wife (Wanda) and I were sitting there, and I kind of went ballistic," McCulloch, a Republican, said of his experience watching the $1.1 trillion spending bill pass. A few days later, after prayer and consulting with family, the 59-year-old physical therapist from Baker had made up his mind -- he would enter the already crowded race for Louisiana's 6th Congressional District seat.

While McCulloch might be a political newcomer, he's not a total outsider. The lifelong Louisiana resident, football player from Nicholls State University and self-described "country guy," is the first cousin of Mike Cross, the former Baker mayor and four-time state senator who died in November after a short battle with cancer.



Cross' son, Ryan, will step down from his position as communications director of the state Republican Party to run his campaign.

McCulloch says he's glad to have Cross, a well-known entity in local and statewide Republican circles, help him navigate the race. This would have been impossible if Cross' most recent client, state Sen. Neil Riser, hadn't lost his bid to replace Rodney Alexander in Louisiana's 5th District seat.

"It was fate," McCulloch said, adding, "you gotta keep it in the family."

Eight other candidates have already jumped into the race, with a few more likely to join within the next several weeks. But, McCulloch says he believes he brings something new to the field -- the perspective of an ordinary Louisianian, a family man, a country guy.

McCulloch is decidedly conservative. He holds strong beliefs on social and fiscal policies, often describing himself as "100 percent" behind a concept or person, including Bill Cassidy for U.S. Senate.

In this vein, he said he's "100 percent pro-life," supports Tony Perkins wholeheartedly and has concerns with stances like that of possible 6th District candidate Shelley Hendrix, who said last week abortion should be allowed in some incest and rape cases, and when the pregnancy threatens the life of the mother.

Unlike Vance McAllister, the political newcomer that beat out Cross' Riser in the 5th District race, McCulloch is against opting into the Medicaid expansion available under the Affordable Care Act. He said his personal experience seeing one of his own employees try to navigate the Obamacare website and choose the right coverage helped solidify his opposition to the law.

He's in favor of the bipartisan effort to delay massive premium hikes for those covered by the National Flood Insurance Program, and while he said he thinks Gov. Bobby Jindal is "doing a great job," he expressed concern with years of cuts in state funding to higher education.

McCulloch acknowledges the fight ahead, in which he'll have to battle a state senator, multiple other small business people with more name recognition in the capital city as well as some outlier candidates who could scoop up the conservative vote. But he said he wouldn't be entering the race if he didn't think he could win: "I'm planning on winning this thing."

"I feel like it's my time to step up," said McCulloch. "I feel like I can make a difference...I don't care how many people are in the field."

McCulloch and his wife Wanda live in Ethel on 40 acres of land. Like his father, McCulloch's son is also an athlete at Nicholls State University. While he's never run for political office, McCulloch helped volunteer for both Mike Cross and former East Baton Rouge Mayor-President Bobby Simpson.

Before beginning his physical therapy practice 30 years ago, McCulloch always had summer jobs. From the age of 14, worked in the zoo, first helping to build animal enclosures. During his Christmas vacation he worked in the oil fields, an experience he described as difficult but which helped him learn the value of a dollar.

Although he hopes to raise enough funds from his close supporters to make a go of it in TV and Internet ads, McCulloch also said he would self-finance his campaign if necessary -- anything to keep himself out from under the yoke of interest groups. He will accept endorsement from groups he identifies with, Cross said, but "won't compromise his principles."

His first four fundraisers, scheduled for this coming month, will reflect the kind of image McCulloch hopes to give to voters -- they will be small "Party in the Pasture" affairs of 200 or 300 friends, family and supporters at his home. He's also planning on hosting a golf tourney or two at the Bluffs Country Club and Resort in St. Francisville.