Buy Photo Some Old Hickory residents have railed against controversial plans for a new limestone rock quarry near Old Hickory Dam. (Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights There are elected officials and advocates who are trying to stop the quarry, but they have been met with resistance.

Efforts have been stymied by Tennessee lawmakers, and the Army Corps has not asserted its authority.

Scroll down to watch a replay of The Tennessean Editorial Board meeting with key elected officials.

Public can comment or attend Department of Environment and Conservation public hearing on April 18.

Citizens’ fears about a dam collapse, mass flooding, environmental degradation and property destruction must be allayed before a proposed quarry in Old Hickory is allowed to operate.

The process of providing a permit to Industrial Land Developers LLC is moving forward, however, because no government body or agency has been able or willing to stop the quarry.

There are elected officials and advocates who are trying, but they have been met with resistance.

That is a travesty and a disservice to the public.

While the debate over property rights versus public safety is nothing new, government has a compelling interest to act when the lives and land it is supposed to protect are at risk of danger.

While no long-term studies exist to show that limerock blasting less than a mile from Old Hickory Dam would compromise the structure, the history of poor dam construction in Tennessee and Nashville’s 2010 flood, which caused $2 billion in damage, should provide any regulator pause.

The federal government has spent $1.1 billion to repair Wolf Creek and Center Hill dams, and the 60-year-old Old Hickory Dam’s levee once collapsed in the 1970s. While the latter’s concrete structure could conceivably withstand blasting, the earthen portion of it, built on loose sand, would be vulnerable to a process known as liquefaction, in which earth shaking weakens soil.

The issue is not only the structure, but also the effect on homes, small-business owners, nature and the probability that Old Hickory Beach could be severely compromised or lost. Old Hickory has 22,356 residents and more than 9,200 homes, census data show; the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers reported 7.9 million visits to the Old Hickory Lock and Dam recreational sites, making it the third most popular Corps site in the U.S.; and protected species like bald eagles are in the area. And, because Old Hickory Lake is 60 feet above the level of the Cumberland River, a breach could cause havoc for residents as well as recreational and commercial boaters and barges.

Neighbors are so concerned they filed a lawsuit on Thursday to stop the quarry.

There are numerous players on this issue, with different levels of authority and power, which is why a solution is not simple:

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

The Corps is responsible for operating and protecting the dam and surrounding federal property.

Corps officials have asserted that they cannot regulate activities like blasting, and in a Nov. 7 op-ed in The Tennessean, Lt. Col. Stephen F. Murphy, commander of the Nashville district, wrote: “So far, our preliminary information leads us to believe that the resulting vibration levels are within an acceptable range of what the dam is designed to withstand, but we are continuing to look into this issue.”

U.S. Rep. Jim Cooper, D-Nashville, questioned that assertion in a subsequent letter to Murphy and requested more data.

At a March 18 meeting with The Tennessean Editorial Board, Cooper challenged the Corps’ inability to act, citing its decision to expand the anti-fracking zone around a dam in the Fort Worth, Texas, area.

He will be able to express his concerns personally to Corps Brig. Gen. Richard G. Kaiser, who on Tuesday will be visiting Old Hickory Dam and meeting with Nashville city officials.

Should the general find the dam and property are in danger, he should use his authority to protect them.

Tennessee General Assembly

Nashville lawmakers Rep. Bill Beck, a Democrat, and Sen. Steve Dickerson, a Republican, filed three bills in the 2016 legislative session that would stymie the quarry, but the House Agriculture and Natural Resources subcommittee in March hearings had no interest in advancing any of them.

Opponents brought up property rights and pooh-poohed safety concerns.

In a March 8 hearing on one of those bills, the Dam Safety Act, which would have prevented the state from issuing a surface mining permit within one mile of a dam operated by the Army Corps, Rep. Andy Holt, R-Dresden, called the idea of government providing safety in this case “subjective.”

“One of the primary roles of government is to protect private property rights,” Holt said, in response to testimony from Cooper. “I do think safety is a noble goal, it’s unachievable. Governments can’t provide safety. Governments can provide private property rights.”

Beck, who also met with The Tennessean Editorial Board along with Cooper and Metro Councilman Larry Hagar on March 18, questioned that logic.

“We … are privatizing the profits of this quarry 600 feet from a 60-year-old earthen embankment and socializing the risk,” he said.

Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation​

The agency issued a draft permit to Industrial Land Developers on March 11 and is accepting public comments on that permit through April 12.

TDEC also will hold a public hearing on the quarry permitting issue on April 18, and citizens should take the opportunity to make their voices heard.

The department will make a final decision soon after and should take safety and quality of life into the highest consideration.

Metro Nashville

Last November Hagar successfully persuaded the Metro Council to pass two bills unanimously that would create buffer zones preventing mineral extraction activity and asphalt and cement plants from operating immediately near residences.

However, Metro attorneys said the new ordinances would likely not apply to Industrial Land Developers because of the company's property rights, state law and common law. The lawsuit filed by six Old Hickory neighbors aims to persuade a judge that Hagar's ordinances are enforceable against the company.

On March 1 the Metro Council unanimously passed a resolution supporting Beck and Dickerson’s Dam Safety Bill.

For Hagar, the issue is a regional one. “This is a not a Nashville problem; this is a Middle Tennessee problem,” he said. “If this dam were to bust, we’re not just talking about Nashville, but Cheatham County, Montgomery County, everybody.”

The city has open space funds to buy property and turn it into a parkland. Hagar said this is under discussion, and it is something that would be in taxpayers’ interest.

The Nashville-Davidson County Property Assessor has appraised the value of Industrial Land Developers’ 155.95 acres in Old Hickory at $3.898 million. The company bought it for $2.735 million on Oct. 31, 2014.

ILD previously sold land intended for a quarry to the Nashville Airport Authority for $10 million so it could expand the airport.

“If you want to be cynical, it makes you think they want to be bought out,” Cooper said.

Industrial Land’s spokesman on the quarry could not be reached for comment this past week because he was out of the office.

Opinion Engagement Editor David Plazas wrote this editorial on behalf of The Tennessean Editorial Board. Call him at 615-259-8063, email him at dplazas@tennessean.com or tweet to him at @davidplazas.

Old Hickory Dam (Photo: Courtesy of Sumner County Sheriff's Office)

About the property

Industrial Land Developers purchased 155.95 acres near the dam on Oct. 31, 2014, for $2.735 million, according to Nashville-Davidson Property Assessor records.

In April, it pulled a permit for a building. In May, the request became one for a quarry to blast limerock along with asphalt and concrete processing.

State legislation

Nashville lawmakers Rep. Bill Beck, a Democrat, and Sen. Steve Dickerson, a Republican, have filed three bills that would try to stymie the quarry, but the House Agriculture and Natural Resources subcommittee in March hearings had no interest in advancing them.

House Bill 2292/Senate Bill 2357, aka the Dam Safety Bill, would have prevented the state from issuing a surface mining permit within one mile of a dam operated by the Army Corps.

House Bill 2293/Senate Bill 2356 would have prevented a quarry from operating within 2,000 feet of a park or 1,200 feet of a residence.

House Bill 2294/Senate Bill 2355 would have allowed Metro Nashville government to regulate blasting.

TDEC public comment

The deadline to submit public comments for the draft permit for Industrial Land Developers is April 12. The public can send comments to the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation Mining Section at the Knoxville Environmental Field Office, Attn: Public Notice Coordinator; by fax at 865-594-6105; or by email at Gary.Mullins@tn.gov.

The public hearing is at 5:30 p.m. Monday, April 18, at the Comfort Suites — Airport/Opry Mills, 2521 Elm Hill Pike, Nashville. The deadline for comments for the hearing record is April 29 and they can be sent to Department of Environment and Conservation, Division of Water Resources, Mining Section, 3711 Middlebrook Pike, Knoxville, TN 37921-6538.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1MthMam