Collection features three local women

Rachel Walker, left, and Michelle Theall, both of Boulder, have written essays included in the new book "Tales From Another Mother Runner." ( Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer )

Mike Sandrock (Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer)

I was not too surprised when Terzah Becker sent an email Thursday morning, bowing out of a photo shoot for the just-published "Tales From Another Mother Runner" anthology that she is featured in, along with fellow local runners/mothers/writers Michelle Theall and Rachel Walker — because, after all, being a mother of young twins means "stuff happens."

In this case, it was an ill child, a plumber set to show up and needing to pick up the other twin from school.

Such is the life of a "badass mother runner," the term anthology editors and "Mother Runner" founders Dimity McDowell, of Denver, and Sarah Bowen Shea use to describe themselves and the large national community that has grown up around their books, podcasts and website.

Terzah Becker (Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer)

The qualities of these "badass" women are aptly illustrated in "Another Mother Runner."

What I was surprised with was how much I enjoyed "Tales From Another Mother Runner." The book brought me into a world far different than the often-competitive male running world focusing on performance, competition and separateness.

The women open up to "diapers and divorce," loneliness and happiness, tears and laughter, with running the unifying force coursing through their lives.

Some of the Mother Runners' stories do focus on times, as in Becker's case.

Her essay, in the "Hang On; You've Got This" chapter, is titled "If You Don't Run, You Can't Win." It details her attempts to get a "BQ" — Boston Qualifier — by her 40th birthday.

Advertisement

If you go What: "Tales from Another Mother Runner" book reading with Michelle Theall, Terzah Becker, Rachel Walker and Dimity McDowell When: 7 p.m. Thursday Where: Training Peaks, 7007 Winchester Circle, Suite 200, Boulder Cost: Free More info: runmother@gmail.com

Becker gives a good description of Boston's appeal:

"I'd heard it's something only 10 percent of all marathoners can accomplish, and that quest appealed to me the way getting into prestigious universities had when I was a junior in high school"

"It was an honor," Becker said of her inclusion in the collection. "My first marathon years ago took me five hours. I hope that reading about my BQ will make other runners realize that they, too, can do it."

Theall's quest was different. The former collegiate track athlete's essay is titled "Up the Down Escalator" and is a moving account of her battle with multiple sclerosis that grabs a reader from its opening lines:

"I am running, fast and furious, without thought to pace or form. Dirt from the Grand Canyon covers me with a red film kicked up from my shoes. My lungs burn, but I can't stop ... What if the next time I am here, I'm in a wheelchair?"

Theall continues: "I've been a runner almost all my life, and through those 47 years, I've equated running with survival. I started running at age 11, pigtails flying, after I was abused by a neighbor, and shortly afterward, by my best friend's father. I was too afraid to tell anyone what happened. Instead, I ran."

The essay flows easily, as "effortless as breathing," which is the way Theall describes what running had been like as a young woman.

She had just started Women's Adventure magazine when, in 2002, she began losing balance and coordination, the first signs of MS. Her essay culminates with the story of a climb up Tanzania's Mt. Kilimanjaro with her partner, a woman she is still with.

Through it all, she writes, "running had been my elixir, therapist and cure for depression."

While she no longer competes, Theall, author of "Teaching the Cat to Sit," a memoir, runs often on the trails west of town, still looking for those "superhero moments, when running is just clicking, gliding."

Walker's essay, the final one in "Tales From Another Runner," definitely clicks and glides.

Titled "Nine Runs, Nine Lives," it is another personal look into a world men don't always see.

Walker, a journalist living in south Boulder, gives us nine vignettes that take us from her 16-year-old self speaking at her high school cross country team's year-end banquet through an amazing experience with an old midwife in a one-room hut in Madagascar — the woman "stood 5 feet tall with a wrinkled-apple face, bright eyes, and two thick braids."

The midwife's response when Walker asks what she tells scared women giving birth might surprise you. Walker keeps running through a move to Bend, Ore., back to Boulder, and through her pregnancy. She ends her essay, and the book, with a six mile run "under a stunning blue sky," and writes, as she did when she was 16: "After all, running for me is my truest sport."