The Obama administration’s recent decree – which would, among other things, allow boys into girls’ bathrooms, locker rooms and showers – has generated predictable outrage and pushback. Oklahoma lawmakers are reportedly considering legislation that would protect students’ privacy.

But this federal intrusion comes as no surprise whatsoever. Just as high school students have no right to complain when their parents are paying the bills. As education researcher Greg Forster memorably put it, “with the president implementing his new commode core program, now can we finally admit it’s unrealistic to expect the federal government to keep its hands off schools?”

Washington, D.C., bureaucracies use federal funds to manipulate transportation priorities, pushing things like HOV lanes that some communities may not need or want. They use participation in medical welfare programs to control how doctors’ offices bill their patients, actually preventing certain kinds of discounts for patients. Federal funds in every area come with strings attached.

Thanks to Oklahoma participating in the federal Medicaid family planning services waiver, Oklahoma state taxpayers now subsidize RU-486, vasectomies and tubal ligations for single able-bodied adults.

What to do? Texas Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick: “(President Barack Obama) says he’s going to withhold funding if schools do not follow the policy. Well, in Texas, he can keep his 30 pieces of silver. We will not yield to blackmail from the president of the United States.”

Transgender bathrooms or not, refusing federal funds could sometimes be the prudent course. In 2013 Ed Allen, president of the Oklahoma City chapter of the American Federation for Teachers, said the Oklahoma City school district should “turn down some federal money.” As The Oklahoman editorial board pointed out: “Allen noted federal grants often required implementing new programs or initiatives that take teachers away from classroom duties. In a district where 75 to 100 teaching positions are routinely vacant, accepting federal funds therefore made a bad staffing problem worse.”

Oklahoma has been wise in some areas. Refusing to create an Obamacare exchange (we would have wasted half a billion) has now been validated. Remember they were decried for passing on the “free money.” Oklahoma lawmakers have repeatedly rejected any forms of Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion, including the latest scheme to pass a 145-percent tax increase on Oklahomans to usher in Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion.

Once you get tangled in the federal government’s strings, they generally always win.

Jonathan Small serves as president of the Oklahoma Council of Public Affairs (www.ocpathink.org).