With the key pieces in place, celebrity stylist and designer Kate Halfpenny uses curios and objets d’art to give her home a unique atmosphere



Kate painted the dining area of the open-plan ground floor in Farrow & Ball Pavilion Gray and kept all the other walls white. 'Now it feels like a proper eating area,' says Kate. The chairs, Liberty glass table and chandelier are all vintage finds. The three limited-edition prints on the wall are by her husband James-Lee, the creative force behind cult fanzine Pavement Licker and branding agency We Are Shadows (weareshadows.com). A selection of his prints is available from Luna & Curious (lunaandcurious.com). The floor is the original concrete foundation of the building, ground down and coated in high-gloss varnish to give the effect of polished concrete

Kate's client list includes big names such as Kate Moss, Erin O'Connor, Daisy Lowe and Pixie Lott. She recently opened a flagship boutique at Woburn Walk in London's Bloomsbury

‘Home for me is a creative place, it always has been. I grew up with my mum recovering chairs,rearranging the furniture, painting rooms. I’d come back from school to a different house. I loved that change, the sense of evolution. I’m the same now. There are some constants: my yellow chairs, the chandeliers, the chesterfield sofa.



'If something is a design classic, it’s like your favourite handbag – everything else can work around that. Objects help to create a narrative – there’s always something to talk about if you have a flying owl or a stuffed hare in the room. Calm comes from the quiet palette of grey, white and black and acres of storage to hide the day-to-day clutter.



‘James and I are both control freaks, so doing the house could have been tricky, but it’s been a marriage of tastes – he is slightly more graphic than me, but I love our mix. We work in the same way – we aren’t really spreadsheety people, we’re more moodboard types. It’s been fun putting it all together and it evolves all the time.’ halfpennylondon.com





The family

Kate shares her three-bedroom, two-storey early-1800s mews house in North London with husband James-Lee Duffy, an art director and illustrator, and their cats Chicken and Punk

James-Lee's studio on the first floor is home to his extensive collection of art and culture books and his quirky collectables





In a bizarre coincidence, before Kate and James-Lee met, he had tried to buy these shop drawers from an antiques store, but Kate had already purchased them a couple of hours earlier. 'James couldn't believe it when he saw them in my house after we had got together! We'll keep them for ever - I think they'd look great in the kitchen with a huge slab of marble on top.' Rockett St George sells a range of glass cloches (rockettstgeorge.co.uk)



Kate and James-Lee are big art collectors. 'When we were married last year, we asked guests to 'shoot, make or draw' gifts for us - we received some amazing pieces, and a brace of pheasants from a friend who is handy with a shotgun!' Kate goes to the Affordable Art Fair each autumn to find new talent (affordableartfair.com). 'They have a great buyer who selects some fantastic graduate work,' she says. Paul's Emporium in North London (020 7607 3000), the stretch of antiques shops on Golborne Road in West London, and Sunbury Antiques Fair in Surrey (sunburyantiques.com) are Kate's other favourite haunts for tracking down vintage artworks and quirky objects

'When we were married last year, we asked guests to “shoot, make or draw” gifts for us'

Kate found the leather chesterfield at Sunbury Antiques Market. The cushions are her own design and are available from the Mint List (themintlist.com)



'I hang my necklaces on the taxidermy crow’s head above the bed'

The original bathroom was split in two to allow for an en-suite wet room to the master bedroom. Kate commissioned the cast concrete sink and copper taps to her design and had them made by her builders, Francis Grimaldi Lowe (francisgrimaldilowe.com). ‘They’re more artisans than builders and were able to do anything we wanted,’ says Kate. The matt black tiles are from Tower Ceramics (towerceramics.co.uk). The yellow Ghost mirror by Philippe Starck for Kartell is available from Made In Design (madeindesign.co.uk)