Flooding of the Reid Building at the University of SA, September 2009.

THE State Government and Adelaide City Council are being sued after their alleged incompetence caused $5 million worth of flood damage to UniSA facilities, destroying its research.

In Supreme Court documents, obtained by The Advertiser, the university asserts it lost irreplaceable research, expensive equipment and laboratory animals to a 2m “inundation” of stormwater.

The deluge is being blamed on two separate sets of public works being conducted at the same time — one by the council, the other by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources.

“It was reasonably foreseeable that, if the works were not performed with reasonable care, skill, diligence and competence, then the university would suffer loss and damage,” the document says.

The Council and the Government, meanwhile, have pointed the finger at one another, each asserting the other is to blame for the drenching of the university’s work and property.

The university’s case, in court this month, was filed in relation to incidents of flooding that happened in the basement of the Reid Building, on Frome Rd, in May, June, July, August and September 2009.

The statement of claim says the university’s Schools of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences were located in the building’s basement during that period.

Prior to that time, it asserts, the council began earthmoving work at nearby Frome Park to remove a bitumenised car park, while the Department carried out other earthmoving work close by.

It says work disrupted the overflow of stormwater from Main Lake, situated in Botanic Park, to First Creek and required the erection of a swale to catch the run-off.

“Water and silt overflow from the council’s works ran across the adjacent roadway toward the basement of the Reid Building,” it asserts.

It says the council tried using hay bales and “long rubber snakes” to stem the flow of water but both measures “were ineffective and failed” to assist.

“On August 29, there was a substantial overflow (that) caused inundation of water … up to a depth of approximately 8-10cm,” it asserts.

“On September 21, at approximately 4pm, the Reid Building was subjected to a substantial inundation of water (that) reached a depth of 2m throughout the basement area.

“The Metropolitan Fire Service was involved in pumping stormwater from the building for approximately 48 hours.”

It says the council and government “knew, or ought to have known” overflow would result from its earthworks and that the measures put in place were inadequate.

Flooding of the Reid Building at the University of SA, September 2009.

It further asserts they breached their duty of care by failing to take steps, or taking only inadequate steps, to respond to the risk of overflow.

“The basement contained a vast array of contents used for scientific research (and) also hosted engineering workshops and animal laboratories,” it asserts.

“The inundation of water (caused the) loss of animal cohorts, biological samples, research results and equipment.”

It asks the court to award $458,645.13 for building repairs, $2,197,900 for damage to contents and facilities and $2,437,500 for “interrupted and destroyed” research.

In its defence papers, the council says the Department diverted water overflow from its project into the swale without first informing the council.

It claims the water that flooded the Reid Building originated from that project and that the basement “would have flooded in any event” due to the area’s topography.

The government denies this assertion in its defence papers, claiming the council never told it that the swale was unable to hold overflow from both projects.

It says any loss or damage suffered by the university is the sole responsibility of the council.

The case returns to court on Wednesday.

Today the university released a statement saying it had settled a claim with its insurer in 2011 and the university had no interest in pursuing legal action against the State Government or city council.

“The legal action is in fact being initiated by the insurance company as part of their normal subrogation processes,” it said.