Nearly 90 cats participated in the NoCo LoCo Purebred and Household Pet Cat Show

International all-breed judge Adriana Kajon talks about a Sphynx cat named Bemisu Olive, who won Best Short Hair Alter, during the NoCo LoCo Purebred and Household Pet Cat Show on Saturday at The Ranch. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

McFurry Scurry and Sweet Pea wrestled, pawed and playfully bit at one another Saturday before entering the ring at the NoCo LoCo Purebred and Household Pet Cat Show at The Ranch.

The 4-month-old Scottish Fold kittens — a brother and a sister — had cream-colored fur, copper and gold-colored eyes and ears that folded down against their heads, as is characteristic of the breed. The two kittens accompanied their owner, Elyse Ramsey of Parker, to the fifth annual show.

In cat shows, owners don't put collars and leashes on the cats, nor do they walk them in a circle in front of judges.

"People ask me, 'So, what, it's like a dog show?'" Ramsey said. "But, no, you can't parade around a cat in a ring."

Instead, the cats wait in what are called show shelters, often similar to a cat castle with padding and upper and lower levels. When an announcer calls the cat's number, its owner takes it out of its shelter and places it in a line of cages in a ring.

The judges then take each cat out of its cage, individually, for judging. Cats are judged based on set characteristics of their breed, as well as characteristics such as health and grooming.

The pedigreed cats were judged in three groups: kittens 4-8 months old, championship cats older than 8 months, and spayed and neutered adult cats called championship alters.

Of the 87 cats, 10 were household cats. They were divided into two groups: kittens 4-8 months old and cats older than 8 months.

Advertisement

As McFurry Scurry and Sweet Pea awaited their own turns in the rings, they played with each other and the assortment of toys stashed in their show shelter. The shelter was encased in mesh and had clear plastic flaps on the front. Ramsey said the shelters are ideal because they protect the cats from over-eager onlookers who reach in to touch them.

A chorus of meows rang through the room. Calls of "Cat out!" came from owners if their cat leapt for freedom, signaling people to close the doors of the room and prevent a cat's escape. Once a cat was returned to its owner, a shout of "Cat caught!" could be heard.

Ramsey said the environment can be taxing for some cats because of the crowd, the noise and the smell of the other cats. She has been showing cats since 2002, and she said she only brings the cats that enjoy the shows. She leaves home the cats that are scared by the chaotic environment.

Some of the onlookers in the crowd were not showing their own cats, but were there to see the show. Part of the proceeds from the event benefited Duncan's Shelter, a local shelter that facilitates foster families for cats, as well as vaccination and spay and neuter clinics.

Jackie Rose, the show manager, spent the last eight months planning the show as a volunteer.

"I'm a cat person," she said. "I've been showing cats for almost 30 years now. The exhibitors like to show off their cats and talk about their cats."

Sweet Pea and her brother were each shown in eight different rings throughout the day. Ramsey scooped up Sweet Pea when her number was called and left her brother napping in the show shelter.

Ramsey then placed the kitten into a line of cages with other short hair kittens.

Sweet Pea stood on her hind legs to get a better view of the ring.

When the judge placed her on the judging stand, Sweet Pea inquisitively sniffed around and jumped off the stand to explore further, eliciting laughter from the crowd.

"I just love the whole thing, the whole shebang," Ramsey said. "It's not a cheap hobby, but it's a fun hobby. Enjoy what's here because you don't see these breeds everywhere."

Sweet Pea left the ring with a third place award.

Contact Staff Writer Cassa Niedringhaus at 970-635-3691 or news@reporter-herald.com