On the subject of sex, a subject that makes so many stammer, clam up or crack wise, Esther Perel, a couples therapist and author, is uncommonly eloquent, even rhapsodic.

That rhetorical gift is in high demand: In July, Perel gave an opening talk at Summit Outside, a meeting of 900 entrepreneurs and creative types on Powder Mountain in Eden, Utah.

"Think of a moment when you have an experience of major adventure, of novelty, of surprise, of mystery, of risk," Perel, 55, asked the audience, seated on a grassy lawn stretching out in front of the stage. "A moment perhaps where you express desires in your body that you usually don't allow yourself to know."

At one point, a young man looked around nervously, as if he found the exercise uncomfortable, but some of the guests, their name tags hanging around their necks, closed their eyes, luxuriating in their moment of reflection.

Summit's organizers knew that Perel's talk, which addressed the paradox of wanting both adventure and security in monogamous relationships, went over well. But they were surprised when more than half the 900 guests turned up the next morning to hear her talk on "Love, Sex and Power." Perel ended up holding three more workshops to meet demand.

Since 2006, when Perel published a best-selling book, "Mating in Captivity," she has become a go-to speaker on sexuality and relationships in the world of couples therapy as well as in the luxury self-actualization set. Her 2013 TED talk, the "Secret to Desire in a Long Term Relationship," had 1 million hits in the first two weeks it was posted, taking on an apparent epidemic of low-libido marriages in what is theoretically the least repressed era in modern history.

That may be part of the problem: "How can you desire what you already have?" Perel often asks in her talks.

"Americans fundamentally believe there is not a problem that does not have a solution — it's the Nike approach: Just do it. But try to apply that to eroticism?" asked Perel, drinking coffee in her Manhattan apartment not long ago. "I don't have answers, as in 'This is what you do.' I do say, 'This how I think it works.'"

Perel's book and talks make the claim that in seeking total comfort and intimacy, couples sometimes squash any possibility of a sexual charge.

"Intimacy becomes cruel when it excludes any possibility of discovery," she writes. And also: "When there is nothing left to hide, there is nothing left to seek."

Perel has nudged the conversation "away from the more politically correct concept that if you really understand and care each other, good sex will follow," said Jim Walkup, president of the metro chapter of the New York Association for Marriage and Family Therapy. "She's an advocate of understanding the difference between the erotic and the deep, caring commitment."

Petite, perfumed, blonde and someone who strategically brushes back her hair while speaking, Perel quickly builds intimate connections. Which is not to say her manner is gentle.

Perel still sees clients but these days is only taking on new ones who have experienced infidelity, which is the subject of her next book. Her approach so far is empathetic and provocative.

"Not every infidelity is a symptom of a problem in a relationship," she said. "Sometimes it has to do with other longings that are much more existential. Sometimes you go elsewhere not because you are not liking the one you are with; you are not liking the person you have become."