Housley stumps for lieutenant governor post

Sen. Karin Housley, R-St. Mary's Point, has no reluctance describing herself and her running mate, Republican gubernatorial candidate Scott Honour, as relative political newcomers. She said her status as a neophyte is an asset.

"I'm not tainted," she said.

The first term senator, whose district runs along the state's east border and includes Stillwater, Bayport and Forest Lake, thinks Minnesotans are ready for candidates who are different.

"The way we've always done it doesn't work," she said.

Housley campaigned throughout central Minnesota this past week, stopping in Brainerd on Tuesday. In addition to her busy campaign schedule she was preparing for a daughter's wedding on Saturday.

Her first run for elective office was in 2010 when she fell 606 votes short of defeating Sen. Katie Sieben, DFL-Cottage Grove. She had planned on a second try for that seat only to have redistricting place her in a new district with a Republican senator. On the last day of filing for the 2012 election the Republican incumbent decided not to run leaving Housley only a few hours to decide whether she would run in her new district.

Housley filed for office and won the seat. After her first session ended she decided that since she didn't have to run for re-election this year the best use of her efforts would be to help remove Gov. Mark Dayton from office. After considering the Republican candidates for governor she told Honour she wanted to help his campaign effort. He countered by asking her to be his running mate.

Honour will face opposition from three other Republicans for the GOP nomination in the Aug. 12 primary. They are former Rep. Marty Seifert; Rep. Kurt Zellers; and Hennepin County Commissioner Jeff Johnson, the endorsed candidate.

Housley said she and Honour will work to gain jobs in Minnesota and help small business. She said most business people simply want "the governor and Legislature to get out of their way."

She said they'll work on getting a handle on spending and keeping businesses from moving out of state.

Honour and Housley will work to get rid of Obamacare and MNsure and replace them with free market competitive alternatives. She said she'd like to keep aspects of those two programs, including keeping children on their parents' health care plans until an older age and not disqualifying those health care insurance recipients with pre-existing conditions.

"What we had before (the previous health care system) had to be tweaked," she said.

She compared the problems with Obamacare and MNsure with a faulty start on a knitting project.

"You've got to completely unravel it," she said.

Housley said she and Honour will win the primary and he is the strongest candidate to run against Dayton. While Honour's name recognition might not be high now, she expects it to improve once political advertising points out distinctions between her candidate and "career politician, career politician, career politician."

Housley is a radio show host and a real estate agent. She's married to Phil Housley, a former NHL hockey player who is now an assistant coach with the NHL's Nashville Predators. They're the parents of four children.