Marcie Caplan

Allegheny Health Network has named one of its own executives to take the helm of Canonsburg Hospital.

AHN officials said Jan. 3 that Marcie S. Caplan, senior vice president of physician strategy and program development at Jefferson Hospital, has been promoted to chief executive officer at Canonsburg.

Caplan, 56, of Mt. Lebanon, who has held a number of leadership positions in the region’s health care sector, succeeds Chief Operating Officer Kim Sperring, who left Canonsburg for another position in the health care industry.

Caplan said Jan. 3 that she’s looking forward to continuing a career that has focused on leading smaller community-based hospitals in the region.

“It’s very much Pittsburgh,” Caplan said of the ability to walk down halls and recognize and say hello to everyone, including employees as well as many of the patients.

AHN said in a press release that since joining Jefferson Hospital in 2009, Caplan has been instrumental in developing its bariatric surgery and women’s health programs, and has led physician recruitment initiatives for both affiliated and independent practices.

She has a long and successful record of health care leadership in the greater Pittsburgh region. She joined South Side Hospital in 1980 and advanced to the position of chief executive officer after South Side’s affiliation with UPMC. In 2002, she became chief operating officer of UPMC Passavant and UPMC Passavant Cranberry.

One of the big differences Caplan sees as she arrives here, she said, is that Canonsburg Hospital sits in the middle of one of the region’s fastest-growing areas, with the hospital serving residents from Cecil Township, the Southpointe business community as well as The Meadows Racetrack & Casino and other Racetrack Road businesses just to the south of the health care facility.

“As companies come into the area, we want to be there as their health care facility of choice,” she said.

Caplan said Canonsburg is well-prepared to handle the growing volume, noting that in addition to its wide range of inpatient and outpatient medical, surgical and diagnostic services at the hospital, it also operates the Outpatient Care Center in Peters Township to provide the community with an array of medical, surgical, and diagnostic services as well as a site for community health outreach programs.

In addition to her new role at Canonsburg, Caplan will continue to lead physician strategy and recruitment for Jefferson Hospital and will work collaboratively within AHN’s southern region to help meet community needs and promote growth of the Allegheny Health Network.

“We are incredibly pleased to have an executive of Marcie’s caliber join our network’s leadership team at this important time,” said AHN Chief Operating Officer Pat Liebman. “Her considerable experience, sharp health care acumen and dedication to the highest standards of patient care quality and service excellence are a true asset to our organization and to the many communities served by Canonsburg.”

Caplan also acknowledged that she faces many of the same challenges as other hospital CEOs, noting the advent of the Affordable Care Act, which she said requires “providing high-quality care at a lower cost.”

Established in 1904, Canonsburg Hospital serves residents from northern Washington and southern Allegheny counties. It employs approximately 430 people, and has 180 physicians on staff.

In 2011, it opened the outpatient center just off Route 19 on Gallery Drive.