“Everywhere I went in America, I told people about our beautiful, beloved state,” Governor John Kasich, of Ohio, said on Wednesday, when he announced that he was suspending his campaign for the Presidency. “I expect that we’re going to have more visits as a result.” He had made the decision to get out of the race, aides later told reporters, as he sat on the runway at what the Columbus Dispatch described as “a humble charter aircraft facility” in Ohio; the plane was supposed to take him to the Washington, D.C., area for a series of a events, including a number of fund-raisers. He apparently didn’t feel good about asking for money that wasn’t going to buy anything. He did like to travel, though. The prop that his speech, which was delivered in a wood-panelled barn in Columbus, seemed to lack was a Kodak carousel of slides from his trips to New Hampshire (“I visited these beautiful, beautiful towns”), Florida (“the energy of Miami Beach”), California (“being able to sit in traffic in Los Angeles!”), and Michigan’s Upper Peninsula (“I never knew it was actually located above Wisconsin”). He recalled that, when he arrived in that part of Michigan with his campaign staff members, he told them, “Would you all please put down your phone, because this is a winter wonderland. This is magical.” He did not mention the name that they may have been reading on their phones while he exhorted them to stare at the snow: Donald Trump.

The passivity of certain Republican leaders in the face of the coming Trump nomination will take any number of forms. Some will talk about picking the lesser of two evils; some, like the two Bush Presidents, will “sit it out”; some, like Senator Kelly Ayotte, of New Hampshire, will keep lexicographers busy explaining the difference between endorsing and supporting; others will persuade themselves that they have an obligation to join Trump’s team to make him a little better—careerism in the guise of a patriotic duty. Paul Ryan told Jake Tapper, of CNN, that he was still thinking about whether to support Trump (“I am not there right now. I hope to and want to”). And then there’s Kasich, taking a close look at his own role in the 2016 Republican Presidential primaries and concluding, with a note of pleasure, that he just might have done something to help the tourism industry in Ohio.

Kasich spent hours on debate stages and in close quarters with Trump; he mentioned those encounters in his announcement, but only to congratulate himself for having made it to the main events and, in his mind, for having won a couple of debates. The theme of Kasich’s goodbye was that his very Kasich-ness had improved the tone of the enterprise, and that this was contribution enough. One doesn’t want to be ungrateful for small blessings. But maintaining a minimal level of dignity is a starting point, not a triumph. Glorifying politeness can be its own trap, leading to distortions, linguistic and otherwise. Calling Kasich “moderate” became an observation about his unwillingness to discuss his opponents’ body parts, rather than his own policies, which were not all that moderate. (Cruz wanted to defund Planned Parenthood, and compared the organization to a gang of felons; in Ohio, Kasich did defund it.) His role seemed to be to inspire encomiums about how decency didn’t stand a chance these days, an argument that would have been more persuasive if he’d ever really made it a fighting chance, rather than a chuckling one. His vanity about his own good cheer—“And they love me,” he said of his supporters—could, at times, make him prickly (a trait that emerged in odd places, including a Judaica bookstore in Brooklyn). A friend of his told ABC News that Kasich’s great fear was that people would “start making jokes” about him. Before he decided to withdraw, his campaign put out a Web ad in the style of the opening scroll of a “Star Wars” movie, in which he was called “Our Only Hope”—not against Trump but against Hillary Clinton. (The dark times that might come otherwise involved increased spending on Obamacare and gun control.) In a moment that might have called for some engagement—some reckoning with the bigotry and xenophobia of his party’s standard-bearer—Kasich congratulated himself on his disengagement.

The only grappling in his farewell speech came in the form of an ode to hugs. “We all remember that hug in South Carolina,” he said. For those who do not, it occurred when a young man at a town hall talked about a series of wrenching personal crises and Kasich came down off the stage and embraced him. “He just wanted to give me a hug,” Kasich said, “and the country marvelled.” That marvelling, as he told it, continued through a season of hugs in multiple states, like the time a woman in Michigan talked about losing her son. “Everybody in that hall embraced that woman,” Kasich said. “See, stories like this occurred all across our country. And I think it’s frankly because, for whatever reason, God gave me the grace to make people feel safe and comfortable.”

Donald Trump seems to have felt safe and comfortable enough, after Kasich’s announcement, to say that he might vet him for the Vice-President’s job (though the next morning he told CNBC that he was unlikely to actually choose him). If Trump has been your opponent—if you were, momentarily, his only opponent, as Kasich was after Ted Cruz withdrew, on Tuesday night—an admonition might be a more suitable exit note than a gleeful recitation of your own personal charms. But the only political passion that Kasich showed in his goodbye speech was in a broad call to lower taxes and to get rid of regulations; of the issues facing the country, he said, there was “frankly, nothing more imperative” than passing a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution. Otherwise, people should listen to one another and be good neighbors, with a charitable spirit. “When we help someone else to rise, it opens us up to receive the things that we need in our lives,” Kasich said. But what did he ever need from Donald Trump?