Understanding Medicare plans and choices can be a complex undertaking. Aaron Tidball, manager of Allsup Medicare Advisor, a Medicare plan selection service, answers beneficiaries’ most frequently asked questions.

Q. What changes are expected for Medicare this year?

A. It’s possible a portion of Medicare beneficiaries will see a significant increase in their Medicare Part B premiums for this year.

Earlier this year, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services indicated premiums could increase. More details will be provided in October.

In addition, individuals may see changes with their Part D prescription drug plans and Medicare Advantage plans in 2016.

It’s important that Medicare beneficiaries read the Annual Notice of Change from their providers, which they should have gotten by Sept. 30. This lists any changes for next year.

Q. If I have Medicare already, do I need to get coverage from an “Obamacare” marketplace exchange plan?

A. No. You do not need to use the health care exchanges. If you have Medicare, you are insured and you will not face penalties under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act.

Q. When can I switch my Medicare coverage?

A. Medicare annual open enrollment runs from Oct. 15 to Dec. 7. This is the one time of the year when anyone with Medicare can switch plans, including those with Original Medicare, Medicare Advantage or Part D prescription drug coverage.

The Medicare Advantage dis-enrollment period runs from Jan. 1 to Feb. 14. This is when someone can leave a Medicare Advantage plan for Original Medicare (Parts A & B) and a Part D prescription drug plan.

Q. Is it necessary to review my Medicare Advantage plan every year?

A. Medicare Advantage plan prices and availability change every year. Your health care needs also could have changed this year, and they may be different in 2016. This means a plan that you purchased and was relatively affordable could be more expensive for you next year.

Some plans may be discontinued completely. It’s not required that you review all your options every year, but we recommend that you do so at least every couple of years to make sure you’re getting the coverage that is right for you.

Q. What if my circumstances change, like if I move out of my home?

A. If you experience certain changes, you should have your Medicare options reevaluated. It may be possible to find a health care plan that is a better match for your finances and health.

Changes include moving outside the area your plan covers, moving into or out of a long-term-care facility, or becoming eligible for low-income subsidy.

Q. What preventive care does Medicare cover?

A. Preventive care is now free under Medicare and includes an annual wellness exam or check-up, a personalized wellness plan to help you stay healthy, screening tests to detect chronic illnesses and cancer, and flu shots.

These services are free if you use Original Medicare (Medicare Parts A and B) for your hospital and medical coverage. If you get coverage through a Medicare Advantage plan, preventive services covered for free under Original Medicare also are free under your plan as long as you see providers that are in your plan network.

Q. What steps should I take if I want to change plans for 2016?

A. It’s important to start early. Don’t wait until the last week to enroll. Look at your current coverage and your needs. Then research the options that are available to you.

You may want to reach out to a Medicare expert to better understand the differences between plans, because they can be detailed and difficult to compare.

If you are still working or have retiree health care benefits, make sure you understand how those benefits coordinate with Medicare. If you are uncertain of your options or how to evaluate them, seek professional help.

Q. Where can I get help in choosing coverage?

A. Several resources are available. There are government-supported resources that include Medicare.gov, which provides information about plans, and State Health Insurance Assistance Programs (SHIPs).

People who want comprehensive help can use Medicare plan selection services such as the Allsup Medicare Advisor (medicare.allsup.com), which provides objective, fee-based help in choosing Medicare plans.