A new survey examining whether the American people view a range of issues as “morally acceptable” has found that infidelity is more acceptable among those identifying as Democrats than Republicans.

While extramarital affairs are largely frowned upon across party lines, the Gallup poll found that 13 percent of Democrats believe married men and women having an affair is morally acceptable, compared to just 1 percent of Republicans.

In examining the differences between issues Republicans and Democrats find “morally acceptable,” those identifying with the GOP viewed the death penalty, buying and wearing clothing made of animal fur, and medical testing on animal to be respectable.

Democrats, to the contrary, viewed divorce, sex out of wedlock, having a baby before marriage and abortion, among others, to be “morally acceptable.”

“In the 12 years Gallup has asked this overall question, Democrats have become significantly more tolerant on many issues, while independents generally showed a smaller shift in the same direction and Republicans’ views have changed little,” Gallup said of changing attitudes across political ideologies.

Over the past 12 years, the poll stated, Republicans have become more accepting of homosexual relations, sex out of wedlock and divorce. In that same time frame, Democrats have evolved across 10 issues: Abortion, sex out of wedlock, extramarital affairs, cloning humans, cloning animals, divorce, suicide, stem-cell research, polygamy and homosexual relations.

While Americans across the political spectrum have become increasingly tolerant of issues that were previously deemed “morally wrong,” 74 percent of those polled believe the country’s moral values are getting increasingly worse. And when asked about the most important issues facing the country, 6 percent pointed to the United States’ moral and ethical decline.

The polling agency pointed to age differences and political ideology as cause for the divide in which issues are deemed “morally acceptable.”

“Deep divisions exist among Americans,” Gallup noted, “and clashes over the moral acceptance of certain issues will more than likely continue in the years to come.”