Abby Rorex, right, works on a fitness drill with Ana Maria Castañeda in preparation for the 2014 Miss U.S. Latina Pageant. (Photo: Angela Folds / For Williamson ) Story Highlights Follow Ana Maria Castañeda’s pageant journey at facebook.com/MissTennesseeLatina.

Abby Rorex met Ana Maria Castañeda — Miss Latina Tennessee — in the most modern of ways: via Instagram. A mutual love for all things “#Franklin” brought these two enterprising women together.

“I started following Ana Maria on Instagram because I was drawn to her story,” said Rorex, a local fitness instructor. “I had no idea there was a Miss Tennessee Latina Pageant, much less that this year’s winner was right here in Franklin.”

Their online friendship developed into a professional partnership when Rorex, owner of 100% Fit fitness studio, chose to sponsor Castañeda as she competes for the 2014 Miss U.S. Latina Pageant title.

“The Hispanic community in Franklin is a thriving one, and I wanted to show my support for this important demographic in the town I’ve chosen for my business and home,” Rorex said. “I want others to hear Ana Maria’s inspiring story because she’s a great example of the successes that hard work and determination can bring.”

Born in Los Angeles, Castañeda moved with her family to Middle Tennessee when she was 4. The daughter of Reyna Graciela Barragan and Felipe Angel, she is now 23, the oldest of nine children. She attended Saint Cecilia Academy, where she received multiple recognitions for her outstanding community service, often volunteering with nonprofit organizations such as Catholic Charities’ refugee program.

A first-generation college graduate, Castañeda later attended Lipscomb University, where she studied psychology and communications/public relations.

Castañeda’s first pageant competition was for the Miss Tennessee Latina title in 2013, where she finished as second runner-up.

“Competing in a pageant was a ‘bucket list’ item for me. I trained for it all on my own,” Castañeda said. “Now, as the 2014 titleholder, I am truly living my dream. My goal as Miss Tennessee Latina is to empower the Hispanic community by helping families empower themselves through education and career driven success, whether it be appearing at Tennessee schools to speak to children about the importance of education, or volunteering at different charities that aid Hispanic families,” she said.

Sponsoring Castañeda is Rorex’s first involvement in the pageant world.

“Even though I’ve never been around pageants, I have a very competitive nature and I know what it takes to set and reach goals.”

Rorex tailored a fitness program for Castañeda that included one-on-one training and group classes to help her achieve her optimal fitness level for the national competition, which will begin on Sunday and continue to Aug. 31 in Punta Cana in the Dominican Republic.

“The first time I worked with Ana Maria, I was expecting her to be a little bit prissy and delicate. But, every time she trained, she gave it all she’s got. She works hard,” Rorex said. “I think I’m as excited as she is about the national competition! I am so proud of her.”

Getting fit on a deadline

You’re probably not preparing for a beauty pageant, but life events, such as weddings, class reunions,and vacations are great motivators for getting fit.

Abby Rorex, a certified health and life coach and owner of 100% Fit Franklin, shares her tips for getting in shape on a deadline.

“The first thing you need to do to get ready for your big event is to drink tons and tons of water. Next, continue your normal weekly fitness program, but I suggest adding the following:

• Six 20-second sprints four times a week. This is absolutely the best way to burn fat quickly. Go 80 to 100 percent of your maximum speed to get your heart rate up and burn fat.

• Complete a “daily wake up call” every morning as soon as you wake up: 10 push-ups, 20 curls with weights, 30 squat jumps, 40 side lunges and 50 jumping jacks.

Rorex says that by adding this to what you are already doing, you will see better tone and weight loss changes much faster.

The details

• The 2014 Miss U.S. Latina Pageant will continue through Aug. 31 in Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Delegates from across the nation representing their states and Hispanic heritage will vie for the coveted title and right to represent the United States at the international Miss Latin America of the World competition.

• Abby Rorex’s fitness studio, 100% Fit, is in Jamison Station, Suite 120, at 320 Liberty Pike in Franklin. For more information, call 615-591-3321 or visit http://get100percentfit.com.

Learn more

Miss Latina Tennessee 2015 is now accepting applications for legal residents of Tennessee with Latina or Iberian heritage by birth or ancestry. Females age 13-17 may compete for the Miss Teen Latina title and those ages 18-27 may compete for Miss Latina Tennessee. More information is available at www.misstennesseelatina.com and www.missuslatina.com.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/news/local/williamson/franklin/2014/08/23/fit-crown-miss-latina-tennessee-running/14453499/