Atlanta Hawks forward DeMarre Carroll drives against Brooklyn Nets forward Joe Johnson in the first half of an NBA playoff game in Atlanta April 19. Associated Press/John Bazemore

After losing a bid to buy the Los Angeles Clippers last year, Ares Management co-founder and Chief Executive Tony Ressler finally got into the NBA owner club this month, leading a group that bought the Atlanta Hawks for $850 million.

The size of the deal, while no comparison to the $2 billion paid for the Clippers by former Microsoft Chief Executive Steve Ballmer, isn’t shabby either for an NBA franchise that isn’t located in a top-tier market such as New York, Los Angeles or Chicago.

Much like today’s buyout market, to which Mr. Ressler is no stranger, a little too much capital is chasing a limited number of deals in the sports arena.

“There are only so many NBA teams out there for sale,” said Jimmy Lynn, special adviser to Georgetown University’s sports industry management program. He said Mr. Ballmer’s $2 billion price tag for Clippers also helped raised the bar for asset prices.

Still, Mr. Lynn said he thinks the $850 million price for Hawks is justified, citing factors such as a new broadcast deal NBA signed last year with sports network ESPN, as well as “the size of the [Atlanta] market, and a team that should be in the playoffs for the next few years.”

The nine-year deal ESPN announced with NBA last October, valued at $2.66 billion a year, extends ESPN’s rights to cover NBA games through television, digital, data, audio and other channels starting in the 2016-2017 season. The new deal almost tripled ESPN’s revenue from broadcasting NBA games, according to Mr. Lynn.

“Owners of NBA teams get a percentage of the TV revenue,” Mr. Lynn said. On top of that, he said owners also receive cuts of revenue from ticket sales, merchandising and sponsorship.

Mr. Ressler joins a long and expanding list of private equity practitioners who count NBA teams among their personal holdings: Avenue Capital co-founder and Chief Executive Marc Lasry and Fortress Investment Group co-founder Wesley Edens, for instance, acquired the Milwaukee Bucks for $550 million last year.

The Philadelphia 76ers count Blackstone Group Senior Managing Director David Blitzer and Apollo Global Management co-founder Joshua Harris among the team’s owners. The Detroit Pistons are controlled by Platinum Equity founder Tom Gores, while the Boston Celtics count Bain Capital Managing Director Stephen Pagliuca as a co-owner.

“They have the money to invest,” David Carter, executive director of University of Southern California’s Marshall Sports Business Institute, wrote in an email.

“Top private equity execs are interested in parlaying their success in one intense and competitive industry into another—sports franchise ownership,” Prof. Carter wrote, adding the ownership “allows them to have some high profile fun.”

“In short, those in private equity, like so many others, covet owning a trophy asset.”

It is hard to determine whether these basketball investments are for purely personal or investment purposes; often, they are both. Speaking at the Dow Jones Private Equity Analyst Conference in 2012, Apollo’s Mr. Harris admitted that his purchase of the 76ers was “both an investment and a hobby.”

Mr. Lynn said these basketball deals, if priced correctly, make good economic sense, pointing out the potential to expand the teams’ reach in countries like China and Taiwan, where NBA players like Yao Ming and Jeremy Lin are treated like idols.

“This is a sport that’s globally popular,” said Mr. Lynn. “From PE perspective, it’s a good investment.”

The investment could look even more lucrative depending on the outcome of the NBA playoffs. The Hawks, which are leading the Brooklyn Nets 2-0 in in the first round of the 2015 Eastern Conference playoffs, head to the Barclays Center Saturday for game three.

Write to Shasha Dai at shasha.dai@wsj.com Follow her on Twitter at @ShashaDai1