Even as she proposed changes in the health law, Mrs. Clinton said it was working, and she promised to fight Republican efforts to dismantle it. Republicans said she was trying to have it both ways, embracing popular parts of the law while rejecting those that are unpopular.

Mrs. Clinton’s health policy proposals were calculated to appeal to Democratic voters and labor unions who might be tempted to support Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, her main rival for the Democratic presidential nomination. Many unions say the Cadillac tax, scheduled to take effect in 2018, will hurt their members, including schoolteachers and factory workers who gave up higher wages to secure generous health benefits.

But her aggressive approach is nothing new. The health care plan she drafted for her husband, as presented to Congress in 1993, had the same goals as Mr. Obama’s health law, but it took a more aggressive regulatory approach. The government would have set lower limits on out-of-pocket costs and provided more generous subsidies to many consumers and employers. A new agency, the National Health Board, would have set a health budget for the nation and would have regulated most private insurance premiums. And “regional health alliances” would have been responsible for collecting premiums and could have set fee schedules for doctors.

Mrs. Clinton revealed her opposition to the Cadillac tax five days after a dozen senators introduced legislation to repeal it. Among the senators were Mr. Sanders, who has support from many rank-and-file union members, and Chuck Schumer of New York, the No. 3 Senate Democrat, who is expected to take over as Democratic leader with the retirement of Senator Harry Reid of Nevada next year.

Mr. Obama has long boasted about the law’s provisions that hold down consumer costs. The law imposes limits on out-of-pocket costs and requires insurers to cover preventive services, like vaccinations and cancer screenings, at no cost to consumers.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And the big rate increases sought by some health insurance companies for 2016 are less significant than they appear, administration officials maintain, because most people buying insurance through the Affordable Care Act’s public exchanges receive federal subsidies that cover most of the premium. They do not need to worry about the “list prices,” officials said, and if they do, they can switch to less expensive plans.

Video

But Mrs. Clinton said that many families still struggled with medical costs. She wants Congress to give them financial assistance: tax credits up to $2,500 a year for an individual and $5,000 for a family if out-of-pocket health costs exceed 5 percent of income.

Each insurer sets its own limits on out-of-pocket costs, up to a federally imposed maximum. The limits this year cannot be more than $6,600 for an individual plan and $13,200 for a family plan.

The Affordable Care Act requires health insurers to disclose the costs to consumers of specific medical services, but the Obama administration has yet to enforce that requirement, disappointing consumer advocates who say the data would be useful to patients.

Mrs. Clinton said she would “vigorously enforce” these provisions and broaden them so consumers could make more informed choices about coverage and save money.

The Obama administration does post information about the benefits and costs of different health plans, but making comparisons can be difficult because the plans do not use a standard definition of deductible — the amount that consumers owe before their insurance begins to pay.

Mrs. Clinton would go further than the law’s guarantee of free preventive health services and would require insurers and employers to cover three “sick visits” a year without charging a deductible.

The White House pointed out that one of Mrs. Clinton’s proposals — to let Medicare negotiate prices for high-cost drugs and biotech medicines — was in Mr. Obama’s budget in February.

First Draft Newsletter Subscribe for updates on the 2016 presidential race, the White House and Congress, delivered to your inbox Monday - Friday.

Again, Mrs. Clinton would go further. She would limit consumers’ out-of-pocket costs for prescription drugs to $250 a month, or $3,000 a year. She would eliminate tax breaks for drug advertising aimed at consumers. And she would put pressure on pharmaceutical companies to spend more of their revenue on research and development.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

She is also proposing measures to protect consumers against “surprise medical bills.” Health plans often have networks of preferred doctors and hospitals. Even when patients use one of the preferred hospitals, they sometimes receive tens of thousands of dollars in unexpected bills from anesthesiologists, surgeons and other doctors who were not in the network.

Under her proposal, Mrs. Clinton said, consumers would not have to pay those extra charges for care at hospitals in their health plan’s network.

In a series of reports in recent years, the Obama administration has cited data to show that health costs were growing at the slowest rate in decades. But that overall trend may stem in part from costs landing directly on patients, causing them not to seek needed care, experts said.

“One way to lower premiums is to increase deductibles, shifting costs back to consumers,” Mr. Jennings said. “Mrs. Clinton worries that high deductibles lead to the underuse of necessary medical care.”

A recent study by the Commonwealth Fund, a foundation that specializes in health policy, said that “the growing use and size of deductibles in both employer and marketplace plans as a means to lower premiums threatens to undermine the gains Americans have made in coverage since 2014.”

Neera Tanden, president of the Center for American Progress and a longtime confidante of Mrs. Clinton, said the health care law poses a challenge for Democrats. The law, she said, has expanded coverage and slowed the growth of national health spending, both major achievements.

But, Ms. Tanden said, “consumers feel their costs have risen” because wages are stagnant and many employers have required workers to shoulder a greater share of their medical expenses.