Campaign finance disclosure reports show 1st District congressional challenger Roger Marshall outraised incumbent U.S. Rep. Tim Huelskamp last quarter in his quest to close the fundraising gap between the western Kansas Republicans.

Marshall, an obstetrician from Great Bend, raised $184,580 between April and the end of June. About $153,000 of that came from individual contributors, adding to $2,700 from a political action committee and a $29,000 loan from Marshall himself, according to Federal Election Commission filings.

“Taking on an incumbent, I expected fundraising to be a challenge, so I am overwhelmed by the eagerness of Kansans throughout the district to get involved,” Marshall said in a statement. “It’s clear Republicans in the Big First want a congressman who will focus on working for conservative solutions to America’s problems.”

Chapman Rackaway, a political science professor at Fort Hays State University, called it “a very strong quarter” for Marshall.

“I'm impressed,” Rackaway said. “It's not easy to impress me with this stuff but I'm impressed.”

Huelskamp raised $76,520 in the second quarter, $40,020 of which came from individual donors and $36,500 came from political action committees. The second quarter figures add to the $227,948 that Huelskamp has raised this election cycle. His campaign committee, Kansans for Huelskamp, had $666,040 on hand at the end of June.

“I am honored by the grassroots support my campaign continues to receive, and I am confident we will raise all the resources necessary to win next August,” Huelskamp said in an email Wednesday. “At my nearly 300 town halls, Kansans tell me over and over again — they appreciate my independent, conservative voice for them in Washington.”

Huelskamp’s campaign said it has received 1,598 individual contributions thus far in 2015.

“He hasn’t really ramped up yet,” Rackaway said of Huelskamp. “Fundraising is not going to be an issue for him.”

Among the political action committee contributors to Huelskamp’s campaign were Koch Industries Inc. PAC, which donated $7,500, American Freedom PAC, which donated $5,000, and the National Rifle Association’s PAC, which donated $1,000. Marshall received a donation from only one PAC: Barton County Businesses for Growth.

Marshall received donations from nearly 400 donors, according to the campaign, 90 percent of whom are from Kansas.

“If you want to see Tim Huelskamp lose, Roger Marshall just very loudly stood up and said, ‘I'm your guy,’” Rackaway said, adding that Marshall’s strong second quarter could prompt a rash of new support. “Marshall just cued everyone in that he’s taking this campaign very seriously.”

The Federal Election Commission requires candidates for federal office to reveal the funds they have accumulated every three months. Since Marshall and Clyde native Alan LaPolice both joined the Republican race in the second quarter of 2015, this week’s disclosures were the first look into their campaign finances.

For LaPolice, there wasn’t much to look at. His quarterly report, filed Tuesday, showed the student retention specialist didn’t raise funds last quarter, leaving him with $3,042 on hand at the end of June. Asked about his decision not to raise funds, LaPolice said last week that elections should be about voters.

“I had asked for nothing. I do not want to comment much on it other than to say elections are about people. Leaders represent people,” LaPolice said.

“For someone running a second time, there’s no excuse for that,” Rackaway said of LaPolice's decision.”Most people have forgotten who Alan LaPolice is.”

LaPolice garnered 35,108 votes to Huelskamp’s 42,847 in the Aug. 5, 2014, primary, a race widely regarded as surprisingly narrow considering LaPolice’s status as a political novice. Huelskamp went on to defeat Democrat Jim Sherow and win a third term in Congress.

“Despite the attacks by Roger Marshall and Alan LaPolice, I will continue to lead the battles to protect life, defend traditional marriage, help our veterans, and repeal ObamaCare,” Huelskamp said Wednesday. “In the just the last few weeks, I have led efforts in Congress to roll back the listing of the lesser prairie chicken, protect VA whistleblowers, stop the EPA’s ‘Waters of the U.S.’ rule, and grow Kansas agriculture exports.”

Marshall and LaPolice entered the 2016 congressional race this spring, setting up a three-way marathon to the August 2016 primary. In the rural 1st District, which encompasses more than half of the state, challengers can face obstacles reaching voters and funding the travel needed to do so.

“As I take time to listen to people from Liberal to Manhattan, Norton to Emporia and those in the small towns in between, I find they share my conservative values and believe America’s greatness can be restored,” Marshall said Wednesday.

Though all four U.S. House members from Kansas have announced they will run for re-election, only Huelskamp has drawn challengers. That hasn’t stopped the other candidates from fundraising, however.

Yoder for Congress, the campaign committee for 3rd District Rep. Kevin Yoder, raised $338,975 last quarter and had $1,810,627 on hand at the end of June. More than half, $184,450, came from political action committees, including $3,000 from Koch Industries, $10,000 from the Friends of Medical Research PAC, and $10,000 from QC Holdings Inc.

“I am grateful for this tremendous outpouring of support and will continue to work hard to serve the Third District of Kansas,” Yoder, a Republican, said in a statement.

Yoder’s campaign said its $1.8 million is more than any congressional candidate in the state’s history had at this stage of a race. Rackaway said the congressman’s stockpile of campaign funds could scare away potential challengers.

Republican Rep. Lynn Jenkins raised $321,257 in the second quarter and had $728,090 on hand at the end of June. Rep. Mike Pompeo raised $156,875 and had $1,101,484 on hand.

The re-election campaign of another Republican, Sen. Jerry Moran, announced this week that it had garnered donations from individuals in every Kansas county.

“In every corner of our state, Senator Moran has donors stepping up to show their support for his re-election,” Moran for Kansas spokeswoman Elizabeth Patton said in a news release. “Donations from individuals in each of Kansas’ 105 counties is a testament to Jerry’s commitment to putting Kansans first, and his campaign will continue to reflect that commitment.”