A drug for men with advanced prostate cancer has been licensed for use earlier in the disease – delaying the need for chemotherapy.

Enzalutamide extends life by at least five months in men who have run out of treatment options – with some living 18 months or longer.

It is currently given to men who have stopped responding to hormone treatments or chemotherapy.

The drug enzalutamide is currently given to men who have stopped responding to hormone treatments - but when given earlier can delay the need for chemotherapy and its distressing side effects (pictured)

But new data shows that when given earlier in the course of the disease, the drug can delay the need for chemotherapy and its distressing side effects by 17 months.

It cuts the risk of the disease progressing or death by more than three-quarters compared with ‘dummy’ treatment.

Doctors hope enzalutamide – which was discovered in the UK – will help turn prostate cancer from a killer disease into a chronic illness by combining new and older agents together for longer survival.

Around 10,500 British men have advanced prostate cancer that has become resistant to standard hormone treatments, of whom about 6,000 might be eligible for pre-chemo treatment with enzalutamide.

The drug, which is a pill taken at home, costs around £25,000 for an average course of treatment and it is not routinely available on the NHS.

Some men in England have been able to get it via the Cancer Drugs Fund, for which manufacturer Astellas Pharma reduced the price through a patient access scheme.

The drug costs around £25,000 for a course of treatment and is not routinely available on the NHS

Dr Alison Birtle, consultant clinical oncologist at the Royal Preston Hospital, said the drug was cost-effective because it improved quality of life, reduced the need for palliative radiotherapy and GP visits, and cut down emergency hospital care.

She said ‘For many men with advanced prostate cancer, enzlautamide has already shown that we can improve how long men live with this diagnosis and ensure they have good quality of life achieving all their milestones.’

She said men needing the drug were often breadwinners, or taking care of their grandchildren.

‘The pre-chemotherapy data is very good and today’s approval for a new licence is a much needed development in prostate cancer’ she said.

Owen Sharp, Chief Executive of Prostate Cancer UK charity said ‘Enzalutamide is a highly effective drug which we know can give men with advanced prostate cancer the extra quality time they need.

‘Making it available for use pre chemotherapy is a no brainer. We hope today’s announcement that enzalutamide is now licensed for use in this way means we can finally see it appraised to become routinely available on the NHS.

‘Enzalutamide was already being made available to some patients pre-chemotherapy before receiving its licence.

'This has been via the Cancer Drugs Fund in England and the Peer Approved Clinical System in Scotland.

‘This early access means that there is now real-world evidence of the drug’s effectiveness, leaving Nice and the Scottish Medicines Consortium with no excuse but to get on with the process of making it more widely available.

A doctor at the Royal Preston Hospital (pictured) said the drug was cost-effective because it improved quality of life, reduced the need for palliative radiotherapy and GP visits, and cut down emergency hospital care

‘We also hope that the fact that men have been accessing pre chemotherapy enzalutamide before it received its licence heralds a much needed step change in how a drug’s effectiveness is established, so that we have a faster, more effective appraisal process in the future.’

Sandy Tyndale-Biscoe, honorary chairman of Tackle the charity, said ‘It is great to have such a treatment for prostate cancer patients with advanced disease, where treatment choices are so limited.’