Urgent:

Do You Support Marco Rubio for the GOP Nomination? Vote Here Now

Urgent:

Who Should the GOP Nominate in 2016? Vote Here Now

Vote Now:

Which Potential GOP Candidate Would You Support in 2016?

U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida still remains a fresh face among 2016 GOP presidential candidates. His proposals have been the target of critics as he sometimes changes views to make plans flexible.Here are seven political positions Rubio has taken over the years in the U.S. Senate:Rubio favors protected borders to prevent the flow of illegal immigrants, but also easing a way for responsible immigrants to enter the country through such procedures as an E-verify system when screening for employment to weed out undocumented workers. He’s been accused of flip-flopping on the issue, but Rubio claims he listens to critics and supporters on his measures to reach conclusions.The Florida senator prefers to look at economic solutions to deal with environmental problems. He does not fully believe in the climate change reports that claim instant remedies are necessary. His question is whether or not the changes are man-made. He is against regulations to curb greenhouse gas emissions.If Rubio appears to conservatives as a compromiser on some issues, he would stand out as a strong military and defense proponent in a 2016 presidential campaign. He supports the idea of sending in U.S. troops to defeat the Islamic State in the Middle East, an idea that is gaining support as Americans become more concerned about brutal terrorist activities. He has positioned himself as an interventionist and even supported President Obama’s plan to arm moderate Syrian rebels in the fight against terrorists.With a strong belief in American exceptionalism, Rubio opposes relying on global institutions for worldwide policy. He does, however, believe in strong involvement by the U.S. abroad. He is particularly concerned about China’s role as a world leader, which has forced labor and other authoritarian measures, and this could spread to other parts of the world, he said.Rubio favors a balanced budget amendment. He has criticized Obama for trying to tax and spend our way out of the current economic problems. Government spending is the reason businesses aren’t growing and hiring, so job growth continues to suffer. Rubio pointed out that the “government has been spending $1 trillion more than it takes in every year,” during the GOP response to the 2013 State of the Union Address.He does not believe gun control laws have any overall effect on the prevention of crime and has worked to oppose restrictions on the right to bear arms, which can benefit him among gun owners in a 2016 campaign. Rubio has a concealed weapon permit, although he does not carry a weapon.Rubio has spoken out against Obamacare, saying many Americans have lost the health insurance plans they wanted under the new regulations. His proposals for affordable health insurance include finding alternatives to employer-based plans through the marketplace, while helping low-income seniors by maintaining Medicare and prescription benefits.