NMSU Dean’s Health Symposium will explore end-of-life planning, care

Date: 04/21/2015

Writer: Tiffany Acosta, 575-646-3929, tfrank@nmsu.edu

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+ Pinterest

New Mexico State University provides educational opportunities to more than just the students on the university’s campuses. As part of its commitment to connecting with the broader community, the College of Health and Social Services is hosting its second Dean’s Health Symposium in Las Cruces.

This year’s one-day seminar, “A Beautiful Death: What will you choose?” is from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. May 1 at the Las Cruces Convention Center. The event is free and open to the public. Registration is required at http://health.nmsu.edu/2015-deans-health-symposium/.



“We hope this event will encourage residents of the area and members of our health care community to come together to talk about what is often a difficult topic for both the health care providers and the family members of a dying person,” said Donna Wagner, interim dean of the College of Health and Social Services.



The conference topics are selected for significance and timeliness. Wagner chose the end-of-life conversation because of her interest in advanced care planning and the importance of engaging the health care workforce to provide meaningful services to the dying patient and his or her family and friends.



The college’s first educational community outreach effort, “Understanding the Affordable Care Act,” was held in 2013. The inaugural event helped prepare residents for the law that went into effect in 2014, which was designed to increase the number of people covered by health insurance and implement numerous health insurance-related reforms.



The 2015 event has options available for consumers and family caregivers as well as clinicians. Workshop topics include legal issues, the conversation across the lifespan, communicating effectively with health professionals, advanced care planning, New Mexico regulations affecting end-of-life care, hospice and palliative care, pharmacological issues at the end of life, assembling and managing the care team and writing an obituary.



The morning session’s keynote speaker will be Margaret Battin, a bioethicist at the University of Utah. She is not only an expert on end of life, but also has a captivating personal story. She and other experts will give presentations throughout the day.



To learn more about Battin’s story visit http://www.tedmed.com/speakers/show?id=308908.