marian galbriath

Several department representatives were in attendance at last week’s meeting of the Coffee County Budget and Finance Committee to request additional funds for unforeseen expenses.

Among those requesting funds was Coffee County Purchasing Officer Andy Farrar, who is asking for funding to replace an out-of-date phone system in the Justice Center.

Farrar told committee members that the existing phone system in the county courtroom building, or Justice Center, frequently shuts down and/or malfunctions so that callers often cannot get through.

Voice mail messages have gone to the wrong recipient at times. In addition, he said, data transmission lines are outdated and insufficient for the building’s computer system.

“They also need a paging system in the building in the event something goes wrong in a courtroom and they have to put the whole building on lockdown, for example,” Farrar said.

Details of the upgrade had not been fully determined, but he said he had obtained preliminary quotes and information from Ben Lomond, whose fiber optic cable runs along Highway 41, and Charter Communications.

“(Circuit Court Clerk) Heather Duncan is willing to pay for part of the upgrades from her own budget, and we’re looking at quotes from different companies, but the final request will be bid out.”

Duncan later said the courts’ phone system has been shutting down intermittently for many years, but recently the problem has spiked into a constant hindrance for members of the public who are trying to pay a fine or check on a court date.

Employees are also frequently hindered from getting work done because they can’t call out, or their fax goes to the wrong location. In some instances, she said, it even becomes a safety issue.

“One time we had someone pass out due to an illness, but we couldn’t get a dial tone to call 911,” she said. “Fortunately, we have cell phones now, but we need a phone and paging system at this building that works right.

“And I want the public to know: we are here every day, and we’re not ignoring the phones, even though it may sound like your calls are not being answered.

“Its just that the phone system shuts down a lot and we have no control over it. We don’t hear any ringing, and then suddenly I start getting emails from people saying they’ve been calling all morning and can’t get through.

“It’s not fair to the public to have a problem like this.”

Duncan said call volume is high from about 8 to 10 a.m., and that often seems to be when it goes out.

“But it’s also after rain storms and other times. So if you don’t get through in the morning, just try back in the afternoon,” she said.

“We want to hold expenses down for the county as much as possible, but this phone system was installed in 1996, and the phones were used even at that time. So these phones are so old at this point, we can’t even get parts for them.”

Duncan said that fortunately, the state allows her department to charge $4 per case to go into a technology fund, from which she feels the phone system would qualify as a justifiable expense.

Farrar said Duncan’s funds could pay for roughly half the cost of a new system for the entire building, which he estimated at around $13,000, but the rest would have to come from elsewhere.

Edinger suggested the capital outlay fund could pay the other half. The committee then passed motion to approve up to $6,000 to be paid from the Capital Outlay Fund, with the remainder to be paid from Duncan’s budget.

New roof for child care center

Maintenance director Robert Gilliam requested a preliminary amount be set aside for a new roof at the Coffee County Child Care Center, which has been leaking during rain.

“It’s a fairly small roof job,” he said, “and we will be bidding out, but I think if we could set aside about $7,000, the bids should come in well under that.”

EMS

EMS Director Michael Bonner requested an additional $246,812 for next year, or 2.5 cents, over his current-year budget of $2.43 million. The extra funds are needed, he said, for his staff’s 2-percent step increases, the 3.85 percent increase for the 27th pay period, a new ambulance and a new ambulance engine.

“We have one ambulance that will be going off-line next year that has to be replaced, but we’ve also had to replace three engines in three years for these Ford ambulances, so I’m guessing we’ll probably need another one next year too,” Bonner said.

The EMS budget is not included in the general fund but is supported for by a 5-cent tax on the annual property tax bill, which generates $500,000, roughly one-quarter of its total budget. EMS tries to cover the remaining 3/4 through its own ambulance billings. However, Bonner said, costs continue to outpace revenues for a number of reasons, including unfunded mandates on the state and federal levels.

One example, Bonner said, was that under the Affordable Care Act, hospitals can no longer be reimbursed by insurance for a patient who returns to the hospital within one week for the same medical reason. If the return visit involves an ambulance, the ambulance transport does not get reimbursed either.

“They’ve talked about the problem (of return visits to hospitals) through some kind of community care service, where EMTs or someone goes to people’s homes to check in on the patient, make sure they’re taking the meds as directed, and so forth, but they haven’t said where that money is going to come from either.”

Bricken then asked why the non-emergency transports, such as those for scheduled dialysis appointments, were not generating more revenues.

“We had all those discussions last year about how the non-emergency truck was supposed to generate more revenues than the emergencies, what happened with that?” he asked.

Commissioner Mark Kelly answered that there were two problems with the non-emergency transport business, one being competition from private ambulance companies, who only service non-emergencies, and the other being that those enrolled in EMT and paramedic programs can become nurses with only one extra semester of schooling.

“If we send our non-emergency truck out, we can’t answer the emergency calls, which we’re required to do, by law,” Kelly said. “The private companies don’t have that problem.

“Plus, (EMS) cannot staff our non-emergency truck when the county only pays $14/hour for a paramedic because the private ambulance companies offer $17 an hour or more in some areas,” Kelly said.

“Plus, if these same people can go to school just one more semester, they can start as a nurse for $30/ hour instead of $14.”

He went on to point out that TennCare and Medicare continue to pay the same flat rate for ambulance transports that only amounts to a small fraction of the actual bill.

“I’ll bring you more revenues as soon as you can get Medicare and TennCare to pay the full amount of their bill,” Kelly said.

“There is only one model nationwide that has a ‘profitable’ ambulance service, and that’s when the fire department and EMS department are combined.

“If we can ever make that happen here, we can have an ambulance service that at least breaks even.”

The next meeting of the budget and finance committee is scheduled for 5 p.m. Tuesday, May 3 in Committee Room 1 of the Coffee County Administrative Plaza in Manchester.