Paul Rodriguez poses with his pet Chihuahuas Chica (top) and Mosca. (Photo: Getty Images)

Sometimes people stop Paul Rodriguez and ask him to tell a joke. And he doesn't really tell jokes.

"Most of my material is just conversational stories," the comedian says. "I'm not really a joke person."

But, you know, he'll give it a whirl.

"I tell them the quickest joke I have," he says. "I say, 'Obama.'

"And then you find out if they're Republican or Democrat by the way they laugh or snarl at you."

Rodriguez hopes for more laughs than snarls, of course, when he performs tonight and Saturday at the new Off the Hook Comedy Club in Gulf Coast Town Center.

The Mexican-American comedian has learned a few things in more than three decades performing in TV shows and movies and on comedy-club stages across the country. For one thing: Politics goes down much smoother when the audience is laughing.

"You can have people totally disagree with you," he says, "as long as they walk out of the show going, 'That guy's full of crap — but it's funny crap!'

"That's what I sell. I'm out there selling funny crap."

Rodriguez, 59, talks about sex, relationships and being Latino in his stand-up act. But he also talks about hard topics like immigration and ObamaCare.

"I'm not a preachy guy," the Los Angeles resident says. "When you come to my show, I'm not trying to change your religion or your political affiliation.

"I just want you to know that these are the things that trouble me, these are the things that rob me of my peace."

Rodriguez talked about many of those things during a recent interview with The News-Press. Here's what he had to say about immigration, his beloved Chihuahuas and how he still gets nervous whenever he steps onto a comedy-club stage.

How are you doing, Paul? I presume you're with your pet Chihuauhuas. Do they go on the road with you?

(laughs)No no, they can't. They're too ornery! They're spoiled! When I go, I put them in a little hotel for dogs.

And why Chihuahuas? [Rodriguez has three named Chica, Mosca and Luna].

Well, I guess I have to stick with my own kind. They understand me. They're small, they're fierce and it takes three of them to make a real dog (laughs)!

Let's talk about your upcoming show at Off the Hook. We have a huge Cuban population in Southwest Florida. How does that change your show?

I was married to a Cuban woman from South Florida and we had a child (Rodriguez lived in Miami for several years). So I'm well versed in the differences between the Cubans and the Mexican Americans.

Cubans are probably the most successful Latinos in America. They're the smallest group, and yet they're probably the biggest economic powerhouse. … I've been to Cuba. It's a different kind of lifestyle. You have to admire their inventiveness. These people can make a satellite dish out of a tin can!

So you tailor your act for the Cubans in the audience?

Yeah, you have to. … You have to more or less be able to think on your feet. When you get to be my age, it's hard to stay hip, you know? You've got to find out what's going on. You've got to go on the Internet. You've got to learn about Candy Crush. You've got to learn about a whole different language: sexting, texting... You have to find material that they can relate to.

I'll get into it. I'll talk about immigration. I'll talk about how the dream of most Cubans is to open a McDonald's in Havana. That sort of thing, you know!

What else do you talk about in your act?

I talk about Lothario on a budget. I talk about all those kind of sexual things. Not blunt and not coarse, but innuendos and material that suits my age, you know? I talk about ObamaCare and the failures of that. And I'll talk about immigration — I've been on the news lately for that.

Yeah, I saw!

I had to go on Spanish television last night to repeat what I said (on CNN two weeks ago). I do believe that we just can't open our doors and say "Everybody come in." We'd turn this country into a third-world country. That's not a very popular view among Mexican Americans, but I think in the long run I'd be a phony if I said different.

It's a barrel of crabs and dangerous waters to go into. But I find comedy in the controversial, really, you know?

It's all in good humor. What I say doesn't have the weight of law or anything. I think it's the job of a comedian to stir the water, to find something where there was nothing.

You still love stand-up, right? You've said that everything you do — TV, movies, whatever — you do just so you can keep performing stand-up comedy.

Absolutely, absolutely! I'm about to start another picture, my 42nd. I really don't see myself as a movie person. I do everything so that my name will resonate, so that they'll go in there (to a comedy club) and say, "Wow, I've heard of this guy! Let's see what he's got."

Why do you like being onstage?

It's the fear of not knowing whether you're going to be successful or whether they're going to look at you and go, "Well, that was a waste of time and money." … There are some nights where I wish I could capture the audience and bring them with me. And there are other nights where that one hour seems like two hours. As long as you go up there and give them your best…

But for the most part, I'm out there hustling. Everyday I'm hustling.

Just like the song.

It's like a preacher without a religion. You're out there just trying to weave and bob and shake away the cobwebs. The last thing I want is for them to be bored. That's something I won't accept. I can accept "That joke isn't funny," but you won't be bored. I'm out there to keep you up. I'm Sominex! That's what I am.

The 10 minutes before I open is the hardest part of doing stand-up. You're second-guessing yourself. I'm always afraid to get in front of an audience. ... You gotta go out there and look into your bag of tricks and, like Felix the Cat, you gotta come up with some magic. For the most part, I'm nervous. But I've learned over the years how to use the nervousness, you know? That shot of adrenaline. It's the most exciting thing I do other than go to bed with a stranger (laughs)!

If You Go

• What: Comedian Paul Rodriguez performs stand-up comedy

• When:8 and 10 p.m. today and Saturday

• Where: Off the Hook Comedy Club is located inside House of Brewz in Gulf Coast Town Center, 10045 Gulf Center Drive, San Carlos Park.

• Tickets: $22 ($30 for VIP tickets)

• Info:389-6901 or offthehookcomedy.com

Charles Runnells (News-Press) (Facebook) @charlesrunnells (Twitter)



Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1rUUAWL