Topics: Border Security, Congress, Felipe Calderon, Immigration, Mexico, Politics News

With the opening of the new Congress, Republican lawmakers have been promising a renewed focus on border security as a supposed cure-all for America’s broken immigration system. Left unaddressed, though, is a simple question: How does border security address the status of millions of undocumented immigrants currently in the United States?

The answer is that it probably won’t, according to a person who knows a thing or two about immigration: Felipe Calderon.

In a recent interview, the former Mexican president told me that he believes the crackdown on undocumented immigration combined with intensified border security has prompted large numbers of undocumented Mexican laborers to remain in the U.S. permanently — even as many prefer to go home — out of fear they will never be able to return.

Calderon, who was president from 2006 to 20012, characterized the primary motive of undocumented Mexican immigrants as economic. Many, he said, are simply seeking to stay in the U.S. for a few years to earn money before returning home with cash to build houses and support families. But, he added, the American border crackdown has made the crossing so treacherous and expensive, many unauthorized immigrants already in the U.S. are staying put.

“Many of them are currently trapped,” Calderon told me. “There are a lot of these people [who] want to be in Mexico eight months every year, but they are unable to go there, because if they cross the border, they will never be able to cross back again.”

Calderon said he believes U.S. lawmakers should consider adding provisions to proposed immigration legislation that would permit “temporary work in a massive way,” but without giving immigrants automatic citizenship.

“I don’t believe that most of the Mexican workers looking for a job in the United States are wanting to be American citizens,” he continued. “They are looking for an opportunity to get economic benefits and actually thinking when they are leaving [Mexico] what will be the way in which they can go back to their own home.”