Thousands of elderly and disabled Californians will be pushed into managed health care plans soon under a state pilot project, but doctors’ groups and patient advocates have found a number of problems with the program that could threaten care for the most medically fragile.

Called Cal MediConnect, the project is touted as a voluntary, three-year pilot. The state’s Department of Health Care Services and the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), described it as a way to “help those eligible receive coordinated medical, behavioral health, and long-term institutional, and home-and community-based services through a single organized delivery system.”

More than 450,000 senior adults and disabled residents from eight counties who are covered under both Medicare and Medi-Cal, known as dual eligibles, will receive or already have been informed about the transition. More than 200,000 Los Angeles County residents have been targeted for the transition, and enrollment is set to begin on July 1. Those who live in San Bernardino, Riverside and San Diego counties will begin their transition on May 1.

But several groups, including the Los Angeles County Medical Association, the Los Angeles Podiatric Medical Society and at least six other nonprofit organizations, have voiced their concern to the state, saying the notices sent to those who are eligible are inadequate and confusing, and there are no forms that clearly give patients the right to opt out.

“If you look at the materials sent out, it requires a high level of reading skill to recognize you have an option,” said Dr. Marshall Morgan, president of the Los Angeles County Medical Association.

“They need to make the opt-out issue very clear,” Morgan said. “A lot of these people are not in the position to understand they have the ability to stay with their doctors and providers. A lot of people are going to be passively moved into this new system. On the one hand, the patients won’t be able to access the doctors they are seeing. On the other hand, doctors and podiatrists will be unable to take care of those patients, and it will be an emotional financial blow to both of them.”

Morgan and others said they also are concerned with the staggered way the program is starting. Enrollments were set to begin on April 1 in all eight counties. But there have been some bumps along the way. In Los Angeles, L.A. Care was unable to take some patients because of an issue with Medicare, according to a document on the Cal MediConnect site. The start date was pushed back to July 1.

Officials from the California Department of Health Care Services said integrating Medicare and Medi-Cal for dual eligibles has long been a goal of the medical community and the program is ready to go everywhere except in Orange County. But DHCS officials also acknowledged they have received letters of concern.

Advertisement

“We continue to work with stakeholders, counties, and health plans to improve the managed care enrollment process for members,” DHCS said in a written statement. “We will use the valuable information we gain from meeting with these parties to ensure all members have the necessary information they need to make the right decision for their integrated care.”

The statement also referred to an opt-out form that would be included with the letters.

In February, six groups — California Health Advocates, Disability Rights California, Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund, National Health Law Program, National Senior Citizens Law Center and the Western Center on Law and Poverty, sent a letter to the state saying the program should be postponed until the letters and forms are changed, and the process refined.

“Pushing forward in the face of inadequate notices and enrollment systems and an unprepared call center deprives beneficiaries of the right to make an informed choice and meaningfully participate in their healthcare, one of the main goals of the Coordinated Care Initiative,” the letter stated.

Other concerns remain, including the scope of the project.

“It was supposed to be a demonstration project to see if it will work,” said Dr. Gabriel Halperin, president of the Los Angeles Podiatric Medical Society. Halperin cares for patients with diabetes and circulation problems. Disruption in their care means ulcers and wounds could fester, resulting in amputation.

“They were only supposed to try this with a small fraction of people, but it’s basically throwing the majority of the dual eligible overboard without knowing the outcome,” Halperin said. “Who did they pick on? The most vulnerable of patients. They are the ones who have been financially fragile.”

One of Halperin’s patients, Maria Morales, said her experience with changing insurers illustrates how her quality of care has changed. A former dual eligible, Morales said she suffers from diabetes and arthritis, and had been happy with her doctors when she had Medi-Cal and Medicaid. But a woman representing an insurance company who came to Morales’ apartment complex last year where many seniors reside, told them they had to replace Medi-Cal with a health plan as part of the Affordable Care Act.

“I asked her, ‘Will I keep my doctors?’ She said, ‘Yes, nothing will change, you will keep your doctors’,” Morales, 77, of Los Angeles said. “But instead, I was sent to clinics very far away. I had such magnificent doctors and then they sent me off to doctors who didn’t know me or my case.”

One of the newer doctors diagnosed Morales with a tumor in her uterus, but Morales said there have been no examinations or surgeries planned.

“Now (the insurer) is sending me bills and letters charging me and I don’t understand what they want,” Morales said. “I not only feel sick. But I feel angry. I’m stressed. Who knew that such a thing could happen?”