Governor Cuomo’s runningmate also won her primary Tuesday over Columbia Law Professor Tim Wu, according to the Associated Press. That race made literal headlines after Wu gained several large endorsements, including that of the New York Times and the Public Employees Federation.

But Kathy Hochul had significant advantages over Wu. Besides previously holding public office as a Congresswoman in Western New York, she also had the advantage of many big guns, including the Governor himself. Former Sec. of State Hillary Clinton recorded a robocall supporting Cuomo and Hochul that went out just last week. That, along with endorsements from other top-level Democrats, like NYC Mayor Bill DeBlasio, Senators Chuck Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand, and many more gave her an edge up in the statewide election.

Wu, a former government employee and tech-field mini-celebrity, was criticized heavily for lacking experience as an elected official. He responded to that criticism with his experience working in government and as a leader in the tech industry. Wu is well-known as the creator of the term “net neutrality”, and his campaign showed. He, along with Teachout spoke out against the Time Warner Cable-Comcast merger often throughout their campaign.

Teachout and Wu also had a robocall sent out by actor and anti-fracking activist Mark Ruffalo. That may have helped with name recognition, but it’s worth noting that only a small number of New Yorkers come out to vote in even the general election, much less the primary.

Kathy Hochul now has to overcome Chemung County Sheriff Chris Moss, who is running alongside Westchester County Executive Rob Astorino on the Republican party line. Hochul has faced criticism for holding what some call a conservative voting record in Congress. During her time in office, she voted against parts of the Affordable Care Act and was opposed to granting driver’s licenses to undocumented immigrants. She has since taken more progressive positions on specific issues, in her support for the DREAM Act and firm stance as pro-choice.

(AP)