The Eye

'Sleepy Hollow' Season 2 Spoilers: Evil Coin Making Townspeople Act Out Violent Fantasies, 'One Tree Hill' Actor Matt Barr Guest-Starring [VIDEO]

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Fox) They're after the 'Root of All Evil'.

On tomorrow night's episode of "Sleepy Hollow", titled 'Root of all Evil', some of the town's "usually benevolent" residents pull what seem to be emotional and psychological one-eighties. After a violent bank robbery, Ichabod (Tom Mison) realizes the Judas Coin, a "centuries old piece of mystical currency with the power to bring the previously dormant but decidedly deadly urges of its bearer to the fore," is to blame.



He and Abbie (Nicole Beharie) deduce that Henry Parish (John Noble) is at fault, but aren't sure what his end game is. That's where Nick Hawley (Matt Barr), a "highly capable local adventurer and purveyor of rare and mystical artifacts" comes in.



Ichabod is weary of Nick at first, but they put aside their differences and discover that the next target of the Henry and the Judas Coin is someone close to the Witnesses, "one whose darkest thoughts — if left unchecked — could have deadly consequences for the pair."



Could Henry be headed for Captain Irving (Orlando Jones) at the psych hospital?



RELATED: San Diego Comic-Con 2014 'Sleepy Hollow' Panel Announces New Characters, Katrina's Powers, and 'Twistory'

While Ichabod and Abbie are investigating the Judas Coin, Jenny (Lyndie Greenwood), just released from jail, discovers a surprising secret about the new Sheriff, Leena Reyes (Sakina Jaffrey) — a secret that has to do with the Mills sisters.



Katrina (Katia Winter), meanwhile, plots to "drive a wedge" between the two Horesmen holding her captive, hoping she can distract them long enough to escape.



Sounds exciting! Are you looking forward to the new episode? If not, the below clip might get you pumped up!







SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.