Chief Justice John Roberts, left, and Justice Anthony Kennedy, along with other members of the Supreme Court, attend a State of the Union address in 2013. (Photo: Pool photo from Getty Images)

WASHINGTON — When the Supreme Court upheld President Obama's health care law by the slimmest of margins in 2012, conservatives blasted Chief Justice John Roberts' majority opinion and accused the court of abandoning its principles.

But when the court gave same-sex marriage the green light across major sections of the country last week, the battle cry from conservatives was muted at best.

The difference reflects a realization on the part of conservatives: The Supreme Court under Chief Justice John Roberts, despite having five members named by Republican presidents, cannot be counted on to reflect conservative views. That's particularly true on issues affecting gays and lesbians, when Justice Anthony Kennedy, the court's swing vote, holds sway.

"This isn't the Roberts court. This is the Kennedy court," said Ed Whelan, president of the Ethics and Public Policy Center. "The idea that this is a conservative court is a fallacy."

Those low expectations prompted many of the nation's leading conservative legal theorists to accept the court's action last Monday, when it denied officials in five states the opportunity to appeal lower court decisions striking down same-sex marriage bans. The denial affected six other states as well, raising to 30 the number of states with controlling court opinions upholding the right to same-sex marriage.

Had they voted to hear one or more cases, only to have gay marriage declared constitutional nationwide on a likely 5-4 vote, the result could have been worse, many conservatives acknowledged.

"There's no reason for the (conservative) justices to charge up a hill that they don't think they can take," said Randy Barnett, professor of legal theory at Georgetown University Law Center, who helped orchestrate the original challenge to Obamacare.

But eventually, many on the right say, the court's conservatives must stand and fight, if only to make clear their view of the law.

"If you're a judge, you were put in the position to interpret the law as you see fit," says Josh Blackman, a conservative legal blogger and assistant law professor at South Texas College of Law. "I think this is a very dangerous pattern. … You put aside your own jurisprudence. You put aside your own view of the law."

Conservatives' views of the court have changed radically by the year, depending on the decisions issued. They can be greatly appreciative of rulings with which they agree but fickle when the tables are turned.

In 2001, shortly after the court's ruling in Bush v. Gore gave the presidency to George W. Bush, 80% of self-identified Republicans viewed the court favorably in Gallup polling. After the court's Obamacare ruling in 2012 and gay-marriage rulings last year, only 30% did.

This year, after the more conservative justices gave family-owned corporations with religious objections an exemption from providing health insurance coverage for contraception in a case involving Hobby Lobby stores, the number rose back to 51%.

Though the justices may assume they will get a chance to clear up the constitutionality of same-sex marriage in the near future, it's possible all federal appeals courts will rule the same way. If that happens, the Supreme Court may never weigh in — and conservatives may never benefit from the type of backlash that resulted after the court legalized abortion in 1973.

That would leave a hodgepodge of legal reasoning on same-sex marriage from the nation's federal appeals courts, which have judged states' bans unconstitutional on different legal bases. Some have called marriage a fundamental right. Others have ruled on the 14th Amendment's guarantee of due process and equal protection.

"I think that it will be an incredible black mark on the Supreme Court as an institution," said Chris Gacek, a senior fellow at the Family Research Council. "Five of them have to belly up to the bar and say, 'We're redefining marriage in America, and this is why and how.' "

Presumably, only the justices know what happened in their private conference, when four votes did not materialize for accepting any of the gay-marriage cases from Utah, Oklahoma, Virginia, Indiana or Wisconsin. But since most of the petitions were filed by opponents of same-sex marriage, the court's conservatives would have been most likely to step forward.

For that reason, much of the criticism has focused on Roberts, the former Reagan administration official and federal appeals judge who sided with the liberals on Obamacare.

"The chief justice has this preference for showing unanimity and not showing divisiveness," Blackman said. "The pattern is always avoid a fractured 5-4 by capitulating. That doesn't bode well for the future."

John Eastman, chairman of the National Organization for Marriage, which has led opposition to same-sex marriage in states and nationally, said Roberts "proved that there was a reason that he kind of studiously avoided being identified as a conservative back in the days of the Reagan administration, because he's not."

Conservatives say the decision to leave same-sex marriage up to federal appeals courts, at least for the time being, cannot be called an example of judicial restraint normally championed by conservatives.

"That term properly describes deference to the democratic process," said Curt Levey, president of the Committee for Justice. "What the Supreme Court is deferring to here is just the opposite — namely, lower courts striking down the state gay-marriage bans that resulted from the democratic process."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1xLDsTo