Band leader Jack Ross Courtesy of Nick Briggs/Carnival Film and Television Limited 2013 for MASTERPIECE

Is “Downton Abbey” still the Super Bowl’s biggest ratings foe? We’ll find out soon enough, but here’s what happened in case you chose the big game over the Crawleys.

Lord Grantham’s birthday is coming up, and Rose–always up for a good party–decides to hire a jazz band as a surprise (and the return of Jack Ross). To help orchestrate the logistics, she lets Mrs. Hughes in on the secret, with Baxter catching only that there is a secret between the two of them–without the context of the birthday.

When Thomas presses Baxter for an update on news upstairs, she reveals what scant information she knows. Thomas thinks something big is under way, when all Rose wants to do is hide the band downstairs. He questions Mrs. Hughes after seeing Rose leave her office, but she will only say they could all be affected. Thomas takes this as a bad sign and pressures Baxter to find out more information. “You’ll think of something,” he says to her when she asks how she’s supposed to get Mrs. Hughes to reveal anything.

Upstairs, Lady Grantham reveals to Mary that she believes something has gone wrong between Bates and Anna. “Anna’s been hurt somehow and Bates feels he should’ve protected her,” says Cora. “I don’t want any of that to leave this room, Baxter.”

Baxter reveals to Thomas that she’s not comfortable in this eavesdropping role. “You knew the conditions when you came here,” he warns. Baxter airs her reservations about harming someone who is polite and considerate. “What you have to decide is where your first loyalties are,” says Thomas.

On Lord Grantham’s birthday, Lady Rose comes downstairs to inform the servants of the band’s arrival. Everyone is game until Jack Ross steps inside, and shock waves ripple through the room at the sight of a black man at Downton!

Let the awkwardness begin. Carson asks Ross if he’s ever thought of visiting Africa. “I’m no more African than you are,” replies Ross. While the older folk are uncomfortable (save for Mrs. Hughes), we see that times are changing, with giggling maids waving shyly at Ross downstairs, and Rose’s continued interest in him.

When dinner is over, Rose unveils her surprise, with the jazz band playing in the next room. As the initial shock upon seeing Ross washes over Lord Grantham, Edith asks, “Who is this singer and how did he get here?” But Lord Grantham accepts it and happily starts dancing. It’s surprising that Edith is the one having such a hard time with Ross’s presence, as she has been the symbol of many of the changing times: learning how to drive, writing for a newspaper and falling in love with a married editor. Even the Dowager Countess lectures her on being provincial: “Try and let your time in London rub off on you a little more.”

The jazz party is a success, and Mary and Lord Grantham decide to pay the bill for the band. When Mary goes downstairs late in the night to find Ross, she discovers he’s not alone. Rose and Ross are kissing, and Mary announces her presence to give them time to recover. “I’ve been so well looked after here,” Ross says, while glancing at Rose. The family was fine enough to let a black band leader into the house and enjoy some jazz, but how will they react to an interracial romance?

Introducing Charles Blake

Evelyn Napier, Lady Mary and Charles Blake Courtesy of Nick Briggs/Carnival Film and Television Limited 2013 for MASTERPIECE

Moving on with estate matters, the family discuss Tamworth pigs as part of Downton’s move to take on intensive farming. When Mary asks Branson about his intentions to move to America, he reveals that he won’t go until the pig business is up and running.

Meanwhile, Evelyn Napier makes good on his promise to stay at Downton, bringing his boss Charles Blake. But Blake doesn’t make a great first impression on Mary, who is disappointed to learn that the men aren’t here to help the landowners, but instead are looking at more practical matters like food production.

The mounting tragedies at Downton are brought together in a poignant moment with the widows and widowers of the family: Isobel, Mary and Tom. They reminisce about their partners, and the “madness” that came with love. Isobel recalls being almost sick with love at her engagement to Reginald. For Tom, it was like being hypnotized–all he could think about was Sybil for weeks. Mary remembers standing outside in the snow without a coat, but not thinking of anything except Matthew’s proposal. “Well, aren’t we the lucky ones?” says Isobel with a smile.

During dinner, the verbal sparring continues between Mary and Blake. When she laments the plight of pigs, Blake asks Mary if she eats bacon and sausage. She says yes, to which he replies: “Then you’re a sentimentalist who cannot face the truth.” Blake is having a promising start as a potential suitor for Mary, who hasn’t taken to fawning gentlemen (Gillingham). Her past attractions have either had an element of mystique (Pamuk) or challenge (Matthew).

Napier seems to recognize this, as he gazes with concern at the pair from across the table. “I’m afraid Charles is challenged by anyone with a sense of entitlement,” he says to Lady Crawley. And then comments, “She’s welcome to take charge of me.” Although that seems unlikely if he keeps introducing Mary to interesting men.

Later, when Mary wants to know what estates Blake is investigating, he smiles and steps away. “You seem to have brought a traitor into our midst,” Mary tells Napier. Blake isn’t enthralled with Mary either. “She’s the type who demands all this as a right, but she wants it on a plate,” he says. “She won’t work for it and she won’t fight for it, and that type doesn’t deserve to survive.” Napier reveals that Mary feels the same way about Blake.

Tom remarks with surprise at having jazz at Downton. And, in an effort to persuade him to stay, Mrs. Crawley says: “Things can happen at Downton that no one imagined even a few years ago.” The Dowager Countess has thoughts about jazz, too: “Do you think any of them know what the others are playing?”

More Trouble for Edith

Lady Edith Courtesy of Nick Briggs/Carnival Film and Television Limited 2013 for MASTERPIECE

Edith has gotten precious few minutes in these last episodes, while still undergoing one of the show’s biggest character transformations, and enduring some of its more shocking developments. While still waiting for letters that don’t arrive and placing calls that go unanswered, Edith finally breaks down in front of her mother, saying that Michael has “vanished into thin air.”

A letter arrives in the evening post, confirming suspicions surrounding her visit to Dr. Goldman in London: Her symptoms are consistent with those associated with the first trimester of pregnancy. Aunt Rosamund’s prediction is starting to bear fruit, so to speak.

Lord Grantham later finds his daughter weeping by the fire, and asks her what’s the matter, calling her “my most darling girl.” Edith, who can never let go of that cynicism that has been the hallmark of her upbringing, says, “But I’m not your most darling girl, am I.”

“I love all my children equally,” he replies. “I don’t know why people say that when it’s almost never true,” she says sadly. Edith reveals that there’s a detective in Munich working with the German police to find out what happened to Michael.

Mr. & Mrs. Bates

Anna and Bates go to dinner at the fancy Netherby. Courtesy of Nick Briggs/Carnival Film and Television Limited 2013 for MASTERPIECE

Anna is in better spirits after reconciling with Bates, but now her husband appears tormented by what happened. They carry on, treating each other as angelically as ever, but it’s not enough.

In a scene that reflects their situation–Bates lights a lantern in a dark room, illuminating the pair but casting shadows all around them–Anna expresses her fears. “I want to make some new memories–good memories,” says Anna, “So it’s not as if all our happiness was before.”

“I’m happy whenever I look at you,” insists Bates. “But you’re not, are you,” says Anna. “Everything is shadowed.” The couple decide to have dinner at the Netherby Hotel in the evening as a way to momentarily forget about their worries.

But when they arrive at the restaurant, we get a sense of what it’s like to be in the lower class. A snooty waiter claims to not have their reservation. The waiter says the restaurant is full with Lady Grantham’s large party dining there. When Anna and Bates say they know her, the waiter doesn’t believe it. That is, until Lady Grantham comes over and greets them. The transformation of the waiter’s demeanor is remarkable, as his tone changes and he promises to fix the situation. “Please excuse the little hiccup earlier,” he whispers to them. “It will be the last.”

Kitchen Shuffling

Daisy is relieved that Alfred isn’t leaving just yet for cooking school, and can hardly contain herself. But wait! A letter arrives from the Ritz arrives in the mail, and he has gotten a spot after all. One of the other candidates dropped out after getting a job. “I was fifth–see Jimmy?” says Alfred, who has to go to London as soon as possible. Everyone’s delighted except for Daisy. Jimmy, being spiteful, asks why Daisy hasn’t congratulated him (now it is clear why Thomas was attracted to him).

Alfred is nervous, but Jimmy dismissively wonders why he should be nervous. Carson sticks it to him: “You’re nervous because you’re intelligent, Alfred. Only stupid people are foolhardy.”

Ivy finds an upset Daisy in the kitchen and says she’s sorry. But Daisy lashes out and blames Ivy for driving Alfred away because she picked Jimmy.

Upstairs, Alfred has a chance to express his gratitude to the Crawleys. He also says that Carson has been “a kind–and wonderful teacher,” much to everyone’s (including Carson, whose expression softens) surprise. But a character transformation can’t be expected overnight. When Mrs. Hughes asks Carson to contact Molesley to replace Alfred, he objects. That would involve some backpedaling on his part considering their last exchange. Carson goes on about expecting gratitude from his workers, even as the women around him–Mrs. Patmore and Baxter included–all think it most prudent to bring Molesley back.

When it’s time to leave, Alfred says goodbye to Daisy privately. “I’m sorry if I’ve hurt you,” he says. “You’re a good person and you’re going to make some man very happy one day, but I’m afraid it was never going to be me.”

We later see Molesley making his way back to Downton to confirm his “willingness to return” to the life of a footman. Carson has the perfect opportunity now–without having to ask awkwardly–to fill the position. But he just can’t seem to let anything go, and instead says he is looking for more enthusiasm in a new employee. “I don’t want to humiliate you,” says Carson. “You feel you’re meant for better things and I won’t contradict you.” Even though Molesley says he’s willing to do it, Carson says, “You have your pride, and I respect you for it.” Unfortunately Carson cannot recognize his own pride and obstinance in this matter.

Jimmy appears to still be interested in Ivy, and takes her to the movies. On a bench outside after their date, they start to kiss until Jimmy gets a little too pushy and Ivy stops him. He reminds her how nice he’s been to her, taking her to the theater and cinema, and how he’s not getting anything in return. Ivy says she’s not playing his game, and storms off. “Alfred would never have done such a thing,” she later tells the ladies in the kitchen. “He had too much respect.” Well, that ship has sailed.

On Lord Grantham’s birthday, Mrs. Hughes decides to ask Molesley to the house to help serve tea to the servants, without first telling Carson. This irritates Carson, but it also gives him a chance to save face and hire Molesley as a footman after wall, without looking like he was softening his stance.

When Molesley is back serving dinner upstairs, the Dowager Countess remarks at how difficult it will be to have to call him by his first name, Joseph, instead. (The more senior servant staff is always referred to by their last names only–think Carson, O’Brien and Bates–while the junior staff uses their first names–Daisy and Alfred. Historically, some staff were even given generic names.) Lord Grantham asks if it’s fine for the household continue to use Molesley’s last name, Carson stiffly agrees. It looks like the tension between Molesley and Carson shall continue.

An Honest Gardener

The Dowager Countess, playing Nancy Drew after the disappearance of a paper knife in the last episode, tries to figure out what happened to a netsuke carving she had on her desk. She questions her butler Spratt about who was in the room, and once again makes it clear she suspects Pegg.

Later on, we learn Pegg has indeed been fired–without any hard evidence–much to Mrs. Crawley’s outrage. “All I know is this: I find Pegg in this room, and my paper knife is gone,” says Violet, defending her actions to Isobel. “He comes into the room again and a very valuable piece of Japanese netsuke is missing.”

Isobel starts on a tirade about focusing too much on material objects instead of justice. “I wonder you don’t just set fire to the Abbey and dance ‘round it, painted with woad and howling,” says Violet. As the tension grows, Spratt walks in with the missing netsuke, mistakenly lost during a cleaning. Ah, if only real life worked this way with such impeccable timing! “I’m very relieved,” says Violet, unconvincingly. Spratt gives one of his priceless Sprattly looks and departs.

Despite this, Violet says she won’t apologize to Pegg, saying he might have sneaked it into the maid’s bucket when nobody was looking. “How you hate to be wrong,” says Isobel. “I wouldn’t know,” says Violet, “I’m not familiar with the sensation.” She digs in her heels and says, without any doubt, that he took the knife.

But Isobel is nothing if not determined. She sets up a scheme to enter Violet’s house while the Dowager Countess is away. This gives Isobel a chance to search the room thoroughly, and she finds the paper knife wedged along the side of a chair. She gives it to Spratt to share her discovery with Violet.

Later on, Isobel and Dr. Clarkson show up at Violet’s, with Isobel eager to lecture Violet about injustice again. But after some bluster, Violet reveals that she’s already hired back young Pegg. “If you wish to understand things you must come out from behind your prejudice and listen,” says Violet. For once Isobel is speechless. “I’d say that was game, set and match for Lady Grantham,” says Dr. Clarkson.

Family Problems in America

Cora’s brother Harold writes to Lord Grantham about a bind he’s in regarding oil leases. “Why is he bothering you with it?” asks Edith. It sounds like more money problems ahead.

Readers, what did you think of this episode? Leave your thoughts in the comments.

Write to Robin Kawakami at Robin.Kawakami@wsj.com. Follow @robinha