Welcome, President Erika Beck.

Ventura County extends its greetings to you and congratulations on being named president of our state university, CSU Channel Islands.

By now, someone has filled you in on the long, tortuous history of our effort to secure a state university here in our county. It finally came to fruition in 2002 when students started showing up for classes on the old Camarillo State Hospital campus.

Frankly, we think we stumbled a bit those first few years. It's as if we were so relieved to have finally gotten our own campus that the community didn't know what to do with it. But what started as a nodding acquaintance has grown into a beautiful relationship.

We're pretty proud of our higher education here in Ventura County. We have three community colleges that truly represent their parts of the county and have become cores of those communities. We have California Lutheran University, which has provided outstanding educational opportunities, in addition to becoming a central part of our lives, since its founding in 1961. Thomas Aquinas College, tucked into the hills near the Los Padres National Forest, offers a vigorous and unique education based on teaching the great books in a Catholic tradition.

You are taking over the leadership of the new kid in that group. But it's one that has plenty of ambitions.

You have the blueprint for that in the university's audacious 2025 Vision Plan. It calls for a nearly doubling of enrollment to 10,000 students by 2025, and a doubling of classrooms, labs and offices, plus amenities like a recreation center and conference facilities, plus more student housing and maybe even an athletic team or two.

It also envisions a steady development of new degree programs, both undergraduate and graduate.

We assume you will bring your own vision to the actual implementation and development of that plan. We look forward as a community to engaging you and your new leadership team in that conversation.

We anticipate and desire that we, as a community, will continue to play a major role in the development of this university. The 2025 Vision Plan was built on the foundation that the state of California would not pay for the growth of this university. Its future is contingent on us. The public-private partnership will range from basic direct contributions to unique arrangements where private developers might build and operate facilities like student apartments on the campus or a fitness center.

There is a history to that. The University Glen housing development showed an initial creative way to provide nearby housing and a source of university revenue through its site development authority. The hiring of creative faculty led to the development of fascinating interdisciplinary programs, the matching of community needs with Channel Islands' education plans and the creation of unique projects like the Institute for Social Business and the Henry L. "Hank" Lacayo Institute for Workforce and Community Studies.

We are ready to continue as partners. We want to continue to send our children to you. We want you to continue to educate them and challenge them and help them grow. And then send them back so they can dig their roots even deeper into Ventura County.

Dr. Beck, we hope you and your family get settled comfortably and enjoy our paradise. We are ready to work with you. There is much to do.