Culture of the 1960s and '70s didn't welcome soldiers back from war, veteran recalls

Click through this slideshow of each video we've done to represent our Vietnam veterans in this series.

The Vietnam War was unpopular because there was a climate of peace and love in the United States, said Ken Curry, who was involved in Vietnam in 1970 and 1972.

"We love people. You're cool. We're like this," Curry said, raising his first two fingers in the peace symbol to describe the 1960s mentality.

"That's the way it was. It permeated the culture. There were a lot of protests from young people who hated the war because they were indoctrinated."

Curry was with the Air Force as a co-pilot and then flight commander, and flew a total of 157 missions in North Vietnam.

When he returned from his three stints to Vietnam, he said that people scowled and gave him dirty looks.

Welcoming them home Thank you: Community members are invited to thank Vietnam veterans for their service at 599-1218. Leave a voice message, which will be used in a story. Use this call button to have the service call you so you can leave your thank you message. Share your story: Vietnam veterans who have stories to share, with a focus on Vietnam homecomings, can call 669-5050 ext. 530.

"Most guys had long hair in those days. You stood out if you had short hair. You almost always got questioned," he said.

Once people knew he had flown B-52s and dropped bombs, the conversation sometimes just ended.

He said that military people questioned their service and there was even some dissension in the ranks in the later part of 1972.

"I thought that was wrong," he said. "You take an oath. You take that oath seriously that you're going to defend your country and give your life. You're committed. For anybody to be questioning anything they're doing is wrong."

The B-52 he flew in 1972 was the first ever B-52 to be struck by a surface-to-air missile, Curry said. He and his crew of five were on a mission to drop a bomb on an airfield in North Vietnam.

Advertisement

It was a high-danger area and the North Vietnamese immediately started firing. Curry's plane was the second in a three-ship formation. He began evasive maneuvers in the air, gliding higher and back and forth.

A missile with a proximity fuse -- meaning it would explode if it sensed metal -- detonated 100 feet off the left wing and sprayed the length of the fuselage of the plane. Curry's navigator and radar navigator were covered in fuel and scared. However, none of the team members were hurt. They landed in Da Nang on four out of six engines. The plane never caught on fire.

This was the first time Curry had ever landed in the country, since he usually took off from outside bases like Guam, Okinawa and Thailand. Engineers counted almost 60 large holes punched into the body of the plane.

"God had his hand on me and my crew. Otherwise, we wouldn't be here. I can't explain why no one got hurt. I can't," he said.

It also was a rough time after the war, Curry said.

"No one ever said those magic words that means a lot to every veteran, 'Thank you for your service,'" he said. "It was, 'You jerks.' 'You bums.' 'You killers.'"

And it wasn't over quickly. It lasted. Which is why Curry is thankful that those feelings turned around and people care today not only for his generation, but for the current generation.

"There is nothing more important than honoring our troops and recognizing their willingness to give their lives for our country," he said. "I did it willingly. I never even thought of it."

Curry didn't realize until two years ago that he had suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder for years. The diagnosis of this kind of trauma disorder wasn't known back at the time of the war. It was called combat fatigue and other names.

Curry had nightmares, anger, anxiety and trouble sleeping. He finally went to the Larimer County Veterans Office, which he described as a wonderful place, and got hooked up with a Vietnam vet support group in Fort Collins.

"I didn't realize how it had impacted me in so many ways," he said. "Thousands have been damaged but didn't know they were damaged."

From everyone at the Reporter-Herald to veterans who have served: Thank you for your service and welcome home.

Note from the Editor: This is the third in a series of weekly articles on Vietnam veterans. Veterans Day is Nov. 11 and the theme this year is a welcome home to Vietnam vets. Look for feature stories on Vietnam veterans every Monday through Nov. 11. Community members are invited to thank Vietnam veterans for their service at 599-1218.

Jessica Benes can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 530, or jbenes@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaBenes. Read her blog at jessicabenes.com.