The president and co-founder of Causeway Capital, Mr. Harry Hartford, cited three major European pharmaceutical stocks as his top international value picks in an interview to Barrons.com on Wednesday. The stocks include London-based GlaxoSmithKline plc (ADR) (NYSE:GSK), Switzerland-based Novartis AG (ADR) (NYSE:NVS) and France-based Sanofi SA (ADR) (NYSE:SNY).

The veteran portfolio manager has an impressive track-record of managing to pick the most profitable stocks in foreign developed markets. His $7.2 billion Causeways flagship International Value fund has a ‘Gold’ rating from Morningstar and has outperformed 91% of its peers over the last five years. The fund returns an annual 9.77% on average. To put things in perspective, the MSCI ACWI ex USA Index returned an annual 6.72% on average during the same time. So far this year the fund has grown by 9.46%, slightly higher than the benchmark return of 8.63%.

Mr. Hartford has only good things to say about the future prospects of foreign pharmaceutical industry. He believes the patent cliff that hit blockbuster drugs of most pharma giants last year is almost nearing its end and it’s now time that the aggressive research and development spending on new drug pipelines start reaping results.

“It’s not dirt cheap as it was four years ago when people were worried about Obamacare and the patent cliff, but there is decent scope for continued improvement,” said Mr. Hartford.

GlaxoSmithKline

The largest drug-maker in Britain has been going through a tough time lately, mostly on the back of intense competition, generics, pricing pressures and corruption scandals faced last year.

Mr. Hartford, however, believes the company is swiftly moving towards improvement. Glaxo struck a $20 billion-plus three-way asset swap deal with Novartis early in 2015 according to which its cancer drug unit was sold off to Novartis while Glaxo acquired vaccines business of the Swiss company. Apart from that, the two companies jointly created one of the world’s biggest consumer healthcare ventures. According to Mr. Hartford, the deal refocuses Glaxo’s expertise on core operations relating to vaccines, consumer healthcare and pharmaceuticals. Glaxo CEO Andrew Witty himself describes the deal as value generating that favors the company by divesting risky cancer drug development and investing into stable and long-standing vaccines and consumer healthcare including over-the-counter products.

Glaxo said in a statement to investors yesterday that the company expects savings from the deal to start accruing by 2016. Mr. Hartford also remains optimistic about the company’s R&D efforts which have been mostly directed to a promising respiratory drug pipeline over the last year. Glaxo faces intense generic competition for its top-selling asthma drug Advair in both US and EU – the drug’s sales slipped 20% YoY to $6.9 billion in 2014.

Novartis

Mr. Hartford expects the GSK deal to serve Novartis well. The company has also recently sold off its animal health unit to Eli Lilly and Co (NYSE:LLY) and is well on its way to consolidating its business around three key areas of pharmaceuticals, eye-care and generics or biosimilars (knockoffs of biologic drugs). The renewed concentration on eye-care and biosimilars can help the company realize a margin growth amounting to three percentage points, as estimated by Mr. Hartford.

Novartis also struck a $750 million deal with a small biotech firm Aduro Bitotech soon after securing the GSK deal. Aduro develops immune-therapy cancer drugs that aim to harness the body’s immune system to fight cancer. The company further established a new immune-oncology unit at Cambridge, headed by former Dana-Farber Cancer Institute researcher Glenn Dranoff. The company’s restructuring around oncology treatments and consecutive set of new deals have started reaping dollar benefits already. Novartis attributes $200 million of income to Glaxo’s oncology assets for March alone.

Another bright spot in Novartis’ future is an experimental heart failure drug, LCZ696, which is expected to be approved by US Food and Drug Administration by this year’s third quarter. The drug is tagged as a definite blockbuster with analyst consensus placing peak sales at above $10 billion. The company is also well on its way to launch the first-ever biosimilar in the US, a cancer drug Zarxio.

Sanofi

Sanofi has been undergoing a rough patch especially in its key diabetes business that saw a larger-than-expected decline in sales in the first-quarter of fiscal year 2015 due to low pricing of the company’s blockbuster drug Lantus. The low diabetes sales are expected to continue at least till the end of this year. Sanofi stock has been down 8% over the last year, as investors lose confidence in the company’s key growth driver – diabetes drugs.

However, Mr. Hartford expects the company to significantly benefit from drug launches in emerging markets, particularly in Asia. Sanofi currently derives 15% of its sales from Asian emerging markets, where most currencies are either pegged completely or partially to US dollar. As dollar continues its upward trend, the company predicts foreign exchange fluctuations to add about 12% to 2015 Earnings per Share, up from a previous 5% estimate.

Furthermore, Sanofi’s new diabetes drug Toujeo – an advanced version of Lantus – was launched in the US recently. The drug’s sales are expected to be closely followed over the next few months, as per London-based Mirabaud Securities analyst Nick Turner. Toujeo can potentially help cover up lost dollars from Lantus’ price cuts in the US.