Topics: ebola, Ebola outbreak, ebola virus, Editor's Picks, Fox News, gretchen carlson, Joe Scarborough, Media Criticism, Peggy Noonan, political pundits, Punditry, pundits, Ron Fournier, Wall Street Journal, Media News, Politics News

Being a pundit means that you have a preternatural ability to speak for “America.” The magic of punditry, the stuff that makes cable news hum, is the ability of the pundit to divine through telepathy or clairvoyance or good old fashioned gut feelings what “America” is thinking about any given issue at any given moment. Once the divination is complete, the pundit goes on television or writes a newspaper column and informs America of how they feel.

There are masters of this craft, like Wall Street Journal columnist Peggy Noonan, whose connection with “America” is so finely tuned that she can sense the minutest vibrations in public sentiment and interpret them for her audience. When news broke that a man in Texas had been diagnosed with Ebola, Peggy Noonan opened her mind to the country and sensed what they were feeling. With the IRS scandal and the Secret Service failures, Noonan discovered, America just wasn’t ready to trust the government when it said the Ebola situation was under control:

Ebola will not, all agreed, produce a full-fledged American epidemic. “We are stopping it in its tracks in this country,” Dr. Frieden said. That may be true. But nobody thinks it because government doctors and professionals said it. Americans do not have confidence in what The Officials tell them anymore.

The skeptics among you might be quick to point out that Peggy Noonan, as a Republican and a conservative, is herself mistrustful of the Obama administration, so when she claims to be speaking for “Americans,” couldn’t it be that she’s simply projecting her own opinions onto the American public writ large?

Well, to all you logic-bound naysayers out there, if Noonan is wrong, then how do you explain the fact that so many other pundits arrived at the same exact conclusion?

Like NBC’s Joe Scarborough:

Right now, a lot of Americans are seeing what happened in Dallas and looking at your laundry list, what happened with the secret service, what happened with the IRS, what happened with the VA, what happened with ISIS being a JV team. So when anybody, any member of the government says, “Hey, just relax, everything’s going to be okay,” Americans don’t believe that.

And National Journal’s Ron Fournier:

Trust. There’s that word again. How much faith can the public summon toward an administration that used incompetence as a defense in scandals involving the IRS, Benghazi, and Obamacare; that lied about its surveillance of Americans; and that just recently acknowledged dangerous misjudgments regarding the Secret Service and ISIS?

And Fox News’ Gretchen Carlson:

What more and more people seem to be asking about Ebola now isn’t that they are necessarily scared about actually getting the disease, but that they’re scared the government agencies responsible with helping us if we do get sick might not be up to the task. So if Ebola becomes a bigger issue, the question still remains: will we be safe?

Is it just a coincidence that all these seasoned observers of public opinion came up with the same argument for why the American people obviously don’t trust the government to stop the spread of Ebola? I mean, when four pundits are in such close agreement on an issue, it feels stupid to even question the truth of it.

But, in the spirit of science, we’ll put it to the test. Four pundits, all claiming that the IRS scandal and Benghazi and Obamacare and whatever have eroded public faith in “the government” so much that they just can’t bring themselves to trust public health officials when they say that Ebola is under control. Let’s go to the public opinion polls.