Happy Holidays, Congresswoman Annie Kuster.

The state chapter of the fiscally-conservative, Americans for Prosperity tried to dump a heavy load of coal into Kuster’s yuletide stocking with a new, six-figure negative ad hammering her support for the Affordable Care Act. ...

Please sign up for as low as 36 cents per day to continue viewing our website.

Happy Holidays, Congresswoman Annie Kuster.

The state chapter of the fiscally-conservative, Americans for Prosperity tried to dump a heavy load of coal into Kuster’s yuletide stocking with a new, six-figure negative ad hammering her support for the Affordable Care Act.

The Telegraph got an exclusive, pre-Christmas viewing of the 30-second spot that begins airing on cable television programs seen throughout Kuster’s Second Congressional District.

The ad is also posted on youtube.

A woman narrator tries an unconventional way to give a soft side to what is a very hard hitting spot.

“People don’t like political ads, I don’t like them either but health care isn’t about politics, it is about people,” the narrator opens.

She then recites the criticisms of Obama’s signature issue, his national health care law.

“It is not about a web site that doesn’t work; it is not about poll numbers or approval, it is about people.

“And millions of people have lost their health insurance, millions of people can’t see their own doctors and millions of people are paying more and getting less.

“Obamacare doesn’t work; it just doesn’t work.”

The ad closes with the only personal reference to the freshman Democrat who will be favored but still faces a tough re-election fight in 2014.

“Tell Congresswoman Kuster to stop thinking about politics and start thinking about people.”

Versions of the ad will likely be used against other Democratic members of Congress who supported the President’s health care reform law.

Kuster was not in Congress when Obamcare became law in 2009; her predecessor, ex-GOP Congressman Charles Bass voted against it along with every Republican on Capitol Hill.

But AFP State Director Greg Moore said Kuster has resisted numerous attempts by House Republicans to repeal the law or alter it such as a one-year delay in the individual mandate that has some congressional Democratic support.

“She has shown steadfast support and a complete unwillingness to work in a bipartisan way to make substantive changes people have been talking about,” Moore said.

“We have seen it become a nightmare for tens of thousands of New Hampshire citizens who have seen their premiums go up, their choices for hospitals limited and their policies canceled.”

A Kuster spokesman said she’ll remain focused on helping the middle class and not get side-tracked by partisan attacks.

“Rep. Kuster isn’t focused on politics – she’s focused on bringing people together to ensure that New Hampshire families have access to the quality, affordable health care they need and deserve,” said Rob Friedlander, Kuster’s communications director.

And Harrell Kirstein with the New Hampshire Democratic Party said AFP’s ad is in bad taste coming during a holiday season where brotherhood and finding common ground should be the theme.

“Running this negative attack ad over Christmas proves just how desperate Marilinda Garcia, Gary Lambert, and their allies are to repeal the ACA and bring New Hampshire back to a system where insurance companies had free reign to deny care, drop coverage, and raise costs,” Kirstein said in a statement.

“They are on a reckless mission to dismantle this law and prevent Granite Staters from getting the health care they need.”

Moore said this was precisely the right time to air the commercial given the most sweeping aspects of the ACA take effect Jan. 1.

“We hope ads like this helps Congresswoman Annie Kuster see the light and support making changes to a law that is badly flawed.”

Moore offered few details on the ad buy other than it was “significant” and that all 2nd District voters would see it “several times” over its run.

The Telegraph confirmed through independent sources it will run for three weeks on programing geared towards women voters.

A hefty buy of that length on cable can run $300,000-to-$400,000.

The ad clearly had the potential to be replicated and used against other, vulnerable Democratic members of Congress.

“Usually when we run an ad it is in multiple district states,” Moore said.

It comes on the heels of a radio commercial from the Republican Congressional Campaign Committee accusing First District Congresswoman Carol Shea-Porter of lying to voters that under Obamacare they could keep their insurance and their doctor.

Shea-Porter has aggressively marketed some of the concessions, that lead insurer Anthem agreed to let those with individuals extend their coverage for a year without the consumer protections granted under Obamacare.

And she announced before the insurer did that Minuteman Health Plan of Massachusetts secured a $37 million federal loan to join Anthem in offering individual coverage on the ACA exchange starting in 2015.

Meanwhile, the “new, narrower” network for new exchange plans under Anthem closed the market to Southern New Hampshire Medical Center in Nashua and hospitals in Concord, the Monadnock Region and North Country all in Kuster’s district.

Earlier this week, a national CNN poll showed 62 percent disapproval of the new law.

Kevin Landrigan can reached at 321-7040 or klandrigan@nashuatelegraph.com. Also, follow Landrigan on Twitter (@Klandrigan).