Have you heard? There’s a new study creating quite a buzz, probably among your friends too: It found parents have a key role in whether their children become little despots.

The findings, published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, found that parents who “overvalue” their kids between the ages of 7 and 11 raised children who scored higher on tests of narcissism. In other words, parents who described their offspring as “more special than other children” and as deserving “something extra in life” had kids who think they’re God’s gift to the world.

“Children believe it when their parents tell them that they are more special than others,” said Brad Bushman, co-author of the study and professor of communication and psychology at The Ohio State University. “That may not be good for them or for society.”

Parents should read the findings as a warning that labeling their kids as “extra special” may not be the self-esteem booster previously thought.

Here are ways to keep narcissism at bay in our kids and avoid overusing praise.

■ Love your kids, warts and all. The more we view our children as flawed (as we ourselves are), the more we will be able to love them in their imperfect state. The ability to recognize failings and to still love and accept them is one of the greatest gifts we can give our children.

■ Stick to the point with your praise.

Think about how you feel when someone says, “Good job!” as opposed to “You really nailed that presentation by including those questions at the end. Gave us something to think about going forward with this project.”

General praise is much less meaningful than a compliment on a certain achievement. Our children are no different. When we are as precise as possible in our compliments, we tell them that we truly recognize their effort.

■ Praise the present. When we talk in terms of “always” or “never,” we negate the effort right in front of us. We also mar the satisfaction in a job well done if that job is lumped in with the past and future. This means we shouldn’t tell our kids, “You always do such a nice job” when referring to their room cleaning. What we should say is something like, “You did a good job on your room today.”

■ Be sparing, but not a miser, with your praise. When your child has had an overload of praise, she will start to crave it by asking you to compliment every effort she makes. Over-praising can also lead to a child viewing your compliments as meaningless.

■ Praise what is worthy. More often than not, we tend to not think about what we’re praising our children for. Rather than praising every good grade on a test in a subject that’s easy for your child, praise the effort it took to finish a particularly difficult math worksheet.

■ Teach the Golden Rule. The concept of treating others as you would like to be treated has taken a beating in today’s all-about- me culture, but it’s, ahem, golden in helping kids not think too highly of themselves. Have your kids memorize “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you,” and use it to check motivations, actions and attitudes in their lives.

■ Walk in their shoes. The more we can guide our children in thinking about how the situation looks from the other person’s point of view, the less likely they will develop an attitude of superiority. By pointing out how the other person might feel or why the other person might have acted a certain way, we help our kids think through situations with compassion rather than a “what’s-in-it- for-me” outlook.