Following a motor vehicle stop in Berkeley, further investigation revealed that an occupant of the vehicle, a Manchester resident, was in possession of under 50 grams of marijuana. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto )

Arrest (Driving While intoxicated) - On August 30th 2014 at 6:50PM, Ptl. Al Foca Ptl. Jason Malley and Ptl. John Fosbre responded to Pinewald-Keswick Rd at Rt 530 for a report of a motor vehicle crash. Upon arrival. The driver of one of the vehicles, identified as Ellen Klimczuk 50 of Hamilton N.J. was found to be operating her motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol. As a result Klimczuk was arrested by Ptl. Foca and transported to police H.Q. for processing. Klimczuk was charged with driving while intoxicated and later released on a summons.

Arrest (controlled dangerous substance) - On August 30th 2014 at 8:30 PM Ptl. John Mulvihill conducted a motor vehicle stop on Rt 9 near Gladney Ave. Further investigation revealed that an occupant of the vehicle, identified as Paul Salamone 23 of Buckingham Dr in Manchester, was in possession of under 50 grams of marijuana. As a result Salamone was arrested and transported to police H.Q. where he was processed and later released on a summons.

Arrest (Driving While intoxicated) - On August 30th 2014 at 10:40, Ptl. Michael O’Connor Ptl. Jim Mauncele, Ptl. Al Foca and Ptl. Jason Malley responded Harbor Inn Rd for a report of a motor vehicle crash involving an overturned vehicle. Upon arrival officers assisted in getting two occupants out of the vehicle. While speaking to the driver identified as Stephen Tracy 53 of E Arverne Ave in Ocean Gate, was operating his vehicle while under the influence. As a result Tracy was arrested and transported to police H.Q. for processing. Tracy was later charged with driving while intoxicated and then released on a summons.

Arrest (Driving While intoxicated) - On August 30th 2014 at 10:40PM, Ptl. John Mulvihill conducted a motor vehicle stop on Rt 9 near Harley Blvd. While speaking to the driver, identified Louis Alejandro 42 of Brook Forrest Dr in South Toms River, it was determined that he was operating his vehicle while under the influence. As a result Alejandro was arrested and transported to police H.Q. for processing. Alejandro was arrested and transported to police H.Q. for processing. Alejandro was later charged with driving while intoxicated and released on a summons

Arrest (Warrant) – On August 30th 2014 at 10:50 PM Sarah M Cocuzza 25 of Seaside Heights, was arrested for a contempt of court warrant issued by the Berkeley Twp. Municipal Court. Cocuzza was transported to Berkeley Police H.Q. where she was processed and later transported to the Ocean County Jail in default of bail. Ptl. Steve Kappok and Ptl. William Somers were the arresting officers. The Seaside Heights Police Department assisted in this arrest.

Arrest (Driving while intoxicated) - On August 31st 2014 at 12:30AM Ptl. Michael Tanis conducted a motor vehicle stop on Rt 9. Upon speaking to the driver, identified as Lisa Gatto 45 of Northampton Dr in Toms River, it was determined that she was operating her vehicle while under the influence. As a result, Gatto was arrested and transported to police H.Q. where she was processed and later released on a summons. The vehicle was impounded in accordance with John’s Law.

First Aid (NARCAN) - On August 31st 2014 at 3:25 PM Ptl. Michael Poikans, Ptl. Patrick Stesner and Ptl. Christopher Elliot responded to 41 Frederick Dr for a report of a possible overdose. Upon their arrival first aid was rendered. Officers then administered NARCAN to the victim who became responsive and alert. The victim refused further medical treatment. The Bayville First Aid Squad assisted.

Arrest (Warrant) - On August 31st 2014 at 5:30 PM, Ptl. Patrick Stesner and Ptl. Michael Tier were investigating a report of a suspicious person on Rt 9 near Cranmer Rd. Further investigation revealed that the male, identified as Robert Sammis 30 of Avalon Ave in Bayville, had several outstanding warrants issued for his arrest. As a result Samis was arrested and transported to police H.Q. where he was processed and remanded to the Ocean County Jail in default of bail

Arrest (Stolen Property) - On August 31st 2014 at 11:00PM Sgt. Peter La Rocca conducted a motor vehicle stop on Ocean Gate Drive near Henry Ave. While speaking to the driver, identified as Michael Pierasanti 34 of Brooks Ave in Bayville, it was learned that the license plate on the vehicle was reported stolen in Middlesex County. As a result Pierasanti was arrested and transported to Police H.Q. for processing. In addition a female occupant of the vehicle, identified as Kelsey Bingham 24 of Brooks Ave in Bayville was also arrested on the strength of an outstanding warrant issued by the Pine Beach Municipal Court. The vehicle was impounded pending proof of ownership. Ptl. Patrick Stesner and Ptl. D.J. Williams transported and processed both subjects. In addition, Ocean Gate Police Officers Vincent La Rocca and Adam Sabatino assisted.

Arrest (Warrant) – On September 1st 2014 Barbara Manning, age 52 of Frederick Dr in Bayville, was arrested for several active warrant issued by the Berkeley Twp. Municipal Court. Manning was transported to Berkeley Police H.Q. where she was processed and later transported to the Ocean County Jail in default of bail. Ptl. Taylor Butler was the arresting officer. The Seaside Heights Police Department and Ptl. Tim Pizzella assisted in this arrest.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1om3xCt