'It's a whole fun world'

Jeff Bland of Boulder's BackFlip Studios told Boulder Valley students writing code may sound boring, but it's all about problem solving.

He showed them examples of glitches in the games his company creates that required coding changes to fix, from a fragmented dragon to a character that came out miniaturized, and talked about getting to work creatively with a team on design. He also noted the cool perks, including attending gaming conferences and volunteering on the job.

"There's a lot that goes into game development," he said. "It's kind of cool to be the one who puts it together and makes it happen."

Bland and other programmers talked to students at Boulder Universal, Boulder Valley's online school, and students from Boulder Explore, a district program for homeschool students, as part of the Hour of Code.

Boulder Universal, Boulder Valley's online school, hosted an event that included students from Boulder Explore, a district program for homeschool students.

Most schools across the St. Vrain Valley and Boulder Valley school districts hosted Hour of Code events last week, from coding parties to robotics tournaments. The University of Colorado at Boulder's Science Discovery also got in on the coding action, hosting several workshops that focused on robotics.

The Hour of Code initiative was developed because of concerns that, despite a growing job market, fewer K-12 schools are teaching computer science, while women and minorities are severely underrepresented in computer science.

At Boulder Universal, teacher Sandra Wilder, a former programmer who teaches a introduction to coding class, said she wanted to show students real world careers in coding.

"Programming doesn't have to be this big scary word," she said. "It's a whole fun world. Anybody can do it."

Helen Zhang, an artist at BackFlip, told the students that knowing programming basics makes her better at her job, allowing her to hack an image so it will look the way she wants it to. Plus, she said, there's the fun factor.

"You can make really wacky, goofy designs and sometimes they get picked," she said.

Along with hearing from programmers, students had the opportunity to try coding using AgentSheets, software created by CU's Alexander Repenning to teach programming skills through game and simulation design.

Junior Hiatt Franck said he found AgentSheets intuitive.

"Coding is all logic based," he said. "Once you figure that out, it's not too hard."

Seventh-grader Max Paulson said he's interested in programming because he likes "the flexibility of being able to do what you want."

Senior Kevin Butterfield added that his dad and brother are programmers, so he knows it's a good career option.

"I like the problem solving and the attention to detail," he said.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa