Road Knights Blue Light Special Car Show draws crowds, car enthusiasts to three-day show ending Sunday

Pat Landspargersits poses in her 1933 Ford coupe during the Blue Light Car Show in Loveland Saturday. ( Aaron R. Atencio / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: Road Knights 32nd Annual Blue Light Special Car Show. When: 8 a.m.-1 p.m. Sunday; awards will be presented at 1 p.m. Where: The Ranch Events Complex, 5280 Arena Circle. Cost: Admission is $5, 16 and older; $3, 7-15; and free, 6 and under. More info: Visit www.roadknightscarclub.com.

Instead of a normal glass windshield, Octaviano Jojola figured a pair of oversized spectacles with drop-down sunglasses would be a great add-on to his 1923 Ford T-Bucket.

Car enthusiasts gathered during the Blue Light Car Show in Loveland Saturday. (Aaron R. Atencio / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

But that's not all that makes his wild cherry with silver fire flames car an attention-grabbing street rod — it's the remote control, which Jojola of Arvada pulled out of his pocket Saturday during the Road Knights 32nd Annual Blue Light Special Car Show.

Jojola's fancy wheels — fat in back and rail thin up front — had to compete with 600 other trucks and cars from 1972 and earlier parked on the sidewalks and grass of The Ranch Events Complex. The last day of the event will take place from 8 a.m.-1 p.m. Sunday at 5280 Arena Circle.

With a push of a few buttons, Jojola lifted the body of the car off the frame, raised the deck lid in back and, when the key was in the ignition, dropped down the license plate.

Advertisement

"It was unique. It was something different I wanted to build," Jojola said.

Jojola, who restored a few cars, built the custom car starting in 1989 and finished it three years ago. He built the frame and body and hired out the building of the motor, the painting and the upholstery work.

"You see other street rods, but you want to give something more for people to look at," Jojola said.

Street rods, street machines

Jojola's custom street rod is among the 700 to 750 street rods, street machines and custom-built cars brought in by auto club members, auto restorers and car enthusiasts for the three-day show. Another 100 to 150 trucks and cars are expected to arrive Sunday, the last day of the show hosted by the Road Knights Car Club.

Street rods are pre-1948; street machines are 1949 to 1972; and custom cars have had some kind of modifications to the body or were built from scratch.

Guests of the show could tour the rows and lines of cars, listen to music, stop at vendor booths of car-related and nostalgic items and participate in games that included poker walks and horseshoe contests. They could vote for people's choice awards to be given out Sunday for the top 10 rods, top 10 machines, top three customs and under 25.

"We're the biggest car show that a local car club puts on in Colorado," said Mark Martinez, co-chairman of the show with Andy Anderson. "It gets bigger and better every year."

Rebuilding cars

Jean Bourassa of Windsor wanted a modern engine in a classic car, so he rebuilt a 1958 Chevrolet Corvette and put in a 2010 Corvette engine. He rebuilt the car, doing all the work except for the painting and leather.

"Chevrolet in the evolution of the engine in the last 20 years has built phenomenal transmissions and engines that exceed the old school designs," Bourassa said, adding that he wanted the performance, driveability and gas mileage of the later model years packaged in a vintage car.

The engine wasn't the original, something he personally experienced when he bought the car in 1970. He sold it and, regretting his decision, bought it back in 1975.

"It was a natural transformation to go from the original motor to a late model Corvette power train," Bourassa said. "I drive this car. It's fun to drive. I don't care about people looking at it. My favorite thing is to drive it."

Bourassa brought the Corvette to the car show because "she just needed to get out in public more."

Larry Rouch of Loveland and his son, Eric, built from scratch a Bonneville Lakester, a rear engine modified roadster with a Model T body in back they painted bright orange. They want to get the yet-to-be-driven car, intended for amateur racing, up to 264 miles per hour.

"I tell people 200 is the easy part. The 64 is the problem," he said.

The Rouches named the car "Saline Sisyphus" after the Greek myth of a king's punishment of continually pushing a rock up a hill over and over again.

"We race the car, and we start over again because we didn't make a record," Rouch said.

Buying parts, restoring

Loveland resident Jack Walker, who's done some restoration work, bought his 1932 Ford Highboy Roadster five years ago fully restored and painted midnight blue.

"This one was built from the ground up," Walker said. "I used to sell car parts, and I thought, I've done this for years and years, why don't I buy a decent car? Everybody's completed their cars, and all I had was parts."

Josh Sell of Scottsbluff, Neb., bought his 1933 Pontiac 3-window coupe in pieces and did all of the restoration work except for the paint, which he had mixed special into a bright lime green. His father, Ron, helped him with the work.

"I like seeing what it was before and what it can turn out to be," Sell said.

Once their work is done, Sell and his father show their cars at multiple car shows, he said.

"As I tell my dad, it's a bunch of old guys trying to be my age," said Sell, who is 39.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm