x of x A street hawker carries cotton candy on a pole on a rainy Wednesday in Dharamsala, India. Ashwini Bhatia/AP

x of x Cars sit on a street that collapsed after heavy rain in the Gulf port city of Veracruz, Mexico, on Tuesday, as coastal towns brace for more bad weather with Tropical Storm Dolly coming inland. Felix Marquez/AP

x of x Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, front row center, and his new cabinet members pose for a group photo following the first cabinet meeting Wednesday in Tokyo. Abe picked five women for his cabinet, matching the past record and sending the strongest message yet about his determination to revive the economy by getting women on board as workers and leaders. Eugene Hoshiko/AP

x of x President Barack Obama, right, greets Estonian schoolchildren waving U.S. and Estonian national flags during a welcome ceremony at the Kadriorg Palace on Wednesday in Tallinn, Estonia, where he conducted a one-day visit ahead of the 2014 NATO Summit. Mindaugas Kulbis/AP

x of x An Indian Muslim woman cries as she hugs her son at the airport Wednesday in New Delhi, India, before leaving for the annual Hajj pilgrimage to the holy city of Mecca. Manish Swarup/AP

x of x Ragheda, foreground – the wife of Sgt. Ali Sayid, who was beheaded by Islamic militants – mourns during her husband's funeral in his hometown of Fnaydek, Lebanon, on Wednesday. The sergeant went missing around the same time that some two dozen soldiers and police were seized by militants from Syria who overran the border town of Arsal for several days last month. Hussein Malla/AP

x of x Hindu devotees hold earthen lamps as they perform the Maha Aarti ritual during the Ganesh Chaturthi festival Wednesday near Ahmedabad, India. The 10-day long festival celebrates Lord Ganesha's birthday. Ajit Solanki/AP

x of x Pro-Russian rebels lead suppressive fire against the Ukrainian army during shelling Wednesday in Donetsk, Ukraine. A day ahead of a NATO summit, Russian President Vladimir Putin issued his own peace plan for eastern Ukraine, calling on the Russian-backed insurgents there to "stop advancing" and urging Ukraine to withdraw its troops from the region. Mstyslav Chernov/AP

x of x People mourn revolutionary martyrs at the Jianchuan Museum on Wednesday in Chengdu, China, to mark the 69th anniversary of victory in the War of Chinese People's Resistance Against Japanese Aggression, as World War II is called in China. ChinaFotoPress/Getty Images

x of x Visitors to Arlington National Cemetery place their hands over their hearts as they view the start of a burial service for Sgt. 1st Class Matthew Leggett on Wednesday in Arlington, Va. Leggett, a paratrooper stationed at Fort Bragg in North Carolina who received the Bronze Star Medal and Purple Heart, was killed in action on Aug. 20 in Afghanistan. Win McNamee/Getty Images