Will the consolidation of health care providers result in better care for patients or is it a worrisome sign? Let us know what you think in the comments

CLEVELAND, Ohio -- In one of Ohio's largest health care mergers in recent memory, Akron General will be fully absorbed into the growing hospital network of the Cleveland Clinic, the two organizations said Friday.

The deal has been in the works for over a year and will have significant implications for health care in Ohio's fifth largest city. Though already a Clinic affiliate, Akron General will now get the benefits of full membership, including better access to funding for technology upgrades and physician recruiting.

Meanwhile, the Clinic gets a large outpost south of Cleveland, increasing its access to patients in a market where it has not been a significant player until now.

"We will be investing in this community," the Clinic's chief executive, Dr. Toby Cosgrove, said in an interview. "This is not about buildings. It's about a commitment to the community and providing high-quality affordable care."

The arrangement still must be reviewed by the state's attorney general and the Federal Trade Commission. Akron General's board of trustees will remain in place in an advisory capacity to provide local input.

The merger includes the entire Akron General Health System, including the flagship Akron General Medical Center, Lodi Community Hospital, the Edwin Shaw Rehabilitation Institute, three health & wellness centers, the Justin T. Rogers Hospice Care Center and Visiting Nurse Service and Affiliates.

Last year, when the Clinic took a minority stake in Akron General, it invested $100 million that resulted in plans for a new emergency department and deployment of a more modern electronic records system, among other upgrades.

Executives with both hospitals said they expect to make investments in cardiac and cancer care at Akron General, and that additional clinical upgrades are under consideration.

Akron General's chief executive, Tim Stover, said the relationship will result in significant cost savings, while also bringing better coordinated care to patients.

"We've already taken advantage of ways we can do things more efficiently," Stover said, citing about $1.3 million in savings on medical supplies. "...Raising the bar clinically for patients in Summit County is number one on our wish list. There is no question that a partnership with the Clinic meets that goal."

The merger of the two non-profits is part of a broader trend of consolidation in health care that is sweeping across Ohio and the nation. Last year was a record-breaker for mergers and acquisitions, with 1,307 deals nationwide accounting for $387.5 billion in total spending, according to the health care research firm Irving Levin Associates.

That's a 25 percent increase from 2013, when there were 1,045 deals accounting for $163.7 billion in spending.

Several factors are behind the rapid uptick in merger activity, said Lisa Phillips, editor of Irving Levin's M&A report. She said the federal Affordable Care Act has resulted in more Medicare and Medicaid patients for hospitals, but it has also instituted service-related reimbursement cuts that have squeezed their bottom lines.

The law encourages a so-called "value-based" system where hospitals and other providers are paid based on the quality and effectiveness of their care, rather than the sheer volume of tests and other procedure they perform.

Independent community hospitals are finding it increasingly difficult to meet record-keeping requirements of the law and afford technology improvements needed to offer top-quality care. Meanwhile, private equity firms have begun investing more in urgent care centers, regional medical systems and other providers.

"It's really all kinds of things taking hold at once," said Phillips. "Smaller hospitals are looking for partners so they can tie into their electronic records and manage other costs."

As a result, bigger networks such as the Clinic and University Hospitals have been gobbling up community medical centers across the region, expanding their market shares and accessibility to patients.

UH has acquired three hospitals in the past two years and is in the process of acquiring a fourth, Samaritan Regional Health System in Ashland County. Meanwhile, the Clinic has added Medina Hospital to its network, and has expanded partnerships and affiliations with other providers across the country.

Industry specialists said the merger with Akron General will strengthen the Clinic's foothold south of Cleveland, giving it a flagship medical center as well as outpatient services. It will also create a stronger competitor to Summa Health, the city's leading hospital system.

"For the people in the Akron community, it gives them a better choice than they had before," said Bill Ryan, president of The Center for Health Affairs, a Northeast Ohio hospital association. "They now have two health systems that are on even footing."

Akron General employs about 5,000 people and is one of Akron's largest private employers. The hospital plans to open its new $30 million emergency department in fall 2017. In the past year it has instituted several clinical upgrades, such as new centers for patients in need to chemotherapy and rheumatology infusions, and pre- and post-surgery care for organ transplant patients, among other improvements.