Toward the end of his concession speech in New Hampshire Tuesday night, John Kasich said some words that underline the unfortunate emptiness of his brand of so-called compassionate conservatism.

The Ohio governor delivered a seemingly heartfelt, even moving, talk, after finishing in second place behind reality TV star Donald Trump in the state's primary.

Hailed as the one reasonable Republican presidential candidate amid a sea of terrifying extremists, Kasich made an earnest plea for all of us to just "slow down" and connect with our families and our neighbors.

"If we would just slow down and heal the divisions within our own families. Be willing to listen to the person that lives next door, when you’re in such a hurry to get out of the driveway or such a hurry to get out of the shopping center," he said. "Just slow down, look ‘em in the eye. Give ‘em a hug."

His words seemed aimed straight at any working adult beset by endless demands, hustling to care for and support loved ones or to simply stay sane in a 24/7 world. At a time when we've all got our heads bent down to stare drone-like at our iPhones, working ever-longer hours to get by and racing from work to home and back again, it struck a chord.

But alas, Kasich kept going. "It doesn’t take government. It takes our hearts. Our hearts to change America," he said.

The trouble is, it absolutely does take more than our hearts to give Americans the space and the time to slow down. And Kasich's policy prescriptions for working families offer little support for his truly laudable goal.

Let's take family leave. The United States is the only developed nation in the world that does not give mothers paid time off from work to spend time -- precious once-in-lifetime, mission-critical time -- with their infants. Kasich is by all accounts OK with this.

Kasich thinks employers should be free to choose whether or not to offer paid leave, saying it's "up to employers to try to be creative about this."

That's essentially the failing system the U.S. has now. It's meant that only 12 percent of workers in the private sector have access to paid leave. It's meant that one in four women are back at work less than two weeks after giving birth.

It's hard to find any better kind of "slow down" time to heal your family than the days, weeks and months after the arrival of a new baby.

This is time that is of critical importance to a family's health and well-being. Babies who have their mother at home during their first year of life are less likely to die, for starters. Infant mortality rates drop when mothers are able to stay with their babies and bond, research has shown.

Women who are able to take time off from work after childbirth are also less likely to become depressed. And post-partum depression doesn't simply affect mothers, it can have devastating consequences for their children and families as well.

Considering that Kasich is one of the staunchest anti-abortion governors in the country, you'd think he'd have a vested interest in ensuring that all babies who are born receive the best kind of care that is possible. At a time when the majority of American children live in households where both parents work (or in a household headed by one working parent), you have to find a way to allow one or both parents to slow down and take that time.

Most Americans simply do not live in a world where women stay home and raise the kids. But Kasich, notably, does live in that world. Here he is talking about how his wife is at home doing laundry and taking care of the kids: