Gene Michalski, the outgoing CEO of Beaumont Health, sits down for a Q+A on the massive changes he's seen in health care.

Gene Michalski is retiring this spring as president and CEO of Beaumont Health. (Photo: Beaumont Health)

Gene Michalski , who is retiring as Beaumont Health System president and CEO after nearly 44 years in the hospital business, said the Affordable Care Act has been good for patients and the bottom line.

On March 16, Michalski, 66, retired as president and CEO of both the Beaumont Health System and the newly formed Beaumont Health regional system, which formed last year in a three-way merger with Dearborn-based Oakwood Healthcare and Farmington Hills' Botsford Hospital.

He plans to stay on through May to help acclimate his successor, John Fox, who was previously in Georgia as CEO of Emory Healthcare.

Michalski last week discussed the Affordable Care Act and the state of health care with the Free Press. The interview has been condensed and edited.

Question: What big changes have you seen in the health care industry since the 1970s?

Answer: Talking big picture, what we've seen is a growth in government-sponsored health care over that period. A large component has been insuring the population that hasn't been insured. In general, I think that's been a good thing. It's been very costly, however.

The government flow of funds (to hospitals) is becoming less and less certain, and more and more based upon value, rather than volume-based. Back in the early days, everything was (billed) à la carte in Medicare. And now everything is in small bundles.

Q: Has medicine and doctors become more specialized?

A. The number of specialists has grown over the years. Government and private insurance have rewarded specialists with more money, more economic opportunity, to become a specialist.

Now, it is harder to become a specialist -- much harder. If you want to become a heart specialist, you're going to spend 10 years doing it. It's not a trivial amount of investment of human capital. But the rewards are great, too. It's just like any other business -- if you make a big investment, you expect a good return.

Q: What affect has the Affordable Care Act had on the local health care business?

A: It has filled a gap in health care delivery in southeast Michigan, as well as at Beaumont. Before the Affordable Care Act, patients would still show up in the emergency room – they just couldn't afford to pay anything. Now at least they have some coverage. It's not a lot – if it costs us $1 to give care, we might get 10, 15 cents at the most on that dollar for Medicaid patients under the Affordable Care Act. But it's better than nothing.

Q: Has the law been good or bad for Beaumont's bottom line?

A: It's been positive because people who show up in the emergency room or, worse yet, don't show up, are really a problem, because when they do they're in the intensive care unit and you're correcting a bigger problem. Or they show up in the emergency room and can't pay.

So I think it's a good thing for the patient, I think it's a good thing for their families, I think it's a good thing for the community. And that's our mission. We want to take care of people and help them prevent problems instead of correcting them.

Q: Have you been seeing more patients because of the ACA?

A: We have seen a tremendous surge in activity over the past couple of years. Now whether that's because people put off care before the Affordable Care Act and when the economic downturn took place, is highly probable. And also because of the aging population. So now we're seeing a surge in demand, particularly at the old Beaumont, but throughout Beaumont Health.

Q: Why have we been seeing so many hospital mergers lately in southeast Michigan?

A: As the government reduces payments to hospitals, nursing homes, home health agencies, ect., that's a squeeze. So you can reduce your bottom line and not reinvest -- that's not a good strategy. You can cut costs only so much until you compromise something -- that's not a good strategy. Or you can consolidate with other health systems and reduce duplicative infrastructure.

Q: Health care analysts have said that mergers give hospitals better leverage in negotiations with insurance companies. Has that been a consideration?

A: That may have been in the past. I don't see that as a viable strategy going forward, I just don't. And I'll tell you why -- because that raises the cost of health care, and you don't want to be the high cost provider in a market."

Q. Have hospitals been raising their prices?

A:They did for many many years, but they don't do it anymore. At least we haven't. We're getting reimbursed basically on a fixed fee through these bundles. So you can raise prices all you want, but you're not going to get the money.

Gene Michalski Bio

Born in Detroit

Graduated from Cousino High School in Warren in 1966.

Holds three Wayne State University degrees: a bachelor's in biology; master's in physiology and an MBA.

Started at Beaumont Hospital in 1971 as a lab tech

From 1992 to 1996 was an executive at St. Francis Hospital in Evanston, Ill.

Appointed President and CEO of Beaumont Health System in 2010

Married with two grown daughters and two grandchildren, a third on the way.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1Cl5PLc