Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

NEW YORK (AP) — Al Pacino says he can relate to Simon Axler, the lead character in his film ‘The Humbling’ — about an aging actor who worries he’s lost his craft and his appetite for acting.

That’s partly why he made the film. “I thought I had a better chance of making a movie that was effective because it was about a world I understood,” the Oscar-winning actor said in a recent interview to promote the film.

Adapted from Philip Roth’s 2009 novel, “The Humbling” was directed by Academy Award-winning filmmaker Barry Levinson (“Rain Man”) and co-stars Golden Globe nominee Greta Gerwig (“Frances Ha”).

At 74, Pacino says that at times he feels his age. “I do feel differently. I don’t quite get up from this table the same way. I may want to but I don’t.”

Yet the actor says the similarities end there. Simon may be ready to give up acting but Pacino is not.

“Acting, especially if you’ve done it as long as I have,” he said, “it becomes such a part of your nature you rarely ever think about quitting or anything like that.”

The star of such iconic films as “The Godfather” trilogy and “Scent of a Woman,” which won him his 1992 best actor Oscar, says he’s convinced there’s another big role ahead of him, but adding, “I don’t know if it’s going to be in movies. … Acting, it can take on different forms.”

Pacino was scheduled to perform with the Philadelphia Orchestra this weekend, doing Shakespeare and personal readings. “That’s a variation on a thing that takes acting and it’s a little different,” he explained.

Pacino will return to Broadway this fall to appear in David Mamet’s latest work “China Doll,” even if he won’t do the standard eight performances a week. “I wouldn’t do eight performances if you paid me,” he said. “It’s too much. I gave that up a long time ago.”

Television remains in Pacino’s acting future, as well.

The two-time Emmy winner (“You Don’t Know Jack,” ”Angels in America”) says he’s looking into an episodic series that could stream on a service like Netflix or Amazon about Napoleon’s final days on the Island of Saint Helena.