Good news: Captain America supports amnesty

posted at 2:41 pm on October 16, 2015 by Allahpundit

Via the Daily Caller, someday I’m going to learn not to let douchey left-wing comics writers troll me so easily, especially when it’s as obvious as it is here that they’re trying to troll. Someday. But not today.

The plot involves illegals crossing the border and being met by a group known as the “Sons of the Serpent,” who read like a cross between the Minutemen, a militia, and the Klan. Here’s the “Supreme Serpent” addressing the immigrants. Gotta hand it to Marvel: Their writers have really mastered what natural, everyday speech sounds like.

“Until the mighty wall is built, you come here for employment that is rightfully ours! And if denied it, you seek welfare paid for by our tax dollars!” he bellows. “Also, you know how you make me press one for English at the beginning of every call to my satellite provider? That is something I cannot abide!” he says in the next frame. Wilson, now dressed as Captain America, enters the scene, telling the Supreme Commander, “if you’re done threatening a bunch of unarmed folks, mostly women and children…I’d pack up the pickup and head home if I were you, gentlemen.” Accompanied by his bird-of-prey partner, Captain America springs to action, attacking the Sons of the Serpent.

I don’t know what to make of that line about having to press one for English. Presumably it’s a goof on how supposedly petty the grievances of border hawks are, but the effect here (without having seen the full context) is to make the Serpents seem ridiculous and less threatening. That’s something you’d hear in a Key & Peele sketch on this subject, not from an archvillain whom Captain America’s about to smash in the face. It would have made for better, more morally ambiguous drama to have Cap caught between illegals and garden-variety strong-borders protesters, like laid-off workers, rather than a white-supremacist outfit like the Serpents, but I suppose the needs of this particular form of propaganda require the least sympathetic villain possible. If the point is to get the reader cheering as Cap cracks heads, making his nemesis a violent racist is an obvious move. Or am I assuming too much in thinking the people who wrote this see a meaningful difference between the Klan and amnesty opponents to begin with? Either way, it’s a nice bit of trolling to make a racist group the face of resistance to open borders, knowing that not only will this create a media controversy but that some righties will inevitably take a “go Serpents!” line in their reaction. Heightening the contradictions by making all criticism of illegal immigration racist is a shrewd way to lead undecideds towards siding with the open-borders crowd. But then, the left’s known that for decades.

As for Cap, he remains the go-to superhero in recent years for tedious liberal propaganda, for obvious reasons. During the Bush era, when the left was still pretending to care deeply about government surveillance and civil liberties, he led the resistance to a new law that would require superheroes to register their true identities with the government. A few years later, after dawn had broken and America had elected a new progressive president, Captain America turned his attention to the scourge of tea partiers. Now he’s got border hawks in the crosshairs. I wonder how many anti-government storylines Marvel has on the shelf from last decade that are all set to be dusted off in 2017 if Hillary can’t seal the deal next fall.

And if she can, presumably Captain America will be recast as a woman to celebrate Our New Leader’s ascension. You know, like Thor was. Exit question: When is Superman finally going to be deported, anyway?

Related Posts: