On a Labor Day weekend when there’s already a dusting of snow on the high peaks, Village Homes has an opportunity to get out in front of this coming ski season – with two big-family-sized cabins perched 500 yards above the lifts at Ski Granby Ranch. Both are sharp looking single-family resort designs, never seen before, with HUGE room for you to entertain kids, grandkids, cousins and friends – and if you buy now, Village will include a session with a decorator, and credits for a full complement of your choice of alpine interior furnishings.

Meanwhile, in a family-friendly resort where there’s still time for summer biking, hiking and fishing, Village will give you a twosome for 18 holes on the scenic Golf Granby Ranch course, just for coming to see the model and Village’s ski-in/ski-out ‘Tall Timber’ enclave, nestled between two of Granby Ranch’s lifts. The first 25 families will receive the coupons for a return golf visit; and will see the site beside the course where Granby Ranch’s developer has committed to begin construction on a clubhouse and residents’ pavilion.

Move into either home this coming month and you can start spending weekends here right away – using the swim club and spa; the trails into 5,000 acres of back country; Granby Ranch’s own trout lease along the Fraser River that winds through meadow below the golf course; and Granby Ranch Grill in the remodeled base lodge, where you can meet the neighbors and wind-down over drinks and dinner after a day on the trail. This winter, you and the kids can be using Ski Granby Ranch’s trails and terrain parks (owners get full family lift passes, plus some golf foursomes, as part of their monthly HOA). All of this is only 20 minutes from the slopes at Winter Park; 93 miles from downtown Denver — closer than Vail, while avoiding the Eisenhower Tunnel.

Not surprisingly, Village’s Sheila Bailey (you’ll meet her this weekend) is Grand County’s fastest selling agent; showing single-family designs that wrap a huge complement of appealing, functional holiday space into fetching Colorado mountain architecture. She’ll show you a Connemara plan ready for move in within weeks, with 3,800 square feet of finished space, on a main level with entertaining area and master suite, a walkout level with plenty of room for guest suites and a bunkroom, and in an upstairs loft for a library or retreat. The five-bedroom cabin is at $684,000 — and Bailey can show you another on the same September timetable, with 3,012 square feet at $599,000.

She’ll also let you see where other homes are coming on line about the time the snow flies – and three home sites right on Granby Ranch’s Owners Lift where Village could create a highly personalized retreat for you, at a base price including lot premium from the mid-to-high $500s. Village’s Signature Retreat Collection model is located on the way into Granby Ranch just before the ski lodge; but the two homes nearing completion are totally new plans, never viewed before this weekend – each with rustic stone fireplaces, engineered wood floors, granite kitchen tops with a Travertine backsplash, set beneath high ceilings and lodge-style windows, with a large loft perched overhead. Both have two-car garages and “gear rooms” where you can strap on skis or store your fly rods and backpacks.

Granby Ranch is 90 minutes west of Denver; to reach the model from I-70 take U.S. 40 west 43 mi. (15 mi. past Winter Park) to Village Road, then east 1.8 mile to the model at Fairway Lane.

Tall Timber at Granby Ranch by Village Homes; ski-in/out cabins on Ski Granby Ranch mountain, furnished for move-in; two homes for early fall occupancy on view sites; 4-season amenities with skiing, biking, golf, trout waters; free 18-hole golf twosome for first 25 visitors. 108 Fairway Ln, Granby; from I-70 take U.S. 40 west 43 mi. (15 mi. past Winter Park) to Village Rd., right 1.8 mi. to Fairway Ln

From low $500s, furnished cabin move-in $599,000

970-887-0144

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him atmark@samuelsonassoc.com. You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns online at DenverPostHomes.com