marin coverage Healthcare coverage by percent, Marin’s cities and towns: Ross 98.7 Mill Valley 97.9 Tiburon 96.9 Belvedere 95.9 Corte Madera 95.2 San Anselmo 94.9 Larkspur 94.7 Sausalito 94.1 Novato 91 Fairfax 90.8 San Rafael 87.3 Communities with highest levels of uninsured, by percent: Tomales 35.5 Lagunitas 18.5 Marin City 17.2 Santa Venetia 16.7 Bolinas 13.9 Source: U.S. Census Bureau

The number of Marin residents with health insurance coverage is on the upswing, according to U.S. Census Bureau data released this month.

In 2008, the first year census data was collected on insurance, 10.3 percent of Marin residents were uninsured. In the latest data, which looks at 2014, the percentage of uninsured in the county had been trimmed to 6.4 percent.

Local health officials credit the federal Affordable Care Act.

Since the initial enrollment period in 2013, 16,774 Marin residents have purchased insurance through Covered California, the state’s health insurance exchange, and another 14,563 Marin residents have gained access to medical care via Medi-Cal, county officials said.

The change has been noted at the Coastal Health Alliance which operates community health centers in Point Reyes Station, Stinson Beach and Bolinas.

As of 2013, 32 percent of its patients were uninsured. That figure dropped to 23 percent in 2014 and 18 percent this year.

“We are very proactive about enrolling people,” said Steve Siegel, chief executive officer of the alliance. “The process can really be complicated. But the Affordable Care Act has had an impact.”

Those who are uninsured can still receive health care on a sliding scale, Siegel noted.

People have varying reasons for not signing up for health care, some of it is financial.

“Some people have to make choices between health care and then food, gas and clothing,” Siegel said. “It can be a rough system.”

West Marin is an area where there is a high percentage of uninsured residents, according to U.S. Census Bureau data that was released as part of its 2010-2014 American Community Survey five-year estimates.

While data lags as it does not show 2015 figures, it does provide a community-by-community snapshot of health insurance coverage. The data shows that 35.5 percent of people in Tomales are uninsured, the highest percentage in the county. It is followed by Lagunitas, where 18.5 percent of people are uninsured, then Marin City, where 17.2 percent of residents do not have healthcare insurance.

But the Marin City Health and Wellness Center — which has a health insurance enrollment counselor — reports 99 percent of its patients have coverage.

The large percentage of uninsured in Marin City indicates many have not signed up for health insurance and have not sought medical services from the Health and Wellness Center. San Rafael’s Canal Neighborhood also has been deemed an under-insured “hot spot” by Covered California. That means there are more remaining subsidy-eligible individuals per capita than the rest of the region.

Advertisement

But residents who are undocumented citizens are not eligible for Covered California, noted Tom Wilson, executive director of the Canal Alliance. For others, it’s simply cost.

“When you compare the Canal to say Ross, the disparity is huge,” Wilson said. “You can certainly connect affordability and health care. The poor put off health care and they don’t end up getting preventative care.”

The Canal being identified as a hot spot likely had an impact on San Rafael having the lowest percentage of people signed up for health care at 87.3 percent among Marin’s incorporated cities and towns, according to census data.

Ross had the highest percentage of covered residents at 98.7 percent, followed by Mill Valley at 97.9 percent and then Tiburon at 96.9 percent.