They say money can't buy happiness, but it doesn't seem to hurt Lehigh Valley residents' overall feelings about their quality of life.

For the first time since the Muhlenberg College Institute of Public Opinion launched its annual quality of life survey in 2003, more than half — 51 percent — of Lehigh Valley residents surveyed last year said life in the region is getting better.

The numbers closely track respondents' improving perceptions of the local economy and their own family finances, and have improved drastically since 2011, when the economy was still shaking off its hangover from the Great Recession. Barely a quarter of respondents that year said things here were improving.

Just 56 percent of Lehigh Valley residents were optimistic about their family finances in 2011. Last year, that number grew to 86 percent.

"Many things go into one's overall satisfaction with quality of life, but economic well being is a major contributor to those evaluations," Muhlenberg College pollster Chris Borick said. "If you are worried about paying the bills and keeping your family fed and provided with good housing, those things can have an enormous effect on your overall evaluation of how you like the place that you are living and how satisfied you are."

The survey, and Borick's analysis of the numbers, were presented Thursday at DeSales University as part of the Lehigh Valley Research Consortium's annual State of the Lehigh Valley.

There is more than one way to measure well-being, of course.

This year's report includes a wide variety of regional research by professors at the area's colleges and universities. Topics include health care coverage under Obamacare's Medicaid expansion, and the jobs outlook for various professions.

Authors Michelle Moser-Deegan and Lanethea Matthews-Schultz found, for example, that 69,239 adults have been added to the Medicaid program in Pennsylvania under Obamacare.

This year's report included a special focus on the lives of people with disabilities to honor the 25th anniversary of the Americans With Disabilities Act, which protects the rights of people with disabilities and guarantees access to education and other services.

The findings showed more work needs to be done to fully extend the Valley's gains to its disability community.

The number of residents with disabilities in the Lehigh Valley is increasing, the report found. Between 2008 and 2014, the number of people with disabilities increased 8 percent to 85,648 people in a population of 645,840 people.

That's a faster rate than the state as a whole, where the number of people with disabilities increased at a rate of 3.3 percent. Moreover, the number of African-Americans and Latinos with disabilities is also rising locally, and at a higher rate.

According to the researchers, the number of African-Americans with disabilities in the Lehigh Valley increased 39 percent in the six-year period, while the number of Latinos with disabilities rose 18 percent, compared with an increase of 5.37 percent in whites with disabilities.

Many disabled adults face economic challenges, researchers found. They are over-represented in the ranks of the unemployed. And it's a group that isn't feeling the love. Some 55 percent surveyed by Good Shepherd Rehabilitation believe most people would not willingly accept a person with a disability as a close friend.

During a roundtable discussion Thursday, Amy Edgar of Children's Integrated Center for Success in Allentown said her practice works with hundreds of young people with autism, ADHD, anxiety and depression, many of whom are talented and want to work.

Unfortunately, very few of her clients, especially those with autism, have jobs. She'd like to see more of the region's employers make an effort to recruit and employ people with disabilities.

"One of the biggest problems we face in the Lehigh Valley is that the unemployment rate for people with autism is as high as 95 percent," Edgar said. "You are talking about an age demographic of people between 18 and 50 and they really have no opportunity for employment or jobs in the Lehigh Valley."

scott.kraus@mcall.com

Twitter @skraus

610-820-6745