A Texas ophthalmologist and co-founder of AmericanDoctors4Truth tore down the curtain on Obamacare last week, describing President Obama’s “signature” legislative achievement for the con game of forced labor that it really is.

When she wrote to the Aetna insurance company canceling her participation in its offerings, Dr. Kristin Held of San Antonio was informed she is contractually bound to care for the company’s patients for another year — as though Obamacare not only re-configured the American health care system, it repealed the 13th Amendment at the same time.

In her letter dated Jan. 30, the long-time and vocal opponent of Obamacare wrote that the “law of the land” Obamacare is made up of “politically-expedient mandates, rewards, penalties, rules and regulations with which I cannot rationally or morally treat my patients and run a practice, much less interpret, implement or comply.”

In the letter, Held describes a strange form of care in which a doctor’s services are sold without the doctor’s knowledge or consent.

“So here we are,” Held wrote, “you are getting new business offering health insurance plans featuring my services without my consent under terms which are unacceptable to me …

“It saddens me to think of the decreased access to care from actual physicians and the shockingly increased costs Aetna patients will now experience because of your choice to collude with big government rather than collaborate with patients and physicians.”

The full text of the letter is available here.

Here’s Held’s original Twitter posting:

Just sent this to Aetna. Never dreamed this would be a chapter in my life in medicine. Heart-aching. pic.twitter.com/YE1OCrGhVF — Kris Held,MD (@kksheld) January 30, 2014

Now, with some compliments to Twitchy.com, check out some of the reactions from fellow health professionals ….

@kksheld what a fabulous letter! I am a physician in the same boat.I wish we had a group/ leader to represent us and our an end to maddness — sandhya karna (@aceg738) January 31, 2014

@kksheld Breathless…I don’t know what to say, this was magnificent. Know one nurse is behind the docs all the way. Thank you Ma’am. — Furious Nurse (@Furiousnurse) January 30, 2014

And from the public ….

@kksheld You got BALLS girl,more balls that the entire Government. I have never been more proud of an American than I am you. God bless you — Radical Conservative (@ken24xavier) January 31, 2014



And Aetna’s reaction? Held posted her letter again, with the information that Aetna had informed her she is “contractually bound” to serve its patients for another year.

Obamacare opponents, and Held’s supporters, don’t buy it.

@kksheld@ginthegin If you are bound , then they can’t unilaterally change the terms and conditions. Consult a lawyer, like @KurtSchlichter — JustPlainBill (@JustPlainBill) February 1, 2014

And if a doctor can be forced against her will to treat patients under conditions she finds unacceptable, what quality of care is likely to result?

@gopfashionista @kksheld The harsh lessons on the difference between “coverage” and “care” are just beginning. — Stephen Green (@VodkaPundit) February 1, 2014

@VodkaPundit@kksheld exactly. Coverage doesn’t = care. — GOP Fashionista (@gopfashionista) February 1, 2014

Of course, the Dems and their trial lawyer financiers will have their own answer to that: Doctors better do as they’re told, or else.

That’s Obamacare medicine taken to its logical, socialized extreme: making good on Obama’s promise that you can the health care you prefer – by making doctors provide it.