Buy Photo U.S. Senator Chuck Grassley chats with students on Monday, November 23, 2015, during a visit to East High School. (Photo: Merle Laswell/For the Register)Buy Photo

Two weeks ago, the Wall Street Journal published a disturbing report on small, rural hospitals in America.

Iowa is home to 82 of these so-called “critical-access hospitals,” each of which has no more than 25 beds and has an average length of stay of 96 hours or less.

One of the primary reasons that critical-access hospitals exist is to provide urgent care that’s accessible to people who don’t live in heavily populated areas. As one might expect, these critical-access hospitals typically have a very low patient census, and that translates to higher operational costs. To keep these hospitals in business, Medicare pays them more than what their counterparts in urban areas — called "general hospitals" — typically collect.

Recently, however, the small hospitals have been performing a growing number of elective, orthopedic surgeries. For example, inpatient joint-replacement surgeries covered by Medicare increased almost 43 percent at critical-access hospitals from 2008 to 2013, outpacing the growth of those same services at general hospitals.

From the patient's perspective, this is a problem. Patient outcomes for surgical procedures tend to be best at hospitals that handle a greater volume of cases, and the average critical-access hospital performs only about a fifth of the inpatient joint replacements handled by the typical general hospital.

In fact, patients who underwent the five most common major orthopedic procedures at critical-access hospitals were roughly 34 percent more likely to die within 30 days than patients getting the same services at the typical general hospital, the Journal reported.

So why are these small, rural hospitals providing these services? It turns out that Medicare is structured in such a way that the hospitals have a strong financial incentive. Those higher payments they receive for patient care extend to elective, inpatient surgery, not just to emergency care. And as a result of these higher reimbursement rates, some general hospitals have merged with critical-access hospitals and shifted many of their inpatient surgical procedures to their less experienced, but more lucrative, partners.

To make matters worse, not all of the nation’s 1,300 critical-access hospitals are actually qualified to receive that designation and the higher Medicare payments that come with it. In fact, federal auditors have said Medicare could save the taxpayers almost $450 million by simply pulling the critical-access designation from those hospitals that don’t meet the criteria.

In 2013, Iowa’s two U.S. senators, Chuck Grassley and Tom Harkin, opposed that recommendation by the Department of Health and Human Services' inspector general. But the reality is that changes need to be made, not simply to protect taxpayers, but patients, as well.

Several months ago, Grassley introduced a bill in the Senate that shows real promise. Grassley's bill, co-sponsored by his Republican colleague from Iowa, Sen. Joni Ernst, would would allow critical-access hospitals to convert to newly designated "rural emergency hospitals" that would be barred from providing inpatient care, but would still receive enhanced reimbursement rates for the emergency care they provide. In essence, it would enable rural hospitals to remain open without becoming profit centers for inpatient surgery.

Grassley's bill deserves serious consideration, but in the meantime, federal officials need to eliminate the financial incentives for small hospitals to perform elective surgery, and begin requiring them to report key patient-outcome measures, such as the rate of surgical complications.

While no one wants to see small health care facilities burdened with paperwork, the oversight and regulation of these hospitals needs to keep pace with the changing nature of their practice and their growing reliance on inpatient surgeries.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1RhehVv