Please enable Javascript to watch this video

OKLAHOMA CITY - Crowds gathered in support of Ted Cruz, and many in the crowd, barely old enough to drive.

Cruz seems confident no matter who was in attendance or who the opposition is against him.

Sunday, many families showed up to share in Cruz's confidence, bringing their children for a lesson in American politics.

"If I could vote, I would vote for Ted Cruz," Danielle Sharpton, a 16-year-old supporter said.

"My favorite part was when Ted Cruz came out and started his speech," young Caden Halter who came with his dad said.

A speech focusing on a flat 10 % tax rate, holding constitutional values, protecting second amendment rights and emphasizing he's a true conservative, unlike Donald Trump.

"If I'm elected president, we're going to repeal every word of Obamacare, we're going to adopt a simple flat tax and abolish the IRS and that is going to bring back booming economic growth," Senator Ted Cruz says.

Topics parents say are better than any textbook lesson.

"I want to have my boys experience the political system as a whole, that way when they grow up, they'll be involved," Eric Halter, a supporter said.

Much like this young voter who wishes more people his age were informed.

"I think it's sad that my generation is not interested in politics. I see a lot of millennials who don't vote and I think it's tragic because it's their future they're wasting away," Tyler Wilson, a millennial supporter said.

One of his main likings to Cruz is how he think he'll help our Oklahoma economy.

"Ted Cruz is going to reignite the entire economy. I think he's going to open up the energy sector which is huge in Oklahoma. He's going to bring jobs to Oklahoma through oil and other forms of energy," Wilson said.

Promises for change that lie in the hands of voters come super Tuesday.

"Come support us, let's stand together, because we are the campaign that has beaten Donald Trump and is in a position to beat Donald Trump on Super Tuesday," Cruz said.

Governor Mary Fallin was in attendance Sunday night, although she has not endorsed a specific candidate.