Two years ago, Toll Brothers followed up the rapid success of its McKay Shores neighborhood in Broomfield with a new enclave of large, family-sized homes with wide-open plans, and standard lot sizes that provided exceptional affordability. Now The Enclave at McKay Shores has less than a third of its 110 sites left – now opening a final 40 lots, but with five already spoken for.

Prices on those vanishing opportunities start at just over $500,000. “This is a chance to have new home features with Toll Brothers’ elegance and quality, and a Broomfield city-and-county address,” says Heather Gray – veteran sales rep with over ten years’ experience on Toll Brothers’ luxurious designs.

“These buyers are people who have either lived in Broomfield for years, or come from Westminster, Thornton and Brighton,” Gray adds, showing off her 3-bedroom-plus-study ‘Bellvue’ model, off W. 136th between Zuni and Huron. “They’re all focused on the city of Broomfield and very much want to be inside it.”

Turning up the heat on that buyer is the dearth of new homes available inside Broomfield – particularly for this location with its easy access to new grocery shopping, dining, and schools like Legacy High, rated 8-for-10 stars at GreatSchools.org; and either Meridian or Coyote Ridge Elementary, each 9-for-10 stars.

“Getting to buy new in Broomfield is a huge motivator,” Gray adds. “Resale homes typically need lots of work, and when you figure in how well our homes comp out against older homes of this large size, people tell us that going with Toll Brothers was their only choice.”

But in today’s low-inventory market between Denver and Boulder, making that leap takes some planning, Gray says. “If you want to be part of this new release of sites in The Enclave at McKay Shores, you need to be looking at our site map and talking with us now.”

Gray does have one home that can deliver right away; the only for-sale home close to completion now. It’s a 3-bedroom ranch, 2,155 square feet, with a gourmet kitchen, on an oversized site, at $511,995. “If we were starting it now with the full landscape and all of the upgrades we’ve included, it would be in the $560s, so this is an exceptional opportunity,” she adds. Toll Brothers also offers numbers of main-floor master suite designs that she says are popular with families with teens and ‘tweens.

Three-car garages are an option – and Gray has four new sites that’ll take a daylight walkout basement with deck. You’ll see Toll Brothers’ standard features — fireplace, granite tops in both kitchen and master bath, crown-molding, choices of hardwood cabinets – along with good commuter access to Interlocken or downtown, and close shopping at King Soopers and dining at Orchard Town Center.

You can also tour Toll Brothers’ homes on larger sites at The Preserve at McKay Shores from the $600s. Both neighborhoods have access into open space around McKay Lake and a community pool. To reach either, take W. 136th west from I-25, past Huron to Quivas and turn north just before a roundabout.

The Enclave at McKay Shores, Toll Brothers’ fast-selling luxury homes near McKay Lake, single-family homes with trails; wide-open family/entertaining areas, 3-car garage option, ranch and main-floor master suite plans, Adams 5-Star Schools. 13628 Pecos Loop, Broomfield; from I-25 take 136th Ave. west 1 mi., past Huron, to Quivas St., then north just before the roundabout.

From $501,995

Today 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.

303-452-5173

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him atmark@samuelsonassoc.com. You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns online at DenverPostHomes.com.Follow Mark Samuelson on Twitter:@marksamuelson