American white pelicans’ wing spans can reach more than 8 feet. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By ,

Beaver Dam — Chris Stavropolus is in the know.

He spends six days a week behind the counter of Chili John's Cafe, which has been in his family since 1920. Little happens in this city that doesn't get mentioned in the local gathering spot.

Stavropolus, however, was surprised to learn last month that Beaver Dam Lake is teeming with American white pelicans. Some of his customers, though, know all about the fish-devouring birds.

"When I see pelicans, I know there's fish over there," said Mark Kamerling, who has lived on the lake for 10 years. "Every night there's a few flotillas floating along the shoreline looking for a snack."

Wisconsin is increasingly a nesting spot for the pelicans, which can weigh around 16 pounds with wing spans more than 8 feet. They should not be confused with the brown pelicans seen on the ocean.

Both species are efficient at gobbling down whole fish with their mammoth beaks and pouches but capture their prey differently. Brown pelicans will dive for their meal, but white pelicans are known for fishing in groups while floating on the surface. They will eat about four pounds of fish a day each.

The state Department of Natural Resources reports American white pelican colonies on Cat Island near Green Bay, on islands in Lake Butte des Morts near Oshkosh and, since the mid-1990s, Horicon Marsh, the largest freshwater cattail marsh in the country.

Sadie O'Dell, a wildlife biologist for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service at the Horicon National Wildlife Refuge, said this year, there are about 400 pairs of nesting pelicans on the marsh. They can occasionally be seen along Highway 49 east of Waupun, but their nests are typically on islands buried deep in the marsh.

"The habitat is suitable for them and the foraging so they were able to get established," O'Dell said. "We've been used to seeing them for a while, but they're a highly visible species that people get excited about."

Growing group

The population of American white pelicans is growing at more than 3% a year, according to a report in the most recent issue of The Passenger Pigeon, a quarterly publication from the Wisconsin Society for Ornithology.

The authors, including Sumner Matteson, state avian ecologist with the Department of Natural Resources, say the pelicans' range is expanding eastward from Montana, Wyoming, the Dakotas and Minnesota. In 2013, Wisconsin was home to eight nesting colonies totaling 4,123 nests.

Before 1994, there was no evidence of American white pelican breeding in Wisconsin in modern times.

There may be no easier or more accessible place to spot a pelican than Beaver Dam Lake.

Dozens of the birds have been calling the 6,542-acre lake in Dodge County their summer home since about 2000. The lake is shallow, with a maximum depth of 7 feet. The fishery includes walleye, largemouth bass, northern pike and panfish.

Also common are carp, which frequent the shallows near the lake's southwest side where the pelicans have their nests. Pelicans aren't fussy eaters, and carp are a big part of their diet, O'Dell said.

"Everybody seems to love them, especially when they fly in the big flocks," said Jeff Bahls, president of the Horicon Marsh Bird Club. "They'll get on a thermal, and they'll circle and circle. They've been received really well."

Unlike Canada geese, which foul parks and lawns with their droppings, the pelicans typically stay away from populated areas. The vast majority of their land treks are limited to their nesting island, located in a fairly isolated part of the lake. The pelicans arrive in May and depart for freshwater habitat near the Gulf of Mexico in late September or early October, Bahls said. At this time of the year, the island is brimming with young pelicans, old enough to swim but unable to fly.