Topics: 2016 Elections, Foreign policy, George H.W. Bush, George W. Bush, Iraq war, Jeb Bush, National security, neoconservatives, Paul Wolfowitz, porter goss, Republican Party, Stephen Hadley, Elections News, Politics News

It’s amusing to think back to February of this year and the speech Jeb Bush gave laying out his grand vision for foreign policy. Jeb was still pretending to be undecided on whether he would run for president at that point, but he wanted to head off any suggestion that he’d go down the same foreign policy path as his brother, who left office broadly despised for having launched a costly and unnecessary war in Iraq. “I am my own man,” Jeb promised in that speech, “and my views are shaped by my own thinking and own experiences.”

Since then he’s done just about everything he can to prove that statement false. The foreign policy doctrine he laid out in August was a reimagining of his brother’s worldview: send more U.S. troops to Iraq, send U.S. troops to Syria to help topple Assad and help set up “a stable, moderate government,” and bend the world to America’s will with copious demonstrations of “strength” and “leadership.” Jeb has spent the past two weeks stridently defending his brother’s national security record from Donald Trump’s Twitter trolling.

And, as the New Yorker’s Ryan Lizza writes, Jeb’s foreign policy retinue is comprised mainly of the same cranks and charlatans who populated Brother George’s national security team. Once-notorious Bush administration veterans you probably haven’t heard about or thought of in years – Paul Wolfowitz, Stephen Hadley, Porter Goss – are all signed on to Jeb’s campaign and guiding his thinking on foreign policy. If you thought the Iraq disaster had chased these guys from public life and left the Bush Doctrine on history’s ash heap, you were unfortunately mistaken.

And these guys are still true believers. Lizza spotlights one Jeb advisor in particular: Otto Reich, a veteran of both Bush administrations and the Reagan White House (he oversaw the latter administration’s pro-Contra propaganda efforts). Speaking to Lizza, Reich offered up one of the most morally repugnant and intellectually dishonest “defenses” of the Iraq war I’ve ever seen:

“I can defend the invasion of Iraq,” Reich told me. “What did the invasion of Iraq do? It caused all of the people who would’ve otherwise come and attacked us and killed Americans on our soil—it caused them to go to Iraq and die there. That may sound very brutal, or whatever, but we have seen what has happened when you have an Administration like the current one, that did not realize what Bush had done; sent the troops home from Iraq; created a vacuum that was filled by ISIS. And they’re killing Americans and everyone else—they’re mostly killing Muslims. I lay that at the feet of the Obama Administration.”