New poll: 68 percent of Trump supporters say they would still vote for him if he ran as a third party candidate pic.twitter.com/xujKiFtR65 — OutFrontCNN (@OutFrontCNN) December 9, 2015

Of course they would; this is how cults of personality operate. Please recall this Huffington Post poll released in September. It demonstrated how Republican voters -- driven, it would seem, by Trump backers -- became astonishingly supportive of (a) maintaining the Iran nuclear deal, (b) government-run and -funded healthcare, and (c) race-based affirmative action when the pollster informed respondents that those positions were held by Donald Trump, as opposed to Barack Obama. These aren't hypotheticals, by the way. Follow those links, and you'll discover that longtime Democrat Donald Trump has embraced all three liberal stances during his current presidential run. Not back when he was donating generously to Hillary Clinton and Harry Reid over the years (yes, yes, "because he's a businessman!"), and not even more recently, when Trump was declaring his support for the wasteful "stimulus" package enacted by Obama, whom he declared had rescued the American economy; no, these are viewpoints articulated by the current iteration of Trump. The punchline is that his supporters don't care at all. Trump's Democrat-style campaign is driven by feelings and identity, not issues. The HuffPo survey also revealed the same phenomenon at play on the other end of the spectrum, as hordes of Obama cultists reflexively tossed foundational liberal-left ideals overboard after they were told they were agreeing with Trump, versus Obama. Can we abandon all reason and alleged principles in order to march in lockstep with an anointed political figure, or oppose a bete noir? Yes we can. The point is that emotion-based hero worship can heavily erode afflicted parties' previous adherence to values, ideology, and critical thinking.



Splitting the loosely-defined "center-right" political coalition would vastly increase the likelihood of a Hillary Clinton victory next November. That outcome likely wouldn't particularly bother Trump; therefore, his followers are similarly Ready For Hillary, at least in practice. Trump, who signed an unequivocal pledge to support the eventual GOP nominee and forgo an independent run, has recently indicated that he's open to discarding his promise. This reversal won't hurt him among his groupies, who are comfortable being lied to -- hence their unbending boosterism of this man, and their de facto abetment of Mrs. Clinton. The billionaire mogul is publicly touting the USA Today poll, an unsubtle warning to Republicans that he'd be more than happy to burn the place down if he doesn't get his way:





A new poll indicates that 68% of my supporters would vote for me if I departed the GOP & ran as an independent. https://t.co/ztP5d2ctZl — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) December 8, 2015

The take from Rush today https://t.co/wyT8BAdZO1 pic.twitter.com/tBSxja0NrI — Katherine Miller (@katherinemiller) December 9, 2015