Kootenai County’s longest serving active legislator spoke wisely in a recent column by political writer Chuck Malloy.

“You’ve got to work with other people to get things done,” said Sen. Bob Nonini, a Republican.

Nonini has no opponent in Tuesday’s primary, nor is there a Democratic challenger blocking his way to re-election in November. But some of Nonini’s Kootenai County legislative colleagues are in contested races, and we encourage voters to examine their options closely.

Over the past few months, The Press has published weekly op-ed pieces providing detailed background on issues vital to Idaho. The columns have included charts that show how our legislators have voted on those issues. If you’ve been studying them, you can’t help but have noticed some clear trends. Several incumbents have not worked well with others to get things done. They have objected to investment that will make our state more productive; they have supported legislation that fits their ideological profile.

We think that’s a mistake, one which is costing Idaho dearly today and will cost even more tomorrow.

The single most important issue going forward isn’t gay marriage, sharia law or Obamacare. It is preparing our citizens for a world that is changing so rapidly, ideologues are sure to be left behind.

Working with other people to continue bolstering our education and workforce training will take Idaho to the promised land. More Idahoans filling good Idaho jobs improves their quality of life. It generates additional tax dollars to support cities, counties and the state. There isn’t a downside. What’s required is the understanding of our state’s shortcomings followed by the determination to invest wisely, demand accountability and constantly assess and revise.

Legislators with vision are needed. Legislators with energy are required to keep up and get ahead. Legislators who work hard to represent all of their constituents are prized.

If you’re among the legion of independent voters, we encourage you to register with the party of your choice on Tuesday. Simply go to your polling place and register as a Republican or Democrat and receive the ballot for that party’s candidates. If you don’t know your affiliation or where to go to vote, call the elections office at 446-1030 or email kcelections@kcgov.us. They’ll help you.

Decide for yourself who is best prepared to make our good state great. There’s too much at stake now to sit this primary election out.