By Dann Denny, Herald-Times, Bloomington, Ind. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

July 05 --An Indiana bill prohibiting insurance policies from providing coverage for abortions went into effect Tuesday, but its impact on the number of abortions performed will be minimal, according to a local health insurance expert.

House Bill 1123, authored by State Rep. Jeff Thompson , R- Lizton , prohibits insurance companies from covering an abortion unless it stems from rape or incest, or threatens the life of the mother. The bill pertains to private policies as well as state employee health plans, and allows for abortion coverage if the consumer opts to pay for it separately as an add-on through a rider.

"In all my years, I've never seen an employee insurance plan that covers abortions," said Chris Schrader , president of Schrader and Associates . "There may be one out there, but I've never seen one. I can't comment on individual policies."

Jeff Grossnickle , an employee benefits specialist with the First Insurance Group in Bloomington , said in his three decades in the business he's never seen an individual insurance policy in Indiana cover abortions.

Schrader added that in states that tend to be more sympathetic toward abortion, abortion coverage through company policies is likely more attainable, but Indiana is not one of those states.

"I don't think this bill will move the needle very much in terms of the number of abortions performed in Indiana ," said Schrader, who's also a member of the Affordable Care Act Committee, a Bloomington -based group helping people learn about the new health care law.

In many states, people can buy abortion coverage on the federally subsidized ACA marketplace plans, but all women enrolled in insurance plans that include elective abortion coverage must pay a separate fee from their own pockets into a fund that's used to pay for the abortion services part of the plan. In January, the U.S. House passed a bill banning abortion coverage in federally subsidized Obamacare plans, but it was not taken up in the Senate and died.

Some states have banned all elective abortion coverage from any plan sold on their marketplaces. They can do so under a state "opt-out" clause that was passed as part of the health care law. So far, 15 states, including Indiana , have taken advantage of the opt-out clause to avoid using public funds to help pay for abortions.

"Whether it's a state-run marketplace or a federally run marketplace, insurance is issued and regulated at the state level," Schrader said. "So the ACA allows for an opt out, and Indiana is one of the states that chose to opt out by placing restrictions on abortion coverage. Insurance companies have permission under the ACA to write a rider, but the rider is basically saying if you want an abortion, you will be the one paying for it."

Tammy Lieber , spokeswoman for Planned Parenthood of Indiana and Kentucky , said most abortions cost between $450 and $700 .

Schrader said in Indiana and most Southern states, the shrinking number of providers willing to do abortions is making the matter of insurance coverage for the procedure less relevant.

"In Mississippi , there is only one location that does abortions," he said. "Just because something is permissible doesn't mean anyone will actually do it."

Lieber said only four of the Planned Parenthood health centers, including one in Bloomington , perform abortions.

"We didn't follow this bill because it was not one of our priorities," Lieber said. "As a result, we have not issued a formal statement regarding the bill."

Schrader said just because insurance companies can write these riders doesn't mean they will actually offer them.

"I would not be shocked to find that most, if not all, insurance companies in Indiana will not offer the rider," he said.

___

(c)2014 the Herald-Times (Bloomington, Ind.)

Visit the Herald-Times (Bloomington, Ind.) at www.heraldtimesonline.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 630

[jetpack-related-posts]