Wally Weitz’s July !, 2015 letter to investors titled, “Value Matters.”

H/T Dataroma

Get The Full Seth Klarman Series in PDF Get the entire 10-part series on Seth Klarman in PDF. Save it to your desktop, read it on your tablet, or email to your colleagues.

Dear Fellow Investor,

We are at the halfway mark in 2015 and the stock and bond markets have made very little progress so far this year. The stalemate between buyers and sellers has been going on for several quarters.

The lack of net change in market averages does not mean that nothing is happening in the world, though. There have been many political and economic developments that affect both investor confidence in general and the profitability of companies in a number of industries. The investment landscape is always “uncertain.” However, it seems that there are a number of ongoing “standoffs” between bullish and bearish forces and that this extended period of ambiguity is causing growing investor anxiety.

Wally Weitz - Federal Reserve

One of the most visible standoffs for American investors is the debate within the Federal Reserve over when to end its policy of “extraordinary accommodation” and allow market forces to reset interest rates at more normal levels. Investors love very low interest rates—they can borrow cheaply personally to speculate, and their companies can raise money cheaply for acquisitions, stock buybacks and to repair weak balance sheets. On the other hand, they worry about the potential for future inflation and the possibly negative impact of higher rates on the economy and securities prices.

In our opinion, the Fed’s decisive actions during the financial crisis were necessary and successful. At some point, though, its intentional inflation of securities prices (in pursuit of a “wealth effect” that would stimulate the economy) through “quantitative easing” became unnecessary and probably counter-productive. To the extent that securities prices were bid up to artificially high levels, some of investors’ recent profits have been borrowed from the future. This is no disaster but may lead to near-term disappointment for investors with unrealistic expectations.

As for interest rates, it is safe to predict that they will go up at some point. Very high interest rates can be damaging to the economy and would depress valuations of stocks and bonds. We believe we are a very long way from damaging interest rate levels, but investors tend to react to the direction of changes in rates. We do not expect tight credit to be an issue for the companies we own (or for business in general) for years to come, but investors are subject to panic attacks.

Wally Weitz - International Tensions

On the geopolitical front, we have literal standoffs around the globe: Russia and the NATO countries over the Ukraine; China and its neighbors over disputed islands in the South China Sea; Sunni and Shia factions all over the Middle East. The standoff between Greece and its Eurozone creditors intensifies as I write. The danger, not to mention the pain and suffering in each of these arenas, is real. Any of these situations could trigger a bout of market volatility at any time, but from a narrow, investment point of view, we think our companies are well-prepared to insulate themselves from foreign hostilities.

Wally Weitz - Energy

Another type of standoff is taking place in energy markets. Oil and gas prices have always been volatile. For perspective on the continuing drama of supply and demand imbalances, we recommend Daniel Yergin’s classic, The Prize. New discoveries and advances in transportation and technology create gluts and then new markets for energy (e.g. cars and emerging middle class consumers) cause shortages. New technology for extracting oil and gas from shale deposits has once again upset the supply/demand equation. The collapse in energy stock prices has created some apparent bargains in companies with very valuable reserves.

What is a little different this time is that the lead times required to bring new production on stream in the U.S. has been shortened considerably by the new technology. This may mean that oil and gas price recovery will take longer than usual. If this is the case, it will be important that energy investors own companies with very low production costs and strong balance sheets (and that they have plenty of patience). We think our choices of Range Resources (natural gas), Pioneer Natural Resources (oil) and Core Labs (oil field services) fit these criteria.

Lower fossil fuel prices have a negative impact on the development of alternative energy sources. We would like to find wind or solar investments that could be profitable for our investors. At this point, these alternative sources require government subsidies to generate good economic returns. We do not own any “pure plays” in wind or solar power, but Berkshire Hathaway has made substantial investments in both through its utility subsidiary. We will continue to look for opportunities in this area.

Wally Weitz - Media

In the media world, there are several sets of cross currents that are unsettling investors. The cable “bundle” is under attack. Some cable subscribers and their advocates have argued for the choice to buy channels on an a la carte basis. ESPN has the clout to charge about $6 per month per subscriber and to insist on being carried on the “basic” tier of channels. Aside from the value of collecting subscriber fees from all subscribers, including many who watch no sports programming, ESPN is able to demand premium advertising rates because of its “reach.” Non-sports fans would like to save the $6, but it is quite possible that individual viewers’ overall cable bills would go up under a la carte as cable networks priced to offset declines in numbers of subs.

Cable providers are facing defections of video subscribers, both from younger “cord-nevers” and “cord-cutters” who cancel video service and watch “over-the-top” streaming services like Netflix or Amazon Video delivered via broadband. The result is a loss of video revenue for the cable operator, and both subscriber fees and advertising revenue for the cable networks.

Broadband is a more profitable product for providers, as it shifts the burden of programming costs to the consumer. Thus, it may be possible for the cable provider to price its broadband service to be just as profitable as video plus broadband. However, cable companies face broadband competition from telephone company DSL, and in some markets, from alternate providers like Google Fiber. In addition, the FCC is considering changes in regulation that might prevent such price increases for broadband service.

The issues are very complicated. The players are large and powerful. The regulatory environment is in flux. The amount of money involved is enormous. Hence a titanic standoff. It is very important that we understand the evolving balance of power because we have investments in cable operators (Liberty Global and Charter, via Liberty Broadband) and cable networks (Fox, Discovery and QVC). We believe we own companies with the right combination of competitive position, financial strength and savvy management, but we are watching developments very carefully.

Wally Weitz - Healthcare

A political standoff over the Affordable Care Act has moved to a new stage. The recent Supreme Court decision removed a threat to the law itself and clarified the coverage status of millions. This was welcome news to healthcare providers and removes a significant layer of uncertainty to the immediate outlook for various kinds of healthcare businesses.

On the other hand, the law still has flaws. It also has opponents who will continue to try to dismantle it. Dave Perkins is