Athletic director Jack Graham said school will investigate

Colorado State head coach Jim McElwain talks with referee Ken Williamson during the second half of the NCAA New Mexico Bowl college football game against Washington State on Saturday in Albuquerque, N.M. Colorado State won 48-45 ( Matt York )

ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. -- While people will talk about the fantastic finish to Colorado State's 48-45 New Mexico Bowl victory over Washington State for a while, the hot topic early was a verbal altercation between Cougars' junior quarterback Connor Halliday and CSU defensive line coach Greg Lupfer.

In video that hit the internet fast, it appeared Lupfer had used off-color language toward Halliday, who after the game admitted as much and more, though he didn't elaborate.

"Coach grabbed me and said some profane things to me," Halliday said. "That's all I'll say about it."

In an extend clip of the incident shown on ESPN, it appears the two may have made contact, but it wasn't initiated by Lupfer. It also shows Lupfer never grabbed Halliday, but another coach, assistant strength and conditioning coach Rashad Harris, does touch Halliday in an attempt to seperate the two and get Halliday moving back toward the field and away from the CSU sideline.

Lupfer was not made available for comment after the game, but the school did issue a statement from him through the team's Twitter account in two posts.

"I am truly sorry for what I said. It was wrong and those words to not represent who I am and what I believe in. I apologize for the embarrassment I caused Colorado State University, this team & my family," they read.

Advertisement

It happened after the first of Halliday's six touchdown passes on the day. Colorado State coach Jim McElwain said after the game he didn't know exactly what had transpired between the two.

"I heard something about it, but honestly I don't know anything until I look at it," McElwain said. "We'll definitely handle it in a quick manner, whatever it is."

By the end of the game, Colorado State athletic director Jack Graham had seen the video, had already talked to Lupfer and planned to investigate further.

"I'm fully aware of what happened; I've seen footage of what happened," Graham said. "We're going to take a deep dive on this. It appears as if it was a very inappropriate event. We will take a deep and thorough dive around it. If it is what it appears to have been, that's not who we are, it's not who Colorado State University is. It's unacceptable behavior, and we'll deal with it appropriately."

Graham said if during their investigation they needed to call Washington State, he would. He also said they would not rush to judgment, adding they will take as much time as necessary to come to the right decision.

Records all around -- Colorado State running back Kapri Bibbs continued his impressive debut season, rushing for 169 yards and three touchdowns in the win. It bumps his season totals to 1,741 yards, 31 touchdowns and 186 points on the season -- all single-season records. His touchdowns are also a Mountain West record and lead the nation. His scoring this season already ranks eighth on the career list, the touchdowns second. His three touchdowns in the game tied the bowl's record.

Quarterback Garrett Grayson entered the game as the school's single-season passing yardage leader, a figure he increased to 3,696. His 31-of-50 performance also gave him the single-season marks for completions (297) and attempts (476), and he tied Justin Holland's record with 23 touchdown passes in a year.

Kicker Jared Roberts made four field goals, giving him 21 on the season, tying for the second most in a season. With 17 points, he also established the record for kicker scoring at CSU with 122 points, surpassing the 118 of Jeff Babcock in 2002.

They helped cap the most impressive offensive season in Rams history, as they produced a record 6,044 yards and 507 points while running 1,051 plays.

Max Morgan's five tackles give him 134, the 10th-best season total.

So close -- Colorado State's two biggest offensive plays weren't the best they've produced at the New Mexico Bowl.

Charles Lovett and Garrett Grayson connected for a 63-yard touchdown pass, but in 2008, Billy Farris and Rashaun Greer hooked up for a 69-yard score.

And Bibbs' 75-yard run was two shy of Gartrell Johnson's game-clincher.

Bowl numbers -- Colorado State finished with a total of 5,105 tickets distributed, surpassing what the team did in 2008. It helped produce a crowd of 27,104, the fourth largest crowd in the bowl's history, which witnessed the longest New Mexico Bowl ever at 4:06. ... The temperature at kickoff was 38 degrees which tied the 2011 game as the second coldest. ... Washington State's 35 first-half points broke the game's record. ... CSU is now the only undefeated team with multiple appearances in New Mexico Bowl history at 2-0. It gave them eight wins on the season, the most since 2002, when the Rams won 10 to claim the Mountain West title.

Mike Brohard can be reached at 635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and @mbrohard

Eds note: This story has been updated.