Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Ducey talks KidsCare Yvonne Wingett Sanchez/azcentral.com

Editorial: There's no good reason to keep kids of Arizona's working poor from seeing the doctor.

Arizona froze enrollment in the KidsCare health-insurance program for low-income families in 2010. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto) Story Highlights KidsCare makes sense for Arizona

It's 100 percent paid by the federal government and it helps children of the working poor

Lawmakers need to make sure it passes

KidsCare is not a trap or a trick or part of some sinister federal strategy to undermine Arizona’s independence.

It is a trip to the doctor for a sick child. It is a well-baby check for an infant. It is ongoing care for a chronic childhood ailment, like asthma.

This life-changing, life-saving medical care for children is being offered at no cost – none – to Arizona.

All Arizona's Legislature has to do restart a program that was frozen during the recession.

Federal dollars would cover 100 percent of the costs of taking care of the children of the working poor at least through 2017 and possibly through 2019.

Our state’s health care system would benefit from being paid for medical services to children, instead of facing the uncompensated costs when struggling families with sick kids show up at the hospital emergency room.

Our state’s working families would get a break on one of the most costly and unpredictable expenses.

Who and what we're really talking about

We are talking about families who earn too much to qualify for Arizona’s Medicaid program – the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System – and too little to be able to afford to buy into Obamacare.

We are talking about Arizona families and Arizona kids. An estimated 30,000 kids would be helped, according to AHCCCS estimates.

We are talking about a program that every other state uses to help sick kids and ease the burden on working poor families.

MY TURN: Why kids with autism need KidsCare

LAWMAKER: Why we need to act on KidsCare

We are talking about a move that would bring a projected $76 million in federal dollars to Arizona in fiscal 2017 and $86 million in fiscal 2018, generating tens of million in indirect economic benefits and about $2.6 million in state and local taxes, according to a policy paper by the Grand Canyon Institute.

We are talking about an idea that won bipartisan support in the Arizona House.

So why are we still talking?

Why haven’t we seized this opportunity to help hard-working families?

Cost worries are bogus - there's an escape clause

Arizona Senate President Andy Biggs is holding legislation that would restore previous cuts to KidsCare, a health-insurance program for children in low-income families. (Photo: David Wallace/The Republic)

One man. Senate President Andy Biggs declared his dislike for the program and refused to let it come to a vote in the state Senate he leads.

Biggs – and other conservatives – say Arizona could be left to pick up the costs if Uncle Sam decides to no longer support KidsCare at 100 percent.

It’s a bogus argument because there is an escape clause built into the bill – HB 2309 – that passed the GOP-controlled House 47 to 12. The bill says that if the feds don’t pay, Arizona can cut the program.

MONTINI: His daughter would be dead without KidsCare

It’s also pure sophistry to say the program – if restarted – would become too popular to cut. Lawmakers cut it once before.

Freezing the program during the recession was touted as a cost saving measure because, at that time, KidsCare required the state to put in one dollar for every three the feds ponied up. The 3-to-1 federal match was so generous that eviscerating KidsCare proved counterproductive.

Arizona saved $12.9 million in fiscal 2011 by slashing KidsCare, but the state lost $41 million in federal matching money that year, according to the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured.

Did we mention it's free to Arizona?

That federal money would have helped families and the state’s health care industry at a time when people were losing their jobs and their homes.

Even if the feds were still offering a 3-to-1 match, it would be a great deal.

But what we are talking about now is a health-care plan for the children of the working poor that is 100 percent paid by the federal government.

If Arizona doesn’t use the federal money that is available to help our children, the money will go to other states.

As the state budget moves through the hurried last days of this legislative session, there will be opportunities to bring KidsCare to a vote in the Senate.

Make it happen.

KidsCare should pass for the sake of 30,000 kids who need to see the doctor, for the sake of making sure Arizona's health professionals are paid for care that would otherwise be uncompensated and for the sake of the indirect economic benefits of bringing tax money back to our state.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/26r8LWa