California congressional candidate ran pro-gun robocall hours after UCSB mass-shooting



Tony Strickland is a US House candidate near the congressional district where a mass shooting occurred Friday night at UC Santa Barbara



His campaign robocalled voters on Saturday, touting his gun-rights record

The advertising order was apparently placed before Friday's shooting



An election media buyer in California told MailOnline that the contract could have been canceled with a phone call.



Tony Strickland, a former California state senator aiming for a seat in the House of Representatives, robocalled constituents with a gun-rights message on Saturday near the congressional district where a crazed murderer shot and killed three people, and stabbed three others to death, a day earlier.

'Protect our gun rights! Vote for Tony Strickland for Congress!' the Republican's call script says. 'Tony Strickland has a history of protecting our Second Amendment rights and will do the same in Congress.'

'Tony has been a longtime supporter of the rights of citizens to keep and bear arms,' a voice on the call continues, 'and will continue to oppose, and actively fight, any legislation that would take away our Second Amendment right.'

SCROLL DOWN FOR AUDIO

The campaign of Tony Strickland, a former state senator running for Congress in the district that includes Isla Vista, California, authorized a robocall gun-rights campaign on the day after a shooting and stabbing spree that left six dead

Battle lines: UC Santa Barbara graduate student Jeb Sprague holds up a sign that reads 'Gun Control Now' in a one-man protest following the weekend rampage of 22-year old Elliot Rodger

A community grieves: Jose Cardoso pays his respects at a makeshift memorial in front of the IV Deli Mart, where part of Friday night's mass shooting took place

Strickland spokesman Evan Handy told MailOnline that the 'calls were scheduled before Friday's shooting,' and that they 'went to a small universe of Second Amendment supporters and were completed instantly.'



He gave the Huffington Post a more anodyne statement, saying 'Our thoughts and prayers go out to the families and victims of this tragedy.'

CALL TRANSCRIPT 'Protect our gun rights! vote for Tony Strickland for Congress! 'Tony Strickland has a history of protecting our Second Amendment rights and will do the same in Congress.

'Tony Strickland was a founding member of the NRA Member Council and former California Rifle and Pistol Association legislator of the year. 'Tony has been a longtime supporter of the rights of citizens to keep and bear arms and will continue to oppose, and actively fight, any legislation that would take away our Second Amendment right to bear arms.

'As the founder of the Freedom Firearms Coalition and with a lifetime "A" rating from the NRA, we can count on Tony Strickland to protect our constitutional rights. 'On June 3rd, vote for Tony Strickland for Congress. This call was paid for by Strickland for Congress.'

On Friday night UC Santa Barbara 'virgin killer' Elliot Rodger stabbed his two roommates and another student to death, and then shot and killed two sorority girls and a male student.

A California political media buyer told MailOnline that most robocall vendors can cancel campaigns at any time, at the potential cost of the full value of the campaign.

Strickland 'may have decided that he had more to lose by canceling than he did by going ahead with it,' the ad-woman said, requesting anonymity because of the sensitive nature of the subject matter – and because she works for other Republican candidates statewide.

'But just one phone call – ironic, huh? – could have prevented this.'

Alan Gottlieb, founder of the Second Amendment Foundation, said Strickland's robocall should be considered in light of the anti-gun rhetoric that leapt to the forefront immediately after the shooting.

'Considering that those in favor of gun prohibition immediately started calling for new restrictions on Second Amendment firearms rights,' he told MailOnline, 'I bet that the calls will not hurt his campaign.'



The National Rifle Association did not immediately respond to a request for comment made on the Memorial Day holiday.

The organization's previous campaigns, however, indicate that it would argue in favor of a more heavily armed citizenry in order to create a disincentive for future mass-murderers.



But Richard Martinez,whose son Chris was among Rodger's victims, said Saturday that he blamed, 'craven, irresponsible politicians and the NRA,' for his son's death.

'They talk about gun rights. What about Chris’s right to live?' a visibly anguished Martinez cried



'When will this insanity stop? When will enough people say, "Stop this madness! we don’t have to live like this!"?



'Too many have died. We should say to ourselves: "Not one more".'



When police found his body, Rodger was surrounded by three semi-automatic handguns and nearly 400 rounds of ammunition, which had all been purchased legally.

'The timing could hardly be more tasteless,' wrote blogger Mike Devlin, who first surfaced a recording of the robocall at SantaClarita.com.





Strickland hasn't spoken publicly about the shooting, and his robocall may ensure that he doesn't

KILLER: British-born student Elliot Rodger, 22, son of Hunger Games film director Peter Rodger, murdered six people Friday night in the Isla Vista district of Santa Barbara, California

The Santa Barbara County Sheriff's office showed reporters photos of the Glock and Sig Sauer handguns that Rodger had with him on Friday night

'Tony Strickland actually represented Santa Barbara and Isla Vista in the State Senate until late 2012,' he wrote, 'and many of these victims were likely [his] former constituents.'

Devlin is a part-time editor at the urban-culture website RapGenius.com.

Strickland is running for Congress on an anti-Obama platform that includes opposition to the Affordable Care Act – he called it 'fundamentally flawed' in one debate – and the promise of a federal balanced budget amendment.

He also favors the Keystone XL pipeline, calling it one way to make America 'energy independent.'

Strickland is part of an eight-way race for the seat held by the retiring Republican Rep. Buck McKeon in California's 25th District.

The June 3 'open primary' ballot will include four Republicans, two Democrats, one Libertarian and an independent candidate, all vying for the top two slots and a November runoff.