For StarNews Media

Members of the N.C. General Assembly are expected to vote next week on a framework for Medicaid reform. Children make up the majority of our Medicaid recipients, even though they account for well under half of Medicaid expenditures. Whether or not your family receives Medicaid, you need only look to the past month to know that the decisions our legislators make will will have a lasting impact on your family's health.

On Jan. 1, pediatricians in North Carolina were struck with a 27 percent cut in Medicaid reimbursements, a result of two factors: the expiration of the federal Affordable Care Act provision ensuring that Medicaid (which serves mainly children) would pay the same as Medicare (which serves older adults), and a decision by our legislature to impose an additional 3 percent cut on Medicaid providers. The legislature also voted to “claw back” another 1 percent of what providers had already been paid, a move which is still awaiting approval from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).

It took a while for the impact of these changes to hit home. At first, our region's pediatric practices operated as they always had. By summer, however, it became clear that the model of care for children in Southeastern North Carolina could not continue as it had before.

A local pediatrician friend of mine left the state, reportedly because of deep salary cuts at his practice. The practice I work for, Coastal Pediatric Associates, found that we needed a new care model and a new partner (KidzCare Pediatrics) in order to continue serving our patients. At KidzCare, we are much better equipped to follow our mission of providing “accessible, affordable, quality care” for all children, but we also lost several trusted providers and highly skilled, long-term staff members in the transition. Most recently, three of my colleagues, people whom I respect, trust, and enjoyed working with, have left another large pediatric practice in town.

I have always loved how pediatricians in our community cooperate to serve children on Medicaid. This year's Medicaid cuts have therefore deprived all families in our area -- not just those on public assistance -- of the care of providers who have spent years building relationships with children and their families. Right now our lawmakers have a unique opportunity to reverse this trend.

What sort of model would guarantee all of North Carolina's children access to high-quality pediatric care? First and foremost, we need to preserve the role of provider-led entities (PLE's) in managing care, as opposed to managed care corporations whose leadership may not include anyone who has ever been responsible for a child's life.

Second, strong provisions must protect the role of the patient-centered medical home (PCMH), a place where the patient's needs come first and where providers continue to have personal relationships built over time with their patients. PCMH models have a proven record of cost savings and improved patient care.

Patient centered medical homes also benefit when hospitals, clinics, and specialists can easily share information via an electronic Health Information Exchange (HIE). An effective, transparent HIE can help ensure that providers work together to reduce costs and improve outcomes by keeping everyone on the same page.

Patient and provider protections must be built into any new Medicaid legislation. In the past, North Carolina Medicaid included provisions that prevented managed care companies from padding their profits by denying patients needed care or cutting provider reimbursement to the point that providers fled the system, as is happening now. The new system must preserve such protections, lest patients be harmed by over-zealous cost-cutting.

Finally, a reasonable transition period must be built into the new system. The current Medicaid structure, oft-criticized as “broken,” has actually been shown by a recent State Auditor's report to be doing an enviable job of controlling costs and improving care, with the help of the nonprofit Community Care of North Carolina. It's possible we can improve upon this system over time, but the structural and cultural changes that must occur are extremely complex, and it's important that we not throw out a system that was working while we simultaneously build and a new model.

I remember how blessed I felt 13 years ago to join a pediatric community committed to serving all children with excellence. I am heartbroken, but not surprised, as friends and colleagues flee a system that can no longer make good on that promise. The framework our legislators are poised to adopt is a start, but many decisions remain to be made. I trust, however, that our legislators share our concern for all of our children's health, and I hope to join them in crafting a system that truly provides accessible, affordable, quality care for our next generation.

Wilmington pediatrician David L. Hill serves on the Board of Directors and the Policy Committee of the N.C. Pediatric Society and practices at KidzCare@Leland.