Had Charles Dickens asked William S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan to adapt as a musical his tale of how the bitter and miserly Ebeneezer Scrooge regains his Christmas spirit it might sound a lot like the operetta the Washburn University Opera Studio will stage Sunday evening at Grace Cathedral.

The student ensemble, with the support of the Topeka Opera Society Concert Association, will present "A Gilbert and Sullivan Christmas Carol" at 5 p.m. Sunday in the cathedral, 801 S.W. 8th, as part of it Great Spaces Music & Arts Series. Admission is free, but donations are requested for the cathedral's Saturday Bag Lunch Program, which weekly feeds more than 100 people in need.

The comic operetta was conceived by Gilbert and Sullivan expert Gayden Wren who put himself in the mind of Gilbert and created in his style new lyrics for Sullivan tunes as a way to tell in a tongue-in-cheek fashion Dickens' classic story of redemption.

For example, the Spirits of Christmas Past, Present and Yet-to-Come (Rachel Cross, Brianne Stewart and Marya Feldt, respectively) sing "Three little ghosts for Scrooge we are" set to the tune of "Three little maids from school are we," which Yum-Yum, Peep-Bo and Pitti-Sing sing in "The Mikado." Instead of "three little maids who, all unwary, come from a ladies seminary," sing "three little ghosts who, dark and scary, come from a local cemetery."

The Ghost of Marley (Brendan Boyle) introduces himself with "I am the very model of a mystic supernatural" adapted from "The Pirates of Penzance's" "I am the very model of a modern major-general." When Scrooge (Phillip Watson) and Bob Cratchit (Aaron Springer) introduce themselves to the music of "The Mikado's" "I am so proud," Scrooge sings "my name's Scrooge, my income's huge," to which Bob Cratchit (Aaron Springer) counters "my name is Bob, I hate my job."

The cast wraps up the operetta with praising the reformed Scrooge with a song borrowed from "HMS Pinafore" in which instead of "he is an Englishman," they sing "he's a Good Samaritan."

"A Gilbert and Sullivan Christmas Carol" also samples "Cox and Box," "The Gondoliers," "The Grand Duke," "Iolanthe," "Patience," "Princess Ida," "Ruddigore," "The Sorcerer" and "The Yeomen of the Guard."

Sylvia Stoner directs the operetta, which is accompanied by pianist Patricia Gibson, assisted by Joe Fitzgerald and Caitlin Ediger.

The other cast members are: Young Ebeneezer Scrooge (Tyler Bridges), Mr. Fezziwig (Robert Brown), Belle (Clare Bryan), Fred Scrooge (Carleton Bryer), Mr. Goodfellow (Quinton Church), Peter Cratchit (Zachary Cope), Ghost of Samuel (Caleb Marcus), Mrs. Fezziwig (Rachel Ming), Mrs. Cratchit (Claire Shea) and Tiny Tim (Tyler Woodworth).

Half of the cast performed in last year's debut production of "A Gilbert and Sullivan Christmas Carol" staged at the Topeka and Shawnee County Public Library's Marvin Auditorium.