A LEADING funeral parlour will be subjected to monthly inspections following allegations dead bodies were being dumped naked in coffins or wrapped in sheets, while ­others were allegedly left with frozen grins like The Joker in Batman.

Former undertaker Ben Veenkamp made the claims against his former employers in resignation emails to the company's managers. Among his allegations were that he was told to pull from the mortuary fridge the body of an elderly woman, put her naked into the coffin and throw in her clothes afterwards.

Mr Veenkamp said when he complained, his boss allegedly told him: "It doesn't matter, they're dead, and we cater to the families, not the people who have died."

Mr Veenkamp also alleged one dead woman was placed in her coffin in a "frozen state".

"The lady was in a frozen state and had received no mortuary care," he said.

"I was told to screw the lid down and that it didn't matter because it was being ­delivered straight to the crematorium."

On another occasion, Mr Veenkamp claims he went with his boss to collect a deceased cancer ­patient from a hospice without any body bags and they left with the corpse wrapped in a sheet.

He said hearses were often late and forced to break the speed limit to deliver the coffins to the funeral on time.

"The mortuary fridge was on the blink and bodies were regularly placed without head blocks overnight, which left them with a frozen grin like The Joker in Batman," he said.

"The job of the mortician is to put the people to rest and help the family feel the same way by dressing the deceased appropriately. They want to see somebody who looks peaceful and has been treated with respect.

"I joined the industry thinking it would be performing some kind of public service, putting people to rest and helping their families. Instead, I was being asked to do some very uncomfortable things."

The family undertaking firm is based in southern NSW and is part of the Allison Monkhouse Funeral Directors group, which owns T J ­Andrews Funeral Services.

Managing director Clive Allison confirmed having last May ­received emails from Mr Veenkamp detailing his allegations. He said when the company investigated the claims, the management team and all employees had denied Mr Veenkamp's allegations.

"The branch has a new management team since Ben's departure," Mr Allison said.

He said the operations manager visited the branch monthly to assess performance. "There are new employees there now, so the chances of this sort of thing happening is very limited,'' he said.

"We are now renewing what we are doing and are very keen to ensure that the good name that we have held for a long time is improved."