TOWN OF WALLKILL, N.Y. >> As the 2016 session of the state Legislature opens, members of both houses discussed issues before them with members of the Orange County Chamber of Commerce on Thursday.

A myriad of topics were discussed ranging from corruption, the tax cap increase, LLC funding loopholes for campaigns, changes in the Affordable Care Act and the state of education, but the hot-button topic was the governor’s push for a $15 per hour minimum wage.

County Executive Steven Neuhaus, a Republican, said he has already felt pressure from the local business community on this topic.

“A lot of small businesses have already contacted me and said it would really cripple them; so, I believe there is some type of happy medium to increase wages, but they need to do it, not with the elected officials, not with the politicians, but with the business owners themselves, chiming in and their input and their suggestions,” said Neuhaus. “That’s the way to get a minimum wage adjusted.”

Advertisement

State Sen. John Bonacic, R-Mount Hope, and state Assemblywoman Aileen Gunther, D-Forestburgh, both said that the move toward a $15 per hour minimum wage is happening too fast for all of the variables to be taken into account and reformed.

“I’m not going to go there unless there’s balance,” Bonacic said.

Assemblyman Karl Brabenec, R-Deerpark, said the GOP minority conference has been pushing for years to address some of the variables and, with those addressed, raising the minimum wage may not be the answer.

“We’ve been pushing for these reforms for years: less regulation, less unfunded mandates, lower taxes across the board; that’s what’s going to create economic vitality, not a minimum wage increase,” said Brabenec. “We want people to have a living wage, but we want people to have a job where they can make $40,000, $50,000, $60,000 per year, a skilled job.”

Sen. William Larkin, R-Cornwall-on-Hudson, said he faced those concerns years ago when he owned a business.

“I had to pay you every week,” Larkin said. “Now, if you want me to move from $9 to $15 (per hour) for the counter, everybody, what about the guy that does the machine, that does the pressing? He’s making $15. I’ve got to raise his pay. The devil is in the details; it’s easy for these people in Washington ... saying ‘We ought to raise the minimum wage.’ Maybe, we ought to start looking very closely at what we spend some of the money on.”

Although many of those concerns are from a Republican perspective, Democratic Assemblyman James Skoufis, D-Woodbury, said, the minimum wage “is not a black-and-white issue.”

Skoufis said a majority of minimum wage earners are employed by large corporate entities, such as Walmart, and that, because the minimum wage is so low, some of those full-time workers qualify for public assistance in addition to their wages and that, in itself, is creating a financial issue.