This is the first in a series of regular news roundups on Sen. Ted Cruz’s presidential campaign.

WASHINGTON — Sen. Ted Cruz and most of the declared, potential and theoretical GOP presidential field campaigned at Nashua’s First in the Nation Republican Leadership Summit on Friday and Saturday. The two-day event was the first gathering of the 2016 field in the crucial primary state.

The crowd fawned over Cruz and his calls to repeal the Affordable Care Act, abolish the IRS and “destroy radical Islam,” on Saturday afternoon, as attendees interrupted him with applause and cheers.

Cruz also gave a keynote speech at the New Hampshire Young Republicans’ annual convention, attended a fundraising house party and promoted his fierce defense of the Second Amendment in a forum with a New Hampshire hunting and fishing group to cap off the weekend.

In an hour-long town hall with the Londonderry Fish & Game Club, Cruz told members he’ll continue to push for hearings as to whether soldiers on military bases should be allowed carry their own concealed firearms, according to Politico.

And Cruz might have made inroads with libertarians who backed former Texas congressman Ron Paul for president in 2012 but are sheepish about his son, Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky. While the younger Paul stresses the GOP’s chronic need to expand, Cruz instead offered “liberty without compromise” to mobilize an army of conservatives, according to Bloomberg Politics. On childhood vaccinations, for instance, he would leave requirements to states — a stance that could bolster credibility with libertarian-inclined voters.

Former Texas Gov. Rick Perry spoke at the summit Friday afternoon and pitched activists on his executive experience, a common theme among the governors seeking to elbow aside the senators in the field.

Perry, who hasn’t formally entered the 2016 race, urged the party to reject another young senator — a shot at the sitting president and three GOP rivals still serving their first terms in the Senate, Cruz, Paul and Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida.

It’s a shot that resonates with many voters. When asked which GOP Republican 2016 hopeful had the right kind of experience to be president, 65 percent of respondents chose a governor while 22 percent chose a senator, according to a CNN poll released Monday.

Cruz mum on if he’d attend same-sex wedding

The question of the week for some declared and potential Republican presidential candidates was whether they’d go to a same-sex wedding. Rubio said he would. Former Sen. Rick Santorum said he wouldn’t. Cruz told radio host Hugh Hewitt he’d never been asked and instead of giving a clear yes or no, emphasized that marriage laws should be decided by the states.

The U.S. Supreme Court hears arguments next week on whether state bans on same-sex marriages are constitutional. Cruz has introduced a bill to protect such bans, and with eight Texas congressmen, he filed an advisory brief urging the high court to keep definitions of marriage up to states.

Republican leadership punts Obamacare repeal despite Cruz’s best efforts

Eliminating the Affordable Care Act is one of the linchpins of Cruz’s campaign, and that might only happen if he wins in 2016.

Congressional Republican leadership has given up on a full repeal of the law, which provides more than 20 million Americans with health insurance or Medicare. Instead, GOP senators are mulling potential amendments to Obamacare and stopgaps should the Supreme Court strike down critical parts of it, according to the Los Angeles Times.