Senator and would-be Trump slayer Ted Cruz had a lot of things on his mind Wednesday morning in a speech before Manhattan Republicans: “radical Islamic terrorism,” which he would vanquish; the IRS, which he would abolish; Obamacare, which he would repeal; and New York Mayor Bill de Blasio, whom he just doesn’t like.

“You know, I’ve got to say, if Mayor de Blasio ever holds a press conference saying, 'I agree with Ted,' that will be the instant I hang it all up,” said Cruz.

Cruz’s de Blasio-bashing speech was a continuation of a spat the senator reignited Tuesday when he criticized the mayor for suspending a controversial Bloomberg-era Muslim surveillance program.

Responding to that criticism, de Blasio on Tuesday said Cruz's "comments are not about safety and security. It’s demagoguery."

But the mutual animus extends back at least to January, when Cruz impugned Donald Trump’s “New York values” during a GOP debate.

That episode prompted de Blasio to declare himself “disgusted,” and then raise money off the spat.

The combatively conservative senator from Texas said Wednesday that he’s hoping to make New York State’s April 19 Republican primary a competitive one, even if Trump’s lead currently looks prohibitive.

Pitting himself against de Blasio, who is unpopular among New York Republicans, can’t hurt.

The crowd at the Women’s National Republican Club seemed to dislike de Blasio as much as Cruz did. Manhattan Republican Party chair Adele Malpass publicly hoped for a one-term mayor in her introductory remarks.

When Cruz invoked de Blasio’s name, the audience would laugh or jeer.

“When the heroes of the NYPD stood up and turned their backs on Mayor de Blasio, they spoke not just for the men and women of New York, but for Americans all across this nation,” said Cruz, referring to one of the darkest moments in de Blasio’s mayoralty.

Cruz was briefly drowned out by applause.

The senator also doubled down on his contention that de Blasio was wrongheaded to shut down his predecessor’s Muslim surveillance unit, something Cruz would like to see expanded.

“The mayor’s response is essentially, ‘Who are these terrorists of which you speak?'” said Cruz to laughter. “Look, it is that ostrich-head-in-your-sand political correctness that has made America so vulnerable.”

In a question-and-answer session with reporters after the speech, a reporter asked Cruz if his denigration of New York values might hurt him among New Yorkers who might well subscribe to those values, whatever they are.

“You know, I’m not worried at all, because the people of New York understand first-hand the liberal, left-wing values of New York politicians," he said.

In fact, he argued, they have suffered under those very values, "Whether it is men and women in upstate New York and western New York who would like to work and have high-paying jobs, but liberal politicians prohibit fracking so they don’t get the same high-paying jobs that people in Pennsylvania get, or whether it is African American and Hispanic schoolchildren here in the city of New York who Mayor de Blasio tried to throw out of their charter schools because he is, in effect, bought and paid for by the teacher union bosses."

Cruz railing against de Blasio probably doesn't hurt the mayor either, since Cruz is not exactly popular with de Blasio’s liberal base.

“We understand why Ted Cruz is lashing out,” said de Blasio spokeswoman Karen Hinton. “He's not going to be the Republican nominee. Life gets better, though, when you focus on helping people, not dividing them with eleventh-hour political rhetoric out of desperation."