Though overshadowed by Obamacare, the sustainability of this program needs urgent attention.

President Johnson, with former president Harry Truman at his side, signs the Medicare bill into law in 1965 in Independence, Mo. (Photo: AP file photo) Story Highlights Better medical care and longer lives are forcing a reconfiguration in health care policy.

Medicare has become a pay-as-you-go system, which cannot be maintained.

Now is the time for policymakers to increase the age of Medicare eligibility from 65 to 69.

While all of the health policy attention has been focused on the Affordable Care Act's website problems, a long-term issue is being ignored — the sustainability of the Medicare program.

Baby Boomers might be slowing down, but as they age, the behind-the-scenes debate to reform Medicare is getting more vigorous. Some suggest that the glut of beneficiaries born 1946-64 — what demographers call the "pig in the python" — will pass and we can merely nip and tuck at the program's rising costs.

In fact, the huge demographic bulge is being followed down the snake's gullet by something even larger: increasing life expectancy.

Better medical care and longer lives are forcing a reconfiguration in health care policy. The number of Medicare beneficiaries today is rapidly approaching 50 million.

In 2045, when the youngest Baby Boomers have reached age 80 and many are deceased, the government's Trust Funds report projects that number will swell to 90.4 million. Faced with the hard facts, we need to change the Medicare equation so that the rising labor force is not paying for a 20th century program in 21st century realities. We need to make Medicare sustainable, and the first step in doing this is raising the age of eligibility.

Medicare has become a pay-as-you-go system. Either tax receipts from the current year or new federal debt pay for Medicare benefits. Unless something is done to curb spending, the financial weight on each subsequent generation of workers will expand until the system buckles.

The ratio of workers to beneficiaries is falling precariously. Last year, every beneficiary had 3.3 workers to pay for benefits. In 2030, 2.3 workers will have the burden.

That Americans are living longer is a gift, yet programs that serve these older Americans do not reflect critical changes in life expectancy. When Medicare was established in 1965, a man who was 65 at that time would have a life expectancy of 78 and a woman, 81. Today, on average, a man reaching age 65 can be expected to live until 83, women until 85.

Also, health care costs have grown at more than double workers' income from 1999 to 2009. Based on this, how would workers fare when there are only 2.1 workers paying for each older beneficiary?

Let's do the math using today's numbers:

The annual cost of an average Medicare beneficiary net of premiums is $9,500. When Social Security is added to the package, this older American is receiving about $23,500 in benefits a year. Split between slightly more than two workers, each would shoulder about $11,190.

With an average, middle-quintile worker earning $52,000 annually, a 21.5% tax levy would be required to pay for the burden of senior entitlements.

Today, this middle-quintile worker pays about 14% ($7,280) of his or her annual salary in a combination of income, Social Security and Medicare Trust Fund taxes. Escalating that rate to pay for the cost of these entitlements could have dire consequences on family security. Unless entitlements are reformed, the only alternative is to further drive up the national debt.

Now is the time for policymakers to increase the age of Medicare eligibility from 65 to 69. In the past, such a policy change could have led to difficulty in getting health insurance for individuals ages 65-68.

But Obamacare exchanges guarantee access to insurance. In addition, similar to how Social Security is structured, seniors would have the option of claiming eligibility at 65 but would receive fewer benefits than if waiting until 69.

In the five decades since Medicare was created, we've seen major breakthroughs in health care. Young leukemia victims now have the opportunity to live out their lives. A heart attack is no longer certain death. Ongoing medical innovation ensures longer, healthier lives.

Now policymakers need to dissect the Medicare program and give it a sustainable life.

Denis Cortese, director of the Healthcare Delivery and Policy Program at Arizona State University, is emeritus CEO of Mayo Clinic. Robert Smoldt, associate director of the Healthcare Delivery and Policy Program at ASU, is emeritus CAO of Mayo Clinic.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.



Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1b8sVWg