By Liz Freeman of the Naples Daily News

A concierge medical practice with a twist has come to Collier County - thanks to the NCH Healthcare System.

The NCH Concierge Medicine Practice opened at 870 111th Ave. N. in North Naples with doctors Robert Hanson and Jesse Haven, both of whom are board-certified in family medicine.

Both also have been practicing for many years in Naples.

The idea for NCH to start a concierge practice, where patients pay an annual fee for greater access to their doctors, came from NCH’s clinical affiliation with the Rochester, Minnesota-based Mayo Clinic, Haven said. Mayo has hospital locations in Jacksonville and Phoenix and it has concierge practices in both places.

NCH became a member of the Mayo Clinic Care Network in 2012, and local doctors can communicate electronically with Mayo physicians for feedback, especially in complex cases.

Haven, who has been with NCH for four years, said letters have been sent out to patients to inform them of the change and offer them the chance to sign up for the new practice.

Concierge practices began springing up in the late 1990s, created by physicians who wanted to control their practices and limit the number of patients they see in order to provide more tailored primary-care services.

That includes giving patients 24/7 access using a cell phone number. Many concierge physicians also make house calls or visits to corporate executives’ private offices.

Naples saw its first concierge practice in 2002. There are at least 20 of these practices in the community today, not including some hybrid practices where physicians do it part time, said Dr. Ron Garry, a geriatrician whose practice is Naples Premier Concierge. He said demand is high and there’s plenty of business to go around.

“I think it’s a smart move on (NCH’s) part,” Garry said. “It’s a model here to stay and why not take part in it.”

The NCH annual membership fee is $3,000 per patient, and the practice will accept commercial insurance and Medicare for the traditional medical care that is reimbursable by insurance plans.

Haven developed an interest in a concierge practice after helping a family member through an illness.

“I wasn’t able to give that type of attention to each of my patients,” he said. “I guess I knew that, it just became more evident to me when I was doing it (with my family member).”

He will now accept 200 to 300 patients in his concierge practice, a dramatic reduction from 4,000 patients he saw in his earlier practice, with the help of a nurse practitioner.

Hanson also will have 200 to 300 patients in the concierge practice.

Garry, of Naples Premier, said his practice is full and he recently had to turn away five people, so he isn’t worried about competition from NCH.

Garry said he has not heard of hospital-run concierge practices because they originated years ago out of doctors’ frustrations with the traditional medical system. At the same time, there is no one way to run a concierge practice.

“There is no fixed model,” Garry said, adding that typical annual membership fees in Naples run between $1,500 and $10,000 a year.

The American Academy of Private Physicians, based in Virginia and started in 2003, says concierge medical practices don’t focus only on the wealthy; there are practices that fit any budget, according to president Dr. Matthew Priddy. There are now more than 5,000 physicians practicing concierge medicine in the U.S.

The American Medical Association in Chicago expects increased interest in concierge services. Many patients, especially older adults, fear it will be harder to see their doctors since more people have insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

The NCH concierge fee will include three months admission to NCH’s wellness centers, weekly sessions with a personal trainer during those three months and five consults with a nutritionist, Haven said.

The wellness centers are in the NCH Medical Plaza next to the Downtown Naples Hospital and in the Greentree Plaza off Immokalee Road in North Naples.

Besides offering primary-care services through the concierge practice, another key component will be preventive care through nutrition and fitness, according to NCH.

Haven and Hanson will host an open house on Oct. 23, from 5:30 to 7 p.m. and again on Oct. 30 from 5:30 to 7 p.m. For more information about NCH Concierge Medicine or to register for the open house, call (239) 624-8200.