Buy Photo Double Eagle waitress Shannon Barrio, center, hands a meal check to Bob Hodge while friend Carol Kreitner looks on. (Photo: Jett Loe / Sun-News)Buy Photo

LAS CRUCES - To tip or not to tip?

Upscale restaurants in major U.S. cities are exploring unfamiliar territory in offering fixed-price menu items and eliminating tipping altogether. Some say it is easier for managers to keep records and levels out income for servers. Others say it's a bookkeeping hassle and will drive the price of menu items up so that fewer people will eat out. On one hand, less calculation of a tip at the end of the meal. On the other, no way to reward staff for exceptional service.

But most agree it is not a trend we will see in Las Cruces on a large scale any time soon.

"As far as I'm concerned, tipping is not only for restaurants," said Pete Mitchell, assistant professor and restaurant operations manager for the New Mexico State University School of Hotel, Restaurant and Tourism Management. " It's never going to go away. Period. People tip for taxi cabs, people delivering food. I don't think it's ever going to go away."

The trend of no-tip restaurants surfaced as a result of rising minimum wages across the country and owners trying to figure out how best to cope with the changing landscape. Prior to local minimum wages being raised in cities across the nation, all servers made a minimum wage of $2.13 an hour, with the restaurant tallying in tips to raise their total income to the overall minimum wage.

"It's mainly an issue that, when minimum wage was low we had $2.13 an hour then, through tips, the server made up the the extra to reach minimum wage," Mitchell said. "Now minimum is bumping up to $10-plus an hour in some places."

Keith Mandabach, a professor in the HRTM program, said the trend is also due to the Affordable Care Act and the record keeping needed to determine the employer's and employee's share of insurance cost. Keep in mind that, at sub-minimum wages which exclude tips, many servers see paychecks that may amount to a few cents or dollars at best after taxes and insurance and pooling tips with colleagues in the back of the house.

"There's been a lot of talk about this," Mandabach said. "There are a number of restaurants that are doing this, for the most part the high-end restaurants. They just changed it to the European model and eliminate service charges then increase the price and pay (employees) better."

With the elimination of tipping, restaurants move to a strategy where servers are paid a set wage or salary and "usually pretty well" to compensate for the loss of tips, Mandabach said.

"Now you are getting areas like Seattle, San Francisco, where they are mandating $15 an hour. The no-tipping is involved in that," Mandabach said. "So (owners are saying) 'let's just get rid of tips and have (customers) pay for it.'"

Some nationally-known chefs have moved to the system and say customers love it, he added.

Buy Photo Manager and bartender Seneca Reyna rings up a check behind the bar at the Double Eagle restaurant and bar in Mesilla. (Photo: Jett Loe / Sun-News)

Audri Escobedo, who has two years of service experience and has been working at Double Eagle Restaurant in Mesilla for about five months, said she prefers to receive tips. And, the flexability in her schedule not working set hours might be lost if regular shifts were required, she said.

"If it came down to working hourly or salary I probably would have gone somewhere different or into a different industry," Esobedo said. "It also gives a reflection on your work ethic. If you do a good job, it pays off ... it reflects on how you acted. Every table, every hour you have to do your best."

This is the third service job she has had in Las Cruces and her sister and friends who work in the field agree, she said. She did note that tips also depend on your restaurant's atmosphere and the clientele.

Shannon Barrio, a one-year veteran server at Double Eagle who has worked in the field for some 27 years, agreed that servers would prefer to work for tips.

"Some of the owners might (like no-tipping) but I would not," Barrio said. "I make a lot more than I would hourly. It depends on your attitude and how you treat your customers."

Jerry Harrell, general manager of Double Eagle and Peppers Cafe said, in some ways, no tipping is already here in the form of fast-casual dining like Corner Bakery.

"It depends on what the customer wants to pay," Harrell said.

He doubts that employees would take to the system because one hard-working server would draw the same earnings as someone who was less proficient or dedicated. It would also have a significant impact in menu prices, he said. He estimates increases of 15 percent to 20 percent on menu items if tipping was not allowed.

"A restaurant currently paying $3.40 an hour (the Las Cruces minimum tipping wage in 2015 was set at $3.38) would have to pay $8.40 an hour. That's $5 an hour more that's got to come out of the customer's pocket into the restaurant and back to the server. Now, the server gets the cash on the table."

And, he said, showing gratitude for a well-prepared and consientiously-served meal is part and parcel of the American dining experience.

"I really think people enjoy that active generosity," Harrell said. "They feel good about themselves, doing good to another human being by maybe leaving more than tradition said they should. Maybe the server laughed with them, joked with them, anticipated their needs. There is a human element to that act of tipping that will stay for quite a while. "

Jason Gibbs may be reached at 575-541-5451 or jgibbs@lcsun-news.com. Follow him on Twitter @fjgwriter.

Read or Share this story: http://lcsun.co/1XsAuA0