The Epoch Times published an article on Thursday afternoon in response to a piece published on Before It's News claiming that the Affordable Care Act (ACA) will be mandating radio frequency identification (RFID) chips to be implanted into citizen's skin.

According to the original report, in Hanna, Wyoming, the Obamacare RFID chips are currently being “test ran," and have been since July of this year.

This fascist invasion extends to all Police officers, military and even garbage men will be required to have the RFID chip by the end of next month or face termination from their jobs.

The “Resist the Tyranny” blog claims that the chips are “yet another fatal blow to American privacy and liberties.”Other stories claiming RFID chips are being tested as part of Obamacare have been going viral on alternative news websites, but the one in Hanna, Wyoming is most popular.

Fortunately, the story is fake, because the website, Before It's News, is fake in its entirety.

Besides the disclaimer on its website about its fake reporting, the fakeness of the site can be seen in its headlines, such as “Analysts Forecast Drop In Holiday Spending As More Families Rely On Presents From Santa Claus” and “Naptime Prepares Children for Socialist Entitlements.”

The RFID Microchip implant rumor was started while the ObamaCare bill was still in development. It was a scare tactic thought up by an unknown source. This is very similar to death panels and other rumors that use the complex nature of the law to twist words.

Snopes.com said:

Nothing in any of those unpassed bills mandated that anyone be implanted with any type of microchip or RFID-based device, for any reason. The passages quoted above reference a section of the legislation that simply called for the creation of a registry which would allow the Department of Health and Human Services to collect data about medical devices "used in or on a patient" (such as pacemakers or hip replacements) for purposes that included tracking the effectiveness of such devices and facilitating the distribution of manufacturer recall notices.

The original fake RFID chip story is from three months ago, but the new spate of stories derived from the fake site appear to come after two follow-up stories about an “RFID mascot” beginning a nationwide tour “to help alleviate children’s fears of implantation.” It referred to the mascot as “Chippie the RFID.”

The story quoted a fake person called Doug Walker:

“’It felt like a pinch,’ explained Walker who attended a recent Chippie seminar a Carbon County, Wyoming school.

In other news, Establishment Labs has started marketing breast implants with an (RFID) chip built in. While this may concern women about the privacy issues, the company claims the RFID chip will provide information about the "Ergonomix breast implant" to a patient and her doctor years later.

Like what you’ve read? Subscribe to receive (spam free) email notifications for top news articles.

Emily Sutherlin is also the Pregnancy Examiner.

Got something to say? Say it on Examiner by following this link to sign up.

©2013 Emily M. Sutherlin. All Rights Reserved.