Estefania Bermudez, of Gainesville, Fla., browses the Internet on her laptop Thursday morning at Ziggi's Coffee House. Owner Brandon Knudsen said he's been very pleased since signing up to use the city of Longmont's fiber optic loop last summer for his Main Street location. ( Matthew Jonas / Times-Call )

For some Longmont residents, waiting for an opportunity to tap into the city's fiber optic network may remind them of the days of dial-up modems, or watching that "downloading" bar slowly moving to the right of the screen.

Patience, it is said, is a virtue.

Although construction on a phased city-wide buildout of the network isn't expected to begin until fall, there's plenty happening behind the scenes right now.

Fiber optic cable is shown being spliced together in this Times-Call file photo. (Matthew Jonas / Times-Call)

Uptown Services was recently awarded a contract by Longmont Power & Communications to do the design and engineering for the buildout. This coming week, representatives from Standard & Poor's will be in Longmont to get a presentation from LPC that will ultimately lead to the rating of the bonds the city issues to pay for buildout of the network. On Tuesday night, the Longmont City Council will vote to formally approve the issuance of those bonds, and on approving a new contract with the St. Vrain Valley School District for LPC to build a 10-gigabit network for the school district. Previously, the school district had to lease fiber through an intermediary company.

Advertisement

But that's not to say that no one outside the city, Longmont United Hospital and the school district are currently using Longmont's fiber. Twenty-five businesses and a couple residences are early adopters.

One of those businesses is Ziggi's Coffee, which has its downtown location hooked up to the city's fiber.

Owner Brandon Knudsen said Ziggi's runs all of its business operarations at that location on a hardline hooked up to the network and it also offers its customers wireless connectivity.

Barista Jessica Stratton hands a customer a card on Thursday at Ziggi's Coffee House on Main Street in Longmont. Ziggi's uses Longmont Power and Communications' fiber optic network for wireless for its customers and for its internal business operations. (Matthew Jonas / Times-Call)

Knudsen said he had previously subscribed to one of the "incumbent" providers offering high-speed connectivity. But he describes that experience as "a constant headache."

"I just assumed that there's spikes and there's outages, and that's just the way it is," Knudsen said.

But when Longmont voters approved the city being allowed to override a Colorado statute that prohibited the city — through Longmont Power & Communications — from offering retail broadband, Knudsen took notice. When the city began actively soliciting businesses physically close to the city's fiber optic loop to sign up the for service last year, Knudsen did because he wanted to show his support for the city.

But it's exceeded his expectations, he said: Gone are the outages, gone are the spikes, and way up are the speeds.

"Our customers are getting 100 to 120 (megabits per second), which is ridiculous," Knudsen said. "Before we were lucky to get three or four.

"We haven't even had a blip in it. There's been not one phone call, not one customer complaint. I don't want to jinx myself, but there's been no issues with it. It's been really sweet."

A phased rollout

Boulder-based Uptown Services was the company that helped Longmont Power & Communications with a feasability study to prove the financial merits of the city offering retail fiber. Last May, the city council allowed the question of whether the city could sell bonds to expedite the build-out of the network to be put to the voters in November, and the measure passed. Voters approved the issuance of up to $45.3 million in bonds, with a projected payback of 11 years if the city succeeds in obtaining 35 percent of the market share for high-speed connectivity in Longmont.

Without the bond sales, building out the network city-wide would have taken decades.

Since that green light from voters, LPC has been busy creating what is essentially a utility within a utility.

The city's fiber optic cables have 12 buffer tubes, each holding 12 fiber strands. The 144 strands, each about the width of a human hair, are capable of carrying an almost unlimited amount of data. About two-thirds of the fibers are currently unused, although that will soon change. (Times-Call file photo) (Matthew Jonas / Times-Call)

Boulder-based Uptown Services beat out 15 other companies in its bid to become LPC's design engineering firm for the new network.

"They had the most experience in actually designing a muni fiber network to the home," said LPC director Tom Roiniotis. "And they came in at the lowest price."

Municipal fiber is specifically what his company does, said Neil Shaw, the founder of Uptown. After launching in 2007, Uptown started focusing on the muni fiber business in 2009, and has done projects similar to Longmont's all over the country. Shaw said cities that deploy their own broadband networks often own their own electric utility, as Longmont does, and they typically have some sort of fiber optic backbone in place.

The fact that Longmont's loop, built in 1997, is a little more than 17 miles long and basically encirlcles the entire city is a huge advantage, he said.

"It saves them a lot of money on the front end," Shaw said. "It's both a financial and a network architecture issue. ... It gives them great options technologically, which I think can be at least as significant as the cost savings."

The rollout of the fiber network will be done in phases, Shaw said, adding that all along, his team will be working closely with whatever construction company is hired to make sure that surprises — often inevitable in construction — are minimized.

Roiniotis explained that preliminary plans are for the city to be divided into five sectors. The area surrounding the city's services center on South Sherman Street, which is where LPC is headquartered, will be the first to get built out because that's where the broadband network's operations center will be based. Residents and businesses in that sector will have the first chance to sign up for service. The Twin Peaks Mall property will also be included in that first phase because by that point it will be undergoing a major rebuilding project requiring new utility infrastructure anyway.

"Building a Gigabit city" For more information on Longmont's plan to offer broadband services over its fiber optic loop, visit ci.longmont.co.us/lpc

From there the buildout will proceed roughly due north, through the center of the city, where much of the city's fiber is on overhead lines, which allows for quicker delivery to homes and businesses.

Following that phase, construction will proceed in a counter-clockwise direction, finally concluding on the southwest end of town. 2017 is the target for completion.

Asked the reason for not moving in a clockwise fashion, and having the southwest part of town — and some of Longmont's biggest businesses and the many high-end neighborhoods nearby — being the second phase of buildout, Roiniotis said he and his team are taking a lesson from the way other cities have done it.

Starting on the higher income part of town may seem like the way to get more customers signed up quicker, but other cities that have done that have often received push-back for doing it that way, he said, so Longmont doesn't want to repeat those mistakes.

A utility within a utility

Behind the scenes LPC is busy with a million details, Roiniotis said.

"We're developing a brand and brand name for the service, we're developing a marketing campaign, and another thing we're discussing is pricing," he said.

Regarding the latter, the tentative plan is for a gigabit of service for $49.95 per month, Roiniotis said.

The city will be offering a broadband connection and voice service, but not video. Not only would getting into the cable business add another $7 to $10 million to the buildout cost, Roiniotis said, but the drop in cable subscribers is a recognizable nationwide trend, as more and more people get their entertainment "over the top" — or straight off the Internet.

"That over the top requires bandwidth, and that's our strength," he said.

As for staffing, Roiniotis projects the equivalent of 27 new full-time positions will be needed to effectively serve customers. In many cases, that will mean that LPC staffers will assume dual roles, handling both electric and broadband duties.

"Other cities have successfully integrated broadband into their electrical utility," Roiniotis said.

He uses LPC engineers that will be working with the owners of the mall property as an example: "They're not only designing the mall's electric distribution system but they'll be designing the broadband distribution."

Sometime this summer LPC will be soliciting for bids from construction companies to do the buildout. As was the case with the design engineering contract, Roiniotis said he expects the process to be very competitive and he expects the pricing to be favorable to the city. A successful execution will be a feather in some company's cap, he said, and that will allow the city to be very choosy.

"We'll be the first city in Colorado to build a network like this but we probably won't be the last," he said.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com