A long laundry list of Rockies details on the Independence Day Eve:

* Nolan Arenado is back in the Rockies’ starting lineup for Friday’s game vs. the Dodgers. To make room on the 25-man roster, the Rockies optioned lefty starter Christian Friedrich to Triple-A Colorado Springs.

* Left fielder Carlos Gonzalez felt only mild discomfort in his left hand during batting practice in the cage Thursday, and said he thinks he can be back in the Rockies’ lineup before the all-star break.

“I think I can come back by then, and if not by then, then definitely I’ll be ready after the all-star break,”

The most realistic scenario would have CarGo take regular batting practice on Friday, then face live pitching this weekend. He would then go on a minor-league rehab assignment, and if all goes well he could be back for the Minnesota Twins series at Coors Field beginning a week from Friday.

CarGo said that his long time on the disabled list has also helped ease the nagging tendinitis in his left knee.

“I’ve been getting treatment every day and running,” he said. “It feels good.”

* Expect lefty reliever Boone Logan to be back in the Rockies’ bullpen on Friday night.

After making his fourth rehab start for Triple-A Colorado Springs — a scoreless ninth inning with one strikeout on Wednesday — he’s confident he’s ready. He was not in the bullpen Friday because he had pitched back-to-back days.

He’s been on the DL since June 5 because of left elbow inflammation, but said the time away did him good.

“I haven’t felt this good in a really, really long time,” Logan said. “Let’s hope it holds up.”

* Right-hander Jhoulys Chacin could know by Friday whether of not he’ll need surgery to repair his shoulder.

The Rockies announced Wednesday that an MRI conducted Monday that he has a right-rotator cuff strain and some fraying in his labrum. The injury is more serious now than it was when he was shut down during spring training.

“These past two weeks have been pretty bad for me with my arm,” Chacin said. “Surgery is very possible.”

Chacin said his shoulder never felt right this season.

“It got a little better for a while,” he said. “I could throw the ball better, but then it got worse and worse. I couldn’t throw hard, I couldn’t finish my pitchers. It was tough when I tried to throw sliders of throw with sink.”