Thousands attended the annual downtown event on Friday and Saturday

Loveland residents Jim Van Pelt, front left, and Sandy Morgenstern dance together to live music Saturday, during Loveland Loves BBQ, Bands and Brews in downtown Loveland. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Michael Jackson's cover of "Rockin' Robin" played from a large speaker Saturday as Darryl Johnson sang along during Loveland Loves BBQ, Bands and Brews.

As he sang, he and his family prepared meats and sauces and served customers at the annual downtown festival.

Darryl Johnson and his son, Hank Johnson, co-own Longmont-based Rat's WoodShack BBQ, one of more than 20 vendors of barbecue, desserts and beverages at the popular event.

Loveland Loves BBQ, Bands and Brews is in its seventh year and now run by the Sertoma Club.

For Rat's WoodShack BBQ, Darryl covers the meat in a rub of his own creation. Then, he and his family smoke the meats before the event in four smokers. Brisket stays for 12 to 14 hours, pork shoulders 12 hours and ribs eight hours.

Coni Marquez, right, assists Elias Collins, 7, front, and Kate Collins as they purchase food from the Snack Shack on Saturday during Loveland Loves BBQ, Bands and Brews. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

In anticipation of Loveland Loves BBQ, Bands and Brews, they smoked nearly 400 pounds of meat.

"You look at how tender it is," Darryl said, gesturing toward trays of brisket and pulled pork. "When it's ready to bust it's so tender, that's how you know it's ready."

The meat is smoked with a combination of applewood and charcoal because Darryl said he doesn't like a heavy wood flavor. Instead, he prefers to have softer notes of flavor.

While meats warmed on the smoker, the family prepared barbecue sauces — another recipe Darryl created — for customers to choose from. Hank used a whisk to mix the ingredients, including Worcestershire sauce, brown sugar and cayenne pepper, in a large pan. Then he moved the pan to the smoker, where the sauce would cook for an hour or so before it was ready to be served.

As the family prepared the food Saturday, Darryl's five-year-old granddaughter Deva smiled at customers and recited prices of the T-shirts, sauces and rubs for sale. The barbecue sauces are also for sale in Lucky's Market in Longmont and Boulder. Darryl said he hopes they will soon be for sale in King Sooper's locations around Northern Colorado.

The name Rat's WoodShack comes from Darryl's nickname, Rat. When he was a running back at the University of Colorado, Darryl said his coach nicknamed him Rat because of the way he would run quickly around the field. The name stuck with him, to this day. A friend suggested he use the name for the catering company.

"In the beginning, I was apprehensive about the name Rat with cooking, but it's who I am," Darryl said. "The food goes above the name."

Other vendors at the event had their own recipes and methods of cooking meats. The Boot Grill served fried-shrimp tacos and other grilled meats. Hog Wild BBQ had meats smoked with hickory wood. The Goods Smoke & Grill served grilled, giant turkey legs. Aw Shucks! had fresh, roasted sweet corn.

Although it didn't involve a grill, The Original Berrie Kabobs provided dessert in the form of berries and cheesecake on sticks, drizzled in milk and white chocolate.

This is the fifth year Rat's WoodShack has appeared at the event, and Darryl said he enjoys coming to the event each year and seeing the people.

"I love to cook. I love barbecue," Darryl said. "I like to watch people as they say, 'Wow, that's good.' I like watching people enjoy the food."

Despite some rain and foreboding skies, event organizer Jamie Moyer said that more than 6,000 people attended the event on Friday night. Moyer expected another 10,000 by Saturday night.

Contact Staff Writer Cassa Niedringhaus at 970-635-3691 or news@reporter-herald.com.