Two new movies had solid openings this weekend, though neither was a super-hero at the box office.

“Ant-Man,” from Walt Disney Co.’s DIS, -0.05% Marvel Studios, debuted to an estimated $58 million in the U.S. and Canada. That is a good start for a movie based on a little-known character that cost $130 million to make, but not impressive given the standards Marvel itself has set.

Starring Paul Rudd as the titular shrinking hero alongside Michael Douglas and Michael Pena, “Ant-Man” posted the second-lowest domestic opening of any of Marvel’s 12 self-produced super-hero pictures, ahead of only “The Incredible Hulk,” which started its run with $55.4 million in 2008.

The weekend’s other new film was “Trainwreck,” an inexpensive romantic comedy starring Amy Schumer and directed by Judd Apatow, which debuted to a healthy $30.2 million.

That is an impressive start for a comedian who has never starred in her own movie and on par with Apatow’s most successful release as a director, “Knocked Up.” But it is far below the biggest openings for R-rated comedies, such as last year’s “Neighbors,” which debuted to $49 million. That means it will need a strong run fueled by word-of-mouth to become a major success for Comcast Corp.’s CMCSA, -0.50% Universal Pictures.

Emmy-nominee Ms. Schumer, who has ridden a wave of popularity recently fueled by her Comedy Central show “Inside Amy Schumer,” drew an audience that was two-thirds female. Opening night crowds gave it an average grade of A-, according to market research firm CinemaScore, giving Universal executives hope that positive buzz could keep drawing crowds for weeks to come. The ideal model is “Knocked Up,” which opened to $30.7 million but ended up with $148.8 million.

“Ant-Man” opened to a solid $56.4 million overseas in countries that represent about half the total global market. Its strongest starts were in the United Kingdom, Mexico and Russia, with Germany, South Korea and China among the major markets left to go.

“Trainwreck” has yet to open internationally, although American comedies rarely are hits abroad.

In second place at the box office this weekend was Universal’s animated “Minions.” Coming off a huge $115.7 million opening, it dropped 57% to $50.2 million, on the high end of second-weekend declines for family animated films.

An expanded version of this report appears at WSJ.com.

More from MarketWatch