Ray Kelly has the NYPD blues

Whitestone: Why the sour grapes interview by Police Commissioner Ray Kelly in the upcoming issue of Playboy (“Dumpin’ on de Blaz,” Nov. 15)? Most New Yorkers consider his police career to be praiseworthy, in spite of the justifiable anger in minority communities over his stop-and-frisk policy. Since we haven’t had another terrorist attack, Kelly can claim credit for his counterterrorism efforts. Surely, he knows no one is indispensable. Our nation survived the assassinations of Abraham Lincoln, JFK and Martin Luther King Jr. New York City will survive the end of the Bloomberg-Kelly regime. Mayor-elect Bill de Blasio has said he will not get rid of stop-and-frisk, but end abuses that Kelly not only permitted, but actually encouraged. What really annoys me and many others is the argument, repeated ad nauseam by Kelly and Bloomberg, that the current stop-and-frisk strategy saved lives. The ends don’t justify the means if constitutional rights are being violated. Michael J. Gorman , NYPD retired

Ready for his closeup

Manhattan: I have not been a Ray Kelly fan since he put our lower Manhattan neighborhood under lockdown after 2001. As your article demonstrates, the police commissioner has never found a microphone or interviewer he didn’t embrace — in this case, Playboy magazine. I’m surprised he didn’t demand to be the centerfold. I, for one, welcome his departure — and that of the soda king known as Mike Bloomberg. John Ost

Sick of Rudy

College Point: Re “Rudy: I’ll push frisk appeal” (Nov. 15): Let’s not forget that Rudy Giuliani’s approval ratings on Sept. 10, 2001, were his lowest since becoming mayor. It was truly disgusting to see him desperately jump on the coattails of President George W. Bush and the tragedy of 9/11. And to recall his failed effort to bully his way into a third term, then to see him make money milking the 9/11 lecture circuit, turns my stomach. This disgraceful man’s political opinions should not be relevant in anybody’s world, let alone to the Daily News. Richard Thomas

Seconding the nomination

Long Beach, L.I.: I am responding to the article about Kathleen Cashin (“Mayor Bill, here’s your chancellor,” Op-Ed, Nov. 13). As a student at Brooklyn College 22 years ago, I had the good fortune of having Dr. Cashin as my instructor. She had the reputation of running a tight but fair ship, and I found her to be someone to look up to. When the going got tough for me, she was the reason I forged on. I admired her strength and sense of righteousness. She told us that when it came to the children, she would do what was necessary to provide them with the best education. I only hope Bill de Blasio selects her as chancellor. New York would be lucky to have someone with her skills and determination heading the public school system. Beverlee Bertinetti

Not on my dime

Manhattan: To the ignorant people who say Bill de Blasio should live in Gracie Mansion because it’s “tradition”: Put up or shut up. I can’t afford my own rent, so why would I pay the rent for a guy earning $225,000 a year? That’s beyond obscene. Put it on the ballot next November and let the people decide the issue. Otherwise, de Blasio will prove he is the new Bloombucks — an out-of-touch emperor who lives large off the little people. Janice Amato

Crime pays

Bellerose: I do not believe that Eva Rosenbluh is going to pay back what she stole from the Social Security system (“Scam granny goes free,” Nov. 15). I would bet anything that she will stall and stall. And how come there was no penalty attached to the plea agreement? Sounds like a pretty good deal. Sell your house at a profit, move to Florida. I bet that will catch on. Paul Dellacona

Selling snake oil

Bronx: The President danced a pretty good jig at his latest news conference, but if he were seriously concerned about the financial and health future of Americans, he’d trash his signature piece of legislation. All his news conference did was set up insurance companies to take the blame for a disaster that should never have become law. Patricia O’Hanlon

Moving the goal posts

Staten Island: President Obama admits that he was wrong when he said, “If you like your insurance, you can keep your insurance, period” (“Obama’s sorry story,” editorial, Nov. 15). So far, approximately 5 million have lost their insurance. So what does he say to them? He tells them that they can keep their insurance through 2014 — a time frame that coincides with the 2014 elections. How convenient. Martin T. Reda

Tapped out

Glendale: Mr. President, our hearts go out to the people in the Philippines. But how can you go on TV and ask us to send donations via the White House when we cannot afford your Obamacare? Debbie McBride

Just say no

Putnam Valley, N.Y.: To Voicer Donna Farrington: My husband and I couldn’t agree with you more. With Hil comes Bill — God forbid. I am of the opinion that Hillary Clinton as President would be a threat to our national security. I will never forget her arrogance when, during testimony on Benghazi, she told Congress, “What difference does it make?” She will be a continuation of President Obama’s socialist policies and the downward spiral of our wonderful country. I hope voters will remember the Benghazi four and let her know that her ilk is not wanted. Anne Cioffi

Cheap shots

Edison, N.J.: Voicer Nancy Kennedy is 100% correct regarding the recent writings of Stanley Crouch and the insults he has thrown at Gov. Chris Christie. Crouch also called Bill O’Reilly a half-liar, based on no facts. Can you imagine Crouch on O’Reilly’s program? He’d be laughed off the show. Crouch is an educated idiot. Morris R. Resner

Talking turkey

Brooklyn: To Voicer Michele Dempsey: I agree totally. It is a shame what the retailers are doing to Thanksgiving. It’s nice to save money, but not at the expense of ruining an all-American holiday. Everyone should boycott all stores on Thanksgiving Day. It’s a day for being with our families and friends and for giving thanks for what we have. Let the craziness start on Black Friday. Leave Thanksgiving alone. Maria Soberanis

The war on Thanksgiving

Oakland Gardens: I totally agree with Voicer Michele Dempsey about retail stores that are open on Thanksgiving night, taking workers away from their families on a family holiday. It’s bad enough when they have to get to work at 6 p.m. or 8 p.m. Kmart is even worse. It will open all day on Thanksgiving, for a total of 41 straight hours, leaving its workers no time at all to spend with their families. Then we wonder why there’s no family spirit anymore? Julia M. Maley

Fire facts

Broad Channel: Voicer Stephanie Ortiz, you have been misled. If you truly believe that only white firefighters get assigned to the busier firehouses, you should make an official visit request to my busy firehouse in Crown Heights. I can introduce you to quite a few minority firefighters. Most of them are good men, and people who share your opinion degrade what they have accomplished. Eric Mundy

Enough about Roberts

Brooklyn: Am I the only one who finds Robin Roberts’ perpetual boasting that she beat breast cancer a bit over the top and self-aggrandizing (“Cancer test shocker for ABC reporter,” Nov. 11)? As a man who’s had breast cancer, I think she should bring to light the fact that men can develop it, too — but I have yet to hear that from her. There are other people — celebrities and ordinary citizens — dealing with breast cancer and beating it. Roberts, who’s probably very well off, got the best medical treatment. Let’s see someone who has really been in the trenches, financially and medically, as a spokesperson for breast cancer. Dennis Pascale

Not fit to print

Whitestone: Re “A-Rod’s ladies room romp” (Nov. 13): Needless to say, that day’s paper went straight into the garbage. The Daily News’ job should be to educate us on newsworthy stories, not gossip. Perhaps the time has come to look for a new morning paper, or perhaps just tune to the TV news. Daniela Lamacchia