Buffs LB tallies eight tackles, pass breakup

Colorado linebacker Rick Gamboa, left, finishes off a stop against Colorado State's Jason Oden Jr. during the first quarter Saturday in Denver. Gamboa, who was making his first start in place of the injured Addison Gillam, finished the game with eight tackles. ( David Zalubowski Associated Press )

CU opponent glance Opponent: Nicholls State Colonels Game time: Saturday, 11:30 a.m., at Folsom Field Coach: Tim Rebowe, 1st season Record: 0-2 Last week: Lost at Incarnate Word, 20-10 Key players: QB Tuskani Figaro, Jr. (23-of-35, 214 yards, 1 TD, 2 INT); RB Michael Henry, Sr. (27 carries, 117 yards); RB Tobias Lofton, Sr. (22 carries, 103 yards); WR C.J. Bates, Jr. (five catches, 92 yards, 1 TD); LB Hezekiah White, So. (18 tackles); DB Darius Knight, Sr. (11 tackles, 1 INT). Notable: Nicholls State has lost 20 consecutive games. ... The Colonels play in the FCS Southland Conference. ... This is the fourth consecutive season Nicholls State has played a team from a Power Five conference, losing 77-3 to Oregon State in 2012, 66-3 to Oregon in 2013, and 73-7 to Arkansas in 2014.

Coming into the season, there was a measure of concern about Colorado's depth at linebacker.

Those concerns are no longer there, and it's in large part because of the emergence of Rick Gamboa.

In Saturday's 27-24 overtime win against Colorado State, Gamboa made his first career start — in place of injured junior Addison Gillam — and finished with eight tackles and one massive pass breakup.

Advertisement

"I feel I've played pretty good," said Gamboa, a 6-foot, 230-pound redshirt freshman. "Addison has been starting for the past three years, so it's pretty big shoes I have to fill. He's a captain on the team. I was just trying to do my job, my responsibilities and help my team out."

He certainly did that, as he was a part of one of the game's biggest plays Saturday.

CSU had burned the Buffs (2-1) on several screen passes and went back to that in the fourth quarter. Gamboa hit Rams' running back Dalyn Dawkins just as the ball got there — or maybe a half second early. That caused the ball to hit off Dawkins and pop up in the air. Fellow linebacker Kenneth Olugbode snatched it out of the air and returned it 60 yards for a touchdown.

"We figured that we'd see the screen and right when he broke, Rick took off and hit him," Olugbode said.

It was the type of play that justified the CU coaching staff's trust in Gamboa to fill the starting role. Gamboa earned the right to start by backing up a great training camp with two solid games to start the year.

Gamboa made three tackles in 16 plays in the opener against Hawaii. Gillam injured his knee during a Week 2 win against Massachusetts and Gamboa finished that game, picking up two more tackles.

Saturday was his best performance yet.

"Rick's done a really good job and made some good plays," CU head coach Mike MacIntyre said. "He is a really smart, hard-nosed, tough football player."

Gillam is expected to miss at least one more game with his knee injury, giving Gamboa even more opportunities to shine. So far, he's taking advantage of the opportunity.

"Until the Hawaii game I hadn't played football in almost two years," said Gamboa, from Sylmar, Calif. "But, being able to get in there, it felt easy, it felt natural to me."

Colonels up next

After facing its chief rival on Saturday, CU will host Nicholls State on Saturday. The Colonels (0-2), from the Football Championship Subdivision, bring a 20-game losing streak into Boulder this week.

MacIntyre isn't taking anything for granted, though.

"Any time you step in between the white lines you have to go play," MacIntyre said. "It's not like we've won 30 games in a row. It's important for them to play well and respect everybody."

Notable

After a late game on Saturday, the Buffs took it easy on Sunday, conducting a walk-though with no helmets. ... The Buffs had several players get dinged up Saturday, including running back Michael Adkins II, who did not return after a first-quarter injury to his left hamstring. "Hopefully we'll know completely on all of them by Tuesday," MacIntyre said.

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.