WASHINGTON, DC—Work is the new retirement. While many Americans state that they plan to retire between 65 and 70 (45%), the typical retirement may have changed. In a survey just released by AARP, a surprising 37% plan to work for pay in retirement.



Those surveyed who plan to work for pay post-retirement indicate a desire to work part-time (73%). Almost half are looking to work in a new field (44%).



Connecting with co-workers, interesting and challenging work, and the desire for a work-life balance are all stated as top reasons why work is enjoyable. Some are seeking to pursue their dream job or dream field in this next phase. Sports, hospitality, and education fields are frequently cited. Most are hoping that their new dream jobs will be part-time, flexible with work from home options, and allow time for travel and fun.



The survey results are available on an enhanced, Work & Jobs free website providing a valuable one-stop online experience that includes information, tools and programs: AARP.org/Work.



“Our new research shows a fluid workplace, with many experienced workers looking for flexible part-time work in interesting and challenging positions to continue their careers,” said Kim Adler, AARP’s Work and Jobs lead. “The new website will help experienced workers control their careers and stay connected, competitive and current in the workplace,” Adler added.



AARP.org/Work offers information, tools and connection to a variety of resources and will expand in the coming months. For starters, the website offers:



Tips for those looking for work or exploring workplace options



Programs for workers contemplating a career change



Guidance on the challenges and opportunities for those in part-time, flexible, and work-from-home jobs



An important list of employers who value experienced workers



Programs and advice from experts on starting a business



Insights from experts on how to stay competitive in the workplace



Tips on how to navigate work life, including guidance on reaching peer networks



The AARP “Work and Jobs” survey can be directly accessed here:

http://www.aarp.org/research/topics/economics/info-2015/aarp-post-retirement-career-study.html



The release of the survey – and the announcement of the enhanced website – comes in conjunction with distribution of the September issue of the AARP Bulletin that includes a package of informative work-related stories. A column by AARP CEO Jo Ann Jenkins, titled “Disrupting Work,” cites the need to develop a new multi-generation workplace culture.



On September 22, AARP will conduct a free Real Possibilities virtual career fair at www.aarp.org/virtualcareerfair.

###