Facing a pivotal time for his signature health care law, President Obama will promote the program during a forum Tuesday hosted by predecessor Bill Clinton.

Presidents Obama and Clinton (Photo: Mark Lennihan, AP) Story Highlights Obama will speak a week before the opening of health care exchanges

Some Republicans are trying to block funding for the plan

Hillary Rodham Clinton will introduce the two presidents before the forum

Facing a pivotal time for his signature health care law, President Obama will promote the program during a forum Tuesday hosted by predecessor Bill Clinton in New York City.

Obama will speak at the Clinton Global Initiative exactly one week before the opening of new health insurance marketplaces; the administration needs most uninsured Americans to sign up for health insurance because it is essential to the overall financing of the plan.

Some congressional Republicans, meanwhile, are trying to eliminate funding for "Obamacare," threatening to block any new government spending plan unless that happens. The standoff could lead to a shutdown of the government after the fiscal year ends on Monday night.

The Affordable Care Act "is a train wreck, and it's going to raise costs," said House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio. "It's destroying American jobs, and it must go."

Obama's appearance at the Clinton Global Initiative also comes two decades after President Clinton proposed his own national health care plan during a speech to Congress on Sept. 23, 1993.

Former secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton will introduce the two presidents before the forum.

As his administration launches a renewed health care campaign, Obama himself will speak on the subject again Thursday in Maryland.

In the days ahead, first lady Michelle Obama will speak to groups of mothers and veterans about signing up for health coverage.

Other upcoming health care events: Vice President Biden will hold a conference call with nurses, and Obama will speak by phone with mayors and other state and local officials from across the country.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1fdKlXY