Rosetta Martinez was prowling the exhibits at History Colorado Center on Sunday, when she noticed there were more dads than normal squiring their children through the museum.

“Maybe they’re trying to wear their kids out by 4:30,” when the Super Bowl begins, the 61-year-old security guard said.

History Colorado offered free admission to anyone wearing orange, and offered some Bronco game day activities for the team’s besotted fans.

They could share their favorite football memory on an atrium wall, check out Mile High Stadium seats and Orange Crush cans, among other things.

Jovanna Toppi, 32, and Kevin Eckenrod, 33, decided to come to the museum, in part to tamp down game day jitters, said Eckenrod.

“We live right down the street, so why not,” Toppi said.

At King Soopers on Leetsdale Drive, near Colorado Boulevard, the parking lot was full, as last minute shoppers stocked up on snacks, drinks and other items for Super Bowl parties.

An employee of the store, who identified himself only as Anton M., said the store was far more crowded than on a regular Sunday.

Kristen Myers, 36, planned to join her sister to make some good food and watch the game, she said.

The two usually watch the game with their parents, but this year they got tickets to the big show.

So the sisters planned to make orange and blue Rice Krispies treats, but discovered the store was “out of food coloring. I think others had the same idea,” she said.

Tara Jackson was in the supermarket’s liquor section studying the beer selection. The 29-year-old wore orange Sorel boots, pajama bottoms and a Denver D Broncos shirt.

“I think coming here definitely helps settle the nerves,” she said.

At a nearby Target, Sarah Camp, 29, was checking out a rack full of Bronco’s T-shirts. She and her boyfriend were headed to a party, she said, and he is not a football fan.

“I’m trying to buy my boyfriend a shirt because he doesn’t have one,” she said.

If the Broncos win, Dick’s Sporting Goods stores in the area, which normally close at 7 p.m., will reopen immediately following the game to peddle an assortment of Super Bowl championship gear.

A drumline will greet visitors to the chain’s location at the Belmar Center in Lakewood.

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or @dpmcghee