This story expands upon: Baystate Health lays off 24 employees, cuts hours for 17, eliminates 45 open jobs

SPRINGFIELD — Prior to the layoffs announced Thursday, Baystate Health was on a pace to earn $33 million in operating margin for the fiscal year that ends Sept. 30.

That would have been $22 million less than the $55 million called for in Baystate's budget projections, said spokesman Ben Craft. As a nonprofit, Baystate reinvests the surplus in capital expenses like buildings and equipment as well as in programs.

Overall, Baystate has a $2 billion-a-year budget.

Baystate Health has a total of 11,500 employees at Baystate Medical Center, Baystate Mary Lane in Ware, Baystate Franklin in Greenfield, Baystate Wing in Palmer and other assorted operations. Of those, 6,100 work at the flagship Baystate Medical Center in Springfield.

This makes Baystate the region's largest employer, according to the Pioneer Valley Planning Commission (pdf). The next largest employer, the University of Massachusetts Amherst, has roughly 7,900 employees.

The Baystate layoffs include 24 employees who will be out in 30 days. Baystate also plans to cut hours for another 17 workers and not fill 45 open positions.

The jobs are all based in Springfield and almost entirely at the flagship Baystate Medical Center. The eliminated jobs do not include bedside nurses nor do they include doctors. The jobs do include clinical support and administrative jobs and 10 management positions, Craft said.

Interviewed via email on Thursday, Craft said he hesitates to draw a connection between the layoffs and the federal Affordable Care Act now changing nearly every aspect of health care. Baystate agrees with the ACA's goal that everyone deserves access to health care and to health insurance, Craft said.

He wrote:

"I think the fairest attributions for today's news are first, our overall imperative to transition from volume to value -- striving to deliver the highest value in care; that's high-quality care, with high efficiency, rather than the sheer volume of care. That means looking at processes and resources and often adjusting them, and it means managing costs."

Medicaid also costs Baystate about $40 million a year. Baystate's one of the largest providers of Medicaid services in the state but is compensated only 70 to 80 cents on the dollar by Medicaid.

Medicaid is a federal and state program providing health care to those with low incomes.