LIVE OAK &GT;&GT; About 200 people showed up Friday morning to celebrate something Live Oak has needed for a long time: A family-friendly and state-of-the-art medical clinic with more than a dozen practitioners to treat patients.

The East Cliff Family Health Center, located at 21507 E. Cliff Drive, is a sister clinic to the Santa Cruz Women's Health Center, founded in 1974, where leaders identified an opportunity to make a difference in Live Oak with the Affordable Care Act expanding health coverage.

"Thank you," said Santa Cruz County Supervisor John Leopold, who represents Live Oak, an incorporated area with more people than Capitola and Scotts Valley combined.

For two years, the $3.2 million project was championed by Leslie Conner, executive director of Santa Cruz Community Health Centers, which encompasses two clinic locations.

The clinic will provide primary care for men, women and children integrated with mental health and substance abuse services. It represents an unusual example of collaboration by health care institutions that often compete for patients.

Dominican Hospital and the Palo Alto Medical Foundation each are providing $1.5 million over five years toward operating expenses, and Dominican provided a $2.5 million low-interest construction loan for renovations.

"This is utopia," said Dr. Larry deGhetaldi of Palo Alto Medical Foundation, snapping a cell phone photo of the attendees.

"You are in good hands," said Dr. Nanette Mickiewicz, Dominican Hospital president, noting Dr. Salem Magarian, who had overseen 1,600 children at Dominican's pediatric outpatient clinic at 610 Frederick St., will continue that work in Live Oak.

"Patients like the location," Magarian said, observing many patients live within walking distance on 17th Avenue while others can reach the clinic by bus in 10 to 12 minutes.

More pediatricians will start work in June and August, he said.

Bogard Construction performed a total makeover, creating a welcoming space full of light with a design by Wald Ruhnke & Dost.

"Best thing that ever happened to this shopping center," said former Santa Cruz mayor Katherine Beiers.

What makes it different is that physicians and medical assistants sit next to each other at work stations surrounded by glass walls. They can see patients coming into an exam room; consultation is as easy as turning your chair around to speak to a colleague.

"There shouldn't be a hierarchy," said project manager Kate Hartzell, who was eager to take on this challenge after retiring as director of the Cabrillo College Student Health Center and received a ceremonial key as thanks. "Everyone adds value — it makes a difference in outcomes."

Livia Monteleone of Live Oak was a patient at the Santa Cruz Women's Health Center when a motorcycle accident four years ago temporarily put her in a wheelchair.

"I was always cared for," she said. "I thought they were treating me special but they do it for everybody."

She is now on the clinic board as a patient representative.

Those looking for Dr. Rachel Abrams and Santa Cruz Integrative Medicine, which used to be in East Cliff Village, will find her practice at 740 Front St., Santa Cruz.