Buy Photo Anthony Wilkinson (Photo: Staff Photographer/James J. Connolly )Buy Photo

Newcomer Anthony Wilkinson, the Republican candidate trying to unseat Democratic incumbent U.S. Congressman Frank Pallone in the 6th Congressional District race, believes change is long overdue in the District.

“The days of an activist government is over,” Wilkinson told an Asbury Park Press editorial board Wednesday.

Pallone, by his own admission, is a strong believer in an activist Federal government, one that invests in public infrastructure and provides grants.

“I fight very hard to try and bring money back to the District,” said Pallone, 62 of Long Branch.

Now running for his 14th term as U.S. Congressmen, Pallone said his most important job during the last two years in office was making sure Federal money promised for Superstorm Sandy relief was delivered.

Money, he said, for flood protection projects, beach replenishment and restoration of homeowners and businesses.

“The job is not done. Locally we have to continue the effort to rebuild from Sandy,” said Pallone.

Wilkinson, a 49-year old attorney originally of Detroit now living in Old Bridge, believes government activism has created too large a national debt. He wants to reduce government spending by cutting back on subsidies for the energy, agricultural, and transportation industries.

He’d liked to see the Affordable Care Act repealed and amended to eliminate all government requirements from health insurance packages.

A point Pallone said would return the country back to the “wild west days,” when insurance companies were free to discriminate on who they sold their policies to or what coverage was provided.

“What we were trying to do with the Affordable Care Act was to make sure you not only got insurance but that you got insurance with a good benefit package,” said Pallone.

To fix the troubled Social Security benefits, Wilkinson suggested raising the retirement age and having the private sector pick up more of the responsibility for the care of the seniors.

“My idea for mitigating the effect of that would be [to] encourage businesses to to hire elderly people. That way the private sector is taking care of the elderly rather than the public sector. That will reduce the expenditures for social security and medicare,” said Wilkinson.

Locally Wilkinson, whose resume includes stints as a public school teacher, said education is a concern of his. He’s a proponent of alternative education and smaller classroom pupil sizes as a resolution to problems he sees in some public schools.

“The state of the schools in places like Asbury Park and New Brunswick is disconcerting,” he said.

Dan Radel: 732-643-4072; dradel@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1vS976b