County-wide event draws nine teams

Logan County Scavenger Hunt teams work on placing plants in the four-leaf clover shape and other landscaping elements for the Come Alive Outside project at the Logan County Extension office July 23. ( Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

The scavenger hunt teams await final judgement to determine the winners in each age division. (Courtesy photo)

Last month, the Logan County Extension Office put on a county-wide scavenger hunt with a twist.

Over a two-week period, the nine teams of four youth participated in various activities and challenges. Some of those challenges were "fast tracks" — the teams were notified by text message to show up an activity within a set time frame.

The activities and challenges represented a wide variety of skills, from leathercrafting to sport fishing. The youth, who ranged in age from 8 to 15 years old, practiced tying fishing knots as well as mimicking bird calls and giving livestock shots.

The final product of the Come Alive Outside landscaping project includes a four-leaf clover outlined in rock. (Courtesy photo)

One of the activities was part of the statewide "Come Alive Outside" challenge, which is for Colorado 4-H and FFA chapters. The program, which is sponsored by John Deere and presented by JP Horizons, was founded in 2010 as a way to get professional landscape companies more involved in drawing children back to nature.

The challenge for participating chapters was to plan and execute a CAO community event, such as an event focused on unstructured play, a park renovation project, an activity bringing senior citizens outdoors or creating an awareness of healthy lifestyles.

Advertisement

For the teams in the scavenger hunt, the event was a landscaping project in the outdoor space in front of the Extension Office. With materials donated by local businesses, the youth built retaining walls, moved soil and planted a variety of perennial flowers and bushes, with help from 4-H and horticulture agent Brian Kailey and summer intern Bryant Klem. The supporting sponsors will be honored with a landscape plaque for their contributions.

Members of the "Gold Diggers" team use a syringe filled with colored water and an orange to practice intramuscular injections during the MQA (Meat Quality Assurance) activity for the Logan County Scavenger Hunt on July 23. (Sara Waite / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Also as part of the challenge, the chapter has to make a video about their CAO project and post it online. The video submissions will then be put on the Come Alive Outside website, where the public will be invited to vote for their favorite project from Sept. 29 to Oct. 3. The chapters that receive at least 200 votes will move on to the judging stage by John Deere leadership, professional landscape contractors and JP Horizons. The top three chapters win prizes of $1,000 for first place, $500 for second place, and $300 for third place.

Kailey said more information will be provided when the voting period nears.

Scavenger hunt teams work on leathercraft projects. (Courtesy photo)

As for the scavenger hunt, the teams presented the results of their two-week hunt on July 23 for final judging. First place in the junior division went to Team Vine: Ollie Lemily, Andrew Seyfang, Abbey Seyfand and Kayleigh Mackintosh. In the intermediate division, Team Orange Crush — Tanner Hutt, Cade Conger, Lauren Fritzler and Hannah Stegner — took first. Team "No Name," made up of Rachael Northup, Mckinzie Davis, Rebecca Miller and Emay Underwood, was first in the senior division.

Also placing were:

Intermediate Division

Runner Up: Team Broadway Babes — Mallory Kaiser, Emily Reeves, Hailey Fehringer, Allie Schumacher

Third Place: Team JAMM — Michael Flint, Annabelle Flint, Mitchael Emrick, Joshua Emrick

Team Vine — from left: Ollie Lemily, Andrew Seyfang, Abbey Seyfand and Kayleigh Mackintosh — took first place in the Junior division of the Logan County Scavenger Hunt. (Courtesy photo)

Senior Division

Runner Up: Team Gold Diggers — Reid Kaiser, Greyson Dudley, Liam Skerjaner, Megan Kaiser

Third Place: Team Lock — David, Chris, Ryan, Kathryn Lock

Fourth Place: Team Debby — Luke Jensen, Jacob Schroeder, Ethan Duna, Sam Dick

Kailey said he hopes to grow the scavenger hunt next year to 60 teams.

Contact Journal-Advocate managing editor Sara Waite at 970-526-9310 or swaite@journal-advocate.com