Published: Friday, 1/22/2016



Kasich counterattacks Bush amid New Hampshire push

Ohio Gov. John Kasich today is parrying a series of attacks from Jeb Bush, counterattacking that Mr. Bush was paid by an insurance company that lobbied for Obamacare and disguised tax increases as fees.

The flurry of attacks occurs as Mr. Kasich appears to have moved up to second position in New Hampshire primary polls, making him the prime candidate of the so-called “establishment” wing of the Republican Party against billionaire Donald Trump, who is in the lead in all polls.

The first-in-the-nation primary is Feb. 9, and is expected to generate for its top finishers huge political momentum going into the next primaries: South Carolina Feb. 20, Nevada, Feb. 23, and the 13 states that vote on Super Tuesday, March 1.

The Bush ads portray Mr. Kasich as not conservative, pulling votes from his 18 years as congressman and his decisions as governor, including to expand Medicaid coverage in Ohio as allowed under the Affordable Care Act known as Obamacare.

The Bush campaign’s SuperPAC, Right to Rise, launched four negative mailings against Mr. Kasich in New Hampshire and one negative TV ad. The TV ad accuses Mr. Kasich of having “forced Obamacare expansion in Ohio,” voted for massive defense cuts as a congressman, and had the “worst rating for spending of any governor in the country, Democrat or Republican.”

In a series of talking points, Mr. Kasich blasted Mr. Bush for being paid $2.4 million as a board member for an insurance company that lobbied for Obamacare. And he blasted Mr. Bush for claiming to have not raised taxes while raising fees at the same time.

“Jeb Bush couldn’t fix Florida, so he played budget games and made everyone else pay more,” the Kasich campaign said in a new mailing.

Kasich SuperPAC New Day for America is putting its own ad, called “Mud,” on New Hampshire televisions.

The ad opens with, “Jeb Bush once stood tall, before his campaign sank like a rock and he started desperately slinging mud on fellow Republicans. That’s not presidential, Jeb.”

New Day for America spokesman Connie Wehrkamp said that, "While Governor Kasich was putting Ohioans back to work and getting his state's economy back on track, Governor Bush was filling his back pocket with $2.4 million as a board member of Tenet Healthcare, a national hospital system that lobbied for the passage of Obamacare.”

Mr. Kasich has events scheduled in New Hampshire through Sunday.

Those include town hall meetings in Franklin and Dover, and a house party in Rye today; the New Hampshire First in the Nation Town Hall, by a town hall meeting in Milford, a meet-and-greet in Nashua, and a town hall in Londonderry Saturday, and on Sunday, a town hall in Goffstown.

Contact Tom Troy at: tomtroy@theblade.com, 419-724-6058, and on Twitter @TomFTroy.