Memorial president: We’re committed to turnaround plan - for now

PAWTUCKET – The president of Memorial Hospital of Rhode Island says that hospital officials are committed to turning the hospital around through a reorganization and layoff plan, but he said that could change if finances don’t improve.

Responding to a question about rumors within employee ranks that the hospital is in danger of shutting down, Memorial President Michael Dacey told The Breeze this week that officials will do everything possible to make the Pawtucket hospital more profitable.

“Right now we are very dedicated to this plan going forward, (and we’ll do) absolutely everything we can to get it executed,” he said, but if “things worsen and don’t improve,” hospital officials may have to change their plans and can’t rule out anything.

The Care New England Health System board of directors announced Monday that a restructuring and layoffs are coming to Memorial. The Memorial Birthing Center is one of the departments that will close, with services shifted to other locations.

The changes are needed to respond to the shifting national health care industry’s focus from inpatient hospital care to outpatient preventative and primary care, said Care New England in a release. The hospital has seen a decline in the number of inpatients being served, helping prompt the changes.

Dacey said he doesn’t see the news about the hospital’s future being bad news, but important news. Care New England is seeing the same issues at Memorial that they saw when the company affiliated the hospital in 2013, said Dacey. They see a hospital that is providing services that meet the community’s needs, and it needs the right foundation in place to keep doing that.

“Our goal is to create something that’s sustainable for Memorial Hospital,” he said.

Memorial has operated for more than a century as a medical/surgical hospital and serves as a major teaching affiliate of The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University for primary care.

Under the restructuring, the hospital plans to shift the Memorial Birthing Center, one medical/surgical inpatient unit, and the intensive care unit to other Care New England facilities, while strengthening other services offered on the Pawtucket campus. The hospital will work with the appropriate regulatory officials for the approval required to make these changes.

“On a national level, the Affordable Care Act emphasizes population health care, which calls upon health care facilities to keep people well through preventative measures instead of just treating them in hospitals when they are sick,” says Dennis Keefe, president and CEO of Care New England. “This trend is forcing facilities and systems to redefine themselves to be more streamlined and responsive to the needs of the people we serve.”

The national shift, coupled with what experts say is a 200-bed surplus in Rhode Island and flagging income from inpatients at Memorial, prompted the need for the moves, said Keefe.

“We have invested millions of dollars in upgrades to the physical plant and IT systems at Memorial, and hired new specialists in an attempt to improve the dire financial situation that existed there when we first affiliated in 2013,” he said. “We believe that continuing to invest in Memorial as it is currently structured and not rightsizing our staffing level would be fiscally irresponsible.”

To put things in perspective on how bad the situation has gotten with inpatient services, Dacey said that the 298-bed hospital has at times experienced a census of 50 patients or fewer at the hospital. The main reason for that is a downward trend of 25 percent in hospital admissions nationally, he said, “a good thing” overall, but a decline that “makes it difficult to operate a low-volume hospital like Memorial.”

The entry of for-profit health care institutions in Rhode Island has made it difficult for a nonprofit hospital to keep up, said Dacey, as the for-profit hospitals are able to lure good staff members away with lucrative pay packages.

According to Dacey, the changes planned at Memorial will create a largely outpatient facility with a wide assortment of primary care and specialty services on site, as well as the Emergency Department, orthopedic and outpatient surgical services, and a small inpatient unit. The existing Center for Rehabilitation, which offers inpatient and outpatient services, will also remain open.

Representatives for the United Nurses and Allied Professionals Local 5082 are opposing the plan, saying it will effectively “dismantle” the hospital.

President Rita Brennan, a registered nurse, released the following statement Monday morning after Care New England’s announcement that it intends to close the Intensive Care Unit and the Birthing Center, as well as scale down the Emergency Department and Medical Surgical Unit.

“I was deeply troubled to learn of Care New England’s intent to further dismantle Memorial Hospital – a critical community institution that has provided quality care to Pawtucket and the Blackstone Valley for more than a century,” she said. “Our patients matter. This community matters. Memorial’s hard-working employees and their families matter. We will, therefore, oppose Care New England’s efforts in this regard. I intend to fully review and consider the union’s options with legal counsel, and will move forward with any reasonable efforts that will protect our members and Memorial patients.”

Planned changes at Memorial include:

• Obstetrical services moving to Kent or Women & Infants hospitals, both part of the Care New England system, pending regulatory approval.

• Inpatient rotations for the Memorial Internal Medicine Residency Program moving to Kent and continuing at the Providence VA Hospital.

Changes that will be made throughout the Care New England system include consolidating lab services and eliminating duplicate positions, which will result in an undetermined number of layoffs.

“What Memorial does best – as evidenced by its role as a teaching affiliate with the Alpert Medical School – is primary care, and that will remain open for patients on the campus,” said Dacey in a statement. “Other specialties such as pulmonary/sleep medicine, nutrition, cardiology, The Cancer Center, The Endoscopy Center, the New England Pediatric Institute of Neurodevelopment, and clinics for dermatology, cardiology, gastroenterology, geriatrics and rheumatology will remain in operation.

“We realize that there is concern about the relocation of the obstetrical service,” added Dacey. “But, we know the state already has sufficient obstetrical beds, and we believe there is already sufficient choice in the community to satisfy the diverse preferences of parents-to-be. We encourage the community advocates to engage with us in order to understand that we are continuing to provide availability of a family practice-assisted birth as well as to ensure that the maternity services of Care New England are fully responsive to their needs.”

Dacey said there are 900 full-time employees at Memorial, but it is impossible to say now how many will be laid off. He said a number of positions have been held open at other Care New England hospitals in the area in anticipation of this restructuring happening.

Work on the restructuring plan begins immediately, and it will take several months to complete.

“The overarching imperative with all of these changes is that we continue to deliver quality care through a sustainable network that meets the needs of our patients,” said Keefe.