SIOUX CENTER, Iowa — In the early stages of Ted Cruz’s campaign for president, his ally, Republican Rep. Steve King, suggested a few tweaks to Cruz’s candidacy.

King, a prominent Iowa conservative, warned Cruz against opposing the Renewable Fuel Standard, which has increased the share of biofuels in gasoline and given a huge boost to one of Iowa’s major industries.

“I thought it would be good for this campaign from an Iowa perspective,” King told RealClearPolitics. No candidate has won the Iowa caucuses while opposing the RFS. But Cruz was rigid. King recalled: “Ted said, ‘Legislation I have sponsored or co-sponsored, I am going to stick to,’” referring to anti-RFS bills Cruz supported in 2013 and 2014.

Cruz kept his word, and many Iowans are offering a few choice words of their own in response. During a six-day bus tour across Iowa, with stops in 28 counties, the Texas senator faced a steady drumbeat of questions about his RFS stance. A pro-ethanol group, America’s Renewable Future, distributed unflattering literature in his wake.

On the Cruz campaign bus, King tinkered with the language in Cruz’s forthcoming renewable fuel plan, which he believed would clarify Cruz’s RFS stance and make it more palatable to Iowans. And at events along the route, King tried to act as a legitimizing force for the freshman lawmaker, insisting to constituents that Cruz would not hold oil interests above their own.

To one concerned woman in Cherokee, Iowa, King gave his normal spiel — Cruz would eliminate all subsidies, not only phase out the RFS — before adding with mild exasperation: “Would you really risk the presidency of the United States over” this?

Cruz has wagered that that woman, and other Iowans like her, will not. It could be a stunning miscalculation — or it could be one example of how Cruz’s patient, deliberate plan to win his party’s nomination has gained traction.

The fundamentals are familiar to anyone who watched Cruz’s insurgent campaign for Senate in Texas in 2012, in which he cast himself as a principled conservative fighter who would take on Washington.

He’s hardly the first candidate to use such themes, but the underlying theory of Cruz’s candidacy hinges on his belief that conservative Republicans are sick of settling for a GOP nominee more moderate than themselves. They’ve done this, he believes, having been convinced by the Mitt Romneys and John McCains of the Republican world that it’s the best way to defeat the Democrats in November. Cruz is telling them what many movement conservatives long to hear: that the most pragmatic approach is also the most principled.

"If conservatives unite, we win," Cruz says on the stump. "In past elections, what Washington’s tried to do was divide and splinter conservatives, and what we’re seeing is, conservatives are uniting."

He has found a willing audience for this message. Late last year, a large coalition of conservative leaders, nicknamed “The GROUP” and led by Tony Perkins of the Family Research Council, decided wholesale to support Cruz after he courted them heavily. A wave of announcements followed, including from Bob Vander Plaats of The Family Leader, based in Iowa. Vander Plaats joined Cruz on his bus tour through Iowa last week; James Dobson, founder of Focus on the Family, also made a cameo.

Meanwhile, Cruz has methodically cultivated the grassroots — first in his Senate bid, and then through his fights in Congress, which included a gambit to defund the Affordable Care Act that culminated in a government shutdown. In the presidential race, Cruz has bragged about the bridges he has burned on Capitol Hill, often invoking a New York Times story from the time of his campaign launch, which downplayed his odds of winning his party’s nomination because he lacked establishment support.

“I kinda thought that was the whole point of the campaign!” he concludes with a flourish.

None of this is accidental. Cruz saw in this election cycle, and even earlier than that, what many other Republican candidates did not: that a candidate running farthest to the right would enjoy a wide-open field with the full base behind him —especially in a large field.

Cruz has described four lanes in this presidential race: a moderate-establishment lane, which he would cede in the primary; a Tea Party lane, his natural home field; an evangelical Christian lane, where he could grow his support; and a libertarian lane, which most people initially conceded to Rand Paul but has also become Cruz territory to an extent.

“The players that were expected to be formidable in those lanes have not got the traction they had hoped,” Cruz said in an interview with Politico. “The most encouraging thing I would say is that I think three of the lanes are collapsing into one, which is the evangelical lane, the conservative Tea Party lane, and the libertarian lane are all collapsing into the conservative lane, and we’re seeing those lanes unify behind our campaign.”

Cruz has not often been reluctant to discuss his strategy, except in this story: his campaign did not grant an interview, nor did multiple aides respond to requests for comment.

This strategy is rooted in recent political history. Cruz worked as a policy adviser for George W. Bush’s 2000 presidential campaign, when Bush ran as a Washington outsider from Texas with a strong appeal to evangelical Christians. Cruz has likely also taken some inspiration from Bush’s 2004 re-election campaign, which used a “base strategy” of appealing to and turning out the Republican Party’s most fervent supporters.

Cruz’s tack has been remarkably impervious to changing political winds, or perhaps predictive of them — so much so that whole chunks of his stump speech remain the same.

“I’m here to tell you, I’m incredibly optimistic,” Cruz said during a 2009 campaign for state attorney general he would later abandon. “... The reason I’m so incredibly optimistic is, we are witnessing an awakening across the state of Texas, across our nation.”

His stump speech today incorporates that line almost verbatim, with Cruz’s self-identified optimism and his sense of an “awakening” featuring prominently.

Cruz uttered the line during his first stop on last week’s bus tour, a small Christian bookstore in Boone, Iowa, where people pressed up against bookshelves and each other for a glimpse of the candidate. The venue choice was politically transparent, a play for the evangelical voters Cruz has been courting here.

“Scripture tells us there’s nothing new under the sun,” Cruz told the crowd there. “I think where we are today is very, very much like the late 1970s. Same failed economic policies, same misery, stagnation and malaise.” But Cruz was optimistic, he insisted, “because we know how that story ended.”

“All across this country, millions of men and women rose up and became the Reagan Revolution,” he added. “Why am I so optimistic? Because the same thing is happening again, because conservatives are uniting and coming together, because the American people are rising up.”

As part of his own rise, Cruz speaks about religion in more overtly personal terms than he did earlier in his career. At an evangelical rally in Fort Worth, Texas, in June 2012, Cruz spoke of religion only in legal terms — the cases he had argued before the Supreme Court, the constitutional right to religious liberty. The crowd responded favorably, but the style bore little resemblance to how Cruz talks today. Across Iowa he explicitly quotes the Bible and speaks of faith in deeply personal terms.

Just two months after being sworn in to the Senate, Cruz invited CBN News, a Christian network, to his home in Houston, where they filmed him quoting the book of Proverbs to his family at the dinner table.

"Anyone in politics, you've got a special obligation to avoid being a Pharisee, to avoid ostentatiously wrapping yourself in your faith," Cruz said in that interview. "Because I think in politics, it's too easy for that to become a crutch, for that to be politically useful."

By July 2013, CBN was sitting down in Des Moines with Rafael Cruz, Ted Cruz’s father and a pastor. Rafael Cruz had traveled to Iowa with his son for a meeting of pastors at the Marriott downtown, which marked Ted Cruz’s first trip to test the waters in the Hawkeye State. Vander Plaats, one of Cruz’s key endorsements in this election, also attended that meeting.

Rafael Cruz’s appearance was what Iowa Republican operatives have described since as a long, calculated charm offensive targeting the faith community in Iowa and ingratiating them toward his son.

“He’s spent years on the ground doing what some campaigns have tried to do this year,” said one strategist for a rival campaign in Iowa. “He pretty much moved in here and became the trusting voice for them.”

When Ted Cruz kicked off his presidential campaign in March 2013, he sent a clear signal to that tirelessly cultivated network by selecting Jerry Falwell’s Liberty University as his launching pad. Rafael Cruz has remained a key figure, actively campaigning for his son and showcasing his religious credentials on the trail, while acting as a top campaign adviser behind the scenes.

“He’s got a major role,” said Pastor Rob Ely, a county co-chair for Cruz in Iowa, “mostly with helping to educate pastors and faith leaders on what our role should be in the whole process and how we can have a major impact. Part of the whole game plan is to really mobilize evangelicals and Christians.”

Cruz encouraged his supporters in Iowa last week “to awaken and energize the body of Christ” in mobilizing voters.

Over the course of a few years, Cruz positioned himself well for this election cycle to outflank and out-organize every candidate on the right. But then Trump happened, and that was never part of the plan.

“We can’t strategize around Trump,” King said. “He’s a complete political anomaly, and strategizing around him has essentially come up short.”

Cruz and his allies appear to be trying, however. A message-testing call in Iowa on Monday floated seven potential attacks against Trump, from his faith to his party loyalty, asking the listener whether each would make them more or less likely to support Trump. Other questions about Cruz’s approval pointed to his supporters having organized the poll.

If Cruz has captured the Tea Party zeal of a few years ago, Trump has hit on something new: a populist streak within the Republican Party that is surprisingly strong, if not ideologically pure.

Meanwhile, as Cruz insists he has united conservative voters, three conservative candidates — Ben Carson, Rick Santorum, and Mike Huckabee — still threaten to undercut his base in Iowa. Huckabee and Santorum have each won the Iowa caucuses, in 2008 and 2012 respectively, and Carson was the frontrunner there for a period last year.

“If they can slow (Cruz’s) momentum,” King said, “then I expect Trump will do well.”

Other campaigns aren’t betting on it.

“(Cruz’s) team has worked for months to consolidate the evangelical vote into his camp, and those efforts have largely worked,” said Tim Albrecht, an Iowa Republican strategist advising Jeb Bush’s campaign. “The real story would be if he didn’t win the state, a scenario which seems highly unlikely at this point.”

And Iowa is only one piece of the Cruz master plan — the beginning, not the endgame. “It’s been a national strategy from the beginning,” King said.

For King, watching that strategy play out has been reaffirming, at least so far.

“I bought into something,” King added, “that was better than I thought it would be.”