Can we revisit those “death panels” now? Last summer, my 84-year-old dad faced a frightening kidney cancer. It turned out to be readily treatable. He got excellent care at Brigham and Women’s Hospital. Our family came together to help him with his surgery. He’s back to emailing impossible questions about general relativity and string theory.

Still, we had frank conversations about unsettling possibilities that did not come to pass. Some concerned his preferences regarding end-of-life care. We talked about other tough things, too: money issues, how my 82-year-old step-mother would meet both of their needs if he became chronically debilitated, and more. I’m sure my dad had private talks with his doctor, too.

Story Continued Below

Death and physical infirmity intrude on every human life. It’s important to frankly discuss these matters—lovingly, honestly, with particularity and without euphemism—long before you’re holding your semi-conscious loved-one’s hand in the ICU. People also need to discuss these issues with the doctor who knows them best.

There’s nothing particularly costly here. A health-care system that promiscuously reimburses proton beam cancer therapies can finance a 45-minute conversation about your advanced-care directives. Some private insurers and state Medicaid programs already reimburse such consultations. So it’s no surprise that the Illinois medical society, geriatricians, policymakers and advocacy groups are quietly pushing both private insurers and Medicare to reconsider the idea, this time through regulatory and administrative actions rather than new legislation. The American Medical Association—which plays an outsized role in determining how doctors are compensated—will also submit information to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services concerning the mechanics of reimbursing such services.

There’s nothing inherently ideological about these services, either. Donald Taylor of Duke University, one of the nation’s leading palliative care policy experts, notes that “Prior to the Affordable Care Act, hospice policy and discussions around advanced directives and the like tended to have broad bipartisan support.” Indeed, it was a Republican senator, Johnny Isakson of Georgia, who co-sponsored 2007’s Medicare End-of-Life Planning Act to expand coverage for voluntary care counseling in cases of serious illness. A very similar provision was included in the House version of what became the Affordable Care Act. Section 1223 would have paid physicians for discussing advanced-care planning with their patients.

Then came the “death panel” bomb. I still can’t quite believe that occurred. Sarah Palin, Michele Bachmann and Betsey McCaughey, a pundit whose health-care writings have been widely discredited, grotesquely distorted the debate. In Palin’s memorable words:

The America I know and love is not one in which my parents or my baby with Down Syndrome will have to stand in front of Obama’s “death panel” so his bureaucrats can decide, based on a subjective judgment of their “level of productivity in society,” whether they are worthy of health care. Such a system is downright evil.

It’s disgraceful that a national figure would peddle malicious nonsense that earned Politifact’s “ Lie of the Year” award. It was more than a little pathetic, too. Politicians across the political spectrum have made important contributions in the domain of intellectual disability. When Palin’s life was unexpectedly touched in this way, I had hoped that she would parlay her charisma and national platform to accomplish something worthy.

She chose a different path. To my knowledge, Palin has played no sustained or substantial role in any disability policy issue. She quit her job as governor to hit the right-wing mashed potato circuit. The “death panel” episode itself sealed her transition from intriguing newcomer on the national scene to embarrassing fringe figure. She’s garnered some lucrative media deals. But her reputation has suffered heavily.

***

Americans with most reason to worry about supposed death panels—individuals with disabilities or costly chronic conditions— rank among the most vocal supporters of health reform. The Arc, America’s leading advocacy organization for people living with intellectual disabilities, concluded in a 2012 report: “Numerous ACA provisions related to both acute care and long term services and supports hold great promise for improving the health and well-being of people with disabilities.”

Ironically, the ACA specifically (and rather foolishly) forbids considerations of cost-effectiveness and quality-of-life in a wide range of coverage decisions. Moreover, the experts who do want to aggressively deploy cost-effectiveness research in coverage decisions are much more passionate about needless endoscopies, back surgeries and CT scans than they are about end-of-life care. An Institute of Medicine report identified “priority topics” in which to apply comparative effectiveness research. None of their top 25 priorities were in end-of-life care.