If you’ve ever wondered what a goy’s bar mitzvah would be like, Jimmy Fallon’s Tonight Show debut on Monday probably cured you. Skipping only the “begats,” he naturally recited Scripture: the I’m-not-worthy litany of the eminences who’d preceded him, from Steve Allen (Noah?) to that gooey tower of babble, Jay Leno. He got misty-eyed; he saluted his parents. He looked like he’d never worn a grown-up suit before in his life.

He had both a rabbi (Will Smith) and a cantor (Bono). He even had a stable of high-powered, um, family friends—Sarah Jessica Parker, Mike Tyson, Robert de Niro, Rudolph Giuliani and so on—who queued up to shower him with gifts and congrats. About all that was missing was Fallon declaring, “Tonight I am a host” as Mom and Dad wept.

Ornately sentimental exits are nothing new on late-night TV. But this was Fallon’s hello, not his goodbye—and kind of a peculiar one, considering that he’s got to win over a new audience without any prior investment in The Jimmy Fallon Story. For most of the hour, Jimmy’s translation to a higher plane of television being was the show’s only topic, leaving me grateful for the fleeting moments when he was actually doing his job—that is, treating his guests as guests, not trophies—instead of basking in having won it.

Overall, Fallon’s first Tonight Show may have been the most bungled roll-out since Obamacare. Among other things, a dude who gets this blubbery about his own promotion doesn’t exactly radiate authority—and authority is a pretty vital thing to establish when you take over this slot, right? Instead, Fallon’s worst tics when he’s in his effusive mode—the eager chortles, the vague sense of conversational continuity, the this-little-piggie-went-to-market blinks that make him look as if he’s trying to read an eye chart from a speedboat—were all in overdrive.

Even the scripted bits—you know, the stuff he’s normally clever at—kept hitting clunkers. Given the antigay pall that hangs over the Sochi Games, jokes like naming snowboarder Chas Guldemond the athlete “most likely to host an interior design show on HGTV” were bafflingly tin-eared, if not worse. Even Fallon and Smith’s showpiece “The Evolution of Hip-Hop Dancing” routine was a dud compared to the charm of Michelle Obama shaking some booty in “The Evolution of Mom Dancing” back in Late Night days, not least because she’d been memorably sunny about playing along and Smith looked like he’d rather be unclogging a drainpipe.

The big “get,” though, was U2. And did they ever stink, at least in the rooftop performance blatantly meant to recall the Beatles’ valedictory live show in Let It Be. Just how that mythic moment was relevant to Fallon’s debut was a mystery—“They said goodbye, and I say hello”?—but he clearly borrows glory where he can, and Bono is hardly immune to flattery. For the life of me, I couldn’t tell whether “Invisible” just isn’t much of a song or if it was being rendered badly. Realizing I didn’t care either way cleared things right up, however.

Unsurprisingly, Fallon’s second night was a considerable improvement. He did have to get down to business sooner or later, after all. Even if he was still jittery enough to blurt out an apology for asking Jerry Seinfeld a “boring” question, that was disarming instead of grating. Besides, Seinfeld himself is such an old pro these days—his indolence or affected indolence long gone, he’s turned into boomers’ answer to Henny Youngman—that he cut right through the fuzziness by assuming that he and Fallon were two guys with a job to do, one he’s far more expert by now at than his host may ever be.