OKLAHOMA CITY--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Paycom Software, Inc. (NYSE:PAYC), a leading provider of comprehensive, cloud-based human capital management software delivered as Software-as-a-Service, today announced the release of GL Concierge, offering organizations more control and transparency into their payroll general ledger. Paycom’s new offering is the first financial software application in the human capital management space to operate off payroll, giving finance professionals intuitive reporting, enriched audit trails, customizable file layouts and real-time alerts, all through Paycom’s single-database technology.

“The general ledger acts as the backbone for businesses’ accounting functions, and with this development, Paycom is empowering businesses with data-rich content, unlike anything in our entire industry,” said Chad Richison, Paycom founder and CEO. “Our technology already encompassed the employment life cycle, from hire to retire, and now it is better meeting the demands of finance professionals, allowing them to be more efficient and proactive.”

Paycom’s GL Concierge, now available to all clients, addresses accounting needs in organizations of all sizes and allows clients an infinite number of general ledger maps along with an action-item alert system that improves the dynamics of daily operations.

In addition, Paycom’s GL Concierge offers businesses:

Guided setup – Intuitive, drag-and-drop functionality streamlines the setup process, while code preview and validation ensures the general ledger maps are setup correctly before running reports.

Customizable file layouts – Build and manage multiple personalized files in a spreadsheet-style interface, and also directly customize and automate files for various accounting packages.

Transparent auditing – Audit any changes over any date range to ensure accuracy of your map setup.

Alerts – Proactively monitor system changes that may impact reporting.

Powerful reporting – On-demand reports work with Paycom’s Push Reporting application, allowing users to automatically generate and send reports to necessary recipients.

GL Concierge marks Paycom’s second major application release in the second quarter of 2015, and its third new application in 2015. On June 22, 2015, Paycom announced an extensive Affordable Care Act (ACA) compliance offering, Enhanced ACA. In addition, Paycom Learning, a learning-management system that formalizes and standardizes companies’ training processes, was released by Paycom in February.

About Paycom

As a leader in payroll and HR technology, Oklahoma City-based Paycom redefines the human capital management industry by allowing companies to effectively navigate a rapidly changing business environment. Its cloud-based software solution is based on a core system of record maintained in a single database for all human capital management functions, providing the functionality that businesses need to manage the complete employment lifecycle, from recruitment to retirement. Paycom serves businesses of all sizes and in every industry. As one of the leading human capital management providers, Paycom serves clients in all 50 states from offices across the country.