Dana Hart-Ball came home to her Rockwall home one day last month and found flowers planted all the way up her sidewalk.

Her husband wasn’t the kind to plant anything, so she called her lawn man of several years, Leo Mota.

“I gave Leo a call, and I said ‘Leo I just got home and I see the beautiful flowers, thank you so much,’ ”she said Saturday night. “He said ‘Oh Dana, I just wanted to do something nice for you.’ ”

That was the last conversation they had.

Friday night, Mota, 35, became the 12th person killed by the storms that struck Dec. 26.

The father of four reportedly was driving home after working in Rockwall when a tornado tossed his truck and trailer off Interstate 30 in Garland.

He suffered severe brain trauma. His passenger, 19-year-old Jose Oviedo Juarez, died after he was ejected from the truck.

Ball said she met Mota, the owner of Leo’s Lawn Service, about seven years ago when he was in her neighborhood mowing lawns. It wasn’t long before she was introducing him to other neighbors.

“He’s been taking care of our lawn for years,” she said. “We didn’t even have to ask for things to be done, he knew exactly what we wanted. He just really cared about all his customers.”

“We just developed a friendship,” she said.

But Ball said she didn’t know Mota had been critically injured in the tornado until more than a week after the storm.

“We heard the lawn mowers, and we thought, ‘Oh, Leo is here mowing,’ ” she said. “We got a knock, and it was his nephew … and he told us what had happened and that he came to help his aunt and to do some of the lawns.”

A spokeswoman for the family said online that Mota “passed away peacefully” at Medical Center of Plano after he was taken off life support Friday night.

His wife, Maria, and other relatives were at his side when he died.

“That was a painful and hard decision for Maria to make,” wrote the spokeswoman, Teresa Wisdom. “Leo did not suffer, the hospital cared and treated him with compassion and dignity and extended that to the family as well.”

Mota’s family and friends could not be reached for comment, but dozens of people posted condolences and shared memories online.

“He was just really a special person,” Ball said. “He worked day and night, and when I heard he was leaving Rockwall [that night] … it didn’t surprise me. That’s just how he was, he worked late and every day of the week.”

She said all that work was for his family.

“He adored his children,” she said. “He was so proud of his family and he loved his kids, and that’s what we admired most. He was just a family man.”

She said the flowers in front of her home were beautiful reminders of her friend.

“I went out there today and just looked at the flowers,” she said.

For more information on how to help the Mota family click here.