Extra help employees working for Solano County could qualify for health coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

Today the Solano County Board of Supervisors will consider adopting a resolution to provide health insurance and cafeteria plan benefits for unrepresented extra help employees who qualify for health insurance under the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

The ACA requires employers to provide health insurance to “full-time employees” effective Jan. 1, 2015, and extra help employees might now qualify for health insurance benefits under the ACA. The recommended actions from county staff to the board provide the mechanisms for the county to offer employer-sponsored health insurance to qualifying unrepresented extra help employees.

Staff reported that the proposed action establishes the county’s health insurance and cafeteria plan contributions at $1,044.89 per month, which is proportional to the amount received by the County’s full-time employees. During the ACA transitional measurement period, there are four unrepresented extra help employees who qualify for health insurance. If all four unrepresented extra help employees elect to enroll in the county’s health insurance/cafeteria plan, the cost would be $25,078 for the balance of this fiscal year.

The recommended action, staff said in a report to the board, is to contract with the California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS) for Public Employee’s Medical and Hospital Care Act (PEMHCA) for unrepresented extra help employees who qualify for health insurance under the County’s Administrative and Compliance Procedures of the ACA.

The ACA includes an employer mandate to provide health insurance to full-time employees and their eligible dependents. The ACA defines “full-time employee” as an employee who works on average 30 or more hours per week or 130 hours or more each month. The health insurance must provide minimum essential coverage that is affordable and provides minimum value, as defined by the statute. The county provides health insurance for its regular, limited term and probationary employees through contract with the CalPERS under the state Public Employee’s Medical and Hospital Care Act PEMHCA.

Additionally, under the California Government Code, the county is prohibited from working a retired annuitant in excess of 960 hours, for all public employers combined, during a fiscal year. The retired annuitant is also precluded from receiving benefits and retired annuitants, if qualified under the ACA, will not be offered participation in the health insurance plan. A retired annuitant who works in excess of 960 hours during a fiscal year or who receives benefits is required to discontinue his/her retirement and reenroll as an active employee.

Advertisement

The Human Resources Department worked with the county’s outside actuary, Bartel Associates, to estimate the cost of post-employment retiree health insurance benefits of unrepresented extra help employees who qualify for health insurance under the ACA. Bartel Associates estimates the post-employment health insurance benefits would increase in the actuarial accrued liability by less than 0.2 percent and the annual required contribution would increase by less than 0.2 percent.

The Solano County Board of Supervisors meets at 9 a.m. today in the County Government Center, 675 Texas St., Fairfield.