It's far more complicated than being the official orange juice of the Super Bowl.

The three regional hospitals tapped by the Super Bowl host committee this week must get ready to oversee the health of hundreds of thousands of fans who will participate in the week-long parade of football-related events.

The Hackensack Health Network and two Manhattan facilities, the Hospital for Special Surgery and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, were chosen by the host committee as the health services providers for the Feb. 2 game at MetLife Stadium in East Rutherford.

The three facilities will "ensure that any medical and emergency needs are met during Super Bowl week activities, and that volunteers, staff and fans stay healthy and safe during the Super Bowl," the Super Bowl Host Committee said in a statement.

Hackensack University Medical Center is six miles from MetLife Stadium.

Hackensack hopes to deploy its mobile satellite emergency department - dubbed a "hospital on wheels" by Hackensack President Robert Garrett - onsite during the game. It's a collection of trailers on wheels that contain nearly everything needed in an emergency, including an operating room. It takes up a few city blocks.

"It's a very important asset that we hope will be a benefit. Let's hope we don't have to use it," Garrett said. The hospital last deployed the mobile facility after Hurricane Sandy, when it was used by hospitals elsewhere that were damaged by the storm.

The hospital routinely treats emergency cases from large concerts and other events at the Meadowlands complex - including professional athletes who need emergency treatment after an injury.

The Super Bowl presents a broader challenge, because of the size of the crowd, the number events in the week leading up to the game, and the weather.

In addition, many of the fans will be out-of-town visitors, away from home and their regular doctors.

Garrett said the hospital is in the midst of an expansion of its emergency room, but that construction will be put on hold during Super Bowl week so they will retain the maximum capacity for patients.

"It's good to be prepared," Garrett said.