Insurance Marketplace: Hospital Experts Available to Help



Specialist Jani McLaughlin is available at the Oneida Healthcare to answer questions about Affordable Care Act.

(Oneida, NY – June 2014) The Affordable Care Act, also known as “Obama Care” is a source of considerable confusion, with regards to how health care services are now accessed and paid for. Understandably, Oneida Healthcare’s patients have many questions and concerns.

In response to that need for a reliable source of information, the hospital’s business office now has specially trained counselors who can explain the changes and how they will affect each patient’s individual situation. They can help patients understand, apply, and enroll for health coverage through the Marketplace, including Medicaid, Healthy NY, Child Health Plus, Family Health Plus or a Qualified Exchange Plan.

Specialist Jani McLaughlin is on hand at the hospital, Monday – Friday from 8am to 4PM, to assist patients who are admitted and identified as “self pay” (without insurance) via OHC’s Emergency Department or Direct Admissions process. Another specialist is available to assist during high volume periods and additional staff members are also being trained.

Patients who would like to speak to a CAC (Certified Application Counselor) must call to schedule an appointment, as walk-ins cannot be accommodated. “They (patients) really do need to call first,” said Patient Access Services Manager Jeff Darling, noting that appointments can take upwards of two hours. “We wouldn’t want to inconvenience anyone by having them wait for an extended period of time while our specialist is either already assisting someone or may have a scheduled appointment with another patient.”

Oneida Healthcare patients can call 361-2230 to schedule an appointment with an application counselor.

“This is a time of dynamic change for health care and for our patients and we want to be a trusted resource they can turn to for answers,” Darling concluded.

Share this: Email

Print

Facebook

Google

Twitter

LinkedIn

Pinterest