Ben Carson, the conservative Republican presidential hopeful from West Palm Beach, is backing away from his assertion that homosexuality is a choice.

Carson, who is a retired neurosurgeon, said Wednesday he knew it's a choice because people "go into prison straight, and when they come out they're gay."

His comments produced a burst of reaction, and his name was a trending topic on Twitter, which also suggested two other commonly searched terms: "Ben Carson is crazy" and "Ben Carson prison."

Writing on Facebook on Wednesday evening, Carson said, "I realized that my choice of language does not reflect fully my heart on gay issues. I do not pretend to know how every individual came to their sexual orientation. I regret that my words to express that concept were hurtful and divisive. For that I apologize unreservedly to all that were offended. …

"I am not a politician and I answered a question without really thinking about it thoroughly. No excuses. I deeply regret my statement and I promise you, on this journey, I may err again, but unlike politicians when I make an error I will take full responsibility and never hide or parse words. As a human being my obligation is to learn from my mistakes and to treat all people with respect and dignity."

Major science-based medical organizations reject the notion that homosexuality is a choice. On Facebook, Carson wrote that "there have been no definitive studies that people are born into a specific sexuality. We do know, however, that we are always born male and female. And I know that we are all made in God's image, which means we are all deserving of respect and dignity."

His original comments came in an interview on CNN. Interviewer Chris Cuomo asked Carson if being gay is a choice, and Carson said, "absolutely."

After going into his prison theory, Carson continued, according to CNN: "So, did something happen while they were in there? Ask yourself that question."

Before a Presidents Day appearance at the Colony Hotel in Palm Beach, Carson told reporters that his opposition to same-sex marriage doesn't mean he's anti-gay. During one of his appearances on Fox News, he raised pedophilia and bestiality when explaining his opposition to same-sex marriage. He said at the Palm Beach event that he believes in equal rights "for everybody including gay people. I don't have anything against gay people."

In his Wednesday post on Facebook, Carson wrote: "I support human rights and constitutional protections for gay people, and I have done so for many years. I support civil unions for gay couples, and I have done so for many years. I support the right of individual states to sanction gay marriage, and I support the right of individual states to deny gay marriage in their respective jurisdictions."

During his speech before the Palm Beach Republican Club, Carson promised not to soft-pedal his views in order to avoid offending people. "I hate political correctness, and I will never yield to the PC police," he said.

Political strategists don't see Carson, who has never run for office, as a likely winner of the Republican presidential nomination. But he has a growing fan base among conservatives around the country.

Last week, a Quinnipiac Poll of Iowa Republicans, showed that in the first state in the nominating process, Carson was in fifth place with 11 percent. A nationwide Public Policy Polling survey had him in fourth place with 18 percent.

He exploded onto conservatives' radar two years ago with an in-your-face critique of Obamacare at the National Prayer Breakfast — with the president sitting nearby on the dais.

Carson, who is black, attracted widespread attention for a speech later in 2013 in which he said "Obamacare is really, I think, the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery." He said the health law "is slavery in a way, because it is making all of us subservient to the government, and it was never about health care. It was about control."

Carson, 63, moved to West Palm after retiring as a pediatric neurosurgeon at Johns Hopkins in Baltimore.

On Tuesday, he announced formation of the CarsonAmerica Exploratory Committee to help him figure out whether he should seek the nomination. The committee is a legal step that allows a potential candidate to raise and spend money as they continue traveling the country to give speeches and court donors. People who form exploratory committees for president nearly always decide to run.

aman@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4550