Longmont is standing up for itself — reminding RTD of its legal obligation to finish the Northwest Commuter Rail Line — and former Boulder County Commissioner Will Toor is annoyed.

In his guest opinion of Monday, Nov. 23, Mr. Toor cites many reasons he thinks rail will harm Longmont. None of the problems he alleges can trump the most significant fact of all, that in the 2004 FasTracks vote, taxpayers voted for rail for Longmont, not buses, and rail is still what the voters want.

RTD's 2013 North Area Mobility Study (NAMS) is referenced by Mr. Toor to support his assertions that rail would be detrimental for Longmont. We think the NAMS study has been misread in a manner that was biased against rail. For instance, some think that the NAMS study predicts a miniscule amount of passengers that will use the rail. On the contrary, the NAMS study actually predicts that by 2035, the Northwest Rail corridor segment between Westminster and Longmont will see a daily ridership between 9,300 and 10,800, which is quite a respectable ridership compared to other RTD rail lines. Further, since forecasters predict that Northern Colorado will increase its population by almost 2 million people by 2040, we don't think there will be any problem filling the seats of the rail we create to fulfill the FasTracks mandate.

Advertisement

Mr. Toor continually promotes the use of Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) instead of the construction of our promised rail. We are not against any viable form of transit, but we just don't think the BRT actually being contemplated instead of the Northwest Rail will be the panacea that its proponents claim. For instance, in advocating for BRT, Mr. Toor points to the modification of regional roads allowing riders to use enhanced buses to get to U.S. 36 out of Boulder. What is not mentioned is that many of the proposed BRT modifications in the Northwest area will not include dedicated bus lanes, which is the major hallmark of successful BRTs. In addition, one of the proposed modifications — using road shoulders for bus usage — has had its legality recently called into question and will now need to be permitted by the General Assembly in the next legislative session.

The cost of a project like the Northwest Commuter Rail is always the stumbling block for such projects, even though the projected cost per mile of the Northwest Rail is the lowest of all the FasTracks rail projects. History shows, however, that once a rail line is built, the economy booms and people are happy with the convenience of a permanent rail line. Why shouldn't the people of the Northwest Denver metro area get to experience this prosperity, especially since we continue to pay for it? Remember that the taxpayers along the proposed line have already paid over $232 million over the past 10 years.

It is clear that the national and metro area economies are currently rebounding from the recession. This has had an interesting impact on RTD's economic forecasts. According to RTD's Northwest Rail Annual Report from Oct. 21, 2015, RTD is projecting a large cash flow surplus starting as early as 2028. This surplus could ultimately be in the billions of dollars, which could potentially bring in enough dollars to cover the cost of finishing the Northwest Corridor. RTD's challenge is to find investors to use this more positive forecast to finish the corridor, and the remainder of FasTracks, decades before the estimated 2040's time frame.

If the city of Boulder and Mr. Toor want this potential RTD cash flow surplus to be put toward the five proposed new semi-BRT's in the Northwest area, perhaps they should ask for a new vote or at the very least hold public forums so that the taxpayers have a voice in their transportation future.

To be clear: We are not against BRT, we just don't want it to be constructed instead of the rail that we have been promised, have voted for, and are paying for.

Joan Peck and Karen Benker are founders of Citizens For Finishing Fastracks, and Judy Lubow is RTD's director from Longmont and other northern Colorado communities. Go to www.CitizensForFinishingFastracks.com for more information.