UPDATE: BELOIT (WIFR) A grandmother is looking for answers tonight after what she says was a random act of violence.

"A five-year-old baby. He was innocent. He was taken from his mom, and his dad and his whole family, Said Alicia Martinez, Grandmother of Ramos."

Alicia Martinez is still wrapping her mind around thoughts of never seeing her grandson again.

Last night five year-old Austin Ramos was shot dead while sitting in the backseat of his father's car on Beloit's East Side.

"This was a five year old baby he's innocent.. I mean he was sitting in the back seat playing his gameboy, riding with his daddy. Somebody's gotta know something. I hope, Said Alicia Martinez, Grandmother of Ramos."

Police say a car was following behind junior and his dad on Shopiere Road, just West of Prairie Avenue, when another vehicle pulled up along side them and started shooting.

Investigators say the pre-schooler was shot in the stomach and later died at the hospital.

"You know it's not acceptable to the Beloit Police Department or the community that this type of violence occurs. Certainly no one expects to have their five year old taken from them in this fashion, Said Beloit Interim Police Chief, David Zibolski."

Martinez can't figure out what the motive could be for what she says is a senseless crime.

" I would say it was a random act because I don't know who would want to hurt either one of them. My son has spent his life making sure he's a wonderful Father, Said Alicia Martinez, Grandmother of Ramos."

She called junior her sunshine.

"He was so free spirited and he was the most polite, sweet little boy. He was always trying to be helpful always trying to be nice to any little kids, not a mean bone in his little body."

As she continues to grieve Martinez is pleading for the community's help.

"If they know anything or if anybody's seen anything.. if they would please report it . So we can find out who did this to them."

BELOIT (WIFR) -- We now know the name of the little boy who was shot and killed while sitting in the back seat of his father's car last night on Beloit's East Side.

Alicia Martinez is also the Mother of the Father who was driving the car . She's grieving tonight over the loss of her grandson Austin Ramos, who went by Junior, in what she says was a random act of violence.

Police say Ramos was shot in the stomach while sitting in the back seat of his father's car.

It happened on Shopiere Road just West of Prairie Avenue a little after 7pm last night.

Officers say a car pulled up beside the vehicle Ramos was in and started shooting.

Martinez says that same car was following very closely behind her son and grandson just moments before shots were fired.

She describes Ramos as her sunshine.

"A five year-old baby. He was innocent. He was taken from his mom, and his dad and his whole family. If they know anything, could they please, please report it Said Alicia Martinez, the Grandmother of Ramos."

There are currently no suspects in this case and police looking for a maroon colored SUV that was involved in the shooting.

There's a vigil planned for tomorrow night at 5pm at the corner Shopiere Avenue and Prairie Road where the shooting happened.

This is the city's first murder of the year.