More than one out of every 10 children in New Jersey was born prematurely last year, putting them at risk for lifelong developmental delays and health problems, according to the March of Dimes annual report card which gave the state a “C” for its efforts.

In 2013, 11.5 percent babies were born before 37 weeks, compared to 11.2 percent in 2012, according to the nonprofit’s report card released today. The state has made progress since 2006, when the premature birth rate was at 12.9 percent.

A fetus needs 39 weeks in the womb in order for vital organs, including the brain and lungs, to be fully developed, the report said.

New Jersey received only a middling grade because more pregnant women lack health coverage: 18.5 percent last year compared to 16.9 percent this year. And 7.9 percent of babies were delivered before 39 weeks via Cesarean section without medical necessity, up from 7.7 percent in 2013.

“This year’s increase in our pre-term birth rate is disappointing,” said Gerson Weiss, professor emeritus at the Rutgers-Nj Medical School’s Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology. “We expect this to be a brief setback in our long term progress toward preventing premature birth and giving more babies a healthy start in life. The programs and partnership we have put in place provide the necessary framework for the future of newborn health, and we expect to see better rates in the coming years.”

New Jersey improved in one area, however. Fewer expectant moms smoked, going from a 16.5 percent rate to a 14.4 percent smoking rate. Lighting up increases the chances of premature birth, according to the report.

The national pre-term birth rate was 11.4 percent last year, the lowest in 17 years, according to the report.

Health Commissioner Mary E. O’Dowd said in a statement that reducing premature births has been a priority of her administration.

“The state’s commitment to preventing premature birth is demonstrated by the investment of $14 million in grants to community health providers for access to prenatal care, smoking cessation, education about the risks of preterm and early term delivery and to persuade hospitals to closely monitor practices that lead to early term birth,” O’Dowd said.

One of those programs, the Mom’s Quit Connection, "links pregnant women and new mothers in New Jersey who want to quit smoking with Certified Tobacco Treatment Specialists to help them decrease the number of cigarettes they smoke with the goal of becoming smoke free.”

Next year, when all of the families who have signed up for Medicaid and FamilyCare are accounted for under the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, the rate of uninsured women will plummet, she said.

The national pre-term birth rate was 11.4 percent last year, the lowest in 17 years, according to the report.