In announcing his intent to resign as Scotland’s first minister, Alex Salmond struck a less-than-defeated note. Channeling the late Ted Kennedy’s concession speech at the 1980 Democratic National Convention, Salmond asserted that “for Scotland the campaign continues and the dream shall never die.” In case you missed it, “the dream” is splitting from the United Kingdom, which Scottish voters decisively balked at in a referendum last week.

That doesn’t mean the issue is settled, not for the wily Salmond who, in the wake of defeat, coyly suggested that a referendum vote was “only one of a number of routes” by which to achieve a break – and was promptly accused of seeking to foment a "coup" by opponents – and certainly not for the thousands of new members who have reportedly flocked to his Scottish National Party in recent days, nor for the energetic Twitter campaign mobilized around variations of the #wearethe45 hashtag, a reference to the percentage of Scottish voters who wanted to sever the 307-year-old political union.

But in the aftermath of Salmond’s resignation, the revolutionary likely to lead the charge to keep the “dream” alive will almost certainly wear heels. Today, Salmond’s long-time deputy, Nicola Sturgeon, formally announced her bid to succeed him as party leader and first minister. (Though in doing so, she made it clear that such dreams will only be ushered in via the “polling booth.”) With the backing of much of the Scottish cabinet already, she is expected to be easily elected at the party’s conference in November, when Salmond will officially step aside.

[SEE: Political Cartoons]

The 44-year-old Sturgeon’s likely elevation puts Scotland’s female politicians in the global spotlight, marking yet another milestone for female politicos across the pond. Not only would Sturgeon be the first woman to hold the top spot in the Scottish Parliament, but she’d also be the first woman to helm any of the U.K.’s devolved parliaments or legislative assemblies, which, in addition to Scotland, also exist in Wales and Northern Ireland. Barring no further shakeups in Scotland’s party leadership hierarchy between now and November, women – including Scottish Labour Party Leader Johann Lamont, who has dismissed rumors she might resign, and Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party Leader Ruth Davidson – will lead the three largest parties in the Scottish Parliament. That’s doubly important because the parliament’s powers are poised to expand exponentially thanks to last-minute, pre-referendum promises of greater devolution by Westminster leaders.

Crack, crack, goes the glass ceiling in Scotland.

But just because Sturgeon has pledged to work for the “common cause,” don’t count on these women to agree. Sturgeon, whose opposition to the policies of pioneering first female British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher inspired her initial political activism, has in the past sharply clashed with Labour rival Lamont in what was described by one U.K. newspaper as a “bad-tempered TV spat.”

It should also be noted that the rising fortunes of Sturgeon stand in contrast to how many women actually felt about her party’s independence drive – one poll showed the “no” camp with a 16-point advantage among female voters in the days just prior to the referendum. (This, despite the pro-union “Better Together” campaign taking flak for an ad featuring a frazzled housewife that was “roundly criticized for being sexist and condescending,” according to an article in Foreign Policy.)

[READ: For Scotland, a Winning Loss]

She’s also viewed as more progressive than Salmond. And while, in the past, she’s defended his ties with media mogul Rupert Murdoch, she’s struck a less effusive note in her assessment of the News Corp executive chairman, parrying questions over Salmond’s willingness to lobby on Murdoch’s behalf by saying, “First Ministers have a job to do and that is to promote the economic interest of Scotland. You can’t pick and choose about that on the basis of who you like and who you don’t like.”

There's a distinctively American inflection to Sturgeon’s coiffed and polished demeanor – a relatively recent transformation, according to British news accounts, which have pointed out her erstwhile reputation as a “nippy sweetie” (or, in non-Glaswegian terms, a bit of an uptight scold).

[GALLERY: Cartoons on the European Debt Crisis]

Sturgeon appears to have left those days in the dust. In her power red dress and blonde bob, she stands out against the usual sea of rumpled U.K. pols. She has an admitted and oft-stated “weakness” for heels and a talent for playfully provocative tweets. This week, she drove her followers wild after tweeting a pair of cartoonish women’s footwear featuring Bambi-shaped heels under the caption: “Guess which member of @scotgov Cabinet is wearing these shoes?” For the record, it turned out to be colleague Angela Constance, Scotland’s secretary for training, youth and women’s employment.

So will Sturgeon – who has a telling interest in both the American Civil War and the popular TV drama "Borgen," about the first female prime minister of Denmark – prove to be the independence movement’s stealth weapon, helping usher in her own brand of Scottish secession via patience, political cunning and shrewd negotiation? Indeed, while she’s expected to adopt a more cooperative approach with Westminster, she’ll also likely push for additional powers for the Scottish Parliament, including control over tax and welfare policy, and hold leaders in London accountable for their "home rule" promises. Of course, she could also find herself presiding over a party whose raison d’etre – independence – having been squarely defeated at the polls, soon loses its euphoric luster when it comes to the more pedestrian workings of ordinary democracy.