Topics: Affordable Care Act, Carly Fiorina, GOP, healthcare, Renee Ellmers, Republicans, Violence Against Women, War on women, Women's Health, Politics News

Remember earlier this year when a coalition of Republican women led a “revolt” against a 20-week abortion ban because it would have denied rape victims access to the procedure unless they reported the assault to authorities?

“We got into trouble last year, and I think we need to be careful again,” explained North Carolina Rep. Renee Ellmers, one of the architects of the so-called rebellion and a supporter of an identical version of the measure — narrow rape exception and all — in 2013. “We need to be smart about how we’re moving forward,” she continued, making it clear that the move against the bill was about optics, not substance.

At the time, this supposed Republican awakening spawned approximately 1 million pieces about the possible new face of the party, lawmakers who were not just savvier about bad press and dodging the “war on women” label but also more concerned with women’s lives in general.

That was January. Welcome to March.

The GOP’s latest budget proposal offers the same-as-it-ever-was scorched earth approach to cutting funding for domestic programs, including the ones that serve low-income women and victims of violence. The hottest Republican presidential contender for 2016 just suggested that he might eliminate the federal minimum wage. Senate Republicans have vowed to block the confirmation of Loretta Lynch until Democrats essentially agree to force child victims of trafficking to carry pregnancies to term. And some of the most prominent women in the party are blaming the pay gap on old people watching porn at work.

It’s tempting to laugh at the absurdity of it all, but these policies actually cause tremendous suffering and — in the case of a possible repeal of the Affordable Care Act and any reduction in funds for programs that serve victims of intimate partner violence — literal death for women.

On Tuesday, House Republicans unveiled their budget proposal for 2016. Among the many draconian cuts in the plan, it includes a repeal of the new healthcare law (to be replaced by an unnamed and undeveloped policy because why bother to figure that sort of thing out in advance). While it’s been well established that people would die and the country would fall into chaos if the Affordable Care Act gets killed (whether by a Supreme Court ruling or a GOP budget), women would face uniquely devastating consequences. People would lose the maternity coverage that is currently provided at no additional cost, access to contraception and screenings for intimate partner violence would no longer be guaranteed in most plans and being a victim of domestic violence could return being a preexisting condition.

The plan is clear about repealing the Affordable Care Act and massive restructuring of Medicaid and Medicare (both major hits to women), but it also contains $1 trillion in unspecified cuts to domestic programs, which, as we’ve seen in years past, means food assistance, housing assistance, Head Start and funding for domestic violence and anti-sexual violence programs.