President Barack Obama's confrontational attitude toward Congress seems to be intensifying the combativeness of many Republican legislators, who want to stand up to Obama as much as possible.

[ALSO: Nancy Pelosi Says Boehner's Invitation to Netanyahu Is Inappropriate]

GOP strategists warn that Obama's tough stance may generate even more toughness from his Republican adversaries, resulting in a spiral of confrontation. This has already started, as seen in House Speaker John Boehner's invitation to Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu to address a joint session of Congress March 3. Boehner, an Ohio Republican, didn't coordinate with the White House before issuing the invitation – a highly unusual move. It appears to be, at least in part, a response to the president's use of unilateral actions to bypass Congress. Now Congress, controlled by the GOP, is bypassing him.

Netanyahu has agreed to give the address, but Obama aides say the president won't meet with the prime minister on this occasion. The two don't get along well. And Obama aides say the speech comes too close to the Israeli election in March; Obama doesn't want to be seen as taking sides.

Netanyahu is expected to use his address to talk about the need to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons, and his appearance will kick up more dust in Washington. Obama is locked in a dispute with congressional Republicans and some Democrats regarding legislation to impose additional sanctions on Iran if current talks fail to stop Tehran's nuclear threat. Obama has warned that he would veto the legislation, arguing that such a measure would hamper U.S. diplomacy. Netanyahu could intensify the emotions on all sides.



[READ: House Passes Abortion Bill on Roe v. Wade Anniversary]

The resentment toward Obama among some Republicans got even deeper when he appeared to taunt them in his State of the Union address this week. Obama said he will circumvent the GOP as much as he can and he proposed tax increases on the rich and big businesses; these are non-starters for most Republicans. "There's no genuflection by President Obama to what happened in November," when the Republicans took control of the Senate and added to their majority in the House, says a GOP strategist and former senior adviser to President Ronald Reagan. "He said all his policies were on the ballot in that election but now he chooses to ignore it.....Now he's talking about executive action and vetoes. He's basically saying, 'My way or the highway.'"