WASHINGTON, July 8, 2014 — President Obama is expected to ask Congress for $2 billion to address the immigration crisis, recently compounded with the arrival of over 50,000 undocumented children. The requested funds would go to the care of the immigrant children, and to fund the legal proceedings which the law requires take place before the children can be deported. According to numerous new source, that could take years.

While Obama tries to secure funding, the children and teenagers in question will be shipped to various locations around the country. This decision has prompted two towns already to stage various forms of protest, including a town hall meeting in Lawrenceville, Virginia, and picket lines in Murrieta, California.

This situation is a brilliant political move by Obama in his efforts to bend the immigration issue to his will, and use it to inflict pain on the Republican Party.

President Obama and his advisers have made it clear that the law will be followed, and the children will not be deported without the necessary legal proceedings. Of course, Obama and his advisers have up until now followed and ignored the law at their leisure. For example, Obama waived the law regarding the restriction on supplying lethal aid to terrorist organizations so he could send weapons to the Syrian Opposition. He ignored the law when he signed the Affordable Care Act as a revenue generating bill that did not originate from the House or Representatives. And he ignored the law when he made recess appointments when Congress was in session, which the Supreme Court recently ruled was in fact, illegal.

This administration, and previous ones for that matter, have little ground to stand on when they decide to stick their chest out and declare adherence to the law. This is the same President who sold firearms to drug cartels in Mexico, resulting in numerous deaths, and then demands that Congress ban semi-automatic weapons. Following the law, in the case of this administration in particular, is not the strongest, or most believable, justification for requesting $2 billion.

According to the administration, it could take years for the hearings to take place before deportation is even possible. That means years of this issue being dragged out, years of this issue appearing in the press, and years of this issue being brought front and center during election cycles. During that time, Obama and the Democrats will have ample time to exploit this issue.

President Obama will use this issue to severely damage the national image of the Republican Party. Well aware that Republicans are anti-immigration, he has the immigrants sent all over the country to be housed. He knows that this will spark outrage among Republicans, they will take to the news with their protest, and in turn they will be blasted as anti-children. When that happens, the president, the Democrats, and the liberal media will pounce on the Republicans and relentlessly call their love of children into question.

What’s more, the president knows that the Republicans will have to respond. If they do not, then their constituency will more than likely vote out any vulnerable incumbents who appear to be laying down on the issue. In addition, increased fervor from the right will most likely cause further friction within the Republican Party as establishment Republicans continue to use words like “amnesty” and “pardon.”

But there is a danger here, so much pushing will cause Republicans to make this a center issue of their own, and Republicans who are in favor of legal over illegal immigration will come to the forefront, making things more difficult down the road for Democrats. With Obama making this particular event a political issue to address the waning popularity of the Democrats, instead of actually dealing with a potential crisis is par for the course for this particular Administration.

Read, follow, share @bckprchpolitics on Twitter and Back Porch Politics on Facebook