Are the Medicaid wars over, or just on pause?

But they went through the exercise anyway. At a cost of a bit more than $40,000.

Everyone knew Del. Tom Rust's bill was going to die, just as they knew the House of Delegates debate on Medicaid expansion last week wasn't going to convince a staunchly opposed Republican majority to change its mind.

"I think the Republicans are trying to say, 'we promised a debate… (Judith Lowery / Daily Press )

Why?

"I think the Republicans are trying to say, 'we promised a debate and we've had a debate and now it is time to move on,'" said Quentin Kidd, director of the Wason Center for Public Policy at Christopher Newport University, which released a poll showing six in 10 Virginia voters like the idea of expanding Medicaid to cover more of their low-income neighbors.

The political stakes remain high in the battle over using Affordable Care Act — Obamacare — money to cover some of the more than 350,000 low-income Virginians who have no health insurance now.

Rust's bill tested how solid his fellow Republicans' opposition to variations on the expansion theme might be. Pretty solid, as it turned out.

But the debate isn't likely to go away.

Rust, a Republican from Herndon, won re-election by just 54 votes last year in a district that went for President Barack Obama 60 percent to 39 percent in 2012. He thought he might win support from a few other moderate Republicans for his proposal packaging a short-term "bridge" program to cover low-income Virginians while moving Medicaid to block grant funding. That approach, in which Washington would write a lump-sum check and let a state make its own rules for the program, is one Republicans have urged for years.

"I hope my friends on the other side will be kind next year," Rust said, looking over at the Democrats, grouped on the right hand side of the House chamber, as his bill headed down to 64-33 defeat on Thursday.

But none of the 10 other Republicans whose districts voted strongly Democratic in the last gubernatorial or presidential elections joined him — not even those such as Newport News' David Yancey, who won their own re-elections in 2013 by margins of one or two percentage points.

The only Republican to speak for the bill, Del. Glenn Davis, R-Virginia Beach, represents a district that split 50-49 for Republican Mitt Romney in 2012 and 47-46 for Republican Ken Cuccinelli in the 2013 gubernatorial race.

"I think that the Republicans in the House believe that there is safety in numbers, and also that opposition to Medicaid expansion is a winning issue if, first, it's linked to the ACA (Affordable Care Act) and second, that it's linked with an open-ended entitlement commitment that any reasonable person would want to avoid," said Edward A. Lynch, a political scientist at Hollins University and former chairman of the Roanoke County Republican Party.

"I think there's another dynamic working here, though," Lynch added. "Gov. McAuliffe has accorded great importance to expansion of Medicaid. A win for him on this issue would give the governor enormous momentum and enormous clout in the next GA session."