SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

On Breitbart News, from 7PM to 12AM EST, Breitbart News Executive Chairman and host Stephen K. Bannon along with co-host and Breitbart News Editor-in-Chief Alex Marlow will be conducting a five-hour special on tonight’s midterm elections.

Bannon and Marlow will speak to a number of prominent politicians and analysts, including: Alabama Senator Jeff Sessions, Texas Senator Ted Cruz, radio host Mark Levin, Kentucky Senator Rand Paul, former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin, Former Virginia Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli, pollster Kellyanne Conway, Fox News analyst Pat Caddell, Chairman of Citizens United David Bossie, Richard Viguerie; Jim Gilmore, former Republican Governor of Virginia and the founder of Growth PAC; Colin Hanna of Let Freedom Ring USA; Jenny Beth Martin, co-founder of the Tea Party Patriots, and Tom Fitton of Judicial Watch, among others.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

There will be LIVE reports from the field by a number of Breitbart News editors and contributors: Jonathan Strong in Iowa, Kerry Picket in Georgia, Caroline May in North Carolina, Matt Boyle in New Hampshire, Michael Patrick Leahy in Kentucky; Sarah Rumpf in Austin, Texas; Bob Price and Merril Hope in Dallas, Texas; Adelle Nazarian, Michelle Moons, and Joel Pollack in California; Mike Flynn in Virginia, Jason Hoyt and Andy Badalatto in Florida; and Kristin Tate in Massachusetts.

Ned Ryun of Voter Gravity will come on the show to give grassroots and ground game analysis using the latest big data technology. Jim Ellis, a Senior Consultant to the PRIsm consulting firm, will also come on the program to give the latest trending analysis.

Stephen Miller, senior aide to Sen. Jeff Sessions, will also appear the program.

Dr. Elizabeth Sheld will be coming on the show to give her analysis of the elections.

Breitbart Texas editor Brandon Darby will speak about how immigration issues will impact tonight’s elections.

Breitbart contributors Dr. Susan Berry and Austin Ruse will be talking about the elections from a social conservative perspective, addressing the issues that are most important for that constituency in this election.

Marjorie Dannenfelser, President of Women Speak Out PAC and the Susan B Anthony List will come on the program to speak about how the pro-life issue will affect the elections.

Dr. AWR Hawkins will talk about gun rights and the key political races impacting the right to bear arms.

Bannon and Marlow will talk about the “War on Women” meme that was so prominent in the 2012 presidential election, which has again been used by Democrats to attack conservatives. Breitbart News’ Kristen Tate, Katie McHugh, Michelle Moons, and Kelli Serio will talk about this issue.

The team of Breitbart TV–Jeff Poor, Pam Key, Ian Hanchett, and Daniel Nussbaum–will come on the program to talk about the media coverage of tonight’s election.

To discuss how issues pertaining to national defense will impact the elections, Breitbart National Security editors Dr. Sebastian Gorka and Frances Martel will come on the program to give their take.

Breitbart News has a LIVE political blog with up-to-the-minute updates on all of the most recent developments in tonight’s elections. Breitbart’s Tony Lee, John Nolte, Wynton Hall, Noah Dulis, Ezra Dulis, Dan Riehl, Warner Todd Huston, and Jarrett Stepman will be posting these updates throughout the night.