Wellness and the Bottom Line

The results of a five-year study find that wellness plans need to include employee incentives and disease management in order to produce real savings at an organizational level.

If you want a wellness program that slashes healthcare costs, it must include meaningful incentives and offer comprehensive services that include chronic disease management. But don't expect any savings for several years.

Those are the key results of a five-year observational study conducted by the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Health Plan. The study was conducted between 2007 and 2011, says Michael Parkinson, M.D., senior medical director at UPMC Health Plan, an integrated healthcare-delivery system headquartered in Pittsburgh.

What made it so unique was its length, cohort size and sophistication of methodology, which was "more profound than most health-management or wellness studies to date," says Parkinson.

The study focused on two groups: an intervention group composed of 13,627 UPMC workers who were continuously enrolled in MyHealth, UPMC's chronic disease-management and wellness program, and a comparison group consisting of 4,448 workers employed at a different healthcare organization who had UPMC Health Plan benefits, but not the MyHealth program.

Participants in MyHealth were divided into three risk levels -- high, medium and low -- based on health factors such as weight or blood pressure activity. Those who shifted from the highest risk to lowest risk group decreased their annual medical spending by $250 a month, or $3,000 a year, while those moving from the medium-risk to low-risk group saved about $20 a month, or $250 each year.

Parkinson adds that the study did not measure other critical factors such as productivity, employee engagement, retention or absenteeism. Nor did it calculate the total cost of program delivery and implementation.

The takeaway for HR, he says, is that in order to produce cost savings, wellness programs need to be designed as a comprehensive health management and support program and initially offer incentives that grab employees' attention.

"[Incentives] are not a silver bullet," he says. "They have to constantly evolve to reflect higher levels of engagement."

During the first year of the study, employees in the intervention group were offered a deductible credit of $200 a year (for individual coverage) or $400 (for family coverage). As the study progressed, so did the incentives.

In 2009, employees received points for completing wellness activities. Those with 100 or more points received either a deductible credit of $500 for individual coverage or $1,000 for family coverage. By 2011, both the incentive and requirements had grown. Those receiving at least 200 points received the maximum deductible credit of $1,000 a year for individual coverage or $2,000 a year for family coverage.

The incentives were contingent upon participants receiving an annual health assessment along with a biometric screening, and engaging in the Take a Healthy Step program that provides more than 140 health and wellness activities.

"Overall, 13.6 percent of members reduced risk levels, 76.4 percent maintained risk levels and 10.6 percent increased risk levels," the UPMC report says.

The comparison group did not fare as well regarding preventive care. Only the intervention group demonstrated a significant increase regarding annual ambulatory or preventive care visits, colorectal cancer screening and breast cancer screening. There was no key difference involving cervical cancer screening.

Likewise, there weren't major group differences regarding the use of chronic disease management services for diabetes, cardiovascular disease or asthma.

Although no explanation was readily available -- perhaps participants in both groups were doing a good job of managing their chronic diseases -- Parkinson adds that effective wellness programs need to offer services such as health coaching for chronic diseases.

And the more onsite services, the better, he says, adding that participation shot up when face-to-face coaching services became available for those in the intervention group.

"We [had] 10- to 20-fold more engagement when we took people off the phone and into clinics," he says, adding that UPMC Health Plan is moving toward outcomes-based incentives and offering more onsite services and hands-on engagement opportunities for people with chronic disease.

As HR professionals continue debating the value of disease-management programs, Barbara Gniewek, a principal in the global HR services practice at PwC in New York, believes wellness programs need to include them to make an impact on a company's culture or bottom line.

She says most employers believe wellness programs are less about ROI and more about employee well-being and they can also be used to carry out strategy regarding recruitment or retention, for example.

Newsletter Sign-Up: Benefits

HR Technology

Talent Management

HR Leadership

Inside HR Tech

HRENow

Special Offers

Email Address



Privacy Policy

Each year, PwC conducts it own survey of 1,000 employers, she says, adding that one consistent result is that employers are investing in wellness and disease-management programs even though they may not produce a ROI.

In most scenarios, ROI is nearly impossible to prove, she says.

"It's really hard to say how many people didn't have a heart attack because they did a good job of managing their high blood pressure," Gniewek says.

Equally difficult is determining the impact of employee incentives, which begs the question: Can wellness programs work without them?

While the Affordable Care Act encourages employers to use incentives to engage employees in their own healthcare, she says employers are now focusing on accountability, designing wellness programs that use incentives to push accountability. Gniewek says incentives initially get workers "hooked," can change their thinking and behaviors and make them accountable for their overall health.

Meanwhile, she says the UPMC Health Plan survey would be difficult for other employers to replicate, especially those in retail, because of high employee-turnover rates. After all, not every organization can continuously track nearly 14,000 employees over a five-year period.

However, healthcare-delivery organizations tend to have high utilization rates, because of employee access to services. Gniewek recalls how another integrated healthcare delivery system experienced challenges years ago with overutilization by employees.

She says management often told this joke: "Anytime people had an itchy eye, they would go to the eye lab and use fancy machinery to clean off their contact lens."

Still, she says the survey addresses real HR problems and suggests that a well-constructed wellness program can be effective if it includes incentives, disease management and is given enough time to work.

For senior executives demanding some kind of evidence of a program's utility, she suggests HR help them change focus from ROI to productivity.

"You [will] get better results."

Send questions or comments about this story to hreletters@lrp.com.