Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico (KRQE News 13)

ALBUQUERQUE (KRQE) – It’s a case study in deceptive business practices that one federal official calls, “A travesty. Outrageous and unreasonable.”

A seven month long News 13 investigation uncovers a cold-hearted health insurance scandal complete with reckless blunders, secret deals and bizarre billings. If you thought health insurance will always protect you from catastrophic medical costs, think again.

Just ask Brett and Sara Janos.

Brett is an immigration attorney. Sara just graduated from medical school. They became unwitting victims November 6th last year when Sara gave birth to triplets. A joyous event was overshadowed by heartbreak when the Janos triplets were born prematurely in critical condition.

From their first breaths, Wyatt, Dustin and Riley struggled to stay alive at Lovelace Women’s Hospital Neonatal Intensive Care Unit. Brett Janos recalls, “I was in another world. (It was) very hard actually seeing them there, pound and a half each and hooked up to a machine.”

Wyatt died within just a few days. Three weeks later, his brother Dustin passed away on Thanksgiving. “He was just critical. We ended up staying the whole Thanksgiving and that evening he kind of gave up,” Brett said.

Riley lived, but stayed in intensive care for an additional four months. Today he is home but Riley will likely face medical challenges the rest of his life. The triplet’s medical bills totaled $3,862,312.

But this is why we have health insurance.

You pay your monthly premium, the out of pocket and deductible, and then the insurance company picks up the rest. That’s the way it’s supposed to work, right? Brett and Sara Janos bought their policy from Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico (BCBSNM). The health insurance company explained in some detail all the things its policy would cover. However, there are exceptions Blue Cross Blue Shield does not talk about.

Brett and Sara discovered the reality of health insurance shortly after Dustin died. Just one month after the triplets were born, the couple started receiving incomprehensible invoices from health care organizations they’d never heard of. There were tens of thousands of dollars in billings. “As far as bills that are stacked on my desk, there’s still probably over $30,000 in bills. I don’t know what one to pay. Every time we are put in collections we’re given an amount that doesn’t match any of the bills,” Brett Janos said in June.

To understand where all those strange bills were coming from you have to understand Lovelace Hospital’s billing practices. For example, doctors at the Lovelace Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, NICU, treated the Janos triplets. However, even though those physicians work at the NICU, they don’t actually work for Lovelace. It’s part of a secret business deal orchestrated by Lovelace to use contract doctors to staff its NICU. Technically, the physician’s work for a Florida company called Sheridan Healthcare and it was Sheridan that billed Brett and Sara for tens of thousands of dollars in doctor’s fees.

Brett and Sara had never heard of Sheridan Healthcare and no one told them the doctors treating the triplets were not employed by Lovelace Hospital.

When Brett asked Blue Cross Blue Shield to explain the more than $20,000 in Sheridan billings, a claims adjuster told him, “You are responsible for everything.” BCBSNM said even though the Lovelace doctors work in New Mexico, their employer, Sheridan, is out of state. Because the doctor’s paychecks come from Florida, BCBSNM explained, the physician’s services are out-of-network. Out-of-network means Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico won’t pick up the tab. All the Sheridan bills were dumped on Brett and Sara Janos.

“After I found out that things were out of network and I was responsible for it, I couldn’t afford it. That’s one reason I stopped paying. If I’m responsible for $30,000, we don’t have that,” Brett told News 13. And when Brett and Sara didn’t pay, Sheridan turned the bills over to a collection agency.

Brett says it never occurred to him that the doctors who were trying to save the lives of his children might be out-of-network. “It doesn’t cross your mind, especially in an emergency situation. Our kids are rushed in there and they are trying to resuscitate them and trying to get them stable and we’re going to have a talk with the doctor and say who do you work for?”

The New Mexico Superintendent of Insurance launched an investigation. “The insured assumes that when they go to a hospital that Blue Cross sponsors that everything that goes on in that hospital is covered by Blue Cross. That was not the case in this case,” Superintendent of Insurance John Franchini said, adding “It’s wrong. It should not be happening. We should not allow that. We will try to stop it.”

To file an insurance complaint, go to the NM Office of the Superintendent of Insurance’s website

The tens of thousands of dollars in bills Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico refused to cover were devastating to the Janos family. “We’re trying to battle all this and still we know these bills are coming in. No one knows where they are coming from. We later find out we are responsible for them and we get harassing phone calls on top of that, even while we are in the NICU,” Brett Janos says.

And, it’s not just bills from Sheridan. When Riley needed delicate eye surgery at Presbyterian Hospital, BCBSNM stuck Brett and Sara with thousands of dollars in doctor’s bills. And when Riley needed hearing aids at UNMH, BCBSNM initially denied the coverage but later changed its mind and covered the bills.

Congresswoman Michelle Lujan Grisham reviewed the Janos case. She told News 13, “Patients have no way of knowing what’s really covered, what isn’t covered, who’s in network, who’s out of network and the fact that this family and many others have to use a spreadsheet to figure out what’s been billed (and) what they pay, is outrageous.”

A spokesperson for Lovelace Health System would not discuss its business relationship with the Florida based Sheridan Healthcare. Neither Lovelace CEO Ron Stern nor Lovelace Chief Financial Officer Stephen Forney would return repeated calls for comment. Sheridan Healthcare also did not respond to questions about its business relationship with Lovelace.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico Chief of Staff Janice Torres calls the Janos case, “incredibly complex.” She admits BCBSNM made mistakes and incorrectly processed claims. She said BCBSNM would fix the errors and pay all outstanding claims.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico CEO Kurt Shipley did not return our phone calls for comment. We caught up with Shipley recently at a public meeting. We asked him if he felt the Janos family was owed an apology. Shipley responded, “I don’t have a personal apology to say to anybody on camera. Period. I don’t have anything to say on camera because it’s a privacy issue.”

Kurt Shipley did tell News 13 he is not aware of any outstanding claims in the Janos case. However, that’s news to Brett and Sara who are still being hounded by Lovelace Health System, Sheridan Healthcare and collection agencies for unpaid medical billings Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico won’t cover.

According to New Mexico’s Superintendent of Insurance John Franchini, “It is a tremendous tragedy and I feel so sorry for this family. I am very upset about the fact there is no transparency, there is no openness or communication like it should have been with this (health insurance) policy.”

Congresswoman Lujan Grisham adds, “We are not holding the insurance companies accountable for providing coverage. They are supposed to cover these bills. That’s their risk, right? You could get sick, they have to pay. And if they are finding exceptions then something is wrong with the entire system of insurance coverage and that means we in Congress have to do something.”

When asked how all this will end, Brett Janos replied, “I don’t know Larry. I do not know.”

Billing Breakdown, What We Learned On June 4th, 2015, the Janos family received an adjusted itemized hospital billing from Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico for the care of Wyatt, Dustin and Riley Janos. This document was provided to the family several months after the New Mexico Superintendent of Insurance began an investigation. Many of the charges that Blue Cross Blue Shield originally listed as “out of network” were later revised as “in network.” The itemized medical billing came in PDF format and is 60 pages long. KRQE News 13 received a copy of this document and analyzed the data and this is what we discovered: According to this adjusted claim, there were 346 line item charges submitted into Blue Cross Blue Shield totaling $3,864,863.01.

As of June, 2015, Blue Cross Blue Shield indicates patient responsibility for payment on this claim is $21,619.18.

Of the items submitted to Blue Cross Blue Shield, 24 of those were duplicate charges – which were denied. The duplicate charges totaled $174,741.55.

There were 307 items billed to Blue Cross Blue Shield as “in network” which were approved totaling, $3,532,811.91 with a patient responsibility of $10,203.89 for the charges.

There were 11 items billed to Blue Cross Blue Shield as “out of network”, which were marked as approved totaling $22,789.00 with a patient responsibility of $10,819.32. Note: All of the providers listed for these 11 items are listed as being “In Network” for other similar charges on the same claim.

There were 2 items billed to Blue Cross Blue Shield as “in network” totaling $736.00, which were denied and deferred to the patient for payment. The reasons for the denials were listed as, “Services not covered for this type of provider”, and “Service not covered by contract for this place of treatment”, despite the fact that other approved claims were made on behalf of this same provider.

There were 2 items billed to Blue Cross Blue Shield listed as “late charges” which were denied. These totaled $133,876.55. There is no patient responsibility assigned for these items.

There was 1 line item marked as being both “In Network” and “Out of Network” for a single service. The item was submitted to Blue Cross Blue Shield was $644.00 with a patient responsibility of $596.47