Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee says Republicans could blow the 2014 elections if they continue to fight each other — and in a worse-case scenario, Nancy Pelosi could emerge as House speaker again."I don't think there's any way the Democrats can win, but there's a way that Republicans can lose . . . if we spend all the money and all the energy fighting each other rather than trying to show the contrast between Republicans and Democrats," Huckabee told "The Steve Malzberg Show" on Newsmax TV."My greatest concern is that if Republicans become the party of a circular firing squad in the primaries, if they spend a lot of time shredding other Republicans, [they'll make] those Republicans [who] end up getting the nomination a soft target for the Democrats."Then Harry Reid will continue to be the majority leader, and it's even possible that Nancy Pelosi could be speaker again. God help us all if that happens," he said Monday.Huckabee, host of "Huckabee" on the Fox News Channel, said he doesn't think the "real debate" in the Republican Party is between tea party and moderates, as many do."The fact is, if you look across the spectrum, there really is an incredible deal of ideological difference between anyone in the Republican Party in the House," he said."You have people who have tactical differences, but there's nobody in the House that supports Obamacare. Not one person."He also does not believe women think there is a Republican "war on women," as Democrats charge."Every woman I know who has an IQ above broccoli tells you that it's an insult to them that the Democrats play them to be incapable of anything other than helpless and hopeless victims of their own gender, who are just sitting around wringing their hands hoping that Uncle Sugar will provide for them free birth control and a free abortion because it's the only thing in life that they really care about," Huckabee said."That is incredibly demeaning. It's extraordinarily outrageous to assume that women who are capable of running everything from major corporations in this country to running a household that they're somehow incapable of controlling their own libido and their reproductive system to the point that if the government doesn't step in with $9 a month worth of birth control, they're going to completely fall apart."The whole concept of 'war on women' is the most ridiculous thing, and why Republicans haven't taken that on is beyond me."Huckabee says he is giving "very serious thought" to running for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination."But it's not something that I'm ready to make a decision about right now . . . I've got to focus on helping some people get elected in this 2014 cycle," he said."It's a deep plunge, and one of the things that I've told a lot of my friends who are encouraging me to do it, I say, well, look, if I jump into the pool, there better be some water in it this time because it's a hard fall into the concrete."By "water" he said he means financial backing."You've got to have the resources to run, and the last time I went out there, in 2008, I had about a dime to the dollar of my opponent," Huckabee said."When you're getting hammered by negative TV ads, you better have some money in the bank so that you can at least respond to it, otherwise, you're just going to be standing there as if your hands are tied behind your back while somebody is pummeling you."

See the “Steve Malzberg Show” on Newsmax TV each weekday live by clicking here now.