Who would have predicted that after six years of President Barack Obama’s hope and change, Millennials who voted him into office would be so miserable? Welcome to Generation Obama:

1. Brother, can you spare a job?

In July, the unemployment rate for 16- to 24-year-old increased from 13.3 percent to 13.6 percent; for 20- to 24-year-olds it jumped from 10.5 to 11.3 percent; and the unemployment rate for 25- to 34-year-olds rose from 6.5 to 6.6 percent, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Grads are so desperate for jobs that they are panhandling for them on street corners. Seriously.

2. What the … ?

Illegal immigrants get to chill out in suites with flat-screen TVs while 21.6 million Millennials still live at home with their parents.

3. Obamacare Nightmare

Millennials have to pay astronomical rates for full-coverage health insurance they don’t need because Obamacare took away their choice to buy cheap, catastrophic-only coverage. Meanwhile, universities hike tuition and slash jobs to pay for the massive federal government mandate. One college student even had to go on food stamps in part because of Obamacare. Not to mention, ad campaigns touting the Nanny State program portrayed women as giddy sluts.

4. Getting Screwed 101

According to Congressional Budget Office findings, the government pulled in more than $50 billion in profit from federally subsidized student loan repayments last year. Meanwhile, the government keeps doling out more loans, easy-to-borrow funds that mean students are able to pay more, so universities keep charging more. Runaway tuition costs have outpaced national inflation rates. It’s a Ponzi scheme, and it’s only gotten worse under Obama.

5. Minimum Wage B.S.

Obama goes around pushing a minimum wage hike as some sort of panacea for young people struggling to make it, when in fact they’re the ones hurt the most by it. Read this and this.

6. Welcome to Adulthood – That Will Be $100 Trillion Dollars

A UC San Diego professor has pegged the national debt at nearly $90 trillion dollars, when the speculative “off-balance-sheet commitments” from Medicare, Social Security, student loan guarantees and other future federal government promises is factored in. Guess who will get stuck with that bill?

7. New College Grads’ Wages Are Growing Slower Than Everyone Else’s

Let’s just add salt to the wound, shall we? San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank research found that little nugget to throw on top the heaping pile of Millennial gloom.

8. They Live in a World Without Privacy

Back in the day, you could live off the grid. Today, by collecting and storing every text, every email, every web search, the government knows everything about you – from whether you like jam on your toast to whether you’re cheating on your spouse. Yes, the Big Brother Spy State has not in any way, shape or form shrunken under Obama, despite his campaign pledges to rein it in.

9. Many Millennials Remain Misguided

Perhaps the worst item on this list is that far too many young people blame the wrong thing for their depressing state. They’re losing hope in America, not President Obama. Thankfully, a good amount of Millennials have stopped drinking that Kool-Aid.

CLICK HERE TO READ PREVIOUS EDITORS’ CORNER BLOG ENTRIES.

Like The College Fix on Facebook / Follow us on Twitter