CLEVELAND, Ohio - University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center will get a $4.6 million grant made possible by the Affordable Care Act to improve care for adult patients with the hardest-to-treat cancers or whose age, physical condition or home situation add to the difficulty of treating them.

The grant, announced Wednesday by Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell, will fund the testing of an interventional model that includes four areas of care for cancer patients with late-stage disease (stages 3 and 4), those who also have several other serious health conditions or risk factors that would complicate recovery and increase health costs, or those who demonstrate needing acute medical care, such as admission to the intensive care unit.

"We realized that we needed additional staffing," said UH Seidman President Dr. Nathan Levitan told The Plain Dealer. In the process of applying for the federal funds, he said, "We decided that we would focus on patients who are most in need."

Twelve positions, including four patient navigators and other positions such as pharmacy, social work and palliative care providers, will be added as part of the interventional model, which will be implemented in the fall.

Around 1,800 patients, including 300 underserved patients, would receive four types of support:

As early as possible following a diagnosis, each patient will get a palliative care consultation that includes standardized psychosocial and symptom-based quality of life assessment. The results of that consultation would be used to create a formal plan - essentially, a written set of instructions - that outlines additional support for the patient during the course of treatment, to help patients find the right balance between treatment intervention and quality of life.

Any gaps in the patient's personal support system will be identified to assess additional assistance for the patient's family and/or caregivers.

Patients will undergo formal assessments (pain, anxiety, stress, etc.) that will help determine additional treatment needs.

Patients will be assigned a navigator to follow them throughout treatment and facilitate communication with the medical care team. The addition of navigator positions at UH Seidman will resemble what has previously been put in place for patients at UH with sickle cell disease.

"We expect that we'll provide the best quality and the best experience to the patient and family, and that we'll also manage the cost of care more efficiently," Levitan said.

Some of the potential ways of keeping costs down, he said, include fewer unnecessary hospital admissions and treatment in the emergency department; and promoting discussion among the medical team, patient and caregiver about the benefits of hospice over medically questionable major interventions in a patient's last days.

The UH Seidman grant is among $360 million given to 39 projects around the country – and the only one in Ohio - during the second round of the Health Care Innovation Awards given this year. The first group of the second-round recipients was announced in May. The money is going toward projects designed to deliver better health care and lower costs.

"The Health Care Innovation Awards support our ongoing work to drive down health care costs while providing high quality care to CMS [Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services] beneficiaries," Burwell said in a statement. "These awards advance innovative solutions in delivering and improving care from all across our nation."

The awards are targeting four areas: rapidly reducing costs for patients in outpatient hospital and post-acute settings; improving care for populations with specialized needs; testing improved financial and clinical models for specific types of providers; and linking clinical care delivery to preventive and population health.

In 2012 UH Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital was one of 107 organizations to receive round-one funding. UH Rainbow received a three-year, $12.7 million grant to create the Rainbow Care Connection, the first pediatric Accountable Care Organization in Northeast Ohio. It works to coordinate care among hospitals, doctors and the state Medicaid program to improve the quality of healthcare while reducing costs. The cost savings attributed to the program, which targets more than 68,000 children throughout Northeast Ohio who have Medicaid insurance or other insurance, is estimated at $13.5 million over three years.

"We believe that the very best cancer care requires three special things aside from the actual treatment," Levitan said. "The patient understands his or her condition and treatment plan; the patient is engaged as a partner in decision making; and that the doctors and nurses understand the personal side of the patient, not just the medical side.

"That's our guiding concept here."

CWRU study: Caregivers benefit from cancer support team

The benefit of putting in place a cancer support team early on after a patient's diagnosis was highlighted the findings of a study conducted by nurse researchers at Case Western Reserve University. The study, funded by the National Institute of Nursing Research and the National Cancer Institute, appears in in the July issue of the journal Oncology Nursing Forum.

The study analyzed data from 106 caregivers who took part in a larger study involving 610 advanced cancer patients at UH Seidman and their caregivers between 2008 and 2012. The 106 caregivers, whose loved ones died from lung, gastrointestinal or gynecological cancers, were divided into two groups: one who had received the cancer support team, comprised of an advance practice nurse, social worker, a spiritual advisor and the patient's oncologist, and one without the additional support. The caregivers were studied over 15 months.

While neither group showed changes in mood and feelings of social support, the researchers found that caregivers who received additional help from the cancer support team showed a higher satisfaction with end-of-life care in five areas: pain relief, managing pain, speed in treating symptoms, information about side effects and coordination of care.

A cancer support team that provides support services early, targeting psychosocial needs of patients and families, should be incorporated routinely with treatment, the researchers said.

"We owe it to the patients and caregivers to start earlier and think the choices through," said Sara Douglas, associate professor at CWRU's Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing and lead author of the study.