Bob Woodward took to "Fox News Sunday" to continue his streak of comparing things to Watergate. This time, the subject was Obamacare.

The disastrous rollout of the health care law has prompted a series of dubious comparisons to things like Hurricane Katrina and the Iraq War, both of which differ from Obamacare primarily in their very high body count. But what about Watergate? Woodward—an acknowledged expert on Watergate—has made a pundit cottage industry of deciding whether the political scandals of the moment are the same thing as that most scandalous of scandals.

For the record: Benghazi isn't Watergate, but it sort of is, and the Obama administration's surveillance of the press—which a lot of people thought was pretty Nixonian!—also isn't Watergate.

On Sunday, host Chris Wallace asked Woodward if he'd "ever seen" anything like Obamacare.

"A president with his three years to roll out his signature accomplishment, literally with his name on it, and it gets so botched," he said.

Woodward had his comparison at the ready again. The verdict?

"I think you have to look at motive. And the president's motive here, even though there are deep problems with the implementation, he wants to do something good for 30 million people and get them health insurance. So, this isn't Watergate. This isn't Clinton and Monica Lewinsky."

So: Obamacare gets an official "Not Watergate!" from Bob Woodward. Host Chris Wallace helpfully interjected to point out that he hadn't even been asking whether Obamacare was like Watergate.

"I'm not saying it's a scandal," he said.

Also on HuffPost: The Second-Term Curse The Second-Term Curse

1 of 9 President Barack Obama Obama's second-term agenda had to take a backseat after several scandals caught the media's attention in May. Republicans' continued scrutiny of the Obama administration's handling of the attacks in Benghazi was a significant distraction . Within the same week that the Internal Revenue Service revealed it had targeted tea party groups requesting tax-exempt status, news broke that the DOJ seized months of phone records of journalists for the Associated Press. Share this slide:

Getty Images