Updates report that 7 cars derailed, reports indicated 10.

SCOTLAND, SD - The Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad says seven ethanol tanker cars derailed and at least one caught fire Saturday morning in southeastern South Dakota.



BNSF spokesman Andy Williams says the 98-car train carrying ethanol derailed at about 6:15 a.m. between the towns of Scotland and Lesterville. He says there were no injuries and no nearby structures were threatened by the fire.



Williams says three tankers were compromised and lost their contents but crews haven't yet determined how many actually caught fire.



Bon Homme County Emergency Management spokesman Lee Rettig says firefighters from several departments responded and the fire was put out about 2:30 p.m. Saturday. BNSF hazardous materials teams were also responding to assess damage.



Rettig says the derailed cars were near the front of the train.

Scotland Fire Chief Mike Mehrer said additional crews were called to the scene.

"We came out here with probably 5,000 gallons of which wouldn't have lasted very long," Mehrer said. "The biggest reason we might have sprayed any water is to cool the tanks."

Firefighters were able to put most of the fire out. Now, their focus is on cleaning up. They're now planning to fill the cars with foam to clean out any ethanol material remaining. Crews also plan to repair the wooden bridge that was damaged.

The exact cause of the derailment and fire still remains under investigation.

BNSF train derailment southeast of Scotland earlier this morning. Fire departments from Scotland, Tyndall, Tabor, Lesterville and Menno are all currently assisting BNSF to clean up. Posted by Bon Homme County Sheriff's Office on Saturday, September 19, 2015

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction:

Updates report that 7 cars derailed, reports indicated 10.

The Associated Press contributed to this report. © 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.