District 45 Democratic candidates (top row) Chauncey Barnwell, William Bowman and Sheree Darien and Kent Fletcher. (Bottom row) Rep. Kenneth Hodges, Margie Bright Matthews, John Washington and Korey Williams. Not pictured: Richmond Truesdale and Robert Horton.

COLUMBIA — Senate hopefuls running in a special election for District 45 are expected to participate in a debate this evening.

The South Carolina Democratic Party will host the debate at the International Longshoreman Association, 1142 Morrison Drive in Charleston from 7 p.m. to 8 p.m. It’s expected to focus on health care, transportation, and education-related issues, according to organizers.

Alberto Fernandez, who is running as a Republican, is not partaking in the debate.

The candidates are running to fill the state senate seat left open when Sen. Clementa Pinckney was killed in a mass shooting on June 17, along with eight of his parishioners. The primaries will be on Sept. 1, with runoffs, if necessary, on Sept. 15. The special election will be Oct. 20. The candidate who wins the special election will still have to run again in November 2016.

Election related:

Two former SC governors endorse Clinton (The Greenville News)

Trump’s bid is getting scarier for Mexicans (The Washington Post)

G.O.P. Again Risks Losing Latinos (The New York Times)

Fiorina’s play for varsity debate (Politico)

Rubio, leading from behind (Politico)

Why No One Likes The 2016 Presidential Field (NPR)

Jindal Accuses Walker of Championing ‘Obamacare Lite’ (Bloomberg)

Walker offers health plan with tax credits (The Associated Press)

Election filing under way in Mount Pleasant (The Post and Courier)

In other news:

Left Behind: The unintended consequences of school choice (The Post and Courier)

Haley asks for review of state’s abortion clinics (The Post and Courier)

Boone Hall cancels 25th Battle of Secessionville re-enactment because of Emanuel AME shooting (The Post and Courier)

Deadly highways: Fatality rates spike on SC roads (The Greenville News)

Seneca’s elected officials silent on Zachary Hammond shooting (Independent Mail)

Reporter’s note: This story has been updated to reflect that Alberto Fernandez is the only Republican candidate in the race.