NEW YORK, Feb. 1, 2016 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- A new FEC report shows that Clyde Williams, one of eight candidates seeking to succeed Congressman Charles Rangel, has raised $251,829 in his end of year filing, and more in the fourth quarter than any other candidate. Mr. Williams has $189,309 on hand, making him the second most well funded candidate behind Assemblyman Keith Wright. A distant third is former Assemblyman Adam Clayton Powell IV with roughly $77,000. Senator Adriano Espaillat, initially considered a serious contender, failed to timely submit his fundraising numbers. His last report on file shows the Senator with more than $90,000 debt, a hangover from his last losing campaign against Rangel.

The Benenson Strategy group, responsible for President Obama's polling in 2008 and 2012 as well as Hillary Clinton's current internal polling, has completed an internal poll analyzing the dynamics of the race to succeed Mr. Rangel who has held the seat for more than four decades. The data showed that the race is wide open. No candidate secured more than 20 percent of support from likely voters. This is mostly owed to the fact that no candidate is known widely throughout the increasingly diverse district, including Mr. Espaillat who is making his third run at the seat. The district's electorate is now 40 percent Latino, 28 percent African American, and 24 percent white, suggesting that the candidates will need to cobble together a diverse coalition in order to win.

Mr. Williams' formidable fundraising underscores his strength as a candidate. Williams has also already received a number of endorsements from national political figures. These endorsements include support from Former Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle and Former New Mexico Governor Bill Richardson. Richardson, who chaired the Congressional Hispanic Caucus said, "I am proud to endorse Clyde Williams to succeed my friend and former colleague Charlie Rangel. NY-13 is a diverse and dynamic community, and Clyde is the best candidate to build bridges, bring the community together, and serve the interests of all its constituents."

Former Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius, the chief administration official responsible for implementing the Affordable Care Act, will also be traveling to the district to support Mr. Williams' candidacy. She will be participating in a panel discussion at Casabe House, a low-income senior center in East Harlem, on February 17th. Sebelius, Williams and Dr. Prabhjot Singh of Mt. Sinai's Arnhold Global Health Institute will discuss how elderly residents can better understand and use the Affordable Care Act, and the campaign has promised another major announcement. Other high-ranking Obama officials are also scheduled to host events for Mr. Williams, whose wife Mona Sutphen also served in the Obama Administration as White House Deputy Chief of Staff.

For additional inquires, please contact Ty Steinhauser at ty@clyde2016.com

Contact:

Ty Steinhauser

Clyde Williams for Congress 2016

ty@clyde2016.com

Clyde2016.com

SOURCE Clyde Williams 2016