With so few publicly traded companies to pick from or pick on, South Carolina has never been a hot-bed of hostile takeovers.

One of the last notable boardroom kerfuffles heated up more than a decade ago, when a well-known Lowcountry investor suddenly pounced on a well-run but unsuspecting Upstate manufacturer. It was a lively but relatively brief skirmish that ended in a compromise, a deal that kept them joined at the hip for more than 12 years.

But this shotgun marriage is now officially dissolved. A recent $4.6 million stock sale closed out what could be The InterTech Group Inc.’s longest disclosed investment to date in a public company.

It turned out to be a lucrative deal to boot for the North Charleston-based conglomerate, thanks to the power of outsized dividends.

No precise reason was given for the sale of the shares back to Span-America Medical Systems, which makes hospital mattress systems and other “pressure management” foam products designed to ease burns and other painful skin ailments.

“We believe the purchase of approximately 9 percent of Span-America’s stock highlights our board’s confidence in our company’s future,” CEO Jim Ferguson said in a statement.

Ferguson didn’t shed much more light on the all-cash repurchase Tuesday, when he briefly discussed it during a quarterly conference call with investors.

“We felt it was a good opportunity for us to buy back a big block of shares and ... feel good about where that’s headed,” he said.

If anyone knows about InterTech’s long involvement in Span-America, it’s Ferguson. He was at the helm in January 2003 when Charleston industrialist Jerry Zucker began buying tens of thousands of shares in the thinly traded company based on an article one of his executives read abou the business in The Post and Courier. The InterTech founder and billionaire spent about $2 million of personal funds to acquire a nearly 10 percent stake, making him the single-largest shareholder in Span-America.

Zucker then launched a $21.1 million takeover bid for the rest of the stock, saying he was impressed by the business and its management.

Span-America immediately pushed back. Among other measures, its board adopted a “poison pill” that would jack up the stock price if an unwanted suitor came knocking.

Zucker, a brilliant scientist and hard-as-nails negotiator, called in his lawyers and sued, pushing his offer further into hostile territory.

After a few months of back-and-forth legal bluster, the two sides settled the dispute in late 2003. InterTech agreed to drop its takeover bid in exchange for a seat on the board, among other conditions.

Zucker would succumb to brain cancer less than five years later at age 58, leaving the shares in a trust.

Span-America, meanwhile, plugged along quietly. But it would prove exceptional in at least one area since InterTech took its seat at the boardroom table: returning profits to investors.

The directors of Span-America have approved five special cash dividends totaling $8.40 since 2004, including a whopping $5 per-share bonus in 2007. Those were on top of the regular quarterly payouts, which have fluctuated over the past decade between 3½ cents and its current rate of 16 cents.

Based on filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, InterTech cashed about $3 million in dividend checks from Span-America. That would bring the value of its original $2 million upfront investment to roughly $7.6 million, for a gain of about 280 percent before taxes.

InterTech chief strategy officer Robert Johnston was the company’s board representative at Span-America since the 2003 settlement. He stepped down as a director immediately after the stock buyback.

Johnston said he was limited in what he could say about the transaction, citing a confidentiality agreement and his previous role as an insider. He called Span-America “a good investment” for InterTech.

“There was an opportunity to sell the stock back to the company and exit,” Johnston said. “We were pleased to do so.”

Contact John McDermott at (843) 937-5572.