Changing preferences is hard work. Preferences for certain devices develop early in a physician's career, often in medical school where they become familiar with the products through training. Manufacturers of high-cost devices and implants, typically considered "physician preference items" or PPIs - invest significant time and money in developing personal relationships with physicians to make them feel comfortable and confident with their products.

It's because of this familiarity with specific manufacturers and their products that physicians may be unwilling to change their preferences.

However, when new products with similar (or better) clinical outcomes and lower costs are introduced to the market, it's difficult to get them in front of physicians who prefer the products they've always used. This is an issue our health systems have been wrestling with for years - trying to collect credible comparative effectiveness data that demonstrates the value of new or different products to physicians.

In Premier's fall 2013 Economic Outlook, we surveyed healthcare executives from our member hospitals and health systems. We found that 19% of healthcare executives and clinicians believe that physicians would "definitely" try a non-branded physician preference item.

No data = no good

In the recent past, there hasn't been much data (outside of supplier sponsored studies) on the efficacy of PPIs, their costs, or how they would perform in the long-run.

Here are 2 examples you may be familiar with:

1. Gender knees

Marketed toward women because their knees are typically smaller than men's, these implants were implied to be better suited for women and in turn, fetched a premium price for a specialized product. But most people in the industry knew that there wasn't a big difference between gender knees and smaller sizes of existing knee implants. These knees were just marketed differently.

Moreover, studies suggested that over time these knee implants didn't have better wear rates or better clinical outcomes than others. So not only were they not necessary, they were producing poorer outcomes at a higher price for both health systems and patients.

2. Large diameter hard-bearing surface hips

These implants have large diameter heads that were made out of specific types of metal or ceramics. They have more surface area, so they were thought to wear better over time and hence reduce failure rate.

Based on general physics, all that logic made sense. There was even a new surgical technique introduced around the same time that was minimally invasive. This new approach supposedly helped the physicians complete the procedure more quickly and the patient had a much shorter recovery period.

But industry analysis came to find that the metal-on-metal hip implants released metal ions potentially causing severe reactions to patients with some metal allergies. The ceramic hip implant versions would audibly squeak and some became brittle and actually broke.

Because there was not enough credible data available prior to product adoption, physicians were unable to anticipate these effects would happen in the long run.

Collecting data = getting closer

Oscar Wilde once wrote

Today, we're collecting more data in healthcare than we know what to do with.

When properly used, the data can lead to sound and well-informed decisions. Credible joint implant registries now exist that allow for the independent analysis of implant performance, efficacy and longevity. When these data repositories are combined with cost transparency, we may just have arrived at the confluence of increased quality patient care combined with appropriate cost.

Unfortunately, a recent study from Health Affairs found that most physicians don't know the cost of the devices they implant. In the study, physicians were asked to estimate the cost of 13 commonly-used medical devices. On average, residents estimated the right prices 17% of the time and attending physicians did so 21% of the time.

This is how physician preference items can drive up the cost of healthcare. In cases where there is no clinical benefit over a similar product, those additional costs are unnecessary and wasteful.

Becoming data informed = key

The solution is clearly focused on the ability to share the right data to establish best practices and standards. We need to look at not only supply costs but also quality, productivity and utilization data that can be compared with national benchmarks.