Buy Photo A sunset, pre-game, Minnesota United FC at Indy Eleven, Carroll Stadium, IUPUI, Saturday, October 11, 2014. (Photo: Robert Scheer / The Star)Buy Photo

No nest-like, $82 million stadium. No lights shining on humongous Indy Eleven logos. No canopy stretching over cushy seats with a striking view of the Downtown Indianapolis skyline.

Just $20 million to renovate IUPUI's frumpy, old Carroll Stadium.

The idea isn't sexy. The soccer fans crammed into metal bleacher seats for the team's home opener on Saturday will surely tell you that.

But the Senate was right to pass a bill this week that would scrap plans approved by the House to build a new stadium on a yet-to-be-named plot of land Downtown.

Instead, the Senate bill would let Indiana University issue $20 million in bonds to upgrade its 33-year-old stadium, where the team currently plays. Tax money captured both at Carroll Stadium and at a Downtown hotel being developed by the team's owner, Ersal Ozdemir, would be used to pay the debt. And the Eleven would have to sign a 20-year lease.

Now the bill heads to conference committee.

The Senate version needs to prevail and end up on the governor's desk. And if it does, Indianapolis needs to lend its support to the project.

Why? Because the bill — and I have to give Republican lawmakers credit here — is smart. It's smart for taxpayers worried about being left on the hook if the team's next few seasons don't go as planned, and, more importantly, it's smart for Indianapolis.

It is as Sen. Brandt Hershman, R-Buck Creek, said a few weeks ago. Sinking money into Carroll Stadium "is an investment in a state university property that I think makes sense for sports fans of Indiana, the Indianapolis landscape and taxpayers."

Without the influx of funds, IUPUI officials said they would probably tear down the grandstand, and leave the track and field section. With the funds, residents, tourists and students will get an amazing resource that, even in its slightly upgraded state thanks to the Eleven, has already brought a new level of energy to an often forgotten corner of Downtown.

Because let's face it. IUPUI is often forgotten.

It can be a weirdly empty and quiet place when classes aren't in session. And even when they are, residents and tourists find surprisingly few reasons to venture that direction. To be so close to Downtown — indeed, part of Downtown — the campus has always felt strangely disconnected from it.

Part of the problem is West Street. The multiple lanes of speeding traffic and massive median make for an awful barrier that city planners have long tried and failed to circumvent. The often-discussed pedestrian bridge across it remains a non-starter.

The one-way streets of Michigan and New York haven't helped either. The good thing is both streets soon will become two-way streets lined with wider sidewalks and bike lanes in hopes of improving Downtown's connection to IUPUI and to the struggling neighborhoods just over the White River.

Neighborhoods like Haughville and Stringtown, where the signs of poverty and lack of investment are everywhere. Where violence is an all too common occurrence. But also where the signs of progress are peeking through with new housing complexes and small businesses.

This is how a bigger, flashier Carroll Stadium, sitting right there on New York Street, can really make a difference in Indianapolis.

It could bring new life and energy to IUPUI. Anyone who has ever been to an Indy Eleven match knows the squad brings in fans and excitement like no other team in Indianapolis.

It could connect the campus to Downtown by providing a reason for residents and tourists to hang out there more times of the year.

And, most importantly, a stadium could connect the vibrancy of Downtown to the neighborhoods that need it most. Indianapolis has made great strides in doing that for neighborhoods to the north, south and east of Downtown. It's about time we do the same for the Near Westside.

Upgrading Carroll Stadium is a no-brainer. Even the Eleven's president, Peter Wilt, seems to have come around, saying Thursday that he was "thrilled" that a plan to "secure a proper stadium" was on the table.

Let's hope our lawmakers see it that way.

Contact Star columnist Erika D. Smith at (317) 444-6424, erika.smith@indystar.com, on Twitter: at @erika_d_smith or at www.facebook.com/ErikaDSmith.Journalist.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1FJZFG2