Nov 17, 2015 4:01 PM Nov 17, 2015 4:01 PM

School districts all over the country are preparing for the roll-out of a new provision of the federal Affordable Care Act at the start of the new year.



Some local school officials say it will put their districts under financial pressure, as they may now have to offer affordable health insurance to many more employees than before.



Under the ACA, employers with more than 50 workers must offer health insurance that is considered affordable and provides minimum coverage to at least 95 percent of their employees who work at least 30 hours a week. Employees are not supposed to pay more than 9.5 percent of their household income toward their health insurance, which now must cover at least 60 percent of all of the employees’ actual health care expenses.



If a school district chooses not to offer affordable insurance, it could be fined upward of $3,000 for each employee.



Many East End school officials will know for sure which employees need health insurance by the end of this month, when a “look-back measurement period” will end.



The impact might not be exactly as expected. According to the Sag Harbor School District’s business administrator, Jennifer Buscemi, it may be more affordable for the district just to absorb the penalty. “Sag Harbor would consider any procedure that would be within the guidelines and law and save money,” Ms. Buscemi explained. “It is cheaper for the penalty for certain cases,” she noted, adding that employees would potentially end up paying more than 9.5 percent of their income for the insurance if the district finds it cheaper to offer insurance that is not considered affordable.



Employees who currently do not have district-provided health insurance but who may work more than 30 hours a week include the school’s lunch monitors, security guards, food service workers and possibly substitute teachers. Their eligibility for coverage will depend on the “look-back measurement” period, when the district looks at how many hours each employee has been working and which started December 2014 and will end November 30.



“This has been an enormous strain, this mandate, on school districts nationwide,” Ms. Buscemi said. “We are hoping that going forward we receive some more concrete guidelines—there is still a lot of information out there that is not clear, so we are hoping that going forward the mandate requirements are eased.”



Currently, Ms. Buscemi said, the school pays 50 percent of the coverage for individuals and an additional 35 percent toward the cost of dependent coverage. Dependent coverage cost is calculated by calculating the difference between the family premium and the individual premium and 35 percent of that number. For example, if an individual policy has a premium of $9,000 per year, the district would pay $4,500 toward that, whereas if a family plan costs $20,000, it would pay $4,500 toward the individual plan plus 35 percent of the $11,000 difference between the two plans.



Ms. Buscemi said the district pays for about 42 percent of the family plan.



For the 2015 calendar year, the family rate is $21,706 and the individual rate is $9,660, Ms. Buscemi said, adding that the 2016 calendar year rates have not yet been released because the school is still in the process of determining which employees have to be offered coverage in 2016.



“There is no way to know right now how much extra it will cost the district,” Ms. Buscemi said of the Affordable Care Act. Currently, the district pays just under $4 million for health benefits for its employees.



As for the Montauk School, Superintendent J. Philip Perna does not expect the Affordable Care Act to have such a significant effect, as all of the employees there are considered full-time workers and thus get health insurance. He added that the district plans to hire more substitute teachers to ensure they do not work more than the 30 hours weekly, thus making them ineligible for employer-sponsored insurance. “That’s horrible, isn’t it?” Mr. Perna said on Monday.



Currently, employees on both individual and family plans at the Montauk School pay only about 10 percent of the cost of the plan. This year, an individual plan costs $11,900, while a family plan costs $26,940. Because the district’s employees do not pay more than 9.5 percent of their income toward their health insurance plans, that aspect of the ACA rules will not be a problem, he said. Mr. Perna nevertheless said the district is expecting the budget for health benefits to increase simply because the cost of health care in general is rising.



At the East Hampton School District, Isabel Madison, the business administrator, said that the effect of the ACA will not really be known until the measurement period is over at the end of the month. Mostly, school substitutes and coaches will be affected, because if they are found to work more than 30 hours, the school will have to offer them insurance.



Ms. Madison noted that some employees in East Hampton who work less than 20 hours a week, like the bus drivers, are already provided insurance as a term of their contracts. Since part-time coaches and substitute teachers do not have contracts, “those are the ones that we are looking at very closely,” she said.



In terms of the 9.5-percent limit, Ms. Madison said that it could be cheaper for the district to absorb a penalty fee. Currently, through NYSHIP, employees pay just 10 percent of the cost of an individual plan, while for a family plan they pay 13 percent. She did not have the exact costs of each plan immediately available, but said that the school pays about $6 million annually for health benefits for its employees.



“It is something we have to go through,” Ms. Madison said of the ACA. “It is another mandate from the government and it is what we have to do; it is an additional administrative cost that we didn’t have before.”



West of the canal, in the Westhampton Beach School District, Superintendent Mike Radday said he does not expect the district to pay penalties, as it will offer insurance that complies with the ACA. Mr. Radday added that the school district is considering other options for medical insurance, so “we have not made any final determination at this point.”



As in Montauk School District, the premium for individual coverage is $11,904 while for family coverage it is $26,940.



“Employees pay between 15 percent and 25 percent of the premium depending on their collective bargaining agreement or contract,” Mr. Radday said.



“The complexity of the Affordable Care Act and frequent changes to the law have become a burden on school districts,” he said, adding that health insurance costs have consistently risen over the past few years. Currently, the Westhampton Beach School District spends almost $6 million a year on health insurance for employees and retirees. “New monitoring and reporting requirements under the Affordable Care Act will certainly strain the limited administrative and clerical resources available in local school districts,” Mr. Radday said.