New efforts to address the shortage of medical providers in Humboldt County go beyond traditional recruitment methods.

Officials are reaching out to sources outside the area to advise them on whether Humboldt County is well-suited for a residency program, training doctors must complete before they become licensed to practice on their own.

And on Tuesday, the county Board of Supervisors will learn more about a UC Davis program where students becoming nurse practitioners and physician assistants learn together to practice in collaboration with health care professionals in a variety of clinical settings.

Doctors who complete their training in Humboldt County would be more likely to remain in the region to close the gap in the physician-to-patient ratio, which by one measure is 1,390-to-1.

That ratio confirms what Humboldt County residents already know: It’s hard to find a primary care practitioner. As more people get insurance because of the Affordable Care Act, the medical community gets stretched thinner, especially when a doctor leaves the area or retires.

Dr. Hal Grotke, a family doctor and owner of Redwood Family Practice in Eureka, addressed the doctor shortage in an op-ed piece in The Times-Standard last month. Grotke was trying to marshal community support for the creation of a family medicine residency program in Humboldt County.

“Most doctors practice their entire careers near where they train,” Grotke said in an interview. “Every doctor currently in Humboldt County is an example of those who don’t do that. We are the rare exceptions.”

Dr. Kiki Nocella, CEO of Believe Health, is a consultant whom officials in the Open Door clinic system have retained to investigate the feasibility of creating such a program in Humboldt County. She will be meeting later this month with doctors and administrators at Open Door, other clinics, area hospitals and Eureka City Councilwoman Natalie Arroyo, who is interested in the city having a role in the creation of a residency program.

A residency program requires years of planning, analysis and effort just to get the stage where a proposal can be submitted to the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. The officials in Humboldt County studying the issue are in the infancy stages of the effort.

“Residency programs are a very long-term strategy that communities can use to increase doctors,” said Connie Stewart, executive director of the California Center of Rural Policy at Humboldt State University. “However, it’s never too soon to start working on such a program.”

Advertisement

Many areas of the country have a shortage of doctors, especially in primary care. Most doctors (68 percent) who attend medical school and complete their residencies in a single state tend to stay to practice medicine, according to the Association of American Medical Colleges.

The closest residency programs to Humboldt County are in Redding and Santa Rosa, and a family practice residency program is in the planning stages in Ukiah.

Every year, county health rankings are released by the University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute with support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to raise awareness about regional factors that influence health. One of the measures is the ratio of population to primary care physicians.

Humboldt County’s ratio of 1,390-to-1 is worse than the state average of 1,294-to-1 and the top U.S. performers in the health rankings at 1,045-to-1. Other similarly sized counties in California were Napa (1,015:1), Nevada (1,346:1), Sutter (1,131:1) and Kings (2,656:1). Those counties are closer to other population centers than the communities of the North Coast.

The counties bordering Humboldt, Mendocino (1,053:1), Del Norte (1,286:1), Trinity (2,254:1) and Siskiyous (1,424:1), present a mixed bag because of remoteness and small populations.

In Shasta County where the ratio of population to primary care physician is 1,294-to-1, a residency program is in its third year with two graduates to its credit. The Shasta Community Health Center in Redding sponsors a Family Medicine Residency Center affiliated with UC Davis.

Program Director Dr. Debra Lupeika said the effort was started because the region had more patients than could be accommodated by the existing number of providers. Recruitment efforts can only go so far in attracting talent.

The goal is for graduates of the program to remain in the community, but simply having a program provides another incentive for doctors to move there, she said.

“In Shasta County, we’re still in need of physicians,” Lupeika said. “By training the residents in our system, they establish bonds. They get to know the specialists. They get to know the hospitals. They get to know the community.”

Nocella was the consultant Shasta Community Health Center officials used to help establish the Redding-based program, and CEO Dean Germano said Humboldt County officials couldn’t be in better hands.

“She’s the right person to find the pathway to make it happen,” Germano said.

While a residency program would take several years to come to fruition, a more immediate option might be with nurse practitioners and physician assistants. Susan Adams, a nurse practitioner and former Marin County supervisor, will be in Eureka on Tuesday to talk about the Nurse Practitioner and Physician Assistant Dual-Track Program at Davis.

Adams is an assistant clinical professor in the nursing school at Davis, will be presenting information to the supervisors about a potential partnerships between her program and Humboldt health care providers who agree to precept the students.

Supervisor Virginia Bass asked for the presentation because she knows how her constituents continue to struggle to find medical care.

Nearly two dozen medical schools have recently opened or are in the planning stages across the country, the most at any time since the 1960s and ’70s. Graduates of those programs will need places to train, and many states are looking at ways of expanding graduate medical education to attract those newly minted doctors. The quality of life in the North Coast always will be a major recruitment tool for trying to attract medical practitioners to the area, Grotke said, but more creative solutions to the doctor shortage are needed.

“We need more doctors,” Grotke said. “We’re always going to need more doctors.”

Steven Moore can be reached at 707-441-0510.