Over at REDSTATE, Erick Erickson has a devastating post on Carly Fiorina, calling her conservative record “thin to nonexistent” and adding that there are “many troubling signs” she holds liberal views.

He points out that after getting the GOP Senate nomination in 2010

Carly Fiorina abandoned pro-lifers, immigration conservatives, and every Californian who (couldn’t) find work because of their state’s eco-radical legislation…(she) shed any pretense of being a full-on conservative — and apparently decided she [didn’t] need her own party’s base

Brenda Walker documented this for us in California Carly Ramps Up Hispandering

Erickson concludes we should understand who Carly Fiorina actually is

a squishy moderate… a RINO

Erickson couldn’t use the more effective term Cuckservative not because it would get him to trouble with Commissar Wolf (which it would) but for another reason:

The article Understanding Carly Fiorina was posted on September 7th 2010. It deserves to be read.

In his dungeon in the modern RedState Erickson has not yet been tortured into supporting Fiorina, but he is being obliged to make ritual denunciations of Trump, one of which Can Donald Trump Please Get Us Those 25 Stories From 2003? September 17th was, amusingly, promptly and adequately answered by by his own comment thread.

But he did manage to smuggle out Because He Fights! September 15th 2015 which I commend

Ask Donald Trump supporters why they support him and the answer typically is reduced to “He fights!” It’s become both a rallying cry for Trump supporters and a source of derision for those who oppose him. But the fact is, Republican leaders don’t fight. They won’t fight. They are too committed to not losing that they lose. They will not take risks. They are too interested in being like. And they have surrounded themselves with sycophants in the press who encourage their surrender… Democrats were willing to blow up their majority by passing Obamacare. Many of them knew they could be going down in flames in 2010, which is why they had to rely on retiring members. They were willing to take the hit to do what they perceived as the right thing. Republicans in Congress either do not perceive defunding Planned Parenthood to be the right they or they simply will not fight. Either way, they should be replaced.

H/T for 2010 link CH