“You suck!” Peyton Manning growled at a wide receiver who failed to catch an easy pass.

Sure, maybe the wide receiver was just a middle-schooler. And, yeah, maybe Manning threw the football as part of a 2007 “Saturday Night Live” commercial parody for the United Way, the punch line of which was, “Spend time with your kids so Peyton Manning doesn’t.”

Still, it’s not too tough to imagine that Manning isn’t feeling so forgiving or loved in real life, either, at the moment. Not after the Broncos were booed at halftime by their own fans during last Sunday’s game because they only had a two-point lead, or after Monday’s headline in The Post declaring their 35-19 victory over the Jacksonville Jaguars had “blemishes.”

At a time when bigger is almost always preferred to better, a simple win isn’t nearly as attractive as a plus-size, obnoxious, run-up-the-score win. Whopping triumphs also often go hand-in-hand with great shows — think tantrums, fights, giddy end-zone dances — that can come at the expense of sportsmanship.

The Kentucky High School Athletic Association recently did its part to contribute to sportsmanship’s obituary by announcing that the postgame handshake is not of paramount importance if it means there’s a chance they might result in fistfights, of which there have been more than two dozen in the last three years in Kentucky alone.

“If you can’t properly supervise [postgame handshakes], you shouldn’t do them,” Julian Tackett, the association’s commissioner said.

Perhaps it might have been more productive for the Kentucky association to issue an edict saying players or entire teams risk suspension for fighting instead of suggesting civility is the first to go, but that would have been out of character with the direction in sports these days.

Not long ago, ESPN started broadcasting high school football games, which is undoubtedly a celebration for the schools and athletes being shown in prime time (or, really, at any other time). Kids who’ve only dreamed of being on TV now get to showcase their talent to an exponentially larger audience and play the part of the pros they’ve watched primping, preening and showboating for the camera.

The difference is that pros get paid big bucks to win games and further their brand, which means acting virtuous is not necessarily high on their list of priorities. And they even get paid to listen to the boos on Sunday afternoons — even if they’re more accustomed to hearing them from the other team’s fans, or if they’re actually losing.

On the other hand, according to the NCAA, only an estimated 0.13 percent of high school athletes will end up going to the big leagues, which raises the question of what the vast majority of them are actually taking from their years on the court and field if not integrity. Shouldn’t handshakes and gamesmanship be at the forefront of every program? And shouldn’t their parents demonstrate to them that booing and fighting — whether at pro or amateur games — is never OK? (But especially when your team is ahead?)

As far as my 5-year-old daughter knows, the high-fives that she lines up to give the opposing team at the end of her soccer games are as integral to the process as the one-in-every-four-minute snack breaks and the minimum of three kids who will cry and/or need a bandage before the end of the first quarter.

Then again, she sometimes forgets she’s even playing soccer because she’s too busy searching the clouds to find one in the shape of a unicorn. But even if she’s not exactly a good athlete, at least she’s a good sport.

How many of the Broncos fans who were at Sports Authority Field last Sunday can honestly say the same about themselves and their kids?

Meredith C. Carroll (meredithccarroll@hotmail.com) of Aspen writes regularly for The Denver Post.