Local farmer invented miniature antenna that helped shape modern communications

Bob Munson, photographed in 2002 at Munson Farms outside Boulder, died on Monday. He was 74. ( Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer )

Scholarship fund Bob Munson's family has established a fund to support future electrical engineers at the University of Illinois. The family asks that, in lieu of flowers, donations be sent to: The Robert E. Munson U of I Scholarship Fund, care of Premier Members Credit Union, 5495 Arapahoe Ave., Boulder, Colo., 80303.

Bob Munson, the farmer and electrical engineer whose invention of the microstrip antenna helped shape modern telecommunications, and whose family farm stand has been a popular local mainstay for decades, died suddenly on Monday at his home outside Boulder.

He was 74.

For years, he would rise before dawn to work the fields of Munson Farms at 75th Street and Valmont Road just east of the city limits, where his sweet corn, pumpkins and squash quickly earned a stellar reputation among restaurateurs, food banks and the farmers' market community.

When the sun came up, he'd throw on a suit and head into what is now known as Ball Aerospace, where he opened the company's antenna group, and later spearheaded one of the notable innovations in the history of miniature electronics.

"From cellphones to modern televisions to WiFi," said Munson protege Farzin Lalezari, co-founder Boulder's First RF Corporation. "If you go back and follow the roots of all that, you run into Bob Munson at the very beginning."

Advertisement

Long before he was selling his inventions to NASA and the U.S. military, Munson was a farmboy in Donovan, Ill., hawking sweet corn from his bicycle for 35 cents per dozen ears.

He attended a high school of 17 people and, at his mother's urging, enrolled at the University of Illinois, where he studied electrical engineering.

After college, Munson was hired to work at the Southern California office of the Ford Motor Company's aerospace branch. On July 4, 1964, walking down Sunset Strip, he met a woman named Marcy, and grabbed her phone number just before she ran off to meet friends.

They were married eight months later, and remained together up until Munson's death.

"Bob used to like to go duck hunting, and I went with him," Marcy Munson recalled of their early courtship. "Since I went with him to go duck hunting, he asked me to marry him. I passed the test, I guess."

'He had a 5-9 job and a 9-5 job'

Ball recruited Munson to lead its antenna business, so he and Marcy moved to Colorado in the late 1960s.

While on a business trip in the rolling hills of central Pennsylvania, Munson observed the Amish farming with horses and ploughs.

"He came back and said, 'Oh, this will be wonderful,'" Marcy said. "He told me and the kids all about it."

The project began as a small backyard plot, and eventually blossomed into a 90-acre vegetable farm and teaching ground for Munson's two sons, Chris and Mike, who, like their father, worked the farm through high school before venturing off to pursue careers in engineering.

Both men now live and work in the Boulder area, still balancing the family's dual passions.

Said Chris Munson: "I learned from him that, simply put, and especially from the farming background, if I don't do it, it probably won't get done. He wanted to make sure things always got done."

Bob Munson got it done at the farm, and then he got it done at Ball, where he patented 30 inventions before stepping down to become a consultant 22 years ago.

"We always said he had a 5-9 job and a 9-5 job," Chris added. "He just had a strong drive for the things life had to offer, whether it was getting up at the crack of dawn to go duck hunting or picking sweet corn in the morning and then going to enjoy his engineering career — he found it all very rewarding.

"He was go, go, go."

'An incredibly busy life'

Through it all, Munson maintained close ties with Community Food Share of Boulder and Broomfield counties, the area's largest food bank and, since 1982, the recipient of more than 1 million pounds of food from Munson Farms.

"We would go out there in the fields at, like, 4:30 a.m. with a group of a dozen volunteers and they'd harvest corn and squash, and he would be there every day to lead," said Kathy Coyne, Community Food Share's founder. "After that he went in and changed clothes and went to work. To the rest of us, it looked like such an incredibly busy life he was leading."

Coyne said that Munson never wavered, over more than 30 years, in his commitment to the food bank, and was in fact the first of Boulder's organic farmers to embrace Community Food Share's mission.

"He was a very big influence on other farmers and in the community once he joined in such a big way," Coyne said.

Those who knew Munson were in constant awe of his boundless energy and zeal for such a range of activities, from his work with antennas to the farm to his lifelong love of skiing and hunting."

"He was one part John Wayne; he could beat the crap out of anyone at anytime, and he was a big guy in cowboy boots, who skiied in a long cowboy jacket," Lalezari said. "But he spoke like Robert Redford. He had a very soft voice and could get along with anyone. And he was also Einstein.

"He was an absolute genius who could get to the bottom of some of the most sophisticated things in our history."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness