1) ObamaCare Surprise: Government can grab your assets after you die to recoup Medicaid costs …

2) Filmmaker and Obama Critic Dinesh D’Souza indicted for violating campaign finance laws

3) Rise Of The Machines: Google’s Eric Schmidt predicts millions of American workers will be replaced by computers…

4) California lawmakers hope to ban the plastic bag!

5) Mike Huckabee catching flack for discussing women’s libido?

6) PER HOT AIR: What happens when presidents make big donors into ambassadors

7) Greta Van Susteren: White House asked me to tell Jennifer Griffin to stop her Benghazi reporting, warned it could ruin her career…

From Greta Wire:

And then as I was sitting at my desk thinking about the reporting since September 2012, I thought about the weirdest of all and the worst of all for me personally! I remembered a disturbing phone call from a good friend in the Obama Administration. I have known this friend for years. The call was a short time after 9/11 (maybe Oct. 2012?) In the call, my friend told me that my colleague Jennifer Griffin, who was aggressively reporting on Benghazi, was wrong and that, as a favor to me, my friend in the Administration was telling me so that I could tell Jennifer so that she did not ruin her career. My friend was telling me to tell Jennifer to stop her reporting. Ruin her career?

In 20 plus years, I have never received a call to try and shut down a colleague – not that I even could – this was a first. Here is what I know: Jennifer is a class act….experienced..and a very responsible journalist. One of the absolute best in the business – no axe to grind, she just wants the facts.

I told my friend before I go to Jennifer telling her she is wrong, I need proof she is wrong, strong proof and you need to be specific – what are you saying she is getting wrong? We went around and around — including the statement again that this was just a call as a favor to Jennifer and me to save Jennifer’s career from reporting incorrect information. I got no proof. Zero. I smelled a rat. Favor to me? Hardly. My friend was trying to use me. I feel bad that a friend did that to me, tried to use me for a dirty reason. I knew then — and it is now confirmed by BIPARTISAN Senate Intelligence Committee — Jennifer was getting her facts right. I think it is really low for the Administration to stoop this low.