Defense missing four players for game vs. Texans

SP25FBNBRONX_2JL7473x.jpg FOXBOROUGH, MA - NOVEMBER 24: Denver Broncos defensive tackle Kevin Vickerson (99) is helped off the field during their game against the New England Patriots November 24, 2013 at Gillette Stadium. Vikerson suffered a dislocated hip. (Photo by John Leyba/The Denver Post) ( John Leyba )

Tape. So much tape, sliced off and still retaining the shape of an ankle, a knee, any joint that needs its support this late in the season.

Bumps. Weird, red bumps on shoulders and arms and legs, knotted and angry.

Ice. Cushioned by gauze, chilling muscles and tendons, slowing players' gaits as they shuffle toward their belongings at the end of the day.

This is an NFL locker room late in the season, where the players are plenty bruised and, in the case of the Broncos, there are too many cubbies that haven't seen their occupants in days. Attrition is a way of life in this sport, as injury reports e-mailed across the league each day report tweak after twist after sprain, and no one raises an eyebrow.

This season alone, Denver's projected starters have missed 41 games because of injuries, and including players on injured reserve and backups, the team has lost a whopping 155 games because of injuries, ninth-most among the NFL's 32 teams.

Most hurt has been the Denver defense, which appears to be hanging on as the regular season nears completion. The Broncos, who play today at Houston, are coming off a loss at home during which San Diego controlled the ball for nearly 40 minutes.

It's a battered defense, having lost in the past six weeks linemen Kevin Vickerson and Derek Wolfe, cornerback Kayvon Webster and safety Rahim Moore. Also, cornerback Champ Bailey has played sparingly in two games all season, though he is expected to play today against the Texans.

Advertisement

Consider this too: Linebacker Wesley Woodyard, once among the Broncos' best players on defense, has watched his role shrink as he's struggled to regain his level of performance after an October neck injury. And safety DukeIhenacho, who worked his way into Denver's starting lineup, has seen a lingering ankle injury clip his playing time.

"You just try to get as much treatment as you can," Ihenacho said of surviving the season. "I mean, it's really hard to just feel 100 percent, so you have to fight through it. I don't think I can stop. When you have nagging injuries, you can get as much treatment, but the fact that we play every week and football is a physical game, those nagging injuries don't necessarily go away. They might get better, but you've still got to learn to fight through."

Like Ihenacho, the rest of the Broncos aren't dwelling on the players they have lost, or the aches they can't quite shake. Instead, they're figuring out ways to get back on the field.

"A common parlance is once the season starts, no one's 100 percent," said Matthew Matava, the St. Louis Rams' team doctor and president of the NFL Physicians Society. "Everyone's sort of banged up ... until the season ends. Fortunately, the vast majority of injuries you see in the NFL are sort of overuse-type things that are just a nagging-type process that aren't going to get better until four to six weeks after the injury."

One problem for the Broncos this season has been regulating who's ready, and when. Injuries such as Vickerson's dislocated hip and offensive tackle Ryan Clady's sprained foot in Week 2 are almost easier to negotiate than some of the smaller, lingering problems. With Vickerson and Clady, the answer is the injured reserve list, which means they're out for the season. The team moves on. But with players such as Woodyard, Ihenacho, and Bailey, things get murkier. Bailey came back too soon when he returned against Jacksonville, too soon again at Kansas City. His foot wasn't quite ready, and he limped to the sideline.

It's a fine line for teams and players to determine what exactly ready means.

"It's hard," said Broncos coach John Fox. "They clear them medically. ... We're not rushing them out there as far as going against what our doctors and trainers say by any stretch. But it's hard for coaches to tell the difference between a guy being healthy and being ready."

Bailey said he's learned over the past few months how to tweak his routine to reflect the fact that he's 35, not 25. He spends more time in treatment, making sure everything from his hamstrings to his foot are in as good shape as can be. According to Matava, players like Bailey don't last so long in the NFL without being mindful of taking care of their body.

"I think now it's just being smart about how I go about doing it and making sure I don't have any setbacks and I don't wear myself down or anything like that," Bailey said. "The good thing is I'm fresh, I'm ready to go. I've had time off and I'm ready to go."

Despite all of their injuries, talk of how battered these Broncos are has been quiet, if not nil. You will hear plenty about Tom Brady's injury-battered Patriots and how he's risen to overcome it, but because the Broncos' injuries have come primarily on defense, and not to their hallowed quarterback or to their high-flying receiving corps, there's been little discussion. The Patriots do lead the league in games lost to injuries, with 190 through Week 15, but the Broncos aren't far behind, and even that isn't an excuse. Just two years ago, Eli Manning's Giants marched to a Super Bowl title after losing 225 games to injuries.

For now, tape and ice are the players' best friends. In the push to the playoffs, the trainer's table might be more important than any drill during practice.

It's Week 16, and that's life in the NFL.