Now is the time for health plan sponsors to consider how they will confront the excise tax programmed into the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), according to Mercer experts.

The firm hosted a webcast Wednesday on preparing for employee health plan open enrollment for the 2016 plan year, noting the excise tax under the ACA is looming large. Mike Sinkeldam, a principal for Mercer's Health and Benefits practice, explained that Internal Revenue Code section 4980I, as enacted by the ACA, imposes a 40% nondeductible excise tax on employers, health insurance issuers, and/or other entities administering health plan benefits if the aggregate value of “applicable employer-sponsored coverage” exceeds a specified annual dollar limit.

“As health plan sponsors, you really need to start thinking seriously about how this impending tax will impact your business,” Sinkeldam warned. “Will you have to cut down on the rich end of your plan spectrum? If you don’t and your plan triggers the tax in 2018 or later, is this cost going to get passed on to employees or be absorbed by the employer?”

One important fact about the excise tax to consider is that the maximum value threshold applies to any group health plan that is made available to an employee by an employer and “is excludable from the employee’s gross income under IRC Section 106, or would be so excludable if it were employer-provided coverage [within the meaning of IRC Section 106].” Thus, both the employer- and employee-paid portions of premiums are taken into account.

The excise tax applies to both third-party insured and self-funded plans, Sinkeldam observed, as well as governmental plans and coverage that provides health insurance to self-employed individuals. According to Mike Boucher, Health and Benefits Solutions Leader at Mercer, the impending tax sets a pretty challenging value bar for plan sponsors of all types to hit.

“Just considering that costs have increased by 3% to 8% annually for the last decade or longer, it’s really not hard to imagine a large number of plans running into the excise tax come 2018,” Boucher said, “Even if they are operating today below the threshold, that doesn’t mean they will still be fine two or three years down the road.”

NEXT: Addressing ACA requirements