The news that John Boehner has been reëlected as Speaker of the House of Representatives brings to mind the old joke, sometimes attributed to W. C. Fields, about a contest that offered a first prize of one week in Philadelphia and a second prize of two weeks in Philadelphia. No insult intended to the City of Brotherly Love, which is a fine place for all sorts of reasons, but you get the idea: Who would voluntarily sign on for another two years of shepherding, or attempting to shepherd, the Republican caucus in the House of Representatives?

As the 114th Congress gathered in the Capitol, Boehner did just that, and, despite opposition from a number of ultra-conservatives who have long regarded him as too moderate and cozy with the Obama Administration, he won two hundred and sixteen of the four hundred and six votes cast. In part, he had the late Mario Cuomo to thank. With a number of Democratic congressmen missing the leadership vote to attend Cuomo’s funeral, in New York, the Speaker could have lost as many as thirty-five G.O.P. members and still achieved a majority—this according to the tallies of the folks at the Washington Post’s The Fix and at Politico, anyway. But Boehner’s success isn’t purely a matter of timing. With the departure of Eric Cantor, his former number two, to the sunnier and more lucrative climes of Wall Street, Boehner lacks an obvious successor. The Republicans, and the rest of us, are stuck with him.

Which, perhaps, isn’t the worst possible outcome. Although Boehner is hardly in the tradition of Henry Clay, Sam Rayburn, and Tip O’Neill, he isn’t nearly as bad as some of the possible alternatives, such as Louie Gohmert, the Texas congressman who announced over the weekend that he would offer himself as a candidate for Speaker. (He ultimately received three votes, including his own.) If you haven’t been watching Fox News and C-SPAN closely, Gohmert’s contributions to the civic discourse may have passed you by. They include comparing President Obama to Hitler, calling for higher taxes for the poor, claiming that America is being infiltrated by “terror babies,” and warning that the U.S. military is allowing gay soldiers to sit around all day and massage each other, thereby courting ruin. (No, really, he did say that, in a television interview. A helpful post at Mother Jones details this and other Gohmert contributions.)

Compared to Gohmert and his ilk, Boehner seems like a conservative but ultimately rational member of the Rotary Club. To be sure, he mouths all the usual G.O.P. lines about President Obama usurping the constitution with his immigration reforms, and about the Affordable Care Act destroying the economy. But he has shown little enthusiasm for responding to points of contention with the drastic measures that some Republican ultras favor, such as impeachment or shutting down the government. “I don’t do anger,” he told Politico’s Glenn Thrush, whose new profile of Boehner is well worth reading.

That quote sounds a bit self-serving, but it’s hard to have entirely negative feelings about someone who grew up working at his family’s bar, dresses like an extra from “Mad Men,” spends much of his time being harried by wingnuts, and, perhaps as a consequence, seems determined to smoke himself to an early grave. Boehner’s cancer stick of choice is a filtered Camel 99, and, according to Thrush, he “smokes more or less constantly when he’s out of the public eye.” He’s also on record as saying that he likes an occasional tipple. Who doesn’t?

The question, of course, is to what end the Speaker will exercise his reconfirmed authority, such as it is. In November’s midterm elections, the Republicans picked up another thirteen House seats. They now have a majority of more than fifty, the biggest margin in almost seventy years. Moreover, many of Boehner’s members, new and old, regard the election as a referendum on President Obama’s policies. There will be immediate pressure on him to secure some policy victories over the White House.

In all likelihood, the first showdown will come over the Keystone XL pipeline, an issue on which the Republicans rightly sense indecision in the White House. The House could pass a bill authorizing construction as early as Friday. Such a bill also seems certain to pass the Senate, which now has fifty-four Republican members. Obama would then be left with the decision of whether to veto it, and Josh Earnest, the White House spokesman, said on Tuesday that the President would, indeed, do that.

For Boehner, Keystone is an easy one. He’s a longtime supporter of the pipeline, and he knows it also has the support of a majority of Americans, including a fair number of Democrats, particularly in southern and western states. (Last April, eleven Democratic senators sent a letter to the White House urging approval of the pipeline.) But the Keystone votes are only the beginning. Republicans in the House won’t be content with pushing for an oil pipeline, and Boehner knows it. Before long, he will be facing calls to confront the White House on Obamacare, immigration, the debt limit, and other issues that animate the conservative base of the party. And urged on by the rabble-rousers like Rush Limbaugh and Mark Levin, the wingers will be in no mood to compromise.

After four years as Speaker, Boehner is under no illusions about any of this. Recounting a meeting in his office in late 2013, following the government shutdown, Thrush quotes the Ohioan as saying, “We got stampeded into a fight we tried to avoid. . . . These [Tea Party] people are crazy, crazy. . . . They just want a fight.” On that front, nothing has changed.

The optimistic take is that the Speaker and the President, each of whom is seeking to create a legacy for himself, will get together and make deals on issues like trade, infrastructure, and corporate taxation. The reality, however, is one of acute polarization on most issues, which leaves party leaders with little room to maneuver. If either one, but particularly Boehner, is seen to be compromising with the other side, the furies will descend on him.

Give that man another pack of Camels. In fact, make it a carton.