It’s been quite a football week at Clemson. CBSSports.com analytics guru Jerry Palm projected Clemson into the College Football Playoff, Mackensie Alexander insisted he was the best cornerback in the country and head coach Dabo Swinney after Saturday’s Death Valley scrimmage explained his “15” chat with the team.

As in the year 2015, and Clemson’s goal of winning a 15th Atlantic Coast Conference championship.

Swinney also noted that tickets are printed for 12 games this season.

“But we want them to print them for 15,” he said.

That would require a national championship run.

“It’s not about being 15-0,” Swinney said. “That would be great, but we just want to be the best we can be.”

Back-pedalling, even slightly, seems difficult at Clemson these days. The confidence brimming within the program is unprecedented over the last quarter-century.

It’s a bit odd. While Clemson is a popular favorite to win the ACC, the Tigers own one conference title since Florida State joined the conference and have lost three straight games to the Seminoles.

Last time Clemson beat South Carolina and won an ACC championship in the same season? In 1991, before any current Tiger player was born.

Last time Clemson won a conference title and a bowl game in the same year? Way back in 1988, when Swinney was in high school.

But all this Clemson enthusiasm is entertaining and hopefully the Tigers don’t publically switch to coach-speak. Good, clean honesty is fun for fans, good for recruiting and a blast for foes if it all falls apart.

What, you’d rather have Nick Saban trying to convince folks to fret about Wofford’s holder?

Fightin’ Tigers

Clemson prowess is built around the return of dazzling sophomore quarterback Deshaun Watson and the return of a cast of fast skill-position players from a team that went 10-3.

Sure, offensive coordinator Chad Morris is gone. Both lines lack experience and there is a sudden serious lack of depth at linebacker.

But Clemson is busy fighting to improve. In fact, linebacker Ben Boulware spent part of Saturday’s scrimmage fighting with left guard Eric Mac Lain. Boulware was ejected by referees after getting in the last punch.

“Way uncalled for,” defensive coordinator Brent Venables said of Boulware’s behavior.

Venables wasn’t too upset with Alexander’s “I’m the best … It’s not close” boasting earlier in the week.

“Clearly somebody led the witness, because he doesn’t say much,” Venables said of the sophomore, an Immokalee, Fla., native who declined to talk with reporters last season.

“Mackensie works hard,” Venables went on. “He takes coaching well. He wants us coaches to have great confidence in him; that means a lot to him. He does his job well. He’ll be fine.”

Alexander didn’t give up a touchdown pass over the final nine games of the 2014 season.

“He doesn’t walk around here acting like he’s above reproach. I want guys to have humility, but if somebody challenges them or calls them out, hopefully their actions are louder than their words. This is an emotional, intense game. Occasionally you’re going to see a little edge to a guy out there. That’s OK, as long as you can back it up.

“Very few guys have both the ability and the edge. I don’t think it’s a bad thing at all. But I think it also needs to be within the team concept.”

Dabo’s bananas

Red flags stick out amid the orange upside. Linebacker depth took a hit this week when starter Korrin Wiggins was lost with a knee injury Wednesday and second-teamer Korie Rogers, a redshirt freshman, quit football to focus on his Pre-Business degree.

“They’re real green,” Swinney said of the backup linebackers. “I mean, I like my bananas real yellow with a little bit of brown on them.”

Venables described the situation as “an emergency.”

“Particularly looking forward a year from now and where we’re at,” he said. “So we’ve got this really important recruiting class. This one and next one are critical, as critical as I’ve been around.”

Still, nothing tempers expectations around Death Valley. For one thing, very few contributors remain from the 2013 Clemson team picked to win a conference title at the ACC Football Kickoff.

Florida State wound up walloping the Tigers, 51-14, on the way to a national championship. Boosted by a big night at Clemson, Jameis Winston won the Heisman Trophy.

That was so 22 months ago.

“I love this team, I really do,” Swinney said Saturday. “I like the make-up of the team; I think they’ve got a great spirit to them. We’re just not very good yet. But we will be.”

Follow Gene Sapakoff on Twitter @sapakoff