Buy Photo Singer-songwriter Tom T. Hall, left, parodies the high school file of John Seigenthaler at a Father Ryan High School benefit gala April 13, 1991. Seigenthaler, a 1945 graduate of the school, was the guest of honor. (Photo: Freeman Ramsey / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights Famous alumni have led newspapers and churches; they've swum the entirety of the Mississippi River.

Last week was quite a week for the more than 5,800 students and the hundreds of faculty and staff who make up today’s Catholic school community in Middle Tennessee.

But the celebration of this community is really a celebration of Nashville itself, because at the heart of this year’s Catholic Schools Week is the legacy of these Catholic educational institutions and the impact these institutions and their students continue to have on our community.

Catholic education is actually one of the oldest and most successful educational models in this city and in much of the country. In fact, three of the oldest educational institutions of any level in the entire state of Tennessee are Catholic, each started between 1856 and 1866.

But it isn’t just their age that makes Catholic schools important. It is their unique purpose and success.

Established and supported by immigrant families and their churches, Catholic schools were created to provide an education and an environment, rooted in our faith but open to all, that would raise the level of opportunity for these children, and as a result better these families and their communities.

That commitment to a quality education, a welcoming environment and the tenets of the Catholic faith made these schools important at their inception, and the accomplishments of their students and alumni continue to demonstrate their value. It’s on display around our city today.

The students graduating from our 20 Catholic elementary and high schools are academically strong, recognized by national organizations like the Duke TIP program and National Merit Scholarship Program at ever-increasing levels. They are valedictorians and salutatorians at Catholic and other private high schools in the area. And they are attending top colleges and universities across the country.

James A. McIntyre, President of Father Ryan High School (Photo: Steve Green)

While Catholic schools have been lauded for decades as standards for excellence in primary and secondary education, they do more than prepare students academically. They mold their students into faithful, charitable citizens, and hone these attributes from their earliest elementary days.

Nurturing a student’s sense of faith and social justice, educating not just the mind, but the body and soul, these principles are at the core of Catholic education, and generation after generation of Catholic school graduates have benefited from that foundation not just in their academic careers, but throughout their life.

Tim Forbes (Photo: Submitted)

Just look at Nashville. The founder of Room in the Inn, the head of Thoracic Surgery at St. Thomas Health, the creator of the First Amendment Center, the Bishop of Nashville … all products of Nashville Catholic high school and elementary education.

The chief investment banker for Morgan Stanley, the former commander of Marine One, a lead dancer for Alvin Ailey and the first American to swim the Mississippi, doing so to honor America’s veterans. Each one a product of Nashville’s Catholic schools.

The Catholic schools in Nashville have also been social leaders throughout their history, whether in matters of serving the homeless or leading social justice causes as the first integrated schools in the South. It’s a wonderful legacy.

It’s not the system that achieves and enacts change, however; it’s the people. Catholic education produces all types — artists and writers, priests and athletes, social workers and business executives, but what our tradition prides itself on more than anything else is producing people who seek to do good, as our faith teaches us to do. That is what we celebrated last week, and what we celebrate each day.

Jim McIntyre is the president of Father Ryan High School and Tim Forbes is the principal of St. Matthew Elementary School, two of the area’s leading educational institutions. Both are products of Catholic education.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1XqZfMI