A veteran language arts teacher from Leavenworth High School and a kindergarten teacher at Cottonwood Elementary School in Paola were named Region 2 finalists for the 2014 Kansas Teacher of the Year award Sunday in Topeka.

The finalists named during the banquet at the Ramada Hotel and Convention Center were Jenny Nash, an elementary teacher for Paola Unified School District 368, and Jeff Baxter, a secondary teacher in Leavenworth USD 453.

The banquet recognized 32 exemplary teachers from 21 school districts in the region. Eight Topeka-area schools had nominees.

As finalists for the Kansas Teacher of the Year distinction, Nash and Baxter each received a $2,000 cash award from Security Benefit, which is a partner in the Kansas Teacher of the Year program.

The two teachers are eligible to be named Kansas Teacher of the Year, which will be announced during a Nov. 23 ceremony in Wichita. The educator selected as the Kansas Teacher of the Year is eligible for national distinction as Teacher of the Year.

Statewide, 105 educators were nominated for the Kansas Teacher of the Year distinction.

Nominations are made in each of four regions of the state. The Kansas State Department of Education, which is a sponsor of the Kansas Teacher of the Year program, appoints regional selection panels comprised of teachers, education administrators and higher education representatives to select semifinalists and finalists from each region.

Each panel selects six semifinalists — three elementary teachers and three secondary teachers.

The Kansas Teacher of the Year is selected from among the state’s eight regional finalists.

Diane DeBacker, Kansas commissioner of education, and Dale Dennis, deputy commissioner of education for the KSDE’s division of fiscal and administrative services, spoke during Sunday’s ceremony.

“Kansas teachers touch the lives of 450,000 students across the state,” DeBacker told the group of more than 350 people gathered for the event.

DeBacker and Dennis traveled to Salina on Saturday afternoon and Wichita on Saturday night for banquets to honor teachers from those regions. After Sunday’s event in Topeka, the two were traveling to Overland Park for another banquet.

“We call this our marathon weekend,” DeBacker joked with the crowd.

Nash and Baxter were among six teacher of the year semifinalists from Region 2, which covers the 2nd U.S. Congressional district.

Other semifinalists were Nicole Rheuport, a fifth-grade teacher at Eudora Elementary School, USD 491; Diana L. Bailey, a fifth-grade teacher at Deerfield Elementary School in Lawrence, USD 497; Bradley Nicks, a high school mathematics teacher at Shawnee Heights High School, USD 450; and Shari Hudgeons, a middle school science teacher at Paola Middle School, USD 368.

Each of the semifinalists received a red marble apple with a wooden base from the Master Teacher in Manhattan, a news release stated.

Other local nominees were Rachel Connett and Stacey Noble, of USD 345 Seaman; Amy Ives and Nathan Mees, of USD 437 Auburn-Washburn; Patricia Nash and Kirsten Nelson, of USD 501 Topeka; and Linnea Ockey, USD 450 Shawnee Heights.

Nash and Baxter said they were honored to be named finalists. Nash told the crowd she turned 21 on her first day of teaching kindergarten and learned so much about parenting and mentoring in those first eight hours.

Baxter shared that he weighed 457 pounds three years ago. As he watched his daughter, wife and granddaughter walking, he realized he couldn’t do it, so he decided to slim down. To date, he has lost 270 pounds and continues to teach because he feels healthier.

“It changed how I do everything,” Baxter said after the event.

He added: “This is really humbling. There are so many wonderful teachers in this room.”