Photo

Good Thursday morning from Washington, where lawmakers are rallying to support France after the terrorist attack in Paris, a group of House members seeks to declassify 9/11 documents, and business resumes on a Keystone pipeline bill that President Obama promises to veto. Next year’s political campaign is casting a long shadow, with new moves by potential Republican candidates and a public relations push by Columbus, Ohio, to land the Democratic convention. Plus, former Senator Saxby Chambliss of Georgia wastes no time in getting a new job.

Congressional Republicans have had their issues with France as an ally, but there were nothing but expressions of solidarity and pledges of aid from Capitol Hill after Wednesday’s attack in Paris.

“America stands with France,” said Representative Mac Thornberry, the Texas Republican who is the new chairman of the House Armed Services Committee.

On his Facebook page, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas was even more emphatic. “This most recent attack,” he said, “is an attack on us all.”

Other lawmakers said the murder of a dozen people at the office of Charlie Hebdo, a satirical newspaper, was a bitter reminder that terrorists can strike anywhere.

“We’re going to be cooperating, obviously, with the French in every way that we can to help them respond in a way that they think is appropriate,” said Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader.

But the attack also presented Republicans with a political dilemma. They are threatening to cut Department of Homeland Security financing over President Obama‘s executive action on immigration while at the same time warning of potential terrorist attacks.

Top Republicans promised that the Homeland Security funds were not in danger.

“I believe that the president’s executive actions with regard to immigration are outside of the Constitution and outside of his powers,” Speaker John A. Boehner said. “And I believe that we can deal with that issue in the Department of Homeland Security bill without jeopardizing the security of our country.”

— Carl Hulse

The attack in Paris figures into a push in Washington to release more classified documents related to the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

A bipartisan group of House members — in cooperation with former Senator Bob Graham of Florida — has joined the families of 9/11 victims in pressing the White House to release a 28-page classified section of the joint congressional report on the terrorists’ strikes.

The 28 pages deal with the hijackers’ financing and logistical support. Mr. Graham — a past chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee — said the report, which he helped prepare and release in 2002, “points a very strong finger at Saudi Arabia.”

The section was classified by President George W. Bush, and the Obama administration has rebuffed calls to make it public.

Mr. Graham and other advocates of the classified information’s release said the pages in question were essential to understanding what happened in 2001 and could deter attacks like the one in France by making it clear that the United States would expose any foreign support for terrorists.

Representatives Walter B. Jones, Republican of North Carolina, and Stephen F. Lynch, Democrat of Massachusetts, have introduced a resolution calling on the White House to declassify the pages. Keeping them secret, the resolution says, “prevents the people of the United States from having access to information about the involvement of certain foreign governments in the terrorist attacks of September 2001.”

“What we are trying to do,” Mr. Jones said, “is put pressure on the White House.”

— Carl Hulse

Potential Republican presidential candidates are becoming less shy about their ultimate intentions.

Former Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida announced a new political action committee this week, and, according to Politico, he is ready to release a decade’s worth of tax returns.

Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin is already jousting with Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, and, according to CNN, has a potential campaign manager lined up. In an interview this week with a conservative radio host, he also had well-practiced answers about his timeline for making a decision about running and whether his lack of a college degree would be a hindrance.

And, as we warned you last month, the books are coming. On Wednesday, hardback editions from former Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas and Senator Marco Rubio of Florida landed on the desks of reporters across the country. The jackets show both would-be candidates against a backdrop of blue skies and scattered clouds.

But even in the earliest days of the 2016 campaign it is hard to avoid controversy.

Dr. Ben Carson, a conservative activist who is considered a long-shot presidential contender, is facing allegations that he plagiarized parts of his 2012 book, “America the Beautiful.” A BuzzFeed investigation found that he lifted passages from the website SocialismSucks.net, among other sources.

Dr. Carson’s agent said he did not intend to plagiarize.

— Alan Rappeport

The door had hardly closed on Saxby Chambliss’s congressional career before the former Georgia senator had lined up a new job.

Mr. Chambliss, most recently the top Republican on the Senate Intelligence Committee and a senior member of the Armed Services Committee, is joining the international law firm DLA Piper as a partner based in Atlanta and Washington. He will be advising clients on cybersecurity and similar topics while keeping a hand in the world of intelligence.

“I want to be engaged on the policy side of that,” Mr. Chambliss said.

Among the former colleagues whom Mr. Chambliss will be joining at DLA Piper is Ray LaHood, a onetime House member from Illinois and a former secretary of transportation.

— Carl Hulse

Senate Republicans will take a step toward an anticipated showdown with President Obama on Thursday as they take action on a bill to force construction of the Keystone XL pipeline.

The Senate Energy Committee is expected to easily pass the bill under the leadership of its new Republican chairwoman, Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska. There will be at least one Democratic yes vote – from Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, who is a co-sponsor.

Senator Maria Cantwell of Washington, the committee’s ranking Democrat, will not try to amend the bill or block the its passage, her staff said last night. She and other Democrats are holding most of their fire for debate on the Senate floor, where they plan to introduce multiple amendments attacking the measure and undermining its Republican sponsors.

The fireworks on both sides will be all for show. Democrats can’t get enough votes to pass their amendments or block the bill, and Republicans can’t get the president’s signature.

But Thursday’s committee meeting will be an opportunity to check out a handful of Republican freshmen in action – Cory Gardner of Colorado, Shelley Moore Capito of West Virginia, Steve Daines of Montana and Bill Cassidy of Louisiana.

Mr. Cassidy won his seat by defeating the committee’s previous chairwoman, Mary L. Landrieu, in a runoff after she failed to move the pipeline bill forward.

— Coral Davenport

A day after the Paris attack, the Senate Intelligence Committee will hold a closed meeting at 9 a.m.

The House is expected to consider the Save American Workers Act of 2015, which would redefine the number of hours that people work each week before their employers fall under the Affordable Care Act.

The United States Agriculture Coalition for Cuba holds its first meeting since President Obama announced he would lift the Cuban embargo.

Columbus, Ohio, wants to sweeten its chances at beating out Philadelphia and Brooklyn to secure the 2016 Democratic National Convention.

The incentive comes in the form of ice cream from homegrown Jeni’s Splendid, with a special note from the founder, Jeni Britton Bauer. “New York and Philly are great, traditional options,” she said. “Anyone who’s had vanilla, strawberry or chocolate knows this.”

But of Columbus, she wrote, “We’re your salty caramel. Unexpected, revelatory, beloved.”

Trash talk is common in the convention-selection process, but until now, Columbus has been relatively quiet in pursuing its bid. That was until a brassy news release went out this week boasting of the city’s 1.7 million-square-foot convention center and bragging that Columbus had the same flair as Jeni’s Splendid, “perhaps the nation’s most famous ice cream maker.” (Ben & Jerry could not be immediately reached for comment.)

Columbus has been the underdog among the three finalists. But Philadelphia has run into problems securing donations for the convention, according to party officials, and there are security concerns about Brooklyn that have grown only worse since the recent confrontations between Mayor Bill de Blasio and the New York Police Department.

The Republicans have already chosen Cleveland. The Democratic National Committee is expected to make its decision in the next couple of weeks.

— Amy Chozick

The latest coverage of the terrorist attack in France.

Democrats are already getting surly in the Republican-controlled Congress.

In a Political Memo, Jonathan Martin looks at the generational challenges facing Mike Huckabee of Arkansas and Jeb Bush of Florida, two former governors, should they run for president.

President Obama is on a three-day tour serving up “spoilers” from the State of the Union address later this month.

A federal appeals court hears arguments over the restrictive abortion laws in Texas.

Speaker John A. Boehner is under pressure to secure immediate policy victories over the White House, according to The New Yorker.

Politico details the problems that four potential Republican presidential candidates — Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, Gov. Bobby Jindal of Louisiana, Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio and Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin — are having at home that could interfere with their plans for 2016.

Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts told a forum sponsored by the A.F.L.-C.I.O. that both parties have supported policies that hurt the American middle class, The Wall Street Journal reports.

Economic growth this year will finally benefit ordinary American families, The Economist says.

The former House Speaker Newt Gingrich reminisces with The Weekly Standard about the “Republican Revolution” of the 1990s and the modern history of American conservatism.