Bernie's health plan: Bad for health care workers?

With help from Paul Demko, Erin Mershon, Jennifer Haberkorn and Brett Norman

HOW WOULD BERNIE's PLAN AFFECT HEALTH CARE WORKERS? … The Vermont senator promises that his Medicare-for-all plan would help millions of Americans, by streamlining access to health care. But what happens to the hundreds of thousands of Americans who stand to lose their jobs because of it?

Story Continued Below

It's a difficult question, and Sanders was forced to face it at Tuesday's Democratic town hall on CNN. One supporter told Sanders that she's "waited [her] whole life" for a progressive like him — but she works in the private health insurance industry, and wants to know how Sanders would help middle-class Americans like her find new jobs.

The question tugs at an uncomfortable thread for Sanders. And his response wasn't especially compelling: He suggested that insurance industry employees could be retrained to work in health care delivery, meeting the needs of the millions of newly insured. But if, for instance, someone in the insurance industry wanted to become a lab tech … it's a time-intensive transition. And it raises a secondary question: How many lab techs do we really need, anyway?

— Two million Americans currently work in insurance and medical billing. That's according to Gerald Friedman, the UMass economist who's done analysis for the Sanders campaign, and those workers would presumably be directly affected by a plan that ends private insurance.

And Sanders' plan calls for lower payments to doctors and hospitals, likely cutting employment there too.

— Millions of non-health care workers would also be affected. Yevgeniy Feyman, the deputy director of health policy with the conservative Manhattan Institute, estimates that the combination of taxes and mandates in Sanders' health plan would lower employment by 11.6 million full-time equivalent workers. (The model partially draws on CBO estimates and assumes that some of those people would choose not to work because they wouldn't need health care, to be clear.)

— Efficiency doesn't equal employment. Sanders is right: Administration and overhead is one reason why the United States carries higher health costs than comparable countries. But, to paraphrase Princeton economist Uwe Reinhardt's famous line, every dollar of health care spending is someone’s health care income. Sanders may be calling for a health care revolution — but every revolution has casualties.

MEANWHILE, IN NEVADA … As the Democrats held their town hall, Donald Trump was in the process of winning the Nevada caucuses. Trump's now won 33 percent of the popular vote across four state primaries, far outpacing Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio, who are both hovering around 20 percent.

WELCOME TO WEDNESDAY PULSE — Where we're not surprised by new data showing the commercials about toenail fungus and constipation were among the 21 least successful ads aired during last month's Super Bowl. The real mystery: How the Doritos ultrasound commercial became the biggest hit. If you've got answers, tip me at ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

CALIFF POISED FOR CONFIRMATION THIS MORNING — Robert Califf is expected to be easily confirmed as FDA commissioner when he finally gets a vote around 11 a.m. Opponents delayed the process as they focused attention on the FDA's role in the opioid crisis.

Sen. Joe Manchin objected to holding the vote Tuesday evening, forcing the Senate to run out the full 30-hour clock following the cloture vote Monday night, Manchin’s office said. The West Virginia senator spoke on the floor for more than an hour Tuesday afternoon, reading letters from people hit by the painkiller crisis.

"Five percent of the population of the world lives in the United States of America … . We consume 80 percent of these addictive opiate drugs,” Manchin said. “Something is wrong. Something must change.”

GRASSLEY ICES WAKEFIELD NOM — Mary Wakefield appeared to be on a fast track to confirmation as deputy secretary of HHS, but Sen. Chuck Grassley has objected to the nomination over what he said is HHS's failure to answer questions about fetal tissue practices at Planned Parenthood, a grant recipient. "Response to the letters did not fully answer the questions raised and, furthermore, raised additional concerns," Grassley wrote in the Congressional Record.

Planned Parenthood exec Dawn Laguens responded, "After leading the charge to obstruct a Supreme Court nominee, now Grassley is seeking to block the second most senior public health official in our country based on a lie." She added, "Planned Parenthood has done nothing wrong."

BURWELL BACK ON THE HILL — The HHS secretary will testify on the administration's budget in front of the House Energy and Commerce Health Subcommittee at 10 a.m. It's Burwell's third go-around with Congress over this year's budget request, and she'll be back tomorrow to get grilled by the House Appropriations Committee too.

— Also on tap today: The Senate takes on two emerging public health issues: At 10 a.m., the HELP committee has a hearing on the Zika virus, and at 2:30 p.m., the Special Committee on Aging will tackle the opioid epidemic. The House Oversight and Government Reform Committee has its own Zika hearing at 2:00 p.m.

ICD-10: 'THE Y2K THAT NEVER HAPPENED' — In an interview with Pro's Arthur Allen, CMS acting administrator Andy Slavitt took a victory lap over the smooth implementation of the ICD-10 coding system.

The ICD-10 transition was advertised as a potential snafu, in the vein of the bumpy Healthcare.gov launch. But it was “the Y2K that never happened," Slavitt said, signaling that the federal health care bureaucracy could do difficult things well if it consulted closely with people on the ground around the country, in this case providers. Arthur has the story for Pros.

— CMS claims might be working better than ever: In the last three months of 2015, fewer than 2 percent of claims were rejected because of technical issues — about the same as under ICD-9 — and 0.07 percent of claims were denied, a lower percentage than under the old system.

COULD AMA CALL FOR DELAY ON MACRA? — Sure, the docs lobbied like crazy for the legislation as a replacement for the much-maligned SGR. But Pro's Erin Mershon tells us the docs have a new concern: MACRA's implementation is approaching, and quickly.

CMS is set to finalize its rules for the program before the end of this year, and the performance period for docs likely starts in January. Is AMA president Steven Stack worried? "Yes," he told reporters, adding that he’s waiting until April to see a proposal before calling for a delay.

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): More transparency is needed into generic drug pricing and reimbursement rates set by drug plan middlemen. Bipartisan legislation (H.R. 244) would enhance oversight of federal health programs and help ensure pharmacy reimbursement for generic drugs reflects market fluctuations. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **

ORRIN HATCH WANTS MEDICARE “LOCK-IN” BILL SOON — The Senate Finance Committee chairman said at an opioid abuse hearing on Tuesday that he hopes to advance a bill “very soon” that would let Medicare plans require patients taking certain drugs to get them from one doctor or pharmacy, Pro's Brett Norman reports.

The bill from Sens. Rob Portman and Pat Toomey has bipartisan support and would give Medicare plans a power that’s widely wielded already by private plans and Medicaid. But the National Community Pharmacists Association opposes it, and has lobbied for changes. The pharmacists want Medicare, rather than the private Part D drug plans, to administer the program because they are concerned the plans have a financial stake in steering patients to big, chain pharmacies. NCPA’s comments to the committee: http://bit.ly/1QwomIm

LAWMAKERS CALL FOR MORE CDC OPIOID GUIDELINES — The agency is still working to finalize a voluntary opioid prescribing guideline for primary care docs treating chronic pain, but Sens. Kirsten Gillibrand and Shelley Moore Capito on Tuesday introduced legislation that would require CDC to develop one for acute pain as well.

ZIKA ROUNDUP — The CDC announced Tuesday that agency and state officials are investigating 14 new reports of possible sexual transmission of the Zika virus. And the White House this week made its request for Zika funds official, sending a letter to Speaker Paul Ryan asking for $1.9 billion in emergency supplemental appropriations

HEALTH SYSTEMS GET INTO MA AND ITS POLITICS, BUT IT'S NOT ALWAYS EASY — Some providers are starting their own MA plans — and they're suddenly finding it in their interest to enter the rate-setting fray, fighting alongside insurers for higher rates. Pro's Erin Mershon has the story: http://politico.pro/21dUgon.

Erin tells PULSE that the trend is increasing — but running an MA plan still isn't an option for all providers. It means creating benefit packages, managing risk, enrolling consumers, coordinating their care — in short, becoming an insurance company and competing with them, too. That might be easier for large systems that already offer other plans or have launched ACO pilots, but others struggle.

"We see a lot of things being tried out and tested," said former Rep. Allyson Schwartz, who heads the Better Medicare Alliance. "Some provider systems are big enough to take on the insurance risk and some are not."

MEDICAID MANAGED CARE IN IOWA IS A GO — CMS has approved an April 1 start for Iowa to implement statewide Medicaid managed care, Republican Gov. Terry Branstad announced. He had wanted the waiver to take effect at the start of the year but CMS questioned Iowa's readiness, partly because of concerns over adequate provider networks.

INSURERS SAY MORE MUST BE DONE TO CURTAIL SPECIAL ENROLLMENTS — Up to a third of all Obamacare exchange sign-ups are coming through special enrollment periods, according to a new study commissioned by America’s Health Insurance Plans and the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association. In addition, those customers racked up 24 percent more in medical claims during their first three months of coverage in 2014 than their counterparts who signed up during the open-enrollment period, according to the analysis by Oliver Wyman.

— Preliminary data suggests that cost discrepancy will be even larger in 2015. In California, for example, customers who signed up through special enrollment periods were 15 to 50 percent more costly than other exchange customers, according to data from four large insurers.

— Health plans have been raising alarms about special enrollment periods for months. They argue that the loose rules allow individuals to wait until they get sick to enroll, and then stop paying premiums once they’ve gotten medical care. The end result: a skewed risk pool and more expensive premiums for everyone. CMS announced initial steps to tighten the rules around SEPs last month, but health plans say more needs to be done to stabilize the marketplaces. The AHIP/BCBSA report: http://bit.ly/20TIBFK

MEDICARE WAGE DISPUTE — The U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia has ruled against the University of California Regents and in favor of HHS in a dispute over the Medicare wage index. http://1.usa.gov/1XLuPoA

SAVE TIME SO YOU CAN SLEEP MORE : Do you waste too much time trying to gather information to ensure that you fully understand what is happening with legislation? POLITICO Pro, POLITICO’s premier solution for policy professionals offers Legislative Compass. Use it to predict how likely bills are to move, find members’ voting records, compare bill language, get whip counts and more. Spend your time acting on that information, instead of gathering it – ultimately allowing you to hit the snooze button a few extra times each morning! Sounds amazing, right? See if you qualify for a complimentary Legislative Compass trial.

WHAT WE'RE READING, by Rachana Pradhan

Frontline has produced a documentary on the country’s heroin epidemic. http://to.pbs.org/20OfGZ5

A letter from the Supreme Court’s doctor says Antonin Scalia’s death was likely linked to coronary artery disease, diabetes and obesity. From the Associated Press: http://lat.ms/1ozV6tS

Bloomberg reports that hospitals are still struggling with bad debt despite the ACA’s coverage expansions. http://bloom.bg/20TubFD

The AP also reports on efforts of U.S. and Brazilian health care workers to study the Zika virus in the South American country. http://nyti.ms/1OtU87x

Membership for health sharing ministries has soared since the ACA was enacted in 2010, according to U.S. News. http://bit.ly/1TEQvnc

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **