Here's the 10 fastest-growing healthcare companies on the Inc. 5000

Last week, Inc. released its annual Inc. 5000 list, which ranks the fastest-growing private companies in America. Here are the 10 fastest-growing companies in healthcare, along with their overall Inc. ranking and a rundown of what they’re doing that may be contributing to their rapid growth:

1. Castle Medical (#4): Over the last three years, Castle Medical, an Atlanta-area company that provides drug testing services for physicians, has grown by 25,485%. The company specializes in drugs of abuse. Some of the services it provides include drug confirmation testing, specimen validity testing, drug confirmation urine testing and prescription drug monitoring.

Castle Medical has been the recipient of multiple awards over the last three years. Perhaps most notably, it was named one of Atlanta’s “Best Places to Work” for two straight years and also

won the Atlanta Journal-Constitution’s “Top Workplaces Award” for 2015. It’s no secret that happy employees generally tend to be better workers.

2. Restore Health (#8): Restore Health has seen a three-year growth of 21,753%. The company, which is located in Madison, WI, provides personalized and specialty medicines to healthcare providers and their patients. It offers a number of products and services, including a full-service specialty pharmacy, a clinical and analytical chemistry laboratory and a clinical services and support group.

Restore Health prides itself on “constantly seeking partnerships with the industry's leading advocates, providers and educators” in order to further its goal of “providing the best, most innovative personalized healthcare solutions to patients and providers.”

3. Seeking Health (#37): Based in Bellingham, WA, Seeking Health has grown by 6,181% over the last three years. The company sells nutritional supplements based on the premise that “if one supports their body's systems with pure, highly absorbable, well-formulated nutrients, the ability to remain healthy and vital significantly increases.” It also provides education on dietary, lifestyle, mental and nutritional needs and has an interactive Learning Center where consumers can view health-related research articles, podcasts, videos, blog posts, presentations and radio shows.

In today’s world where more and more people are seeking organic products with no harmful additives, it’s easy to see where there would also be a demand for all-natural nutritional supplements and related educational materials.

4. BioPoint (#49): BioPoint, a pharmaceutical and biotech consulting company in Wakefield, MA, has seen a three-year growth of 5,302%. The company’s consultants have specialized expertise in drug safety, health economics and outcomes research, regulatory affairs, quality assurance, compliance and risk mitigation.

"We've worked tirelessly to build relationships with key professionals across the entire life sciences spectrum, all as part of delivering tremendous value to each and every client," Co-founder Chris Nash said in a statement. "Life sciences is all we do," said BioPoint Co-founder Edwin Matos. "Our industry focus, along with an emphasis on providing the highest level of customer service to our consulting base and vendors, has allowed us to rocket to the top of our niche."

Stay informed.

to get the latest healthcare industry news delivered straight to your inbox.

5. FITBIT (#53): San Francisco-based FITBIT, a company that sells fitness products to track activity and performance, has grown by 5,057% over the last three years. The FITBIT devices, which can be synced to a computer or smartphone, track things like number of steps taken, distance walked, calories burned and progress toward goals. Their success is likely due to the fact that they tend to motivate people to be more active, and therefore healthier.

6. Clinical Ink (#57): Clinical Ink of Horsham, PA, has seen a three-year growth rate of 4,614%. The company is dedicated to eliminating paper documentation in clinical research through its SureSource platform. Clinical Ink claims that eliminating the problems and complexities associated with traditional paper-based technologies will help ease the burden of clinical research, which will dramatically reduce clinical trial costs, complexities and cycle times.

“Our solutions address the single biggest problems of clinical research – data capture during the patient visit, remote monitoring of research site documents, immediate data availability, and streamlining workflows for research sites,” CEO Ed Seguine said in a statement.

7. Physicians Toxicology Laboratory (#59): Over the last three years, Tampa-based Physicians Toxicology Laboratory, a specialized laboratory that does routine urine drug testing to rule out illicit drug use or non-compliance with prescribed drug regimens, grew by 4,415%. The company claims it can protect physicians from prescription-related liability while also keeping patients safe. It also boasts seamless integration with electronic medical records systems.

8. Cognitive Medical Systems (#95): Cognitive Medical Systems of San Diego, which specializes in clinical decision support systems, has seen a three-year growth rate of 3,499%. The company has “extensive experience building custom solutions for large-scale and complex projects that are compliant with Federal and Military standards.” In 2015, Cognitive Medical Systems was named one of San Diego’s “Best Places to Work” by the San Diego Business Journal.

9. freshbenies (#117): Based in McKinney, TX, freshbenies has grown by 2,999% over the last three years. The company sells membership cards that provide access to a variety of services, including telemedicine consults, a medical health advisor, lower prescription costs, dental care, vision care and others. According to The Dallas Morning News, freshbenies was developed to help small to mid-size companies provide benefits to employees with higher-deductible plans or no insurance at all. The benefits include health services that are not covered under the Affordable Care Act.



10. VitalWare (#123): VitalWare, a company that provides cloud-based technology services out of Yakima WA, has seen a three-year growth rate of 2,938%. The company’s mission is to empower providers and partners to realize revenue cycle success through innovative documentation, coding, billing and auditing solutions. It was founded in 2011 “to help organizations with the overwhelming task of navigating the many regulatory changes taking place in today’s healthcare environment.”