The Seminole Tribe of Florida is currently accepting applications for a Superintendent of Education.

The person in this position will be responsible for the overall leadership, development, organization, management, operation, and implementation of Seminole Tribe of Florida’s Educational programs across departments including the Ahfachkee School, Ahfachkee Traditional Preservation, Pemayetv Emakakv Charter School, Brighton Charter Cultural Program, and the Preschool Program.

The person in this position will also perform a thorough analysis of the educational departments/programs and provide recommendations commensurate with the enhancement of services.

The person hired will also recommend, develop, and implement educational and professional development operating policies for consideration and action by the Chief Executive Administrative Officer (EAO) and the Tribal Council.

Other duties include:

Assist with the direction and supervision regarding methods of teaching, supervision and administration in the schools; directs Preschool and K-12 curriculum and staff development programs; assure ongoing revision of curricula; recommend to the EAO and Tribal Council curricula adoption, curriculum guides, and major changes in textbooks; and oversees the educational evaluation and testing programs.

Prepare and manage annual departmental budget and upon request, presents annual budget to Senior Management and/or Tribal Council. Review annual budget of other educational programs and program components.

Establish and maintain a program of public information designed to communicate objectives, needs, problems, and accomplishments of the Tribal students, staff, parents and the community. May involve members of the community, whenever feasible and practical, in improving school programs.

Establish and maintain a liaison relationship with community groups, school districts, the Florida Education of Department, colleges and universities, and the U.S. Department of Education.

Provide guidance and assistance to staff and other STOF employees, as it relates to educational functions. Identify, schedule, and provide training for the continued development of Education staff.

Minimum Requirements for this position include:

Master’s degree in Education is required. School Superintendent Certification is preferred. Additionally, highly desirable is a Degree or an Administrative Certification in one of the following areas: Community Education, Public Administration, Public Relations, Library Science, and/or Communication.

A minimum of ten (10) years related experience in the management of an educational institution and/or program to include an educational leadership, or an educational administration related capacity is required. Minimum of five (5) years of experience in program development, managing budgets and generating financial reports is required. Minimum of three (3) years of curricular teaching experience with the Native American Community is preferred.

Those interested may apply online at SeminoleTribe.com.