Legal scholars have taken a dim view of Rowan County Clerk Kim Davis’s contention in federal court that she should get a religious exemption from having to issue marriage licenses to gay couples.

A prominent First Amendment expert studying her case says Ms. Davis may be fighting a battle in the wrong court.

The clerk, whose refusal to authorize same-sex marriages has landed her in jail for contempt of court, has a “losing claim,” says UCLA law professor Eugene Volokh over at Volokh Conspiracy.

Analyzing her claims, he says her chances could improve in state court.

Ms. Davis, he observes, refuses to issue same-sex couple licenses that bear her name. He also notes that her lawyers have suggested that her religious objections could be accommodated by “modifying the prescribed Kentucky marriage license form to remove the multiple references to Davis’ name.”

Writes Mr. Volokh:

Kentucky, like about 20 other states, has a state Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) statute that requires government agencies to exempt religious objectors from generally applicable laws, unless denying the exemption is the least restrictive means of serving a compelling government interest [If ] Davis sues in state court, seeking a declaration that she can issue licenses and certificates without her name — as a Kentucky RFRA-based exemption from the Kentucky statutory requirements for what must go on her license — I think she’d have a good case…. But though I agree that her religious convictions can’t excuse her from issuing marriage licenses altogether.. [if] Davis believes that it’s religiously wrong for her to issue licenses with her name on them, ordering her to do that indeed burdens her religious beliefs, enough to trigger the Kentucky RFRA. And giving her the more modest exemption from the include-the-court-clerk’s-name requirement might therefore indeed be required by the Kentucky RFRA… So if Kim Davis does indeed go through the state courts, and ask for a modest exemption under the state RFRA — simply to allow her to issue marriage licenses (opposite-sex or same-sex) without her name on them — she might indeed prevail.

Law Blog reached out to an attorney for Ms. Davis for comment.

Deputies in the Rowan County clerk’s office, meanwhile, have begun to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples in Ms. Davis’s absence, sparking more legal controversy. One of her lawyers, Mat Staver, speaking to reporters outside the detention center holding Ms. Davis, charged that the marriages weren’t valid because they were signed without her authority.

“They are not worth the paper they’re written on,” he said, according to the Washington Post.