Republican Ed Gillespie attacked U.S. Sen. Mark Warner for discussing the possibility of a federal judgeship for the daughter of a Democrat who was on the verge of quitting the evenly split Virginia state Senate and throwing control to the GOP.

In the pair's third and final campaign debate in Richmond on Monday, the Republican underdog used his very first question as an opportunity to bring up Warner's recently revealed job talks with the son of former state Sen. Phillip Puckett. Pivoting from an unrelated question on voting rights, Gillespie said Virginia's voters deserve answers from Warner if he discussed judicial appointments in exchange for Puckett remaining in his seat.

"This is very serious in terms of the federal bench — has a big impact on our lives, and we need to make sure the qualified people are put on the bench, and I would never play politics with recommending judicial appointments," Gillespie said.

Warner responded that he simply called Puckett's son to "brainstorm" potential jobs for the senator's daughter, Martha Puckett Ketron.

"I've been a friend of Senator Phillip Puckett and his family for nearly 20 years. When I heard that he was considering resigning from the Senate, I reached out to his son Joseph to see what was going on," he said, adding that "I did not offer her a job nor would I offer her any kind of position. The following day, I talked to Senator Puckett. At that point, he had decided he was going to resign. He had even drafted his letter."

The "People's Debate" was organized by the League of Women Voters and AARP and broadcast on TV stations across Virginia. It came just three days after Warner's spokesman acknowledged that Warner had suggested several job options for Puckett's daughter in June, at a time when Democrats were trying to dissuade the Southwest Virginia senator from leaving the chamber.

The Washington Post reported Friday that Warner called Puckett's son Joseph had discussed potential employment in the private sector and on the federal bench for Puckett's daughter.

Puckett eventually resigned, putting the Senate under the control of the Republican Party and dooming Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe's top legislative priority — expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. The incident also triggered a federal investigation into Puckett's surprise exit, which came at a time when Republicans were planning to give him a job on the state tobacco commission and appoint his daughter to a state judgeship that she held temporarily but sought on a permanent basis.

The issue is a rare point of controversy in what otherwise has been a staid campaign.

Warner, who is seeking a second term, has styled himself as a pro-business centrist with little zeal for social issues and a soft spot for working across the aisle. Trading on his popularity as governor as well as his national profile, he maintained an early lead of up to 25 points in the polls. Gillespie has shrunk that to 12 points, according to more recent surveys.

Gillespie, a strategist and former lobbyist who entered politics as a candidate for the first time this year, often says Warner has voted with President Obama 97 percent of the time. The accusations are aimed at capitalizing on voter dissatisfaction with the Democratic White House.

Beyond the Puckett scandal, the candidates sparred Monday on a string of divisive issues, including the nation's response to the Ebola epidemic, federal spending cuts and Gllespie's past work as a lobbyist for Enron, the failed energy giant.

When asked about Ebola, Warner said it was perhaps time to consider restricting flights from Liberia. Gillespie took a stronger line on flights, saying that the time had already passed to "impose a flight ban" to prevent the spread of Ebola.

Warner also tied the issue to federal spending cuts and to the no-tax pledge that he claimed Gillespie has signed, saying that "stupid pledges" have prevented the government from investing in essential areas, such as health research.

Throughout the debate, Warner said Gillespie had signed the anti-tax pledge promoted by Grover Norquist of Americans for Tax Reform. Warner suggested that taking a hard-line stance against taxes would prevent closing unfair tax loopholes and keep the nation from getting its finances in order.

Gillespie said he did not sign the pledge. "Just because he keeps saying it doesn't make it true," Gillespie said.

However, according to Americans for Tax Reform's Web site, Gillespie has signed the pledge. And even before the debate was over, an aide to Warner came into the press room to hand out copies of a thank-you letter Norquist had sent Gillespie in June.

"I will share with taxpayers in Virginia and the nation your statement and commitment to oppose and vote against any and all tax increases," Norquist wrote.

Asked about their energy policies, the candidates got into a testy exchange.

Warner invited Gillespie to come to Norfolk, where, he said, the Navy is spending millions of dollars to raise piers because of rising sea levels. Yet Warner said the effects of climate change must be balanced with energy production because "China and India are going to go ahead and build 800 additional coal plants."

Chuckling, Gillespie said he has traveled thousands of miles throughout the campaign. "I put those miles on the road. I don't charter planes all over the commonwealth," Gillespie said, referring to a report that Warner charged taxpayers for flights he took around the state.

Starting to go back and forth, Gillespie said Warner voted against drilling off the coast of Virginia.

"This is a classic are where what Senator Warner says in Virginia is very different from what he does in Washington, D.C.," he said.

Warner, saying he only voted 'no' because the bill didn't give Virginia a cut of the profits, shot back that Gillespie worked against increasing fuel efficiency standards as a lobbyist for Enron.

Gillespie defended his work for Enron, said he knew nothing of the company's corruption when it was a client. He also noted that Warner was an investor in Enron.