If you haven't noticed (no thanks to you, mainstream media), Occupy celebrated its second birthday this month on September 17.

To be fair, what coverage there was turned out to be largely laudatory.

Reuters remarked on its new focus on the theme of the "Robin Hood Tax," as did Forbes magazine which felt it "might have some merit. The Ed Show on MSNBC had nice things to say about its messages which have "survived."

Occupier Justin Wedes in an article in the Guardian vowed that movement members -- even without the platform of Zuccotti Park, that "We will continue to move forward peacefully and deliberately in order to take back our county, our future and our dreams.

As to be expected, requisite documentary films that are now appearing. Have they come forth to praise Occupy, or to bury it?

If producer/videographer Michael Perlman has anything to say about it -- it is the former and not the latter. His just-released film, The 99%: Occupy Everywhere, narrated by Lou Reed, delivers on that promise. It is not only an eye-opener, it is a heart-opener.

What might it mean for Americans to have access to films and footage of the violent, physical crackdown of the Occupy Wall Street protestors at Zuccotti Park that infamous morning on November 15, 2011?

I am talking about visuals that never should have been available, as the police forbid the media to be present at this "cleanup." I am talking about the jackbooted thugs passing themselves off as New York City's finest, of course, and their violent crackdown that day.

What might it mean to Americans to see and hear a 92-year-old grandmother tell us about how important "these young people" in the Occupy Movement are to elderly Americans?

What might it mean for Americans to hear from a retired Police Captain who chose to wear his uniform and stand in support of the Occupiers -- bringing about his arrest by his brothers in blue? Or a marine veteran as he re-thinks "Semper Fi?"

They speak with intelligence and passion, through their personal, emotional stories about critical issues of our time including vast income inequality, jobs, debt, affordable health care and education, war, the environment, police-as-military and gun safety. Economist Jeffrey Sachs connects the dots and offer solutions for a fairer and more sustainable future.

The feeling you will come away with? Long live Occupy! Long live this documentary.

Follow Jerry Ashton on Twitter: www.twitter.com/WrittenOffUSA