Government run health care for our veterans is a failed experiment, and it is time to overhaul the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. Recent reports on VA health care facilities have shed light on the mismanagement, substandard treatment and schemes that have resulted in the lack of quality health care that our veterans deserve. The Veterans Health Administration’s socialized style of medicine, where the government is in charge of the hospitals and managing our veterans’ health care, simply does not work.

We need to ensure that veterans are in charge of their health care and not the government. The Veterans Health Administration is a perfect case study of how government should stay out of patient care altogether. Currently, under the Veterans Health Administration, the government owns the hospitals and employs the medical professionals. It is a top-down, bureaucratic management style that lacks transparency and accountability, and where many facilities are applying a lesser standard of care than is expected. The current government run health care system for veterans has become a breeding ground for cover-ups and mismanagement resulting in lack of quality care for our veterans where thousands of them are being treated as second class citizens.

[MORE: Cartoons on Obamacare]

The numerous stories of our vets who were left alone to die, placed on a “secret” wait list or delayed services are horrifying. CNN reported that the Phoenix Veterans Affairs Health Care hid 1,400 to 1,600 sick veterans who waited months to see a doctor. In Fort Collins, Colorado, Veterans Affairs treatment records were falsified, and thousands of veterans were forced to wait months to be seen at an outpatient clinic. In Colombia, South Carolina, six deaths of veterans were linked to delayed cancer screenings. More and more cases of poor care, delays and mismanagement in Veteran Affairs hospitals are being reported in different states.

I interviewed a civilian health care professional who worked at a naval hospital, and she shared that she was shocked to find that the care for our military was substandard. She added, “I would not send a family member to that hospital.” She encountered a hierarchical system where the treatment modalities were outdated. They would prescribe medications that would not be used in today’s best hospitals. As a civilian and a woman medical professional, she was frequently ignored and encountered unqualified doctors who were “not current in their evidence-based practice.” She said the experience was frustrating.

This is what happens when government is in charge and falls short of effectively managing the health care of even a small yet critical segment of our population. The Veterans Health Administration website proudly claims that the agency is America’s largest integrated health care system. Well, it is clearly the worst health care system in America. Its inability to provide quality care has cost the lives of too many veterans.

The VA scandal will leave a negative mark on President Obama’s administration, especially if little immediate action is taken. He took too long to respond to these recent reports, and his detached attitude and lack of executive action will hurt him.

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

While Obama has promised to “punish” the individuals involved in the cover-ups and mismanagement allegations, it is simply not enough. These issues at the VA have been occurring for too long. A major overhaul is needed now. Obama, along with Congress, should move quickly and take decisive actions that will eliminate substandard government-run hospitals and give our vets access to high quality health care.

Veterans need real choices in health care where they can gain access to the best quality patient care. One idea would be to give vouchers to the veterans so that they can buy private health insurance and make the best health care choice for themselves and their families.

We expect our military members to protect our nation to the best of their abilities. Low standards are unacceptable in the military. Our veterans only deserve the highest standard of health care quality. So far they are receiving substandard care through a government run agency. This is simply not acceptable.