Topics: bedbugs, DDT, herbicide resistance, insecticides, Sustainability News, Life News

A Long Island man made headlines this week after he doused his rental car in rubbing alcohol and lit a cigarette — causing a massive fire and nearly killing himself in the process.

He was trying to get rid of bedbugs. Or, as science writer Brooke Borel describes them, you bastards.

And he’s in good company. As Borel describes in her fascinating new book, “Infested,” reports abound of people setting fire to their apartments, of people accidentally poisoning themselves with chemicals and pesticides meant to be used outdoors, and all other disasters — going back millennia — borne of the infected’s desire to “kill them, and by whatever means possible.” The alternative can be even uglier: the medical literature contains at least one case of a woman with a history of mental health problems who, after suffering multiple infestations of bedbugs, jumped to her death.

Salon spoke with Borel about why, despite our best (and, often, worst) efforts, the bedbug isn’t going anywhere — and what, knowing that, we’re supposed to do next. Our conversation has been lightly edited for clarity.

I had no idea before reading your book that we had come so close so recently to wiping the bedbug out. How do we account for its major resurgence in the past decade?

It’s not known 100 percent for sure –and some people are curious why this didn’t happen sooner — but it seems like it’s a combination of several things. First of all, the reason we were able to lower their numbers so much after World War II is because of the advent of DDT and other synthetic insecticides — insects had never experienced anything like this before, so we were able to wipe them out pretty successfully then. But of course, when you are putting a lot of pressure on any species, whether nature is doing it or we are doing it artificially through something like chemicals, evolution is going to happen. It’s totally inevitable.

So we are finding these pockets of DDT-resistant bedbugs all over the world. The thought is those pockets existed for a long time and were getting worse overseas after DDT was banned for use here, because we were still manufacturing it until the ’80s and exporting it to other parts of the world, and of course it was still being manufactured in other parts of the world. Then in the ’80s and ’90s, partly because of deregulation of airlines here in the U.S. and the international treaties that followed that, it just got cheaper to fly. So people were traveling more, potentially spreading bedbugs from these hot spots just to other parts of the world that they hadn’t been to in a long time.

The other thing that happened during that period is that our population grew considerably, and a lot larger percentage of the population live in cities now. Bedbugs spread much more easily in a city, if you think of an apartment building versus a stand-alone home, it’s much easier for the bedbugs to go from one person’s home to the next because they just have to go through the walls or across the hall.

So probably a combination of all these things happened. And the fact that bedbugs are resistant to DDT is also playing out because even though we don’t use DDT anymore, the main class of insecticides that we’re allowed to use legally in our bedrooms — pyrethroids — work in a very similar fashion in the nervous system for the insects, so the insects that already have these genetic mutations that make them resistant to DDT also make them resistant to pyrethroids. And then on top of them, they’ve developed all of these other resistances to pyrethroid as well. There’s more of them, we spread them around more, and they’re hard to kill.

If even DDT can’t completely knock them out, it’s hard to imagine how bad a poison would have to be.



There were attempts to wipe out mosquitoes on a small island off the coast of Italy way back in the ‘40s or ‘50s and even in that small contained land, it was impossible because of evolution. Resistance will always build. It’s more of a control thing rather than an eradication thing.

What becomes really important is when you talk about this kind of desperation among people for a miracle cure, and these companies selling a promise that can’t be kept. You go into a lot of the ways in which we, in trying to get rid of bedbugs, end up causing more harm.

There are some people out there who are certainly trying to help people in good faith, but there are a lot of companies who use misleading advertising and have false claims. There are even a couple of companies that got sued by the Federal Trade Commission for false claims on these all natural sprays that don’t seem to do very much. I think that there is an attempt, whether intentional or not, to tap into that fear and profit off of it.

What are some of the specific tactics that people trying to get rid of bedbugs have taken that could end up not being effective or fueling more resistance?

As far as fueling the resistance goes, just continuing to throw pyrethroids at them probably is not going to help things at all. There are some other chemicals that people can use now. There is a combination of pyrethroids and neonicotinoids that of course have been in the news a lot in recent years for their use in agriculture. But usually pest controllers or exterminators will go in with a bunch of different tactics and hope that the combination of them works. It will be not just the spraying of chemicals, but usually you have to do all of your laundry, washing it on high heat and drying it in the dryer on high, because heat kills the bugs. There are other combinations of cleaning and vacuuming and after you do all of that, putting it in plastic containers to keep the bedbugs from spreading elsewhere. There are a ton of products out there that are used all together in an actual legitimate bedbug cleanup attempt. Any time someone tries to do it themselves and they go and buy these products over the counter with things that say “kill on contact,” that probably isn’t going to exacerbate the resistance problem, but they’re probably not going to get rid of their bedbugs that way.