Richard Fox

District 18 Congressional Candidates California’s 18th Congressional District includes much of Silicon Valley and northern areas in Santa Cruz County, including the San Lorenzo Valley, Bonny Doon and Davenport. Candidates: • Incumbent Rep. Anna Eshoo, D-Palo Alto, 74, was first elected to Congress in 1992 after serving 10 years on the San Mateo County Board of Supervisors. She is a graduate of Cañada College and the CORO Foundation. • Richard Fox, 69, is a pediatrician and health care lawyer from Los Gatos running as a Libertarian-Republican. He graduated from Michigan State University with a BA in economics, from the University of Minnesota Medical School and from Santa Clara University Law School. • Bob Harlow, 24, recently graduated from Stanford University with a BS in physics. He describes himself as a progressive pragmatist.

SANTA CRUZ >> Longtime incumbent Rep. Anna Eshoo, D-Palo Alto, is running for re-election in the 18th District, which includes northern Santa Cruz County, much of Silicon Valley and some of San Mateo County.

After serving on the San Mateo County Board of Supervisors for a decade, she was sworn into Congress in 1993 and is the ranking member on the Communications and Technology Subcommittee.

“Experience matters most when institutions are least functional,” she said. “The fact that I’ve had 30 bills — three-zero — signed by three presidents, by both parties, demonstrates my abilities.”

Hoping to unseat her are candidates Dr. Richard Fox, a Libertarian-Republican, and Bob Harlow, a Democrat.

Dr. Fox, 69, unsuccessfully ran against Eshoo in 2014. He said one reason he joined the race then was because the Affordable Care Act played a dominant role in the election, and he’s a pediatrician and a health care lawyer in Los Gatos.

“Obamacare is a symptom of a larger spending problem,” he said. “The question is, how can we provide quality health care without breaking the bank?”

He also wants to keep using his candidacy as a platform to show that socially moderate and fiscally conservative Republicans can find some footing in this very blue district.

“I would like to demonstrate that there’s political support for this kind of Libertarian message, which is, of course, not the same message we see from the national candidates, who describe themselves as conservatives,” Fox said.

Though he conceded it’s unlikely he’ll win, he’s still tackling the economics of health care on his own by developing a private marketplace where people can shop for local medical services called Bay Care.

New to the race, Harlow is a 24-year-old Wisconsin native who describes himself as a progressive pragmatist. He became involved in politics when campaigning for President Barack Obama in 2008 and then went on to intern for former Republican Wisconsin state Sen. Dale Schultz.

“I decided to run for Congress because I think our political system is not working for the American people anymore,” he said. “Ever since the Reagan administration, this country has been going downhill. I don’t think people want to live in a society that doesn’t work for the average person.”

In 2010, Harlow moved to the Bay Area to study physics at Stanford University, where he recently graduated. He’s also led the development of a mobile phone app that helps keep first responders safe in disaster zones, interned at Technicolor and designed an electro-mechanical device that the Stanford Office of Technology Licensing filed a provisional patent on, according to his campaign website.

Advertisement

If he wins, he would try to raise taxes on the rich to help average Americans “leave their kids better off than themselves, something that’s not existent anymore,” he said. To that end, he wants to raise $100 billion in revenue by taxing individuals making more than $1 million a year to add a public option to the Affordable Care Act by creating a government insurance provider that would compete on the market. In addition, he wants to create a $1 billion need- and merit-based scholarship program to help low-income students go to public colleges and universities.

In Santa Cruz County, District 18 includes much of the Santa Cruz Mountains, Davenport, Bonny Doon and the San Lorenzo Valley, where a major issue for the past year has been the campaign to elevate Coast Dairies as a national monument.

Eshoo visited Davenport last fall to answer questions of concern over the proposal, which some locals fear will bring more traffic to the area and further strain public safety resources. She also introduced legislation to expand the 1,100-mile California Coastal National Monument to include Coast Dairies and three other federally owned lands. The designation, if approved, would raise the scenic property’s profile and make it more competitive in receiving funding for management and public access.

She also help found the Quiet Skies Caucus in Congress, which is working with the community and the Federal Aviation Administration to mitigate increased airplane noise.

“You have to have tenacity in this job. I’m committed to all that from net neutrality to now on the heels of the Paris climate agreement, that we will continue to make progress in our country,” she said. “No matter what I do, I’m on the side of consumers, competition. When you have competition, it produces innovation. When you have competition plus innovation, consumers win.”