<p>Emma Throndson, 11, of Memphis, attempts to complete the monkey bars as her grandfather, Michael Goode, of Sugar Tree, Tenn., grabs a photo during the Grizzlies Riverfront Fitness Trail and Pop-Up Park, presented by BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, at Tom Lee Park.</p>

By Kevin Mckenzie

A well-timed community health forum on Wednesday provided an information-packed opportunity for business and health care executives in Greater Memphis to rally around a Medicaid expansion plan unveiled earlier this week by Tennessee’s governor.

The Tennessee Business Roundtable, a pro-business policy group based in Nashville, organized similar forums in major cities of the state. The forum held at the University of Memphis Fogelman Executive Conference Center landed two days after Gov. Bill Haslam announced “Insure Tennessee.”

If approved by the Legislature early next year, the program would use Medicaid expansion dollars promised by the Affordable Care Act — but refused so far by Tennessee — to provide an alternative approach for health coverage for an estimated 200,000 Tennesseans with household incomes of up to 138 percent of the poverty level, or about $16,105 for an individual in 2014.

Methodist Le Bonheur Health Care chief executive officer Gary Shorb outlined the health challenges facing Tennessee, ranked 42nd by America’s Health Rankings with high rates of diabetes, cardiovascular disease and cancer.

Shorb said a statewide group of health care providers, business and civic associations called Coalition for a Healthy Tennessee has been formed to promote and advocate for the Insure Tennessee plan. It has about 90 members so far.

“Advocating and supporting Insure Tennessee is the right thing to do and it certainly is going to be good for Tennessee and, after this forum, I hope you would agree it will be something you’ll strongly advocate and promote,” Shorb said.

First Horizon National Corp. chief executive officer Bryan Jordan provided the keynote address for about 175 people gathered for the forum. Jordan outlined the wellness efforts, incentives and benefits at the company, parent to First Tennessee Bank, designed to encourage a healthy workplace.

The health care “crisis” threatens public resources — accounting for 32 percent of the state budget — as well as economic opportunity for unhealthy citizens and a state competing for business, Jordan said. Promoting healthy behaviors and expanding access, two issues addressed by the Insure Tennessee plan, are needed, he said.

“Employers cannot afford not to support health and wellness solutions,” Jordan said. “Our current health path is unsustainable. Dealing with this health crisis will require a public-private partnership, and this forum can be a great start.”