Nancy Pelosi has a lot to deal with in Congress but her hands aren't tied. Congress Nancy Pelosi's power play 'The tea party empowers us,' the unlikely House kingmaker says in an exclusive POLITICO interview.

PHOENIX — A week ago Wednesday, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi marshaled the votes to pass a sweeping budget deal that was overwhelmingly opposed by the party actually running the House. Fresh off that win, she hopscotched across the country to rake in $1.5 million for her party at a series of fundraisers.

It’s been that kind of year for Pelosi — an improbable stretch of prominence that’s been perhaps the most surprising twist of her three-decade congressional career.

Story Continued Below

Last November her political career was, by all measures, sputtering. She and her party had just been trounced in the midterm elections, falling deeper into the House minority than they’d been in 80 years. Chatter was building within the Democratic Caucus that it was time for new blood atop a caucus led by three 70-something lawmakers.

But the rise of the House Freedom Caucus, combined with her skill at managing her caucus, has given Pelosi and the 188 House Democrats far more clout than their numbers would dictate. She’s used it to push through legislation that would count as successes if Pelosi were still speaker and to quiet talk of her retirement.

“In some respects, the tea party empowers us,” Pelosi told Politico in a lengthy interview here before she headlined an Arizona state Democratic dinner that benefited Senate hopeful Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick (D-Ariz.). “Our unity empowers us, first and foremost. But they give more leverage to our votes by their ideological stance.”

As for her own political future, an incessant topic of conversation in the Capitol, Pelosi declared that she feels no pressure to leave, swatting aside suggestions that she might follow John Boehner into retirement.

In fact, Boehner’s weakness became Pelosi’s greatest source of strength. His inability to corral the 40-member Freedom Caucus eventually cost him his job. But it meant that Republican leaders repeatedly needed Pelosi to pass critical legislation — to keep the government open, reform Medicare and pass a major budget deal, to name just a few examples.

Newly elected Speaker Paul Ryan is vowing to break that pattern — no more votes on legislation, he promised GOP lawmakers, that a majority of them don’t back. Pelosi has as much riding on his successfully keeping that promise as anyone: It will determine whether she recedes to the usually weak role of minority party leader or continues to play kingmaker.

It’s safe to say she’s monitoring the situation closely.

Pelosi called Ryan’s inaugural speech as speaker last week — when he spoke of the need to empower a “neglected minority” of Republicans — “a little scary.”

“It was really a speech to the Freedom Caucus, wasn’t it?” she said. “So we’ll see.”

Ryan has had two polar opposite reputations among Democrats: the entitlement- and welfare-slashing ideologue turned into an election-season boogeyman; or the reasonable guy willing to take half a loaf for the sake of progress who cut a major spending deal with liberal Sen. Patty Murray two years ago.

Pelosi said she’s reserving judgment on which version she subscribes to until she has more direct experience with the new GOP leader. The coming weeks will provide her a hefty sample, as Congress faces deadlines on must-pass government spending legislation.

She and Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid are already laying out conditions: no controversial GOP riders, such as those to defund Planned Parenthood, and no more kick-the-can spending bills; Congress needs to fix the problem for at least a year.

“I don’t know what we can agree on, but we’re not going to have [riders],” Pelosi said. “We move together.”

Her ability to make such demands stems from her strong position in her caucus. Rep. Gerry Connolly (D-Va.), a moderate Democrat who was one of the staunchest critics of the Democrats’ message during the 2014 election, said he’s seen a dramatic shift in how the party is talking to voters since last November.

He attributed that to Pelosi widening her inner circle of confidants, including enlisting roughly a dozen younger lawmakers into a new messaging arm of the party.

“She is on a roll and has been for the last few months,” Connolly said. “This is probably her best year since 2009.” That was the year she steered a massive government stimulus bill and financial reform legislation through the House, and paved the way for passage of Obamacare.

Still, it’s a favorite pastime of House Democrats to speculate when Pelosi will move on. After Reid said in the spring this would be his final term and Boehner abruptly resigned months later, many thought Pelosi would be next.

But Pelosi said that other leaders’ decisions to retire have had no effect on her: “It has nothing to do with me.” She’ll stay, she said, as long as Democrats want her.

Pelosi added that she sees one of her chief roles as being the protector of Obamacare and that she has no intention of leaving when the law is still under fire from Republicans.

“My main mission and best accomplishment, of course, is the Affordable Care Act, which is continually under assault,” she said.

Last month, Pelosi also gave her strongest signal to date that she has no plans of retiring after the 2016 elections. In the midst of the Republican leader election, when she was nominated by Democrats for speaker, she joked that she was asking for her caucus’ vote for speaker “sooner than I expected to ask again.”

For now, Democrats are squarely behind Pelosi. The post-election grumbling has subsided, and the party is once again turning toward its most prolific congressional fundraiser to bolster its candidates in 2016. The party is so deep in the hole, though, it probably won’t have a realistic shot at retaking the House until the end of the decade or later.

Some of the more recently elected Democrats are still pushing for a clearer path to move up party ranks. The election of Ryan, who is three decades younger than any of the top three Democratic leaders, has reinvigorated that talk.

Pelosi has been trying to accommodate their concerns. She created a messaging committee and a voting rights-focused group that is stacked with newer House Democrats, along with some of her close allies.

She has also worked to raise the profile of younger members. During a news event last week in Phoenix, Pelosi praised first-term Rep. Ruben Gallego as the “future” of the caucus.

Democrats also know that if Pelosi leaves, she’ll depart with a network of donors unmatched in their ranks. She is one of the most successful nonpresidential fundraisers in history.

Just in the past week, a Democratic Campaign Congressional Committee event that she hosted with Obama raised $500,000. A few days later, she was on hand for a 50-person dinner hosted by Jonathan Allan Soros — Obama was also in attendance — that brought in $1 million.

That brought Pelosi’s haul to $32.7 million for this election cycle — after doing 172 fundraising events in 29 cities just this year. Since entering Democratic leadership in 2002, she has raised $461.5 million, according to her staff.

At the fundraiser for Kirkpatrick, who is challenging Republican Sen. John McCain in 2016, Pelosi energetically worked the room. She stopped for photos with interns and top-tier donors after having spent a bulk of the afternoon meeting one-on-one with party funders.

Pelosi spends so much time on the road that the California Democrat recently reached 3 million miles on United Airlines.

The challenge now is to translate money into seats. Democrats have struggled with that since 2010.

Pelosi and Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee Chairman Ben Ray Luján (D-N.M.) have forged a campaign strategy that tailors the party’s message to individual districts, as opposed to a one-size-fit-all approach. They’re staying away from niche economic issues like paycheck inequality and the minimum wage, which were seen as a loser for many Democratic House hopefuls last year.

Luján said Pelosi tasked him with coming up with a new way of reaching voters who would likely vote Democrat but aren’t motivated to get to the polls.

“We’re focused on having Democratic incumbents and candidates speaking in the right way in their districts,” Luján said. “We’re hearing the same message, we’re just using a different way of communicating that.”

Pelosi’s turnabout over the past nine months has surprised even some of her longtime supporters.

It started when the House was on the verge of a government shutdown, and Boehner in need of Democrats’ help. Conservatives wanted to shut down the Department of Homeland Security to halt a series of executive orders from President Barack Obama on immigration. Pelosi and Boehner joined forces to prevent a federal closure, relying overwhelmingly on Democratic votes.

Weeks later, she teamed with Boehner again to clinch a $200 billion package that overhauled how the government reimburses Medicare doctors. It fixed a problem that had persisted for decades.

But Pelosi’s biggest win this year was getting more than 160 Democrats to back the nuclear deal with Iran, including a number of senior Jewish Democrats who were initially wary. The whip operation became a personal crusade for Pelosi, who kept a three-ring binder of supportive statements and sent handwritten notes to lawmakers who pledged their vote — a tactic she’s used to build relationships for decades. She is also sending out personalized notes thanking members for voting for the budget deal.

Her leverage does have limits, however. Pelosi was widely criticized by lawmakers for what they viewed as a muddled strategy on key trade legislation that passed the House in June. She didn’t disclose her position until just minutes before the vote, when she opted to buck Obama and vote against it. Undecided Democrats said at the time they would have appreciated clearer direction from their leader.

Pelosi said that had she come out early against the bill, it would have doomed the White House’s hopes of passing the bill. Instead, she waited until the end to give Obama the chance to persuade as many moderate lawmakers as possible to support trade powers.

The Democrats who opposed the bill were “never” going to change their minds, “and the ones who did want it thanked me for giving them the leeway,” Pelosi said. “There was no way it was going to turn out any differently than it did.”

Any ill will between Pelosi and Obama or fellow Democrats was short-lived.

And after Boehner retired, he practically skipped through the halls of Congress in a wave of apparent relief. If that got Pelosi thinking what her own post-Congress life might be like, she wouldn’t admit it.

“People keep saying, ‘What are you going to do when you leave here?’” she said. “Do I have to do something? Why do I have to do anything when I leave here?”

Pelosi did concede looking forward to a few things when she does finally leave: “Read, (go) to plays and symphonies and movies, and be with my grandchildren.”