Buy Photo Waves crash over a wall at the end of Plaza Court in Long Branch as superstorm Sandy bears down on the Jersey Shore on Oct. 29, 2012. (Photo: MARY FRANK/Staff photographer)Buy Photo

"Our damage wasn't visible in the same sense as Belmar or Spring Lake," said Mayor Adam Schneider. "You had to walk along the ocean" and look west.

There, not only would you encounter the boardwalk in pieces but also see that the city's iconic bluff - the one recreated by Winslow Homer in a series of 19th Century lithographs —simply wasn't where is used to be.

"The bluff on which it sat was not there, had eroded or been pushed back," said Schneider. "We just got clobbered. The question was how much was salvageable."

The answer still is forthcoming. Without the strength and former position of the bluff, changes in the engineering of any oceanfront structure would have to be accomplished before reconstruction could begin.

"The boardwalk and bluff still is an issue," Schneider said. "There is a bit of a one-size-fits all approach from the federal government which makes sense in towns where all you are doing is putting the boardwalk on pilings."

Armed with $14.5 million in federal money, officials are working on plans for new boardwalk, which Schneider anticipates should be up and running next summer. The mayor also suspects the city will need another $2 million on engineering solutions to the bluff stability issue.

In the meantime, Schneider has restored all public access points that existed on the city beaches prior to the storm. 2012 was a record-breaking year for the city's beach revenue was 2013 — with one third of the beaches unusuable — was the second best year, officials noted.

"We got people on and off the beach safely last summer and we will do the same this year," said Schneider.

Boardwalk planning will continue: "We needed to update the boardwalk" in any case, he said. "We need a lot of room for people to walk. We've got to design something that will withstand the next storm and have FEMA pay for it. I still think that is the right goal."

Officials anticipate the boardwalk will be up and running by next summer. Currently, the last of the demolition and debris removal is ongoing, in advance of the start of the summer season, Schneider said.

"The worst part of it was debris - tree limbs, " Schneider said. "We found pieces had washed two or three blocks inland."

That work is ongoing and officials awarded contracts last month to remove the last of all the demolition and debris, which is supposed to be accomplished before the traditional start of the summer season.

All nine beach access points will be up and running as well the entire length of the municipal beachfront, as opposed to last year when only a portion of the beachfront was usable. Pre- and post-Sandy, however, tourists have returned, if beach revenues are a reliable indicator. They broke records two years in a row, officials said.

Meanwhile, officials are moving forward on funding for repairs, the majority of which will be reimbursed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, including a $925,000 bond ordinance adopted recently by the City Council.

The Pinsky Fountain, at the corner of Long Branch Avenue and lower Broadway, would be repaired, and infrastructure along the beachfront would be improved with funds from the bond ordinance.

FEMA is expected to reimburse the city for 90 percent of the $925,000 project.

The bond issue would include $225,000 for repairs to the Pinsky Fountain, a popular ground-level fountain where children play in the spraying water during hot summer days.

The city also has received $1.5 million in federal funds to repair storm-related damage at both Manahassett Creek Park and Jackson Woods.

The Manahassett Creek Park project will involve replacing fences, removing and replacing 36,347 square yards of synthetic field turf at the soccer and baseball fields, replacing 1,500 square feet of artificial turf at the putting green, and replacing 245 square yards of wood mulch at the park playground. Schneider said the project should be complete by the fall soccer and Pop Warner seasons. Sandy poured four feet of water onto the fields, he said.

Repairs to Jackson Woods will include placing crushed stone in the parking lot, and replacing fences and gates.

Pre Sandy tax revenues:$80,627254.10

Post Sandy tax revenues:$82,609,077.64.

Pre Sandy property assessments: $4,116,411,347

Post Sandy property assessments:$4,045,489,748

Number of "Substantially damaged" homes: 74, with nine demolished so far and six new homes planned as replacements. another 19 "substantially damaged" homes are now being elevated.

Number of businesses, before Sandy and now: all are up and running.

Status of repairs to boardwalks, beaches: engineering and plans to recreate the bluff and rebuild the boardwalk are ongoing. All nine regular beach assessment points are to be open this summer for the first time since Sandy. Beach replenishment was undertaken north to Elberon. Elberon south will be done this October, officials said.

Road, infrastructure damaged/fixed: Pinsky Foundation will have to have its underground control panel repaired. It was flooded during Sandy.

Percentage of the city's recovery: 85 percent throughout the city proper; 65 percent at the waterfront

"People are a little impatient about the boardwalk," Schneider said. "In some ways, we are back, bigger and better than before the storm."

Read or Share this story: http://www.app.com/story/news/local/2014/05/24/long-branch-update/9532555/