Kendra Pearsall did not know anyone when she moved to Longmont in September 2013.

She was 39 at the time, but she felt like a student without friends to sit with in the cafeteria, isolated and alone despite the swarms of people around her.

She was sad and lonely. She needed to make friends.

Pearsall began dating someone shortly after she moved, but that wasn't enough.

"Life is hard, and you need support from a variety of people," Pearsall said. "It makes all the difference in the world if you've had a tough day when you have a group of friends to look forward to, to go out with and laugh it off. It's very therapeutic."

Now, Pearsall has a group of about 25 close friends and her circle is growing every week.

Stacey Franklin, right, talks with host Rebecca Bertolin at the Longmont Social Meetup gathering Jan. 23. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

In October, Pearsall launched Longmont Social Meetup — a group aimed at helping local residents find meaningful friendships.

The group posts information and events on meetup.com, a website that hosts thousands of group profiles and calendars across the world.

The Longmont Social Meetup page has garnered 300 members since launching in October.

Pearsall credits the group's welcoming members and laid-back gatherings for the speedy growth.

Many of the members are single and range in age from about 30 to 60, Pearsall said, though the group is open to anyone who wants to join.

Rebecca Bertolin, one of the group's event organizers, hosted Germanfest at her home in January, which drew about 50 people including most of the group's 30 core members who attend events regularly.

The group played German music, drank German beer, ate German food and learned German phrases like "may I have another beer," Bertolin said.

While she meets people through her job as a teacher and at church, Bertolin said, she does not relate to those friends in the same way that she connects with people in the meetup group.

"I have a lot of friends from my church as well, but many of those friends are married, not single like me, and they have kids and families," Bertolin said. "This group gives me a place to meet people who are more like me."

About 45 meetup groups show up in a meetup.com search within two miles of Longmont.

Hobby groups like The Longmont Hiking Meetup Group and Longmont Area Beginning and Returning Cyclists have some of the highest memberships. More than 1,200 people have joined the hiking group and more than 700 follow the cycling meetup.

Greg Hill, second from left, tells jokes to group members during the Longmont Social Meetup gathering on Jan. 23. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

Longmont Area Moms Network and The LoCo Dogs seek a targeted demographic of women with children or local dog-owners.

Other groups like TinkerMill: The Longmont Makerspace, Startup Longmont and LSC Health Network target area professionals.

Each group has its own goals, but they all promote meeting new people, which can be difficult for adults that have families, jobs and responsibilities to consider, Pearsall said.

It was easier to make friends in school, especially in college when life revolved around socializing, Pearsall said.

Pearsall works from home so she does not meet people in a traditional workplace. And as a married woman, going to local watering holes may send the wrong message, she said.

But meetup groups are not always a quick fix.

Pearsall has attended at least four other Longmont-based meetups since 2013. Some were a good fit. Others were not.

"I got tired of feeling like I didn't fit in so I quit going," Pearsall said. "That's why I started this one."

Longmont Social Meetup won't be the right group for everyone. But for Pearsall, it has become a sanctuary.

"It's my cure for loneliness," Pearsall said. "I've found close, intimate, platonic friendships. The kind of friends that would be in your wedding, and that's what I was missing. I couldn't ask for anything more."

Whitney Bryen: 303-684-5274, wbryen@times-call.com or twitter.com/soonerreporter