Topics: cliven bundy, Editor's Picks, Fox News, Jon Stewart, Sean Hannity, spring break, Television, The Daily Show, TV, Entertainment News, News, Politics News

On Wednesday, Sean Hannity, the right-wing host of Fox News’ “Hannity” weeknight program, had two pieces of big news.

First, he claimed that his coverage of spring break excesses in Panama City Beach had led the city council to pass a ban on beach drinking. And second, he suggested that this proves that Jon Stewart — and all liberals, for that matter — don’t really care about people. He cited the news as “evidence of the left’s hypocrisy; they don’t really care.” Referencing the way that Stewart had mocked his weeklong coverage of spring break the year prior, Hannity went on to call Stewart a “sanctimonious jackass.”

But the real sanctimonious jackass in this story is Hannity. Let’s start with Hannity’s choice of epithet, since it is there that we can discover the core of the debate. Hannity chose to marry two key concepts: the idea of being morally superior to others (sanctimonious) and the idea of being a stupid person willing to perform stunts in order to look cool (jackass). It’s really an amazing insult when you think about it — because it defines precisely all that is wrong with Hannity’s public persona.

Hannity was thrilled to be able to report that something on his show had a real-life impact. Too thrilled, really, since his glee reminds us how rare it is for his show to report anything that is remotely news-like. His reaction, though, is proof of his need to reiterate that he is above others — especially liberal adversaries like Stewart. And then there are Hannity’s innate jackass qualities — his constant need to call attention to himself even when doing so simply makes him look like an idiot.

It’s not surprising that Hannity chose this one moment when his show’s coverage may have done some good to go after Stewart. Hannity had long been a target of Stewart’s sharp satire. There was the time that Stewart busted Hannity for using fake footage to exaggerate the crowds at an anti-health care reform rally in November 2009, causing Hannity to make a rare on-air apology. Stewart has also repeatedly gone after Hannity for his racist coverage of Obama and his constant need to refer to Obama as “the worst president ever.” Then there are Hannity’s repeated appearances on “The Daily Show’s” Moment of Zen. (For example, see this and this.)

But the best showdown between them was over Hannity’s embrace of Cliven Bundy. Bundy, as you may recall, was a Nevada rancher who refused to pay grazing fees on federally owned land. The dispute began back in 1993 when Bundy began protesting the fees by refusing to renew his permit. The standoff reached a peak in March 2014 when the Bureau of Land Management closed down acres of land to capture trespassing cattle and caused Bundy supporters to stage armed protest. Hannity quickly moved to champion Bundy, showcasing him as a patriot.

Hannity’s support of Bundy was covered by Stewart on three consecutive days. At the heart of Stewart’s critique was the fact that Hannity seemed to be excited by the idea of Bundy’s disrespect for the law — when Hannity himself often went after immigrants and student protesters for not obeying the law. Stewart also showed astonishment that uber-patriot Hannity would defend a man who explicitly claimed that he did not recognize the U.S. government as existing.

Bundy wasn’t just an anarchist; he was also an outright racist. Shortly after the protests he was quoted saying about black people, “I’ve often wondered, are they better off as slaves, picking cotton and having a family life and doing things, or are they better off under government subsidy?” Even though Hannity called the racist remarks repugnant, he still defended his view that Bundy had exposed “government overreach.” Of course, given that Hannity paid $300,000 for a portrait of Obama burning the Constitution, we might wonder the extent to which he personally links racism and dislike for government.