SAN ANTONIO - Some families are turning to their Christian faith to deal with the rising cost of health care.

They're called "Health Care Sharing Ministries," and News 4 learned they are making a difference in families day-to-day lives in San Antonio..

"When we had our first child, it took us several years to pay off the bill, and we felt the burden of that," said Christy Cleghorn.

According to Cleghorn, at one point, she didn't think she could afford to have another child, but because of Samaritan Ministries, she and her husband were able to add to their growing family.'

"The more I learned about this health care sharing ministry, I learned we would be saving money, and it was kind of a paradigm shift to how health care works," said Cleghorn.

So instead of paying thousands of dollars each month for a premium and meeting a deductible, Cleghorn learned about Samaritan Ministries through Grace Point Church.

They are a part of a community of people that will help them," said Jamye Cappadonna, Pastor at Grace Point Church. "It's not insurance. It truly is members sharing each other's health costs."

Here's how it works

About 60,000 Christian families of three or more are enrolled in this particular healthcare sharing ministry.

They pay around $400 a month locally to their church for health care.

If they're single, they pay about $180 a month.



"You're sending your check each month to a different person," said Cappadonna.

That money is then shared with families who need help paying for their medical expenses.

"From prenatal vitamins all the way to his first checkup after he was born, everything's been covered and we were only responsible for $300," said Cleghorn.



"Anything under $300 like routine care, members take care of on their own," said James Lansberry, executive vice president of Samaritan Ministries.

According to Lansberry, these families and individuals are also exempt from the Affordable Care Act.

"We have a member systems fund with about $500K in it right now that we would use to offset any needs that would remain after discount," Lansberry said.

Lansberry also said in order to qualify, you must be a Christian, attend Church three out of the four Sundays a month, and not have any pre-existing medical conditions.

"We are called to bear one another's burdens, and so that's what we're doing. We are sharing the burdens," said Cappadonna.

For Cleghorn and her family, she said choosing Samaritan Ministries was the best decision she could've made in the long run both spiritually and financially.

"Knowing that I didn't have to worry about the financial obligation helped me enjoy being a mom on a whole different level, and that I will always cherish," Cleghorn said. "If I would've known this existed, I would've jumped on the bandwagon long before my first child."

Not all church communities have this option. News 4 spoke to other neighboring ecumenical faiths, and they tell us they think this is a good idea and are looking into it.

Learn More



Christian-based health care ministries