Buy Photo Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield’s Wall offices are seen in this 2008 file photo. (Photo: FILE PHOTO)Buy Photo

New Jersey’s biggest health insurer slowly has been rolling out a new way to reimburse doctors for their care, rewarding them for improving their patients’ health instead of the number of services they provide.

Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield said this week the results are paying off: better diabetes control, lower hospital admissions, fewer emergency room visits.

The promise of delivering better care at a lower cost “is no longer theoretical, it’s a reality,” said Robert A. Marino, Horizon’s chairman and chief executive officer.

Newark-based Horizon has 3.8 million members. It started its program – known as a patient-centered medical home – in 2011. And the program has grown to include about 750,000 of its members.

The shift comes as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare, has put pressure on the health care industry to improve the quality of care and lower the cost.

Buy Photo The Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey blimp. (Photo: FILE PHOTO)

One way: reward doctors not for the number of services they provide, but for convincing patients to tend to their mental health, diet, exercise and live healthier lives. Ultimately, those patients will avoid illnesses down the road that can be expensive to treat.

“It’s working,” said Erin Zielinski, practice manager for Dr. Marc Feingold, a primary care doctor in Manalapan. “We’re tracking our patients a lot better with the program. We’re able to make sure they’re getting the screenings they need. As far as catching illness earlier, we’re doing it.”

About 70 percent of Feingold’s patients participate in a patient-centered medical home program – either through private insurers or Medicare, Zielinski said.

Horizon reviewed claims from 2014 and found members visiting doctors in its in its patient-centered medical home had a better outcome than traditional practice.

It included a:

•9 percent lower cost of care.

•8 percent lower rate in hospital admissions.

•5 percent lower rate in emergency room visits.

•6 percent higher rate of improved diabetes control.

•7 percent higher rate in cholesterol management for diabetic patients.

Michael L. Diamond; 732-643-4038; mdiamond@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1SIPfQo