Pharmacology Consult Publication Exclusive

Skyrocketing drug prices have recently been highlighted in national news stories, due in part to several drug products used to treat infectious diseases. In particular, drug products that have soared 1,000% or more within several days have caught the attention of journalists and the medical community alike.

Daraprim (pyrimethamine, Turing Pharmaceuticals) and Albenza (albendazole, Amedra Pharmaceuticals) have recently been highlighted in the press and medical literature. Both drugs are costly and unavailable as a generic product: pyrimethamine at $900 per 25-mg tablet and albendazole at $122 per 200-mg tablet (average whole prices). Pyrimethamine is labeled for use in treating toxoplasmosis, while albendazole is labeled for use as an anthelmintic to treat various parasitic infectious diseases.

While both agents were originally labeled for use by the FDA more than 20 years ago, the prices for both have risen by 2,000% to 6,000% within the past few years when they were newly acquired by pharmaceutical manufacturers. Significant price hikes have occurred for several older drugs as well. Among other reasons, pharmaceutical manufacturers have recently raised prices for these drugs many-fold because little, or no, competition exists with their product.

Edward A. Bell

Can health care professionals and our patients respond to these drug price spikes in a meaningful way?

Understanding drug pricing and economics

Drug prices and the economics of drug-product pricing and availability have come under heightened scrutiny within recent years due to changes in health care policy from implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), pharmaceutical company mergers, the upcoming presidential election and its focus upon health care costs, among other factors. How the price of a drug product is determined and how this price affects our patients and third-party payers is very complex and not well-known outside of the product’s manufacturer (see Parker-Lue 2015 for a more in-depth analysis).

In some respects, drug products can be viewed similarly as other market place commodities that the public purchases, in that shopping for the best price can be helpful and the manufacturers strive to make a profit for the company and its shareholders. In other respects, however, drug products can be viewed differently — they improve our health and may allow us to live longer, more productive lives.

Some drug products may be essential to a person’s life. In this respect, drug-product availability to the public and its price, which may limit availability to segments of the population, then assumes an ethical characteristic. Data from various surveys have demonstrated that up to 40% of patients will reduce medication adherence to save money on high drug costs, by not filling prescribed medications, skipping doses, cutting tablets in size to create more doses, or substituting less expensive over-the-counter drug products for prescription products.

A drug-pricing strategy that is increasingly recognized and scrutinized is differential pricing — variations in drug-product pricing by country as reflected by the country’s wealth. For example, some drug prices in the United States have been criticized for being significantly greater than in other countries. Other pricing strategies may potentially reduce drug prices, including governmental price controls and national drug formularies as enacted in other major developed countries, reference pricing (a single reimbursement price for a drug class), or value-based pricing (price established by the value to the customer, or patient).