HEALTHY MEASUREMENT: Joe Kitto of the St. Anthony North Cardiac Team, takes Mike Hembd's measurements during one of the healthy challenges at Glory Community. ( Photo submitted by Christina Maraone )

More info For more information on Glory Community, go to glorycommunity.org. For more information on St. Anthony North Health Campus, go to stanthonynorthhc.org.

Thomas Edison once said, "If we all did things we are capable of, we would astound ourselves." No one understands this statement more than Glory Community co-founders and proud parents, Jim and Sandy Hembd.

Parents to Mike and Mark, their twin sons born with Down syndrome, the Hembds fought to give their sons the life they deserve and the independence they could handle. After high school graduation, Mike and Mark held steady jobs while staying at home with their parents. While this arrangement worked at the time, Jim and Sandy knew this could not last forever. They knew that as the boys got older, residential care for their adult life would be required. Based on their sons' needs, in 2012 they opened Glory Community, a private, Christian nonprofit based in Broomfield for adults with intellectual disabilities.

Advertisement

Glory Community's long-term goal is a five-home residential neighborhood for up to 40 adults with intellectual disabilities. The first home, opened in 2012, houses eight men and a live-in caretaking couple. It provides a home where adults with developmental disabilities can live, work and socialize. Residents are encouraged to develop their strengths, self-confidence and independence, thus creating a full and balanced life. Sandy Hembd quickly realized that for residents to reach their full potential, they had to learn to improve their health and wellness. That's when she reached out to St. Anthony North Hospital about nutrition and exercise classes for residents.

"Glory Community wants to emphasize health, exercise and wellness," she said. "It's a problem for them to remember what good snack choice is or why exercise is important. I thought since St. Anthony North Health Campus is new to the northern Westminster/Broomfield area, they may want to become involved with a community nonprofit."

The St. Anthony North Cardiac Team, led by Joe Kitto, quickly embraced the challenge.

"Our team sat down and developed ideas we could implement that would encourage involvement and education with the residents while building a long-lasting relationship," Kitto said. "One of our goals for them was to increase their physical activity and to increase their intake of fruits and vegetables. We also knew we needed to educate residents on why incorporating healthy behaviors was so important."

Each month, the cardiac team crafted goals aimed at improving residents' health and wellness. The first month, the cardiac team explained the importance of regular exercise, gave each resident a pedometer and the men were off and running. Each day they would record the number of steps they took and at the end of the month, the cardiac team would return to take core measurements and vitals, see who won the competition and reward all residents for their hard work.

The goals in the following months yielded similar results. One month the cardiac team educated residents on healthy fruit intake and the following month they replicated their efforts with vegetables. The residents were not only excited at the opportunity to eat healthier, they were also excited for a little friendly competition. Resident caretakers said they had never seen residents so eager to pick the fruits and vegetables out of the backyard garden.

"The creativity for the classes was amazing. They loved the competition and the rewards because it included certificates and a prize. The guys went so far as to buy frames for their certificates, so they were very meaningful to them," Sandy Hembd said.

This program and collaboration turned out to be a tremendous success. she said.