John and Sophie Holzwarth left Denver and moved to the Kawuneeche Valley along the Colorado River. The year they arrived, they constructed this cabin they called "Mama." It remains standing as part of the Holzwarth Ranch Historic Site. ( Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park )

The main building at Never Summer Ranch is shown during an April 1974 snowstorm. This, and the other surrounding structures, were razed a year or so later following their purchase by the Park Service. (Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park)

There were a number of lodges on the east side of the Continental Divide within Rocky Mountain National Park. These have faded into history with a policy by the Park Service to reduce the number of commercial operations.

In 1917, John Holzwarth Sr. and his wife Sophie left their Denver business, the Old Corner boarding house and saloon at 19th and Santa Fe, because of Prohibition. The couple purchased a 160-acre homestead on the west side of the Colorado River in the Kawuneeche Valley intending to ranch.

At the time, this was not part of Rocky Mountain National Park.

Johnnie Holzwarth and his three sisters helped their parents with ranching duties. The family constructed a cabin they called "Mama," and the following year, they added the adjacent Fleshut's Ranch and increased their holdings to 900 acres.

Coincident with the opening of Fall River Road in 1920, they discovered that passing motorists offered new business opportunities. They converted their homestead, added cabins and constructed the Holzwarth Trout Lodge. It cost all of $2 a day to stay, including three meals.

Since the road passed on the west side of the Colorado River opposite the ranch, the Holzwarth family developed a new resort on the Fleshut property starting with the homestead cabin. Here they added new buildings, and in 1929, they built a large lodge they named the Never Summer Ranch.

The original Holzwarth Trout Lodge was purchased by the Nature Conservancy in 1974, and a year later, the park boundaries were expanded to include this property.

Advertisement

All of the Never Summer Ranch buildings, except Fleshut's homestead cabin, were razed and the buildings that once formed the Holzwarth Trout Ranch were preserved as a historic site open to summer visitors.

It is a short walk across the Colorado River to the site.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.