Block Steel on the west end of Skokie is one of the companies that would benefit under proposed national legislation creating a tax credit for providing "fair wages and good benefits to workers," according to U.S. Rep. Jan Schakowsky (D-9).

That's why Schakowsky chose Block Steel Friday, May 22, as the venue to announce the bill, which is also supported by U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin. The proposed legislation will be introduced in Congress after the Memorial Day weekend, she said.

Called the Patriot Employer Tax Credit Act of 2015, the legislation would stop rewarding companies that ship jobs overseas, underpay their workers and offer inadequate benefits, according to Schakowsky.

She said for too long, workers and their families have "struggled to make ends meet. We have the power to stop that."

Under the bill, a tax credit of about $1,200 per U.S. employee would be awarded to companies that achieve the following criteria:

• Maintain headquarters in the United States if the company has ever been headquartered here and has not inverted to avoid U.S. taxes. Companies must maintain or increase the number of workers in the United States compared to the number of workers overseas, and not reduce the number of workers through the use of contractors.

• Pay at least 90 percent of U.S. workers an hourly wage equal to 156 percent of poverty for a family of three, which amounts to a minimum of about $15 an hour.

Patriot Employer Tax Credit Act event Mike Isaacs, Pioneer Press U.S. Rep. Jan Schakowsky, D-9, poses for a photo Friday, May 22, with executives and workers from Block Steel in Skokie. The congresswoman and U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin are supporting the Patriot Employer Tax Credit Act of 2015. U.S. Rep. Jan Schakowsky, D-9, poses for a photo Friday, May 22, with executives and workers from Block Steel in Skokie. The congresswoman and U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin are supporting the Patriot Employer Tax Credit Act of 2015. (Mike Isaacs, Pioneer Press)

• Offer Affordable Care Act-compliant health insurance to employees.

• Provide 90 percent of non-highly compensated U.S. employees a defined benefit plan or a defined contribution plan with an employer contribution or match equal to at least 5 percent of worker compensation.

• Pay the difference between regular salary and military compensation for all National Guard and Reserve employees called for active duty. The company would also have to have a plan in place to recruit veterans.

• Put a plan in place to recruit employees with disabilities.

Companies with fewer than 50 employees would be able to qualify for the tax credit by fulfilling a subset of these criteria, Schakowsky said.

To pay for the tax credits, the legislation would close a $50 billion tax loophole currently allowing corporations to deduct interest expenses used to invest overseas, she said.

The congresswoman made her announcement on the factory floor of Block Steel with company executives and long-time workers by her side. Durbin did not attend because the Senate is still in session in Washington.

Patriot Employer Tax Credit Act event Mike Isaacs, Pioneer Press U.S. Rep. Jan Schakowsky, D-9, talks about the Patriot Employer Tax Credit Act of 2015, Friday, May 22, at Block Steel in Skokie. Supported by her and U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin, the national bill would reward companies that treat their workers well. U.S. Rep. Jan Schakowsky, D-9, talks about the Patriot Employer Tax Credit Act of 2015, Friday, May 22, at Block Steel in Skokie. Supported by her and U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin, the national bill would reward companies that treat their workers well. (Mike Isaacs, Pioneer Press) (Mike Isaacs, Pioneer Press)

"This is the type of legislation that I'm happy to see presented to Congress," said Joe Block, company owner.

Block said he has been "aggravated" at competitors being able to ship jobs overseas to save money while Block Steel has always paid decent living wages and treated workers fairly.

In a prepared statement, Durbin said the priorities are turned around.

"Instead of rewarding businesses that ship jobs overseas we should reward companies that invest in their workers by providing fair wages, health insurance and retirement benefits," he said.

Block Steel has been a family-run business for some 65 years. It began in the 1920's when Albert Block started one of Chicago's first steel warehouses, according to the company. In 1948, with the assistance of his son Harvey and son-in-law Oscar Wolfson, Albert Block founded Block Steel in Forest Park.

The Schakowsky-Durbin bill is being introduced at a time when there is a growing movement advocating for a living wage in different parts of the country. Schakowsky said she believes most Americans will support the bill.

How much Republican support the bill gets remains to be seen. But the Illinois legislators have to drum up bi-partisan support for the bill if it is to have a chance.

"The jobs here at Block Steel pay a living wage, provide quality health benefits and ensure workers can retire with dignity," Schakowsky said. "Employers that provide these jobs should get tax credits, and our legislation pays for these tax credits in the best way possible – by closing tax loopholes for corporations that ship jobs overseas."

misaacs@pioneerlocal.com

Twitter: @SKReview_Mike