EHR vendors huddle on interoperability measures

With help from Darius Tahir (@DariusTahir) and Arthur Allen (@ArthurAllen202)

HOW TO MEASURE INTEROPERABILITY: A dozen EHR vendors will work with health IT research group KLAS to develop ways to measure interoperability, KLAS said Monday. "Vendors and providers willingly committed to go arm in arm to work closely with Washington to help alleviate the interoperability-measurement burden faced by the government,” it said in a release. In other words, vendors will come up with a solution to keep Washington from dictating the terms. Not clear yet what the final product will look like, but the vendors haven't been enthusiastic about congressional language on the subject. Allscripts, athenahealth, Cerner, eClinicalWorks, Epic, GE Healthcare, Greenway, Healthland, McKesson, MEDITECH, MEDHOST and NextGen Healthcare are all involved in the process.

Story Continued Below

Some health IT experts question whether the effort will be productive. Intermountain CIO Marc Probst, who attended an Oct. 2 meeting in Utah with the companies, doesn't think so. "There's too many diverse interests associated with it," Probst said last week. "Asking this group of people to solve interoperability is like asking the United Nations to come away with a global language."

KLAS said that John Halamka, CIO of Beth Israel Deaconess, and other health IT leaders had created measures that would form the basis of the project. But Halamka has said he doubts interoperability can be measured. “I would love to know ... because I don’t know,” Halamka told the Health IT Standards Committee in May. “I know, we’ll send C-CDAs and count the number you send; that will achieve a good result. Well look at meaningful use Stage 2 and the number of folks who sent C-CDAs to themselves or to what I’m going to call electronic garbage cans as opposed to [someone else ]. Let’s measure care coordination, close loop referrals or some other positive outcome.” Halamka was responding to language in the House’s 21st Century Cures Act that would decertify EHRs or penalize providers for failing interoperability measures.

#LetDoctorsBeDoctors MOVEMENT LAUNCHES: Animated athenahealth CEO Jonathan Bush has helped launch letdoctorsbedoctors.com, a social media campaign to enable doctors and tech companies to share stories about better ways to design and use EHRS. “We will bring that feedback to Washington to help influence developing health IT policy initiatives, including legislative efforts currently underway to improve the interoperability and usability of EMRs,” Bush wrote in an op-ed published Monday by U.S. News & World Report. The campaign is reminiscent of the American Medical Association's “Break the Red Tape” push this summer. Among the highlights from Bush’s piece: “Health care is the only industry that has managed to lose productivity while going digital.”

— athena's Bush, in a keynote before the Hospital of Tomorrow event in Washington on Monday, noted progress in efforts to ease the flow of patient information. "Somehow, starting in the first quarter of last year, hospitals and systems started to say yes," he said. More of them have connected their EHR systems to athenahealth's, allowing its clients to see more data when they need it. He praised meaningful use Stage 2 as an "essential enabler" of interoperability. “Bush isn't satisfied,” Pro eHealth’s Darius Tahir reports. “He aspires to another stage of interoperability, ‘open platforms,’ where developers can build software atop hospitals' EHRs, which he compared to travel site Kayak's ability to offer airlines' tickets directly on its web page.”

eHealth tweet of the day: @kevinmd: This epic EHR video may save our sacred relationship with patients #LetDoctorsBeDoctors http://bit.ly/1Rkaxiq

Welcome to Tuesday morning eHealth where your scribe continues to be dismayed by the coming cold weather and Washington's first frost of the year. This happens every year, but I still don't get used to the coming cold. Send us news at dpittman@politico.com and connect with us on Twitter @David_Pittman, @arthurallen202, @DariusTahir, @POLITICOPro, @Morning_eHealth.

ONC CHIEF’S NOMINATION HELD UP: Karen DeSalvo’s nomination to be HHS’s assistant secretary of health is in jeopardy after Sen. Ben Sasse on Monday vowed to block all HHS nominations. The Nebraska Republican wants the Obama administration to answer questions about failed nonprofit health insurers under the Affordable Care Act. Eight, including the one in Sasse’s home state, have collapsed in recent weeks. Sasse wrote HHS in August seeking answers to several questions about the co-ops, but they haven't responded, he says. The letter: http://1.usa.gov/1M27sFJ

SENATE NOT ACTING ON OBAMA NOMINEES: Our congressional team had this to report last week about Obama nominees pending before the Senate: As of earlier this month, “the current GOP Senate has moved 107 of Obama's picks, according to a Congressional Research Service report obtained by POLITICO. By comparison, the 2007 Democratic regime confirmed 192 of Bush's civilian nominees. Furthermore, Democrats say this Senate is on pace to confirm the fewest civilian nominees since the end of Ronald Reagan's presidency, the earliest records tracked on congressional databases.” Their story: http://politi.co/1NH7fI5

ELLMERS’ TOUGH REELECTION FANNED BY AFFAIR RUMORS: It appears that rumors about an alleged affair between House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy and Rep. Renee Ellmers, one of the few members of Congress who has shown interest in health IT, might harm the North Carolinian’s hopes for re-election, our POLITICO colleagues report. Ellmers faces a tough primary challenger in the conservative second district. “If the rumors are true, then the [Ellmers] race gets instantly incredibly competitive. If they’re not true, then it doesn’t change that it’s still competitive,” said Carter Wrenn, a North Carolina Republican consultant who worked on Ellmers’ 2010 campaign. “If you come back here in February and no one’s got ads on TV in her race, then she’s probably going to win. But if someone is, she’s got a real race and she could lose.” The full story: http://politi.co/1LwPoOc

ON THE MOVE: In what would be a major coup for the health IT lobbying world. House Energy & Commerce health subcommittee staffer Robert Horne is leaving the committee to work for the Health IT Now Coalition and its sister lobbying organizations, our Darius Tahir reports. Both Horne and a spokesman for the Energy & Commerce Committee declined to comment. Horne was the main staffer behind the scenes pulling the strings on the House’s 21st Century Cures Act.

CISA ON DECK THIS WEEK?: The on-again, off-again cyber-threat info sharing bill currently pending in the Senate could come to the chamber floor as soon as this week. The Senate, which returns to session today, will begin consideration of an immigration bill with the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act to follow, according to a whip notice sent Monday. CISA, as it’s known for short, creates safe-harbors to share information about cybersecurity threats and is supported by HIMSS, CHIME, the Federation of American Hospitals and HITRUST. It’s been awaiting a vote on the Senate floor since July but keeps being delayed.

SURVEY SAYS — CONSUMERS DON’T USE DIGITAL YET: A survey of approximately 4,000 consumers from early-stage investor Rock Health indicates that people aren’t quite on-board with digital health. Seventy-one percent of patients have searched for basic health information online — details on drugs, for example. Fifty-one percent have looked up online reviews of doctors. But adoption falls down after that, and only 7 percent of respondents have used telemedicine. (A similar percentage has used direct-to-consumer genetic services.)

There’s good news for digital health entrepreneurs in here, though. The survey argues that the unhealthy are beginning to adopt many digital health services. Buyers of wearables are now more likely to be unhealthy than healthy, for example. And consumer satisfaction with telemedicine is high — over 70 percent in each of the categories (text, video, audio) measured.

CARDIOLOGISTS TAKE TO THE HILL: More than 400 members of the American College of Cardiology will take to Capitol Hill today as part of their annual policy conference to discuss a number of issues, including — you guessed it — EHRs, interoperability and payment reform. The heart doctors want usable EHRs, clinically relevant standards and EHR vendor transparency. They also want Congress and the Obama administration to work with doctors to implement the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act and its Merit-based Incentive Payment System.

MARK YOUR CALENDAR: The FCC’s next Connect2Health Task Force event will take place next Tuesday and Wednesday in Detroit, with FCC Commissioner Mignon Clyburn attending. The meeting will examine urban health disparities, broadband as a social determinant of health and other issues. More details: http://bit.ly/1G2mGIe

IT’S ALL ABOUT THE BENJAMINS: Research!America sent a letter to HELP Committee Chairman Lamar Alexander and Ranking Member Patty Murray urging inclusion of mandatory funding for NIH and FDA in the Innovations for Healthier Americans Initiative. “A funding boost for NIH will empower our nation to fight harder and find answers faster. The logic for mandatory FDA funding is equally straightforward,” the letter states. “If FDA is given additional responsibilities without additional resources, the stage will be set for slowdowns, not faster speeds, in the review of new medical products.” The letter: http://politico.pro/1W2EESf

WHAT WE'RE CLICKING:

Baby Boomers remain a challenge in mHealth adoption: http://bit.ly/1NR8KU6

5 ways to fuel patient engagement: http://bit.ly/1LGkw1n

Telemedicine isn’t the future — it’s now: http://bit.ly/1RSDuml

Tips, comments, suggestions? Send them along via email to our team: Arthur Allen (aallen@politico.com, @ArthurAllen202), David Pittman (dpittman@politico.com, @David_Pittman) and Darius Tahir (dtahir@politico.com, @DariusTahir).