UPDATE: Tig Notaro has posted a Facebook message explaining the reason for her emergency hospitalization. After a show in Philadelphia last week she collapsed “in horrific pain” and was rushed to the ER, where doctors found a cyst that had burst, which required surgery. She is resting and hopes to get back on tour soon. Read her full account on Facebook.

Comedian Tig Notaro’s Nov. 9 headlining show at the Paramount Theatre has been canceled due to a medical emergency, promoter AEG Live Rocky Mountains announced this morning.

Notaro, a former Denver resident, was set to perform at the theater in downtown Denver with Andrea Gibson and Andrew Orvedahl.

But Notaro “is dealing with a medical emergency and is being hospitalized,” according to an AEG Live news release. “She will be all right but has to cancel the show tonight.”

It was not stated where Notaro has been hospitalized. Calls and e-mails to Notaro’s publicist were not returned as of mid-morning Sunday.

The Paramount Theatre’s website had also not been updated to show the cancellation as of 11 a.m. Sunday.

Notaro’s Nov. 8 set at Boston’s Wilbur Theatre was also canceled due to a medical emergency, according to the Wilbur’s Facebook page.

Notaro experienced a string of personal crises in 2012, including pneumonia and a breast cancer diagnosis that resulted in a double mastectomy surgery.

Her travails were documented in the unusually candid and critically acclaimed stand-up set “Live,” which was championed by comedy giant Louis C.K. and nominated for a Grammy Award.

Notaro has regularly appeared since then, including at comedy festivals and her own headlining shows.

In between dates of her current “Boyish Girl Interrupted Tour,” she played the New York Comedy Festival last Thursday.

Her set, which drew many media reports, included an interlude in which she opened her shirt and went topless on stage, apparently in response to catcalls from the audience.

A new Tig Notaro performance in Denver will be scheduled for a future date, according to AEG Live. Refunds are available at the point of purchase, likely the Paramount Theatre box office or altitudetickets.com.

Check back here for updates on this developing story.

John Wenzel: 303-954-1642, jwenzel@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnwenzel