Pennsylvania may be the epicenter of the presidential campaign this week, but one of its most hotly contested races is for the U.S. Senate.

Four Democrats, including one candidate who was briefly kicked off the Apr. 26 ballot, are vying for a chance to face incumbent Republican Pat Toomey in November.

Here's a look at the race and where the candidates stand on the issues.

The candidates: John Fetterman grew up in an affluent suburb of York, but parlayed a privileged upbringing into efforts to revitalize Braddock, the Allegheny County steel town where he's served three terms as mayor. Katie McGinty, the daughter of a Philadelphia beat cop, served as a key environmental advisor to President Bill Clinton before serving as Pennsylvania's environmental secretary and chief of staff during Gov. Tom Wolf's first six months in office. Joe Sestak served in the U.S. Navy for three decades. He retired in 2005, as his daughter was battling cancer, and held a seat in the U.S. House between 2007 and 2011. Joseph Vodvarka, a perennial candidate and the owner of a spring factory, has successfully fought to stay on the Apr. 26 ballot.

Polling: Sestak led the field in most public opinion polls throughout the campaign, although McGinty has closed in on the frontrunner in recent polls. A Monmouth University poll even found the two tied among registered Democrats. Fetterman's focus on young and low-income voters — who may not have published phone numbers — may be skewing his results. The Braddock mayor has struggled to get out of the single digits. Vodvarka, meanwhile, has barely registered in the polls, if his name was polled at all. Most polls still show a substantial percentage of likely voters haven't made up their minds.

Fundraising: Sestak entered the race with a significant money advantage, but McGinty closed that gap in the first three months of this year. According to FEC reports, the former environmental secretary raised $1.8 million and spent nearly $2 million, while the retired Navy admiral spent $1.5 million against $625,000 in new donations. Fetterman's FEC report hasn't yet been posted, although a campaign spokesperson said it was mailed in time to meet the deadline. Vodvarka, whose campaign was suspended for a month after being ousted from the ballot in March, has reported nearly $47,000 in fundraising.

http://www.pennlive.com/midstate/index.ssf/2015/11/john_fettermans_senate_braddoc.html

Independent expenditures: In terms of Super PAC support, no one compares to McGinty. She's benefitted from $3.6 million in TV ad buys and other spending from outside groups — much of it coming in the last two months. Sestak picked up $1.2 million, but has also been the subject of $1.6 million in opposition spending from a group associated with Emily's List, which has backed McGinty. Fetterman benefitted from $133,000 in spending from a group called The 15104, a nod to his town's zip code.

Who supports them: McGinty has racked up some serious endorsements, including the likes of President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden. Former Gov. Ed Rendell serves as her campaign chairman. Labor unions, environmental groups and LGBT organizations have thrown their support behind her. Sestak says he hasn't asked for or given any endorsements, although a number of major newspapers—including the Philadelphia Inquirer—have backed his campaign. Fetterman's highest profile endorsement came from former Maryland governor and presidential candidate Martin O'Malley. PennLive's editorial board also backed his campaign.

http://www.pennlive.com/news/2016/04/katie_mcginty_us_senate_profil.html

Who they support: Fetterman has endorsed Bernie Sanders. McGinty, who worked in Bill Clinton's administration, has endorsed Hillary Clinton. Sestak has declined to endorse, although he said Clinton would "be a very fine commander in chief." Vodvarka has also declined to endorse, but said Sanders most closely aligns with his views.

ON THE ISSUES:

Abortion: Fetterman, McGinty and Sestak support abortion rights. Vodvarka, who describes himself as pro-life, says he would "vote life all the time."

Campaign finance: All four candidates support limits on spending and the influence of money on political campaigns in the wake of the Supreme Court "Citizens United" ruling.

Energy and the environment: Fetterman, McGinty and Sestak support limits on carbon and greenhouse gas emissions, as well as increased investment in renewable energy and "green jobs." Vodvarka said he wouldn't vote for any environmental policy that could hurt jobs.

Gun rights: Fetterman, McGinty and Sestak support increased regulation of firearms, including background checks for gun show and online sales and limits on automatic weapons and high-capacity magazines. Vodvarka supports government-sponsored lessons about safe gun use, but opposes any gun control measure.

Health care: Fetterman, McGinty and Sestak support the Affordable Care Act, which Sestak voted for during his time in Congress. They also express varying levels of support for either a "public option" or "single payer" health system. Vodvarka opposes the Affordable Care Act, but believes more study of the alternatives is needed before it can be replaced.

Immigration: Fetterman, McGinty and Sestak support immigration reform, including a path to citizenship. Vodvarka, like Donald Trump, supports building a wall along the Mexican border and stricter limits on immigration from Middle East countries such as Iraq and Syria.

http://www.pennlive.com/news/2016/02/joe_sestak_senate_walk.html

LGBT rights: All four support anti-discrimination protections for lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transgender people.

Middle East: All four oppose deploying ground troops in conflict areas such as Syria. Fetterman, McGinty and Sestak support the Iran nuclear deal while Vodvarka opposes it.

Minimum wage: All four support an increase to the current $7.25 per hour federal minimum wage, although they differ on how much. Fetterman and McGinty support $15 per hour, Sestak advocates for $10.60 and Vodvarka supports a $10 minimum wage.

Social Security: All four support maintaining the Social Security system and oppose the prospect of privatizing individual benefits.

Wallace McKelvey may be reached at wmckelvey@pennlive.com. Follow him on Twitter @wjmckelvey. Find PennLive on Facebook.