Weak revenue in the third quarter could make it harder for investment banks to lower their compensation ratios, according to a new report from SNL Financial.

Bloomberg News

Analysts have pointed out that July and August, already seasonally slow months, were slower than usual this year amid uncertainty regarding the Syrian crisis and how the Federal Reserve would act on unwinding its stimulus.

SNL noted that lower deal volumes will likely pressure revenue, driving up the compensation-to-revenue ratios for investment banks.

“Lower revenue can certainly make it difficult for investment banks with less expense flexibility to prevent their compensation ratios from increasing, and this was evident in the second quarter when volatile fixed-income markets led to trading losses,” SNL’s Dhaval Patel and Joe Mantone said.

Compensation-to-revenue ratios are significant because by lowering these, banks are able to increase their return on equity and meet targets.

RBC Capital Markets analyst Fiona Swaffield earlier this month said that through July and August, investment banking fees were running down 35% year over year. In particular, Ms. Swaffield noted that August’s investment banking fees were the lowest monthly total in over three years, at $2.9 billion.

Compared to investment banking fee revenue, trading volumes haven’t dropped as much, but they were still trending down year over year according to Ms. Swaffield. As of the end of August, third-quarter U.S. equity trading was down 4% and U.S. bond trading was down 6% compared to the same period last year, she said.

Fixed income revenue is also widely expected to be pressured in the third quarter.

Earlier this week, Jefferies Group LLC said its fiscal third-quarter profit tumbled 83% as fixed-income-trading revenue slumped 88%. Fixed-income results from Jefferies, which reports a few weeks before the large U.S. banks, are closely watched as they can hint at trends in the larger industry.

For its third quarter, Jefferies reported a compensation ratio of 56.8%, down from the 58.2% reported in the second quarter and also from the year-ago’s 59.6%.

Still, until September ends, some are continuing to hold out hope that trading volume could pick up and help mitigate the weakness shown in the prior two months.

“The pipeline for September is very strong, but you never want to say the pipeline is done until it’s done,” Morgan Stanley Chief Financial Officer Ruth Porat said earlier this month.