Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonClinton ad slams Trump for calling pregnancy 'an inconvenience' Sanders: Networks calling about Trump debate Why superdelegates shouldn't support Sanders MORE would easily defeat GOP counterpart Donald Trump Donald TrumpTrump take victory lap over rivals' remarks Clinton ad slams Trump for calling pregnancy 'an inconvenience' Sanders: Networks calling about Trump debate MORE in a general election match-up, according to an NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll released early Monday.

ADVERTISEMENT

Pollsters found Clinton would cruise to a 10-point win over Trump, 50 to 40 percent, with the help of independent and Hispanic voters.

Clinton would also beat Sen. Ted Cruz Ted CruzTrump take victory lap over rivals' remarks What happens when the GOP base abandons the party platform? Fiorina returns to attack Clinton's 'lust for power' MORE (R-Texas) by just 3 points, 48 to 45 percent, within the poll’s margin of error.

But she would lose to Sen. Marco Rubio Marco RubioWhat happens when the GOP base abandons the party platform? Puerto Rico debt relief faces serious challenges in Senate Trump encourages Rubio to reclaim Senate seat MORE (R-Fla.) by 3 points and Ben Carson by 1 point in hypothetical match-ups.

The survey found that independent voters would back Rubio over the former secretary of State by a 7-point margin. He would lose the Hispanic vote to Clinton, however, by 23 points. Rubio also takes the highest percentage of female voters among the GOP candidates, but falls short in that demographic to Clinton by 7 points.

Clinton holds a 19-point lead over Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersSanders: Networks calling about Trump debate Why superdelegates shouldn't support Sanders Young Turks host offers M for Trump, Sanders debate MORE (I-Vt.) in the new poll. Four percent of respondents backed former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley.

The NBC News/Wall Street Journal, conducted Dec. 6 to Dec. 9, has a margin of error of 3.4 percent.

Read more from The Hill:

Trump 5 points ahead of Cruz nationally

Fox News poll: Cruz up by 2 points in Iowa