Urgent:

Do You Support Paul Ryan for the GOP Nomination? Vote Here Now

Vote Now:

Which Potential GOP Candidate Would You Support in 2016?

Urgent:

Who Should the GOP Nominate in 2016? Vote Here Now

U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan has not yet confirmed whether he intends to run for president in 2016 but as he was recently chosen to head the House Ways and Means Committee, he has an excellent platform from which to address the nation. Ryan was the running mate to Mitt Romney's failed 2012 bid for the White House and the 44-year-old conservative is considered by many to be a serious contender for the GOP nominee in 2016.When asked whether he is considering a presidential run, Ryan told The Washington Post , "I’m not in a rush. My way is to do the job at hand, do it well, and not worry about strategizing how I can do better than this guy or that guy in New Hampshire."Here are seven key political positions of potential GOP presidential hopeful Paul Ryan:Paul Ryan introduced The Path to Prosperity: A Responsible, Balanced Budget resolution designed to reduce deficits by "5.1 trillion over 10 years." Ryan is a fiscal hawk who is committed to cutting government waste while still protecting needed federal programs that keep America safe and also programs that provide safety nets to those in need.Paul Ryan has vowed to overhaul the U.S. tax code with a focus on the tax rates of businesses. This would include reducing the corporate tax rate from 35 percent, which is the third highest in the world to 25 percent. According to The Wall Street Journal , Ryan would like to see changes to "congressional rules to take into account the economic boost that he said would occur if tax rates are lowered." Paul Ryan says America's immigration system is "broken." He takes issue with the 11 million illegal immigrants in the U.S. who are "outside the scope of the law" and how lack of enforcement encourages further illegal immigration. Ryan would secure the border, enforce current illegal immigration laws, encourage legal immigration, and "give people a chance to get right with the law" with a plan to deal with the immediate reality of the current immigration situation.Paul Ryan is for the development of all energy sources and a reduction in government regulations. On The Issues quotes Ryan, "I have fought to utilize American energy supplies, promote the building of new refineries, cut the number of reformulated fuel blends, and responsibly promote conservation technology and alternative sources of renewable energy."Like most Republicans, Ryan would like to see the Affordable Care Act either repealed or replaced but not at the risk of a government shutdown. In 2013, Ryan told CBS News "You know, rather than sort of swinging for the fences and trying to take this entire law out with discretionary spending, I think there are more effective ways of achieving that goal." Ryan is currently working on an Obamacare alternative that would allow Americans the freedom to purchase the kind of care they want and from a company of their own choosing.Paul Ryan considers the first job of the federal government to be "…securing the safety and liberty of its citizens from threats at home and abroad." Ryan points to a mismatch between the severity of the threats facing the nation and the amount of resources committed to meeting them. According to Ryan , defense budgets need to be restored to 'the levels dictated by the national security interests of the nation."Paul Ryan supports the expansion of charter schools as well as private school vouchers. In a discussion written by Ryan, " Expanding Opportunity in America ," he provides reform ideas for education which he says "creates opportunity" and "kindles the desire to learn." These ideas include accreditation reform to provide students with more options, a plan to simplify financial aid for higher education, reforms to the loan cap to prevent tuition inflation, and reforms to reduce the achievement gap created by poverty.