Lakeland Regional Health is now affiliated with Nemours Children's Hospital of Orlando.

The agreement brings expanded pediatric specialty care to the Polk County region. It also makes available Nemours' research and educational resources to the providers in the county.

"Our relationship with Nemours opens up a broad array of care not previously available in our community," said Elaine Thompson, Lakeland Regional Health President and CEO, in a statement.

Lakeland Regional is opening an eight-story Pavilion for Women and Children in early 2018, offering labor and delivery, obstetrics, newborn care, neonatal intensive care, pediatric surgery and pediatric emergency medicine, according to a Nemours news release.

Institutions

GuideWell Health is opening its second GuideWell Emergency Doctors location in Central Florida on Thursday. Located at 1706 N. Semoran Blvd., the clinic aims to provide emergency care in an urgent care setting.

Community Health Centers' Tavares medical and dental clinic is now fully open at 212 E. Main Street. The center is giving tours, backpacks and refreshments on Wednesday from 9 a.m. to 11 a.m.

True Health community health center was recognized by Enroll America during the National Health Center Week for helping low income and underserved communities and for educating patients about health insurance options.

The federally funded clinic also received $271,000 in Affordable Care Act funding to expand services. The Health Care Center for the Homeless, now known as Orange Blossom Family Health, also received $360,000 in ACA funding.

"With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, health centers have taken on an even larger role in our nation's health care system by helping more than 10 million people learn about their options for affordable health coverage and providing a health care home to many of the newly insured," said the Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell, in a blog post.

The Annual Shepherd's Hope Celebrity Golf Classic exceeded last year's goal, raising nearly $100,000. The money will help medical care at the free clinic's five locations in Central Florida.

The Primary Care Access Network has relaunched its Web site for Central Florida ACA navigators, making it more user-friendly and convenient for appointments, questions and finding health insurance navigators. The Web site, CoveringCFL.net, is available in English, Spanish and Haitian Creole.

People

Dr. Susan Kelly of Arnold Palmer Hospital for Children received a $50,000 Hyundai Impact Award to help continue her research in childhood cancer.

Central Florida orthopedic surgeon Dr. Richard Konsens competed in the long jump at the World Masters Association Outdoor Championship in Lyon, France. Konsens was the Ivy League Long Jump Champion in 1980.

nmiller@tribune.com.