Part Swan, Part Goose by Swoosie Kurtz, book cover. (Photo: Handout) Story Highlights Kurtz earned Tony Awards for her work on Broadway in "Fifth of July" and "The House of Blue Leaves."

She is one of the stars of CBS' popular "Mike & Molly," which wraps up its fourth season this month.

Margo Kurtz's book, "My Rival, the Sky," has been issued as an e-book with a new introduction written by Swoosie Kurtz.

Swoosie Kurtz's memoir isn't simply a look back at the life of a celebrated actress. Instead, "Part Swan, Part Goose" is virtually a love letter to her parents, two people quite accomplished in their own rights.

Frank Kurtz, her father, earned a bronze medal in diving at the 1932 Olympics. Perhaps more significantly, he was a decorated World War II pilot. Swoosie was named after his plane, the Swoose.

The 'Mike and Molly' actress' mother, Margo Kurtz, wrote "My Rival, the Sky," a 1945 best-seller that discussed her sometimes lonely life as the wife of a pilot.

"My book is kind of the anti-'Mommie Dearest,' " Kurtz says with a laugh. "I kind of think most people didn't have a great relationship with their parents, but I just had this amazing childhood, which I always felt vaguely guilty about, because it was so wonderful."

Kurtz, who was born in Omaha in 1946, was the couple's only child. Because of her father's military career, the family moved constantly.

"It was a wonderful way to grow up," she says. "They were my support system, and they were always there for me. Partly because I was an only child, we were so thrown together. I was very shy, so I would fall back on their company."

Kurtz says as a student at the University of Southern California and later the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Arts, she often kept quiet about how close she was with her parents.

"I think it was a little bit square and a little bit needy, and I was afraid that people might think it was weird," she says. "But now I feel like I'm coming out. I've always been madly in love with my parents, especially for giving me this incredible foundation of self-esteem and confidence to go into this crazy world."

Crazy or not, show business has been very good to Kurtz. She has earned two Tonys for her work on Broadway in "Fifth of July" and "The House of Blue Leaves," plus an Emmy for a guest spot on "Carol & Company." She currently stars on CBS' popular "Mike & Molly," which wraps up its fourth season Monday, May 19.

Personally, things have been tougher. Her father died in 1996. Her mother suffers from dementia and lives full-time with the actress. But, Kurtz says, she wouldn't have it any other way.

"It affects what jobs I choose to do and the kind of social life I have," she says. "But she's always been my best pal. We've always been in each other's lives. This whole, full-circle thing of parenting a parent is really one of the greatest blessings in my life."

'Mike & Molly': 8 p.m. Mondays on Channel 5 (KPHO).

'Part Swan, Part Goose' by Swoosie Kurtz: (Perigee Trade, $25)

Reach the reporter at randy.cordova@arizonarepublic.com.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1gESkz2