Martin O'Malley plans to announce his intentions on May 30 to challenge Hillary Rodham Clinton for the Democratic presidential nomination.

An O'Malley aide told AP the former Maryland governor and Baltimore mayor will make the announcement in Baltimore and will hold a conference call with supporters tonight to discuss his plans, but was unable to share additional details.

At an event on Wednesday the presumed 2016 candidate told prospective voters that he wasn't a contender- yet - and encouraged them 'to talk to me in three days,' CNN reports.

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

Former Maryland Governor Martin O'Malley, right, talks with New Hampshire State Rep. Bob Backus, left, and former State Sen. Peter Burling before a private meeting with New Hampshire Democrats yesterday in Concord. The presumed presidential contender told prospective voters that he wasn't a candidate - yet - and encouraged them 'to talk to me in three days'

O'Malley earned his political stripes in Maryland on the Baltimore City Council. He later served two terms as that city's mayor before defeating the the state's sitting Republican governor, Bob Ehrilch, who is also considering a national bid, in 2006.

He won a rematch against Ehrlich in 2010 and went on to spend another four years in the governor's mansion before exiting office in January.

He's best known as the inspiration for the Tommy Carcetti in David Simon's Baltimore-based HBO drama, The Wire, which ran for five seasons from 2002-2008.

The cult-classic television series exposed the underbelly of Baltimore's drug and crime problems, chronicling the lives and careers of several fictional homicide detectives, drug lords and politicians, including Carcetti, a white, city councilman who becomes mayor in the final season of the show.

Simon has said all of the characters in the critically-acclaimed television show are fake, and that Carcetti was a composite of several politicians.

'The Wire is most assuredly fiction,' he said in a 2008 essay for Baltimore magazine. 'But we have stolen liberally, shamelessly from a city we know, from people who we reported on, policed, taught, hated, loved and humored.

'We have fulfilled the first law of not embarrassing ourselves as storytellers by writing only what we honestly think we know.'

Still, similarities between the show's Baltimore mayor as the real one have blurred the line at times between fact and fiction.

Both men rose to power on a promise to be the crime-ridden city's white knights. And O'Malley, like the fictional Carcetti, has been accused of fixing crime statistics in order to make Baltimore appear safer'.

'The writing was not unsympathetic to a man who comes in with the idea of changing things and emerges a completely different creature,' Simon told the Daily Beast in 2013. 'That was the story [of Tommy Carcetti] and that is the story of Marty O’Malley.'

TRUCE: David Simon, the creator of HBO's cult classic television show The Wire, which is set in Baltimore and and based in part on O'Malley's tenure as mayor of the crime-ridden city, has a chance encounter on the Amtrak with the former Maryland governor last summer. The two made amends and took a selfie together - although their back at odds following the recent violence in Baltimore sparked by Freddie Gray's untimely death

ART IMITATES LIFE? O'Malley's best known as the inspiration for The Wire's Tommy Carcetti. Both men rose to power on a promise to be the crime-ridden city's white knights. And O'Malley, like the fictional Carcetti, has been accused of fixing crime statistics in order to make Baltimore appear safer

Even before Simon, a former Baltimore Sun reporter, introduced the character of Carcetti into the show, O'Malley was in up in arms about the show's depiction of his city.

He memorably threatened to block the show's permits to film in Baltimore just before the cast and crew began taping the second season.

'We want to be out of The Wire business,' he said, according to Simon, during a particularly terse phone call.

He ultimately backed off, and The Wire was allowed to continue shooting in the city. But the third, fourth and fifth seasons saw the introduction and subsequent corruption of his on-screen adaptation, Carcetti, who Simon has said is 'reflective' of O'Malley.

O'Malley wrinkles his nose at the mention of his career in the context of the television show, though.

'I would take issue with whether or not I’m the inspiration for The Wire,' he told MSNBC in 2009, two years after he'd been elected governor of Maryland and a year after the show's final season. 'I’m the antidote to The Wire,' he said.

He boasted a 40 percent overall reduction in crime in the city during his tenure, and has continued to rely on his crime-fighting image in his campaign to win the Democratic presidential nomination.

Baltimore was the 'most violent, most addicted, most abandoned city in America,' O'Malley recently told a group Iowa Democrats, until 'set out to make our city work again, to make the dream true again.'

'Together, in other words, we put into action that powerful belief that, that in our community, there is no such thing as a spare American,' he said, according to CNN, proclaiming that 'are all in this together.'

'Over the next 10 years, Baltimore went on to achieve the biggest reduction in part one crime of any major city in America.'

In order to get to those numbers, O'Malley's administration pursued a so-called 'broken window' policy, however, that involved pursing minor crimes as a means of forestalling more serious ones.

His critics say that approach is directly responsible for the tension between Baltimore police and blighted communities that's playing out now.

'With the crime rate high and with his promises of a reduced crime rate on the line, he put no faith in real policing,' Simon argued during an interview with the Marshall Project a few weeks ago.

Defending legacy on Meet the Press a few days later, O'Malley said: 'We didn't get it wrong then but we have yet to get it entirely right.'

Family portrait: O'Malley is pictured here with his children, Grace, Tara, William and Jack, and his wife Katie

Now a former governor, having completed his second and final term in January, O'Malley has been considering running against Clinton, the expected Democratic nominee, long before he left office.

His resolve was not shaken by the violence last month that racked Baltimore following the funeral of a young black man, Freddie Gray, who died while in police custody.

Rather than backing away from the legacy-tarnishing incident, O'Malley cancelled a paid junket in Ireland and stayed home 'to be with the people in the city that he loves,' a spokeswoman for the ex-mayor said at the time.

'Whenever, whether it is a police custodial death or a police involved shooting, we all have a responsibility to ask whether there are things we can do that would prevent such a loss of life from happening in the future,' O'Malley told reporters who were with him in South Carolina when Gray's mysterious death came to light.

'There is a lot of grief and a lot of anguish and we have seen it around the country,' he said, per a CNN report. 'And we are going to continue to see more of these images since we all now have cell phones and video cameras,.

He added: 'There is probably very few issues quite as intertwined with the very painful racial legacy in our country as the issue of law enforcement and public safety.'

He plans to formally jump into the 2016 contest in Baltimore, telling Meet the Press host Chuck Todd earlier this month, 'I wouldn't think of announcing anyplace else.'

O'Malley indicated to donors on Monday that he would try to fill the vacuum in the race created by Massachusetts Senator Elizabeth Warren absence. She's said she's not running for higher office in 2016 despite well-organized, national campaigns led by progressives who want her to take on Clinton.

O''Malley greets the crowd after speaking at Politics & Eggs in Bedford, New Hampshire in March. Indicating how serious he is about taking on Clinton, O'Malley was back in New Hampshire on Wednesday, and he met with donors in New York on Monday

He promised to take up the liberal mantle on issues like the president's Pacific Rim trade deal, which is supported by some Democrats, but has been met with boos by the left-wing of the party.

Clinton has straddled the fence on that issue as well as several others that could hurt her support among warring factions of the Democratic Party.

Indicating how serious he is about taking on Clinton, O'Malley made stops in New Hampshire on Wednesday and met with donors in New York on Monday.

'What came through very clearly was that he’s running as a strong progressive,' an attendee of his New York gathering told Politico. 'He hit on big banks and regulations and the shortcomings of the administration.'

In addition to Clinton, he'll face Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders, who is technically an independent but is competing in the Democratic primary, and possibly Lincoln Chafee, a one-time Republican who has gradually moved to the left and now identifies as a Democrat.

Chafee has indicated he'll pummel Clinton for voting in favor of the 2002 authorization of the Iraq war, which he voted against as a U.S. Senator. He was the only Republican in the upper chamber to oppose it.

Sanders, a self-described democratic socialist, is also offering himself up as a progressive alternative to Clinton. He's also opposed to the president's trade legislation, and he's using his candidacy to highlight the confluence of big money and politics.

Thumbing his nose at the billionaires bankrolling his competitors candidacies on the left and right, he's limiting contributions to his campaign to $250.

The strategy has seen early success, and he raised roughly the same amount of money in the first week of his campaign through his website as several Republicans candidates who did not adopt similar caps.

Sanders, Chafee and O'Malley are all tailing Clinton by more than 50 points, however, and none of them have earned support in the double digits in recent polls.