Freelancers gather in the lounge of a WeWork space in Manhattan. | WeWork The gigging taxpayers of New York

In the winter months, a new ritual has emerged among the millions of workers who make all or part of their money by stringing gigs together. They might have earned money writing freelance articles or driving for Uber, delivering for WunWun or selling prints on Etsy, renting out a bedroom on Airbnb or raising funds on Kickstarter. Sometime in January or February, a 1099 form shows up in their mailbox, and they begin to freak out. However the money comes in, some of it is supposed to go out again—they need to pay taxes.

Story Continued Below

One of the second-order consequences of the gig economy is that a generation of people is getting a sink-or-swim education in tax law—search out, for example, online Uber forums, and you’ll find an army of self-taught tax experts, ready to offer advice on the best way to deduct mileage.

In the W-2 economy of salaried employees and their relatively simple tax returns, workers don’t have to think much about their taxes, because the HR department does that work. But in the 1099 economy, companies avoid giving out that sort of assistance.

“If you help contractors with taxes, they start looking a lot more like employees,” said Tristan Zier, the founder of a startup called Zen99 (a play on Ten99, like the tax form). “They aren’t willing to provide support services because of that risk.”

And so, on the websites of these companies, you’ll find disclaimers—“We can’t give tax advice, but we have compiled this guide,” says Kickstarter—or partnerships. Most tax guidance on Etsy, for instance, comes from a separate company, Outbrain, which at one point was billed as Etsy’s bookkeeping partner.

“We’re in new territory as far as the way we’re cobbling together our income,” said Rus Garofalo, the founder of Brooklyn-based Brass Taxes, a tax preparation business that specializes in “artists, freelancers and other nice people.”

Most of the people who come to him are in the midst of their crash education in taxes—which is “very often a first-year disaster,” he said.

There are millions of people going through this each year. In 2014, MBO Partners, a company that provides support services for contractors, counted 17.9 million people in America who work 15 or more hours on 1099 jobs—and another 12.1 million who regularly do similar work on top of more traditional employment. There are benefits to this particular hustle—working from home, not having a boss, getting to pick and choose the work you take on. But there are also costs—and tax time is when “independent workers” are forced to face them, often with little help.

On a 1040 form, there’s no line to declare the stress saved from not having to commute or the freedom to take off an afternoon without having to justify it to anyone aside from yourself. Ultimately, tax forms count money: money in, money out, money owed. Freelancers are constantly telling and re-telling the story of their work life, but every year at tax time, they have to put down on paper a single, dollar-driven story of a year in their work life.

It is often a grim tale. This is when the monetary costs of working at gigs becomes apparent—when independent workers are forced to confront the price of that freedom, in the form of extra taxes, extra expenses, and the extra responsibility of dealing with them.

The number of workers confronting these challenges, in New York and across the country, continues to grow.

The Census Bureau keep tracks of “non employers,” most of which are self-employed individuals—small businesses of one.

In 2012, in New York State, there were 1.6 million “non-employers,” who took in $77 billion in revenue—the third-highest total in the country. That’s an average of about $48,000 for each business. In the New York metro area (which includes Newark and Jersey City), there were almost 1.75 million establishments, with $91 billion in revenue—that’s $44,000 on average.

From the 1970s to the mid-2000s, the percentage of workers in New York City who were self-employed doubled, from 8 percent to 16 percent, according to the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.

What are the costs of the gig economy to these workers? One way to answer that question is to look at what financial responsibilities are shifted from employers to workers when they’re hired as contractors.

In 2013, two Columbia University professors, Steven Cohen and William Eimicke, co-authored a management analysis of independent contracting, and laid out the costs to independent contractors: paying the whole of their Social Security and Medicare taxes (employers pay half for employees), losing out on unemployment insurance, taking on full responsibility for their retirement plans, obtaining their own health care coverage, and taking on responsibility for damages if there’s an accident on the job.

It’s not impossible to cobble together the same sort of compensation package that W-2 workers get.

“Because of the Affordable Care Act and other tools, you can create your own total compensation package that includes deferred compensation,” says Steven Cohen, who, among other roles he serves at Columbia, is a professor in the practice of public affairs.

And organizations like the Freelancers Union are making it easier than ever: Last year, Freelancers rolled out a program of “curated benefits for independent workers.” Those include not just health insurance, but disability, dental, life and liability insurance—as well as retirement planning.

But it’s still hard. Over a year, in Brooklyn, everything aside from health insurance will run you a minimum of about $1,000. Health insurance will be closer to $5,000.

On top of that, self-employed people are responsible for paying all their payroll taxes. (Employers pay half of Social Security and Medicare.) That’s an additional 7.5 percent levy on whatever income “independent workers” make.

In theory, independent workers can get paid more per hour or are meant to be accounting for these costs when they price their services. But it doesn’t work out that way in practice.

Though the average income for self-employed people is higher than for employees, the median is lower—some people do better than if they had a salaried job, but most do worse. In its survey on independent workers, MBO Partners found that only a third expected to make more money freelancing than in a traditional full-time job. Most of the people working freelance side jobs, less than 15 hours a week, said they needed the money.

For about half of “independent workers,” the intangible benefits of working outside a company might outweigh the financial costs: Half the people working 15 hours or more each week on 1099-type work told MBO that “it was their choice completely” to go freelance. But another third—people who MBO Partners calls “reluctant independents”—didn’t choose freelance work to begin with. They feel little control over their work assignments or schedules and want back into the traditional workforce.

For these people, there are few benefits to working without a net. There is only the calculation of coughing up more money for the benefits an employer usually pays for, or going without.

Another way to tally the monetary costs of the gig economy is to look at the form that independent workers have to fill out each spring: the 1040 Schedule C. There’s a section there for expenses—a place to list the costs of doing business.

They include paying for your own advertising, your own car, fees that companies like Uber, Airbnb, and Kickstarter charge, a work computer, office furniture, liability insurance, business travel, and business meals.

Yes, freelancers get to the deduct these expenses from their income. And that can be worth a substantial amount of money—thousands of dollars saved in taxes. That doesn’t make those expenses disappear, though. If you buy a computer for thousands of dollars and deduct that expense from your income, you might save a couple hundred dollars on taxes. But you still end up spending thousands of dollars on a computer—plus, the I.R.S. requires that you spread those tax savings out over a few years.

Salaried people buy computers, too, and they don’t get those few hundred dollars in taxes savings, so there is some advantage. But salaried people also don’t have to pay for their own office space or their own plane tickets to an important professional conference or for their ergonomically sound office chair or their desk. Every single thing that an employer usually provides, self-employed people provide for themselves—or they do without.

This is part of the reason that co-working spaces and rent-by-the-hour office spaces like WeWork exist: Independent workers can’t necessarily afford to rent an office with a conference room year-round. But sometimes they want or need the sort of amenities a traditional office provides. They’re available a la carte in part because few independent workers could afford to buy access to that sort of space day in and day out.

Some of the most confusing “expenses” that the gig economy has created are the “fees” that companies charge for use of their platform. When Uber drivers receive their tax forms—a somewhat mysterious catch-all form called a 1099-K—it lists not just the money they received from Uber, but every cent their passengers paid. If drivers don’t want to pay taxes on Uber’s cut, they have to know to deduct those “fees” as expenses.

“Uber takes a cut of everything. Kickstarter is taking a cut of everything,” said Garofalo. “And there’s nothing wrong with that, but there’s this impression that it’s this altruistic world of dreams.”

The dreams end when the tax form comes.

“It’s like, ‘Oh, it’s just real life,’” he said. “Everyone made money along the way.”

In this version of real life, it’s the worker who’s responsible not just for paying the expenses of money-making but keeping track of what’s owed to the government. It’s not a great system for anyone involved. Already, back in the late 2000s, before the economy crashed and the gig economy took off, the I.R.S. estimated that about a fifth of the tax gap between the taxes the government should be collecting and the taxes it actually received came from independent workers underreporting their income.

The horror story goes something like this: You graduate from college, move to New York and start making money—good money—in video editing. Checks come, you cash them, you spend the money. February rolls around, and mysterious forms, labeled 1099, start appearing in your mail. In April, you plug the numbers from those forms into some tax software, and it spits out a horrifying number: You owe thousands of dollars—money that’s long gone—to the government.

You don’t pay it. And maybe you don’t pay it the year after that, either. Or the year after that. And, suddenly, ten years later, you have $80,000 in I.R.S. debt.

“It becomes a seemingly insurmountable debt,” said Garofalo, who’s seen this story play out in real life. “And there’s a lot of shame on top of it. Who do you tell? When do you bring that up? Fourth date? Oh, you have student loans? I have student loans, too … and I owe $100,000 in taxes.”

Garofalo first started working in the freelance-tax business in 2008; before that he was a freelance performer and video editor, and he still thinks like a freelancer. For years, he worked out of his apartment, figuring that he didn’t want to pass on the cost of an office rental to his clients and that, anyway, people he was helping didn’t care for the pomp and circumstance. Eventually, though, he lost that apartment and expanded, to a big, open space down the block from the Brooklyn Flea, with stencils on the wall, zigzag carpeting on the floor, an old door souped up with a basketball hoop as a barrier, and plant clippings growing in glass Coke bottles in the waiting area.

It’s homey, there’s good music playing, and there’s a surprising amount of laughter in an office where everyone’s here to do their taxes.

Garofalo built this business by asking himself what he’d have wanted when he was working as a video editor, which is perhaps why so many people seem so relieved to have found this place. Often, the first time they come to Brass Taxes, Garofalo says, they’re full of anxiety: They’ve gotten a tax form in the mail—maybe a 1099-K for their Airbnb income—and they just have no idea what to do with it.

“A lot of what we do is explaining things to people so that they understand,” Garofolo said. “It’s all this vague mystery, and in what other place do we come in having such a poor estimate of what’s about to happen?

“Nobody wants to talk about money, because it’s uncomfortable. We occasionally hear things in bars, and that’s the pinnacle of our acumen. We know what we’ve cobbled together based on how we were brought up and what we’ve Googled or heard people say.”

But for some of the weird new income that people are coming in with, there isn’t a right answer. If two roommates split Airbnb profits, but the room’s listed under only one of their Social Security numbers, how should that be represented on a tax form? Is money raised on Kickstarter income or is it a gift? No one really knows—but for now it’s up to the person who receives the money, not Airbnb or Kickstarter, to figure out the answer.

Zier’s company, Zen99, is designed to take some of the stress out of dealing with these business responsibilities. Before starting this company, he worked at Exec, one of the companies that positions itself as a middleman between housecleaners and customers, and he saw a demand for a company that could do what “sharing economy” companies don’t want to—educate the people they pay money to about the tax system.

Zen99 has focused particularly on drivers for companies like Uber and Lyft. In February, the company put out a guide to Uber 1099s, explaining why, for instance, the number that shows up on a driver’s 1099-K is higher than the money they actually received: “The rules for a 1099-K require Uber to report all of the payments they processed on your behalf, which is the total amount the passenger paid. That means it includes things like safe ride fees and Uber’s commission: costs that Uber took out before paying out to your bank account.”

(These are the sorts of expenses that go on a Schedule C. No one wants to pay taxes on money that went to Uber.)

One of the early features of Zen99 is a mileage tracker.

“Really, the goal is helping people stay organized and out of trouble,” Zier said. Right now, Zen99 doesn’t charge people for those services—its own income comes from serving as an insurance broker.

But while start-ups like Zier’s might take away some of the time and stress that independent workers expend on dealing with the money side of their one-person business, ultimately, it’s still workers who are paying extra taxes and accruing expenses. For most of the year, it’s easy not to think about that; at tax time, there’s no avoiding it.

“I think that’s part of what makes people uncomfortable,” says Garofalo. “There’s no spin.”

This article appeared in the March edition of Capital magazine.

Authors:

This story tagged under: Uber

Airbnb

City Hall

Taxes