Silicon Valley may be the world’s center of technology, but New York City drives a lot of other industries that need tech.

Photo by Rod Goodman Metamorphic Ventures Managing Partner David Hirsch

Metamorphic Ventures is trying to connect those two worlds and has closed its second fund at just under $70 million–about $20 million more than the firm set out to raise in 2012 and about $50 million more than its first fund.

Based in New York, the firm is investing in technology startups that can bridge the big industries of that city—fashion, sports, media, consumer packaged goods, financial services, health care and so on—with Silicon Valley and the rest of the world.

“We had a thesis around what makes New York City so special,” said Managing Partner David Hirsch, who joined Metamorphic in 2008 after spending nearly eight years at the New York office of Google Inc., where he co-founded Google’s Vertical Markets Group and worked on sales and business development.

Mr. Hirsch co-founded Metamorphic with Lewis Gersh, who had started an angel fund, Gersh Venture Partners, around 2006, according to VentureWire records. That fund ended, and former TD Capital Managing Director Marc Michel joined Metamorphic as a partner in 2009. The firm raised its first $20 million fund in 2009 and 2010, and Mr. Gersh left for personal reasons last year.

Metamorphic divided the world into four areas, Mr. Hirsch said—Web companies like Google, media companies like AOL Inc., commerce companies like 1-800-Flowers.com Inc. and payments and payment processing companies like Visa Inc. and PayPal.

The global financial crisis had scared off many local angel investors, but there were good opportunities to invest, he said—media and commerce, for instance, were integrating.

However, although Metamorphic built a promising portfolio, the partners found they had raised too little capital to participate in follow-on rounds with their best companies.

“We found ourselves farming out our winners to bigger VCs,” Mr. Hirsch said.

This cramped growth, so the firm raised enough money from current investors to invest more in three of its companies—the crowdfunding platform Indiegogo Inc., the ad targeting platform Chango Inc. and Movable Inc., which enables e-mails to change as users interact with them—and then started to raise a bigger fund.

Metamorphic’s second fund focuses on the intersection of digital and physical businesses. E-commerce, for instance, is the fastest growing online category, but revenue at Wal-Mart Stores Inc. is still bigger than e-commerce. The firm wants to be able to take advantage of those opportunities.

“How do we help move the needle on where the big numbers are–to do more of what we’re doing and take bigger positions when we start and have the ability not only to follow on but to add to our position sizes?” Mr. Hirsch said.

The second fund also includes institutional investors, who contributed about 70% of the capital, although Metamorphic didn’t want to lose the experience and connections of the industry operators who invested in the first fund.

The firm has a group of executives with ties to Silicon Valley tech companies, mainstream companies and universities who advise entrepreneurs and bring Metamorphic potential deals, including companies that are being started by former employees of Google Inc., Facebook Inc. and Twitter Inc.

One portfolio company, Stamped, which created a mobile app that let people share recommendations on restaurants, books and other entertainment, was sold to Yahoo Inc. in 2012 for about $10 million and became Chief Executive Marissa Mayer’s first acquisition, The Wall Street Journal reported.

So far, Metamorphic has invested about $8 million out of its second fund. While the firm has had several exits, and “there’s a lot of moneyball to be made on the investing side selling companies south of $100 million, I don’t want to give you the wrong message there,” he said there are big opportunities out there.

“There’s big money to be made with the big winners,” he said.

Mr. Hirsch, who said he helped develop Google’s culture, has also incorporated some of it into Metamorphic, which has conference rooms painted in yellow, green and blue; gym equipment, and conferences known as “whiteboard workouts, where we’re all working out and taking notes and thinking big.”

“One thing I learned at Google is that you have to have fun and make a difference and have an impact,” he said.

Write to Deborah Gage at deborah.gage@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @deborahgage