A suburban Philadelphia senator toured Colorado’s legal marijuana processing facilities.

A Lackawanna County lawmaker observed the re-established elk herd in the Pennsylvania Wilds in the northwest region.

And several state lawmakers headed to Minneapolis for a public policy conference last year.

Pennsylvania taxpayers footed their travel bills as part of $1.8 million lawmakers spent last year on trips to attend committee hearings and conferences, research bills, meet constituents and participate in sessions in Harrisburg, a Sunday Times analysis found.

The newspaper’s Right to Know Law requests filed with the House and Senate chief clerk’s office show House lawmakers spent $1.2 million and senators spent $600,000 for travel-related expenses. This is out of a roughly $300 million budget for the Legislature. The newspaper found most of the travel was within Pennsylvania, but Denver, Minneapolis and Boston were destinations as well. The records include travel spending by freshmen lawmakers who took office on Dec. 1.

Related:

Their spending includes vehicle mileage costs, receipts for actual expenses and per diem expenses for lodging for which no receipts are needed. Some lawmaker’s accounts cover staff travel as well.

Lawmakers collected 56 cents a mile following IRS rates. The per diem in Harrisburg — daily allowances to cover a lawmaker’s expenses while away from home on public business — for much of 2014 was $157. The federal government sets per diem rates for different cities. Per diems can be collected at separate lodging and meal rates.

Under the state Constitution, lawmakers can receive salary and mileage for regular and special sessions. Some lawmakers have the notation “constitutional mileage” in their reports.

However, many lawmakers fail to include any explanation for their expenses, the newspaper found.

Lawmakers have legitimate travel expenses, but they need to provide better documentation for them, said Barry Kauffman, executive director of Common Cause Pennsylvania.

“You (should) have to submit receipts that you actually have this expense,” said Mr. Kauffman, adding that the Legislature needs stricter policies requiring lawmakers to submit receipts.

The House adopted policies in recent years that require members to sign documents giving the time/date/place and purpose to get a per diem for an overnight stay and ended member reimbursements for meal and lodging expenses on holidays or for attending committee meetings at which they do not have specific business.

Lawmakers’ travel varies

Rep. Sid Michaels Kavulich, D-114, Taylor, said he does not seek reimbursement for all his travel and submits receipts when he does. His spending totaled $5,165.

While he gets reimbursed for mileage to and from Harrisburg, Mr. Kavulich said he does not for travel in the district. He also said he is selective about which committee hearings he attends.

“I don’t go to all the committee meetings,” he said. “Some of them are so far away and take up too much time.”

Rep. Jerry Knowles, R-124, Tamaqua, said he bills for travel that has a clear legislative purpose. His overall spending was $6,080 last year and his records include notations for travel to present citations and attend ground-breaking ceremonies in his district.

Providing notations on expense records provides accountability, said Mr. Kauffman.

“This is another tool that constituents have to see what their public officials are really doing,” he said.

Two lawmakers representing Northeast Pennsylvania rank among the top travel spenders in their respective chambers, the newspaper found.

Rep. Sandra Major, R-111, Bridgewater Twp., spent $16,229 for travel-related expenses last year, ranking third among the 203 House lawmakers. Much of that spending was for attending functions in the district, said Ms. Major, also the House majority caucus chairwoman.

The rural 111th District is the eighth-largest geographically among the 203 House districts, said Ms. Major.

“I’m not one to send staff,” she said. “I go myself.”

Sen. David Argall, R-29, Tamaqua, ranked No. 2 among the 50 senators with more than $25,000 in travel-related expenses.

However, a breakdown provided by Mr. Argall’s staff shows that staff mileage accounts for $9,500 of this amount. Mr. Argall has since put his staff expenses on the Senate chief clerk’s account.

Rep. Patrick Harkins, D-1, Erie, and Sen. Scott Hutchinson, R-21, Oil City, were the top travel spenders in their chambers at $29,619 and $27,388 respectively. Both have long commutes to Harrisburg.

Conferences

Much legislator travel was to attend conferences, the newspaper found.

For example, Rep. Tina Pickett, R-110, Towanda, spent more than $500 last July attending the National Conference of Insurance Legislators in Boston. Her overall travel spending was $10,759.

Ms. Pickett heads the House Insurance Committee, which handles bills involving insurance lines, agents and brokers and the state Children’s Health Insurance Program. The Boston conference covered topics concerning the Affordable Care Act, Medicaid and flood insurance.

Ms. Pickett became committee chairwoman in mid-session in 2013. She said the Boston conference helped her become knowledgeable about this specialized field.

House Minority Leader Frank Dermody, D-33, Allegheny County, and several other lawmakers attended the annual National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL) annual conference last summer in Minneapolis. Mr. Dermody spent $620 on round-trip airfare to the event and his overall travel spending in 2014 was $11,029.

“Not all legislators attend NCSL meetings, but those who do derive great benefits by exchanging ideas and lessons with lawmakers from around the country,” said Dermody spokesman Bill Patton. “Every meeting features dozens of seminars with national policy experts. It’s an intense, focused learning opportunity to find more effective policies to try in Pennsylvania.”

Mr. Dermody reviews requests from his caucus members to attend NCSL events to determine if they will benefit from it, said Mr. Patton.

Legislative advocacy

Many legislators also traveled to research legislation and took field trips related to their committees, the newspaper found.

Sen. Daylin Leach, D-17, King of Prussia, sponsor of a medical marijuana bill, made a well-publicized trip to Colorado where cannabis is legal. He spent $753 on lodging for three nights, $590 on airfare and $562 on car rental during that trip. His overall travel spending last year totaled $10,504.

“We packed as much information-gathering as we could into our three days,” Mr. Leach wrote in an op-ed piece published on his website. “We toured two facilities where the marijuana is grown, one lab where it is processed, one where it is tested for potency and impurities and two dispensaries, which are essentially marijuana stores.”

Committees

Rep. Frank Farina, D-112, Jessup, sat on two committees last year — Tourism and Recreational Development and Game and Fisheries — that went on field trips. His overall spending was $9,088.

He spent $274 on an overnight trip in January 2014 with a tourism panel visiting attractions in Doylestown, including the James A. Michener Art Museum and Mercer Museum.

Another committee member, Rep. Karen Boback, R-117, Harveys Lake, spent $123 on the Doylestown trip. Her overall spending was $3,073.

Mr. Farina spent $377 on mileage and lodging last September while attending an educational lecture and field trip on the Pennsylvania elk herd sponsored by the game committee.

Rep. Marty Flynn, D-113, Scranton, spent $364 attending a House Aging & Older Adult Services Committee meeting in Pittsburgh last summer regarding a state plan to address Alzheimer’s care.

Mr. Flynn said the hearing provided information about how local Alzheimer’s centers have coped with state funding cuts. His overall spending was $10,727.

Rep. Mike Carroll, D-118, Avoca, spent nearly $300 attending House Transportation Committee meetings last spring at Shawnee-on-Delaware and York respectively on police radar use and school bus safety. His overall spending was $8,089.

A Capitol activist who tracks legislative spending thinks much of the travel is unnecessary.

“Public officials can defray travel costs by embracing technology and telecommute, teleconference and Skype,” said Eric Epstein, co-founder of RockTheCapital.

Contact the writer: rswift@timesshamrock.com