The bullied Obamacare girl from the insurance website has been replaced and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie is among the critics ridiculing the program's latest poster child.

The new face of health care reform is a bespectacled, curly haired hipster who embraces holiday cheer as he encourages young people to join the conversation about the Affordable Care Act.

The young man dons a flannel onesie and cradles a mug of hot cocoa to promote the #GetTalking hashtag, an effort to start the conversation about the changes in health care during the holidays, in one ad released on Barack Obama's Twitter account.

Yet another promo shows the model dressed in an ugly Christmas sweater, festive socks and reclining on a leather sofa.

To promote community service during the holidays, Gov. Chris Christie used the Obamacare ad as a template to promote volunteering - telling people to 'get out of your pajamas.' (GOV CHRISTIE VIA TWITTER)

So far the star of the effort is being referred to as "Pajama Boy" and has received mixed reviews on social media.

Some Twitter trolls praised the merriment and his "snazzy pajamas" while others chided the promotional effort as "desperate."

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie took a swipe at the lounging lad, tweeting that people should "get out of your pajamas" and get to work to serve the underprivileged.

Dressed in an ugly Christmas sweater and festive socks, the festive model encourages young people to get talking about changes in health care reform. (Barack Obama via Twitter)

Fronting the President's health care program is not for the faint of heart.

The woman whose face appeared on the Obamacare website during in the initial rollout was ridiculed and said she felt bullied and intimidated during the backlash over the website's technical glitches.

"I don't know why people should hate me because it's just a photo. I didn't design the website. I didn't make it fail, so I don't think they should have any reasons to hate me," the woman, only identified as Adriana, told ABC News in November.

The woman who was featured on the Obamacare website, identified only as Adriana, felt intimidated by harsh public criticism of the program. (Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg)

Her image has since been removed from the website.

llarson@nydailynews.com

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE TO WATCH THE VIDEO.