INDIANAPOLIS — And he thought Peyton Manning was tough to play against in practice drills.

Mike Adams will have to face his former teammate in a game, with the former Broncos safety now nestled in the Colts’ secondary.

“I know he knows little things about me and little things about defenses that he’ll try to exploit,” Adams said Wednesday. “So I’m going to try to turn the tables a little bit on him. He’s been around a long time. He’s studied players. He understands Cover 1s, Cover 2s. He understands the little nuances that we try to disguise and try to trick him with.”

Adams, 33, has the dubious distinction of being part of the makeshift defense that lost in the Super Bowl to Seattle — to be fair, Rahim Moore’s replacement was also part of the defense that won the AFC championship game. But while the likes of Adams and Paris Lenon and others have been replaced, Adams worked his way onto a formidable roster — and a team that beat Denver last season.

“They really whooped us,” he said of the Broncos’ 39-33 loss at Indianapolis on Oct. 20, 2013. Adams was asked about the mentality of his former Broncos teammates, heading into their first meaningful game since the Super Bowl loss.

“I anticipate them coming out hyped as ever,” he said.

Show goes on. Colts owner Jim Irsay spent his first full day Wednesday away from Colts headquarters, after Tuesday’s NFL suspension. He must stay away for six games, after pleading guilty to driving while intoxicated in March.

“I don’t think it’s going to change our preparation in a sense,” Colts quarterback Andrew Luck said Wednesday. “It’s obviously not ideal, but for us, it’s business as usual. I don’t think it will have any negative impact on preparation, games and anything. When he comes back, it’ll be great.”

When Colts coach Chuck Pagano was asked about Irsay, Pagano was at first contrite, saying “business as usual” to answer the first two media questions. But then he opened up, notably when talking about how Irsay was by his side during the coach’s 2012 fight against leukemia.

“Mr. Irsay is family,” Pagano said. “We’re all family. I’ve been on record as saying the first time I shook his hand, the three words out of his mouth, first three words when I came on an interview even before I got offered the job, ‘Faith, family and football,’ is what he lived by. He’s not a guy that just talks it, he walks it. He’s family and we have his back. I certainly have his back, my family has his back. Again, I will never be able to repay the Irsay family, Jim and his daughters and Meg, everybody, for what he did for me during my circumstances and the things that I had to deal with.”

Homecoming. Pagano grew up in Boulder and played football at Fairview High School. He’s coming home — well, a half-hour-down-36 home — for Sunday’s game at Denver. Talking about his childhood, Pagano was asked who his favorite Broncos player was.”He wore number 57. Heard of him?” Pagano said, grinning nostalgically. “First name, Tommy. Last name, Jackson. Sideline to sideline. I had a bunch. Barney Chavous, Lyle Alzado, Rick Upchurch. There’s a bunch, a lot of good players.”