Carlos Alcantara never planned to become a nurse.

A former bar and convenience store owner, Alcantara, 39, expected his life to continue down the same path co-owning businesses with his father, Orlando.

But when Orlando became ill with laryngeal cancer, Alcantara sold the businesses and moved home to New Jersey to take care of him full time.

He followed him to four hospitals.

“I washed him,” he said. “I shaved him. I cut his hair. I kept a list of the medications he was taking.”

The nurses at the hospitals took notice, nudging Alcantara to consider entering the field.

But it was his father’s last wish before he died on Jan. 29, 2011, that convinced Alcantara to pursue the career.

“I promised him before he died that I would be a nurse,” he said.

Alcantara enrolled in the nursing program at Lake-Sumter State College and graduated last month with an associate degree in nursing. After taking the National Council Licensure Examination this month, Alcantara plans to take a position at The Villages Regional Hospital in the Intensive Care Unit.

He said the profession keeps him humble.

“It’s a pride-swallowing endeavor,” he said. “It’s being able to communicate with people. When you are taking care of people, they are at the most vulnerable moment in their life, and you are there to support them.”

But locally and nationally, officials say not enough people like Carlos Alcantara are answering the call to become nurses as the demand continues to outpace the number of people venturing into the profession.

Here, in the midst of National Nurses Week, health care officials reflect on the critical role nurses play in the health care field and worry about the erosion of quality care if the shortage continues.

A shortage

Richard Pearce, chief nursing officer and director of critical care and emergency services at Florida Hospital Waterman, said there has been a shortage of nurses throughout his 40-year career.

But in recent years, the shortage has grown more significant, he said.

“We are adding new nurses to the population that we are seeing,” he said. “The difficulty is the demand for us to provide those services is increasing even more rapidly.”

Five years ago, Waterman was serving 130-140 patients a day, and now, that number has increased to 180-200, Pearce said.

He said the health care field is looking for nurses with more skill sets, also adding to the shortage.

“It is difficult for a new graduate to walk out of school and get a job in a specialty department,” he said. “They have to have experience before they get to the areas.”

There are an estimated 450 nurses in patient care at the hospital, Pearce said. Of those, the hospital is limited in the number of graduates it can hire, averaging 10 twice a year.

“The biggest focus is trying to recruit and retain experienced nurses,” he said.

USA Today reported in 2014 that the “recent recession made it more difficult for entry-level nurses to find work as more experienced nurses put off retirement and stayed in the job force.”

There are 50 nursing vacancies at Waterman, but that number fluctuates week to week, Pearce said. The Florida Center for Nursing reported an estimated 9,111 vacant nursing positions nationwide in 2014.

South Lake Hospital also faces a nursing shortage, according to Paul Johns, the hospital’s chief operations officer.

“Our main concern is how to attract and retain nurses,” Johns said. “There is only a certain number of nurses graduating. There is a demand, but there isn’t the supply there.”

The nursing shortage does impact patients at times, he said.

“When the ER is getting filled up and you need to start admitting patients to the floors and you don’t have the necessary staffing, it is hard to admit faster, which means they stay in the ER longer,” he said. “Outside of physicians, nurses are the core of the hospital. They are the first and the last people that our patients see in terms of personnel.”

The American Association of Colleges of Nursing reported the “U.S. is projected to experience a shortage of registered nurses that is expected to intensify as Baby Boomers age and the need for health care grows. Compounding the problem is the fact that nursing schools across the country are struggling to expand capacity to meet the rising demand for care given the national move toward health care reform.”

Cynthia Griffin, LSSC director of nursing, said that is an issue at the college.

“We have not been able to grow the program,” she said. “One factor of availability is qualified faculty. They must have a master’s degree in nursing. There is a shortage of that availability.”

But she said the majority of graduates do find positions in the field.

Challenges

Health officials said the new Affordable Care Act does not have a direct impact on nurses, but the acuity level of patients does affect a nurse’s profession.

“Patients are sicker than they were in the past,” Pearce said. “Patients 20 to 30 years ago that would not have survived are here today.”

Griffin added that today’s patient is more savvy and knowledgeable.

“Patient satisfaction is a big concern,” she said. “The hospitals have discharged patients complete satisfaction surveys. If they do not receive positive scores, it can affect the hospital’s reimbursement rates for Medicare. The (nurses) are really providing patients that satisfaction.”

The training at LSSC is designed to get students ready to deliver the care patients need and want.

The program required Alcantara to take part in clinical training at hospitals, where he spent 10 hours a week with patients.

During his final semester, he completed his practicum, where he saw patients at the hospital under the supervision of a nurse for a month.

Alcantara was assigned to The Villages Regional Hospital’s ICU.

“My first day in the ICU I witnessed three deaths,” he said.

But as he learned the protocols and got to know the patients and the families, he grew to love working in the department.

Although many of the patients are not conscious in the ICU, Alcantara said he believes they can hear him, and he always speaks to them. He remembers when nurses would not speak to his father when he couldn’t speak, and he promised not to do the same.

“I always speak to the patient,” he said. “They are the ones receiving care.”

The job requires patience, and Alcantara said he takes it in stride when he gets the brunt of a patient’s anger.

“I am a former bartender and bouncer,” he said. “I am not afraid of people getting mad at me. I laugh it off.”

He said he also always seeks to inform the patient.

“Fear is the biggest challenge when you come to the hospital,” he said. “The only way to conquer fear is with knowledge.”

Alcantara said the hardest aspect of working in the ICU is not death but not always being able to help alleviate people’s suffering.

“He has a very sensitive side,” said Nicole Tinny, an assistant professor of nursing at Lake-Sumter who taught Alcantara. “He is that big guy that wants to give everyone that security and comfort.”