Attendance on Demand Our channel is a talented group of business professionals that are dedicated to solving labor management issues for their customers

Attendance on Demand, Inc. held its annual channel partner meeting August 19-21st in Ann Arbor, Michigan. Resellers from across the country gathered to learn about industry trends, new products, and spend time together.

Top of mind these days is the Affordable Care Act and compliance-related measurement, tracking, and reporting. Attendance on Demand, Inc. offered several educational and compelling sessions to help the channel understand and ease the compliance burden customers are experiencing now and into 2016.

Each year Attendance on Demand showcases a different Michigan city and introduces partners to local restaurants and venues. Keynote speaker, Tom Root, Managing Partner for Zingerman’s Mail Order business kicked off the meeting with an inspiring customer service-focused presentation. Zingerman’s Deli, Cornman Farms, ZingTrain, and their mail order company were featured throughout the meeting.

Other topics covered in this intensive day-and- a- half conference were workforce optimization opportunities, efficient decision-making tools, and new compliance-related software and hardware.

“Our channel is a talented group of business professionals that are dedicated to solving labor management issues for their customers,” said Beth Baerman, Director of Communication for Attendance on Demand. “This annual meeting provides an opportunity to stay in touch with each other and learn more about workforce trends.”

About Attendance on Demand

Attendance on Demand supports the labor management needs of thousands of companies and more than three-quarters of a million employees across North America. Launched in 2006, Attendance on Demand is a rapidly deployed, cloud-based solution that minimizes a company’s risk and technology investment while providing advanced features for securely managing labor data – calculating pay rules, scheduling employees, budgeting labor, and automating recordkeeping for labor law compliance. With standard uptime over the industry average of 99.995% and above average customer retention rates, Attendance on Demand removes the worry of maintaining expensive infrastructure. An extensive North American distribution network helps organizations use Attendance on Demand to reduce labor expenses and improve decision-making.