Athens may not look like a farming town, but in fact, the four-county Athens metropolitan area is one of the state’s top-producing agricultural regions, according to statistics in the University of Georgia’s annual Georgia Farmgate Value Report.

Madison County, a part of the Athens metro area, is the No. 1 producing county in the state, measured by dollar value — $521.4 million in 2014.

Oglethorpe County, another neighboring County in the Athens area, is the state’s top producer in the livestock and agriculture category at $125 million. That’s mostly because of the county’s large hog

production, which leads the state, said Kent Wolfe, director of the UGA College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences’ Center of Agribusiness and Economic Development.

Wolfe is also the editor of the report, along with researcher Karen Stubbs.

Even Athens-Clarke and Oconee counties rank high for one kind of agriculture — ornamental horticulture. Clarke is the state’s No. 3 county at $32.4 million in total ornamental horticulture. Oconee County is No. 8 at $17.3 million worth of production last year.

The new report also shows that beef has overtaken cotton as the state’s No. 2 type of agricultural production.

Herds increased along with beef prices, while cotton prices tumbled as China pulled back from buying cotton after stockpiling it, Wolfe said.

Madison County leads the state in overall value of agricultural production, but several other northeast Georgia counties rank in the top 10 — mostly because of poultry production, which accounts for the great majority of agricultural production in Northeast Georgia.

Broilers are by far Georgia’s the most valuable agricultural product, with a value of $4.5 billion in 2014 — four times the value of second-place beef, at $1.1 billion.

Overall agricultural production in Georgia was worth $14.1 billion in 2014, up $448 million from 2013, according to the Farmgate report. Almost all that gain was because of beef production, which shot up by $443 million between 2013 and 2014.

In addition to Madison, six other Northeast Georgia counties rank in Georgia’s top 10 for total agricultural production, including neighboring Jackson and Oglethorpe counties.

No other state in the union keeps as detailed an account of its agriculture as Georgia, Wolfe said.

Some other highlights from the report:

• Georgia may be the Peach State, but sales of that fruit are only a fraction of what Georgia farmers get for the state’s blueberries. Farmers sold $335.3 million worth of blueberries last year, four times the amount the crop’s value five years earlier. The value of the peach crop in 2014 was about $53.5 million.

• Tift County farmers grew the most watermelons — worth $18.4 million in 2014.

• Colquitt County topped the vegetable production chart at $155 million; most of the state’s vegetable production is in south Georgia. The state’s most valuable vegetable crop is onions at $138.5 million.

• At $156.1 million, agricultural tourism grew by about 9 percent from 2013 to 2014 and has nearly doubled in value in five years.

• The value of the cotton crop declined from about $1.2 billion to about $965 million. In 2011, the Georgia cotton crop was worth $1.5 billion.

The full report is online for viewing or download at www.caes.uga.edu/center/caed.

Follow education reporter Lee Shearer at www.facebook.com/LeeShearerABH or https://twitter.com/LeeShearer.