UF Health Jacksonville, Northeast Florida’s only trauma center and only safety net hospital, could be forced to close its doors if the Florida Legislature doesn’t act to maintain its current funding level, officials of the JAX Chamber and the Jacksonville Civic Council warn.

“Any reduction in its current funding will put the hospital at risk of failure,” said a letter sent to the Senate president, the speaker of the House and the eight members of the Duval Legislative Delegation by the Civic Council, which represents about 70 CEOs and business leaders in Northeast Florida.

“If the hospital shuts down, it will be a catastrophe,” former Mayor John Delaney, chairman of the JAX Chamber, said during a news conference at UF Health’s Eighth Street campus.

UF Health Jacksonville has about 90,000 patient visits to its emergency department annually, including 4,000 trauma patients, many of those visits from people who are uninsured or underinsured.

“The other hospitals in Northeast Florida simply do not have the capacity to absorb the patients currently being cared for by UF Health Jacksonville, and a loss of funding at the state level will be felt throughout our entire region,” said Ed Burr, chairman of the Jacksonville Civic Council and chairman of Government Affairs for the chamber.

About $95 million in funding, which represents about 17 percent of UF Health Jacksonville’s $550 million annual budget, is at risk. Since 2005 Florida has had a waiver from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid establishing a Low Income Pool, which last year provided about $2 billion in funds to support Florida’s 15 safety net hospitals. But the centers have said that waiver, which expires at the end of June, will not be renewed,

The Florida Senate released a budget proposal Thursday that includes nearly $2.2 billion for the continuation of the Low Income Pool program.

State Sen. Aaron Bean, R-Fernandina Beach, chairman of the Senate’s Committee on Health Policy, said that while the Legislature has no plan to expand Medicaid in Florida under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act, the Senate plan would greatly expand the number of people covered by Medicaid in Florida, extending it to anyone whose household income is below 138 percent of the poverty level.

In exchange, the recipients would be required to work, volunteer or go to school. Negotiations between the state Agency for Health Care Administration and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid are ongoing, he said.

“I’m optimistic that the federal government could make that work,” said Bean, who works for UF Health as relationship development officer. “They don’t want to close hospitals.”

If the Legislature doesn’t maintain UF Health Jacksonville funding, the resulting shortfall can’t be erased with budget cuts, said Kevin Hyde, who led a UF Health Task Force for the Civic Council. The Civic Council hired the accounting firm Dixon Hughes Goodman to audit UF Health Jacksonville’s operations. What the audit found is that UF Health is a very efficient operation, Hyde said.

“In fact it’s amazing they operate as well as they do with the resources they have, he said. “It’s one of the few safety net hospitals that does not have taxing authority.”

Bean noted that UF Health Jacksonville gets paid 19 cents for each dollar of health care it provides, which is why its needs funding from state and federal sources.

During the news conference, UF Health Jacksonville’s CEO Russell Armstead was asked if the new Northside medical facility UF Health North, which recently opened an emergency room and medical office building on Max Leggett Boulevard and will eventually include a hospital, could offset a funding loss. He said while UF Health North should eventually generate some profit, it’s not going to happen soon enough to make a difference during the next fiscal year. The letter from the Civic Council noted that UF Health has only 55 days of cash reserves available.

In addition to serving as the area’s safety net hospital and trauma center, UF Health Jacksonville, with about 5,000 employees, is Jacksonville’s sixth-largest employer and largest minority employer. It is also a major academic health center with about 350 University of Florida faculty physicians and 350 resident physicians.

Charlie Patton: (904) 359-4413