More than a dozen bills aimed at making college more affordable and lessening students' debt loads were proposed this week.

Democratic Sen. Lisa Boscola is one of seven state senators behind the College Access Plan, which was detailed Wednesday, according to a news release.

"My bills are aimed at getting Pennsylvania workers the kind of education and job experience they need to find jobs in some of the most promising careers available in Pennsylvania," Boscola said.

The proposal is meant to ensure students that are discouraged by the cost of college get the help and incentives they need to attend and graduate from college, Sen. Anthony H. Williams said during the news conference. It also furthers dual enrollment opportunities for high school students, which allows students to earn free college credits.

"Going to college requires a substantial amount of money that most working families do not have," Williams said. "This leaves our young people loaded down with debt."

The proposals are as follows:

Academic Scholarship Excellence Program

Boscola's program would provide merit-base scholarships up to $5,000 for high school students to attend college and stay in Pennsylvania after graduation

STEM HELP

A $50 million program to help STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) majors would repay their student loans through a pay-it-forward plan, according to a news release. Students would have to stay in the state for five years after graduation.

Pennsylvania College Access Challenge Grant

This would give bridge funding to the state Department of Education to continues it Challenge Grant team and fund programs that help more students graduate high school and go on to college.



Pennsylvania Pathways to College Act

This bill would offer high-need high schools more funding for counselors, training and college prep resources.

Free Tuition Lottery

Operated by the Pennsylvania Higher Education Assistant Agency, the revenue from the lottery would be used to provide free tuition and need-based grants for low-income students.

Pennsylvania Education and Employed Loan Forgiveness

Graduates of state system universities that live and work in the state for five years after graduation would have their loans forgiven.

"The $10 million fund would forgive up to $15,000 in loans for applicants from families with incomes of $70,000 or less," according to a news release.

Health-related Industries Education Scholarship Fund

Students in health care programs would get financial help through another pay-it-forward plan and business tax credits.

Credits for Approved Job Training

Work-based learning tax credits would be available to businesses that give internships to high school students in booming "gold collar" jobs, such as biology and medical technicians. Students would earn credits that would transfer to a postsecondary program.

Financial Literacy

Students would have to learn about personal finance from kindergarten through 12th grade.

State Authorized Reciprocal Agreements

The state Department of Education would be able to enter into interstate reciprocity agreements for postsecondary distance learning.

Dual Enrollment Task Force

The task force would find and recommend ways for high schools to earn college credits, including current curricula, hybrid learning and Advanced Placement expansions.

Direct Deposit into 529

A way to give those receiving a state tax return the option to have it directly deposited into a 529 college savings account.

The Fly in 4

A program that would model programs at Temple and Penn State universities that offer incentives and support services so students graduate on time.

Boscola proposed the academic excellence scholarship program and the college credits for approved job training bills.

Sen. Pat Brown, R- Lehigh, is a co-sponsor of the STEM HELP bill.