RoughRiders lose 29-27, nearly score final touchdown

Coronado running back Austin Micci is tackled by Roosevelt's Adrian Pastrana in the second quarter Saturday. The RoughRiders fell short of a comeback, losing 29-27. ( Steve Stoner )

JOHNSTOWN - Omar Rivera watched his high school football career come to an abrupt end right in front of his eyes at Peterson Field on Saturday evening.

No. 3 Roosevelt (8-3) was in the midst of a late-game comeback attempt against No. 6 Coronado (11-1) when the one play that sealed its season took place near the goal line. The RoughRiders had reached the Cougar red zone, trailing by two points with just more than 1 minute remaining in regulation when quarterback Kane Kratz attempted to find Rivera for the go-ahead score.

However, Coronado cornerback Junior York read the pass and made a move to get on Rivera's inside to come down with an interception, leading the Cougars to a 29-27 upset, and advancing them to the 3A semifinals.

"They were shutting down our run game, so we had to go to the air. We made some plays, but on that last play their corner made a good play on the ball," Rivera said. "I knew that they were just going to come up immediate and the game was over."

Before building a cushion to distance itself from Roosevelt, Coronado spent the entire first half working from behind.

The RoughRiders drove the ball down the field on the game's opening drive, setting up running back Randy Molinar's 19-yard touchdown run. The Cougars attempted only one offensive play before they were struck again, fumbling the ball and setting up Molinar again.

Back-to-back scores had Coronado facing a 14-0 deficit just 1:58 into the game.

Advertisement

"Obviously you get concerned because you have to dig yourself all the way back out. But it's beyond belief what I have in these young men. They battle, they don't quit, they keep going," Coronado coach Bob Lizarraga said. "They don't get broken, and obviously that's a quality of a champion."

The Cougars tallied a pair of their own rushing scores as the first quarter rolled on, the initial coming from Zeb Foster and the other on a fourth and goal situation won by Austin Micci, who ended the game leading Coronado's offense with three touchdowns and 159 rushing yards.

Roosevelt running back Randy Molinar, left, eludes Coronado defender Devon Baker (10) on a run in the first quarter Saturday. Molinar scored twice for the Riders, but a late interception knocked them out of the 3A playoffs. ( Steve Stoner )

Roosevelt extended its lead to six points with Lincoln Schutz's 25-yard field goal with five seconds left on the first-half clock. But momentum took a swing when Micci returned the Rider kickoff 75-yards to the house as time expired, putting Coronado up 21-20 going into halftime.

"They say scores right before half make or break you," Roosevelt coach Noland Eastin said. "We scored one and I thought that was good, and then they made a play. We tackled like we never tackled before, our guys are better than that. But then again, they made a play and we didn't."

From that point on, the game's control transferred into Coronado's hands as it continued to capitalize on Roosevelt's second-half mistakes.

The Cougars scored on the opening drive coming back from the break, as well as coming up with a fumble recovery on the ensuing kickoff, forcing three Roosevelt punts, causing a safety and intercepting Kratz twice in the game's final two quarters.

"It comes down to mistakes. In playoff football you can't turn the ball over, you can't give up points before half, you can't give the ball back to them inside the 10 (yard line). Those are the mistakes that come back to haunt you," Eastin said.

Saturday's result awarded Coronado its first-ever semifinal playoff appearance, as the Cougars will face No. 7 The Classical Academy next weekend.

The book of Roosevelt's 2013 season is now closed as the Riders ended 8-3 overall with an undefeated 5-0 run in league matchups, landing them their second consecutive Tri-Valley crown.

"It's not about trophies, even though it would be nice to get one. It's about relationships, knowing at the end of the day you put everything into it and just knowing as a young man you gave everything, and that was a group that did," Eastin said. "They're still champions to me."

Sports writer Quentin Sickafoose can be reached on Twitter @QSickafoose.

CORONADO 29, ROOSEVELT 27

At Roosevelt H.S.

Coronado (11-1) 7 14 8 0 - 29

Roosevelt (8-3) 14 6 0 7 - 27

SCORING SUMMARY

First Quarter

R - Randy Molinar 19-yard run (Jessica Meek kick), 10:55.

R - Molinar 19-yard run (Meek kick), 10:03.

C - Austin Micci 8-yard run (Isaah Duvall kick), 5:21.

Second Quarter

R - Lincoln Schultz 33-yard field goal, 11:05.

C - Zeb Foster 3-yard run (Duvall kick), 7:26.

R - Schultz 25-yard field goal, :05.

C - Micci 75-yard kick return (Duvall kick), :00.

Third Quarter

C - Micci 64-yard run (kick blocked), 10:37

C - Safety, 6:42.

Fourth Quarter

R - Alize Garcia 6-yard run (Meek kick).