By Leslee Kulba- As the federal government declares crony industries too big to fail, government involvement in private-sector affairs is too big not to fail. The reference is made particularly to the healthcare industry, which at the time of government acquisition represented 20 percent of the United States economy. Problems with the Obamacare rollout are well-documented; and the State of North Carolina has been experiencing problems with getting the software to work for a couple years, now.

The latest trauma concerns the state’s largest provider of health insurance, Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina (BCBSNC). BCBSNC is the only company offering health insurance in all 100 North Carolina counties. In a recent corporate webinar, Sales Director Roy Watson, Jr. announced hundreds of sales agents would cease to receive commissions for Affordable Care Act (ACA) policies, and he instructed agents to remove quoting links from their web sites. Cutting commissions is not as dreadful as it sounds, as the applicable period, from April 1 to December 1, is not open enrollment, but a time when policies may only be offered to persons with special exemptions.

The bad news was the reason. BCBSNC lost $400 million on ACA policies in 2014 and 2015. In 2014, BCBSNC sustained $123 million in losses following receipt of $343 million in reinsurance and other federal subsidies provided through the ACA. The kickbacks available for 2015 are not expected to cover much of the loss. The insurer had previously announced rate hikes for 2016 policyholders averaging 32.5 percent to help cover future losses.

BCBS explains suspension of commissions is to “ensure sustainability,” and notes UnitedHealthcare and Aetna stopped their commissions first, in order to stem enrolment. The insurer further claims eliminating online applications will allow it to screen and verify the eligibility of applicants. BCBS attributed losses to Obamacare’s provisions, including a requirement that everybody carry coverage, and that healthcare be subsidized for persons below set income levels. Low-income persons are now signing up for “steeply-discounted” coverage.

The losses were not wholly unanticipated. Subject to a profit motive, insurance companies used to have the power to deny coverage for terms or conditions that would wreck havoc on their bottom lines. With Obamacare, they no longer have the luxury, and individuals, interested in their own financial survival amidst astronomical healthcare costs, may now drop coverage once a condition is treated to their satisfaction.

But perhaps more problematic than the corporate losses are technical problems that have plagued persons attempting to sign up for ACA policies through BCBSNC. Persons who had signed up found they could not verify coverage, were assigned the wrong policies, or even assigned multiple policies. Some were overbilled, and others found themselves locked out of payment options. Several did not receive their ID cards within a reasonable time period, and many are still waiting. The North Carolina Department of Insurance has now received 850 complaints, and it is intervening on behalf of emergency cases. BCBSNC publicly admitted 25,000 customers may have been affected, but internal documents obtained by the Charlotte News & Observer indicate the number is much higher.

To illustrate some of the absurdities, the News & Observer told of one Beth Anne Corriveau of Raleigh. Her policy is valid through December 13, 2199; but, according to her records, her credit card expired in January of 1753. Her attempts to pay have been rejected, and her accounts are delinquent. After spending an estimated twenty hours trying to resolve the issue, it remained a mess. Local employer Jim Lowe made NCNN press for spending three hours on hold only to learn BCBSNC could not find any information about his company’s troubled account.

Monica Dixon of Walkertown received multiple ID cards, and she was billed in quadruplicate off different policies. Since payments are automatically debited from her account, she now has to buy gas and food on credit. She is unemployed. On January 11, BCBSNC promised to refund money wrongly drafted from 3200 consumer bank accounts. The insurer further had plans to implement corrective action the first week in January to show continuous coverage for persons whose coverage was accidentally dropped.

BCBSNC says the volume of applications is partly to blame. They had increased staffing 40 percent anticipating an upsurge, but call volumes turned out to be up 500 percent. By January 6, tens of thousands of customers were already jamming customer service phone lines, spending hours on hold. Then, the call volume exploded. Starting January 1, a 32-percent error rate was documented in the new software to which BCBSNC was converting. 17,000 accounts were reportedly defective. When BCBSNC decided to delay processing ID cards for ACA customers until the kinks could be worked out, the company told the public this was illustrative of the care they take in vetting policies.

Progressives are quick to fault the Republican legislature’s rejection of Medicaid Expansion for the problems. But Katherine Restrepo, Health and Human Services Policy Analyst for the John Locke Foundation, says that is not the answer. Medicaid was designed to help the poorest of the poor, persons with extremely low incomes and extreme health issues – the elderly, blind, feeble, low-income, behaviorally-impaired, and single mothers. Medicaid Expansion would have added to the system a population, 82 percent of which was without disabilities, working, without dependents, and without mental disabilities. Putting these people on Medicaid would deprive the neediest of limited resources and drive up costs for paying customers. “It harms the poor, it fails the poor,” she said.

Restrepo said at this point any reform is in the hands of Congress. Talk is cheap, but there are discussions about repealing, replacing, or transcending Obamacare. Some low-level amendments could offer immediate amelioration by leaving the exchanges intact while relaxing enrolment requirements. Restrepo said the real solution would require a shift from counting the number of people who can get cards to looking at how healthcare is freeing people up to resume productive lifestyles.

BCBSNC ranks as one of the greatest enrollers of ACA participants in the nation. It comforts customers with the awareness that the aforementioned problems are not unique to North Carolina. Consumers in need of assistance from the NC Department of Insurance should call 855-408-1212 or visit http://www.ncdoi.com/.