Everyone knows the quote from Mark Twain: “If you don’t like the weather in New England, just wait a few minutes.” And most people know that Trump has changed his views on various issues over the years — he was for socialized medicine in the U.S. just 15 years ago, once proposed a wealth tax, etc.

But the Washington Post’s David Fahrenthold has compiled an amusing list of “20 times Donald Trump has changed his mind since June.” That works out to roughly one change of mind every three days since Trump announced his candidacy.

To be fair, some of the ones on Fahrenthold’s list aren’t exactly changes of mind. It includes, for example, Trump saying at one point that he’d replace ObamaCare with something “much better,” and later saying he’d replace it with something “terrific,” as though those are two different things.

Trump has, however, said a lot of things over the past two months that are hard to square. Fahrenthold adds up seven different iterations of Trump’s views on tax reform, for example, from backing a national sales tax, to supporting a flat tax, to leaving the system more or less alone.

Even Sean Hannity, who clearly likes Trump, was confused about his position on tax reform. Here’s an exchange from his interview with Trump, which aired Aug. 12.

“HANNITY: Let me go to specifics on the economy. You want to lower the tax. You want to implement a flat tax.

TRUMP: No, no.

HANNITY: You don’t? I thought you liked the flat tax. I read it in a couple interviews.

TRUMP: The problem with the flat tax is it’s sort of the same. I actually believe that people, as they make more and more money, can pay a higher percentage, OK?”

This has been too much for some conservatives, such as National Review’s Charles Cooke, who complained about Trump’s flip flopping on Hannity’s show. “He said on this show… that he was fine with the progressive income tax. … The day before, he suggested he was in favor of a flat tax. Literally 24 hours before. He’s making it up as he goes along, and we are all falling it for some reason.”

It’s possible that this is simply a reflection of Trump’s brazen style. He likes to sound bold and decisive, even if he doesn’t have the particulars worked out yet. But if Trump has such a thin grasp on key issues like tax reform, it does raise legitimate questions about just what it is he’d do if elected president.

As Trump starts releasing details about his plans, it will be far more difficult for him to wing it without looking incredibly fickle. Or worse, looking like a typical politician who’ll say anything to get elected.

Follow John Merline on Twitter: @IBD_JMerline.