Funding cuts threaten access to patient care at federally qualified health centers

Correction appended

Federally qualified health centers in Michigan have been increasing patient access, improving services and expanding buildings, and adding new locations the past five years under funding provisions from the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.



Since 2011, Michigan health centers have treated 21 percent more patients and have hired 873 more employees, said the Michigan Primary Care Association. Last year, health centers also saved an estimated $16 million for the state Medicaid program because of their lower per-patient treatment costs, the association told Crain's.

But all that could come to a screeching halt on Sept. 30 as $11 billion in financial support to the health centers that was part of a trust fund set up under Obamacare is scheduled to run out.



At Covenant Community Care Inc., a tripling of federal funding over the past five years has enabled the five-clinic health center in Detroit to quadruple the number of patients treated to 14,000, said Paul Propson, its executive director.



Since 2011, Covenant's federal funding increased from $875,000 per year to $2.5 million, accounting for 25 percent of its budget, Propson said. Some 55 percent of Covenant's revenue comes from Medicaid, 10 percent from other insurance, 5 percent from self-pay, and 5 percent from grants and donations.



The federal funding, however, has enabled Covenant to grow from one dentist to seven dentists and from two physicians to 11. The health center plans to add another dentist and two physicians in the next several months, Propson said.



Over the past five years, Covenant has been seen a 66 percent increase in uninsured clients to 5,500 and a 15-fold increase in Medicaid recipients to 8,200 from 544, he said.



"Really, this is a 'wow' story," he said. "We are not that unusual for community health centers in Detroit. We are part of a trend that is to move people out of ERs into primary care. It has been a success story in making it possible for people to get care in more appropriate (and lower-cost) location."



But if the Obamacare funding runs out, Propson said, Covenant's budget would be immediately cut by 15 percent, or about $1.5 million, and the health center would face some tough choices.



"We can't abandon our patients. It will be all or nothing. Either we continue to care for the 5,500 uninsured patients we have or go into a spiral that would be the end of our health centers," Propson said.

Kim Sibilsky, CEO of the Lansing-based Michigan Primary Care Association, which represents the state's 40 health centers and 240 clinic locations, said federal funding for health centers could be reduced by 70 percent to about $1.5 billion nationally unless Congress steps in this year.





Health centers are asking for five additional years of mandatory funding in the trust fund that would maintain the $3.6 billion annual spending. Some 35 million patients could be served by health centers by 2020, up from 23 million in 2014.



President Obama has proposed $2.7 billion in discretionary funds in each of his fiscal 2016, 2017 and 2018 budget proposals.



"Another proposal we are looking at would add $11 billion, the same amount in the original bill (Obamacare) for health centers in a three-year fix," Stabenow said. "It could be part of the (so-called Medicare reimbursement 'doc fix')" that will up for a vote in March.



But without additional Congressional funding, the financial hit could mean Michigan could lose $40 million annually, including $8.6 million in Wayne County. Some 49,000 fewer patients would be seen by health centers, which now see about 605,000 patients per year.



It also could cost the state's health centers 600 jobs and an economic loss of $79 million, Sibilsky said.



Because health centers provide primary and preventive care, Sibilsky said, loss of funding could increase overall costs at hospitals and emergency departments.



For example, the MPCA commissioned a study last year that found Michigan's health centers save the state Medicaid program $12 per adult Medicaid beneficiary per month, or $144 per member per year.



The study by the Institute for Health Policy at Michigan State University found those annual Medicaid savings amounted to $15.9 million.





CORRECTION APPENDED

Editor's note: This story has been updated from an earlier version to clarify the Wellness Plan Health Centers is a federally qualified health center.

Related Links