The American Journal of Managed Care will host a tweetchat with The National Pharmaceutical Council on January 28, 2016, from 1-2 pm EDT. For care pathways to meet their intended goals, it will be important to ensure open dialogue with patients and the physicians who guide them, as well as to study their impact on health outcomes.

Care pathways are becoming more widely used in the United States, but even as they are expected to have greater influence on quality of care and patient outcomes, more efforts will be required to improve care pathways’ level of transparency and evaluate their impact on health outcomes.

On Thursday, January 28, 1-2 pm EDT, The American Journal of Managed Care (AJMC) will host a tweetchat with the National Pharmaceutical Council (NPC) to explore current trends in care pathway development and implementation in U.S. healthcare settings, as well as future improvements that are needed.

NPC’s Robert Dubois, MD, PhD, chief science officer and executive vice president, will answer questions through the NPC Twitter handle (@NPCnow) and discuss topics that include the benefit of using care pathways, the use of care pathways with new payment models, who is developing pathways, and more.

“For care pathways to meet their intended goals, it will be important to ensure open dialogue with patients and the physicians who guide them, as well as to study their impact on health outcomes,” said Dr. Dubois “I’m looking forward to having a robust tweetchat about care pathways and recommendations for improvement.”

AJMC and NPC encourage Twitter users to submit questions and participate in the chat on Thursday, January 28, by using #AJMCchat. And don’t forget to follow @AJMC_Journal and @NPCnow.

Check out the research paper from NPC and the Analysis Group on care pathways in the US and recommendations for improving them. The paper is online and will appear in the January issue of AJMC.

About the Journals and AJMC.com

The American Journal of Managed Care is the leading peer-reviewed journal dedicated to issues in managed care. AJMC.com distributes healthcare news to leading stakeholders across a variety of platforms. Other titles in the franchise include The American Journal of Accountable Care, which publishes research and commentary on innovative healthcare delivery models facilitated by the 2010 Affordable Care Act. AJMC’s Evidence-Based series brings together stakeholder views from payers, providers, policymakers and pharmaceutical leaders in oncology and diabetes management. To order reprints of articles appearing in AJMC publications, please call (609) 716-7777, x 131.

About the National Pharmaceutical Council

The National Pharmaceutical Council is a health policy research organization dedicated to the advancement of good evidence and science, and to fostering an environment in the United States that supports medical innovation. Founded in 1953 and supported by the nation’s major research-based pharmaceutical companies, NPC focuses on research development, information dissemination, and education on the critical issues of evidence, innovation and the value of medicines for patients. For more information, visit http://www.npcnow.org and follow NPC on Twitter @npcnow.

CONTACT: Nicole Beagin (609) 716-7777 x 131

nbeagin(at)ajmc.com

http://www.ajmc.com