Obama is officially celebrating this failing economy as his crowning achievement. As reported by Investor's Business Daily on Friday, he recently explained to the American people how grateful we should be for his Constitution-shredding economic policies that "rescued" us from the housing market collapse—the one caused directly by Democrat policies—in 2008.

Photo by Alex Wong/Getty Images

Meanwhile, after seven years of Obama getting his way on trillions of dollars in new spending on everything from Obamacare, to failed "stimulus" packages, to the bailouts (partisan payoffs for political allies), record numbers of Americans remain out of the workforce, economic growth crawls along at an abysmal half a percent, and twenty percent of American families have no one with a job. As Obama's disastrous Wall Street takeover utterly cripples economic growth, his illegal health care takeover skyrockets costs, and his war on the coal industry bankrupts one company after another, he insists on being thanked for "saving" us.

He argued: "We were moving so fast early on that we couldn’t take victory laps. We couldn’t explain everything we were doing [you peasants are just unable to comprehend it]. I mean, one day we’re saving the banks [throwing truckloads of taxpayer cash at 'too big to fail' banks, illegally taking over Wall Street, obliterating small banks, and setting us up for another economic collapse]; the next day we’re saving the auto industry [throwing taxpayers under the bus to bail out the greedy, abusive unions that destroyed the auto industry]; the next day we’re trying to see whether we can have some impact on the housing market [by reinstating the racist lending policies that destroyed the economy]."

The "post-partisan" president also blamed the abject failure of his policies (as always) on President Bush, Republicans, and the severity of the Democrat-created recession—which experts confirm is a blatantly bogus excuse, for which "U.S. history provides no support." And of course, he bragged about things like the creation of just over fourteen million new jobs since 2010 (despite his policies), even though the working age population grew by almost sixteen million, thereby indicating that things are worse, not better.

Additionally, studies show that the left's rampant, tyrannical over-regulation of job-creators and obscenely abusive tax hikes (sixty percent overall increase in investment taxes alone since Obama took office), have imposed crushing costs on consumers and suffocated economic growth to death. Whether Obama can accept it or not, this will be his legacy.