Brenda Robinson |

LET’S DO BETTER

Has Dr. Benjamin Solomon Carson, noted neurosurgeon, lost his mind? He shocked not only the nation, but the world, when he spoke at the Values Voter Summit in Washington, D.C., two weeks ago. In his reference to President Barack Obama, Carson said, “Obamacare is really, I think, the worst that has happened in this nation, since slavery.”

There are reasons we must wonder if Carson’s 36 years in neurosurgery has caused him some personal brain confusion. This renowned physician has spoken in Fort Wayne twice, keynoting the African American Health Care Alliance’s Scholarship Ball. He was an excellent speaker, and his delivery was uplifting and encouraging. His “slavery” comments have no resemblance to past remarks.

He added even more damaging language. He said, “it (Obamacare) is making us subservient of the government and it was never about healthcare, it was about control.” Dr. Carson was referring to governmental control, specifically the Democratic Party and the president.

Dr. Carson, a capitalist, must surely recognize The Affordable Care Act provides private insurance companies opportunities to make more money, sure money, forever money. The Affordable Care Act will not deter premium payments. In cases where individuals and families cannot afford coverage, vouchers will be issued. Families, whose children stay on health plans up to age 26, will provide more dollars to insurance companies for “family plans.”

Neither physicians, nor insurance companies have publicly complained about the plan. Capitalist should be celebrating because “ere’ body is gonna get paid.” The plan should please Dr. Carson who has expressed love for the character of this country. The plan actually helps America live up to its creed:

“We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created equal. They are endowed by their creator with certain inalienable rights and among them are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.”

If an American citizen is to have “life,” then medical services are a necessity.

A speech, last February at a National Prayer Breakfast, by the doctor was equally distributing. He said, and the president was in the room where the speech was delivered, “Our deficit is a big problem; when a person is born give him a birth certificate, an electronic medical record and a health savings account.” Dr. Carson was being facetious, but his words were not humorous. Every American deserves what he joked about.

Further, Carson spoke favorably of the flat tax system, whereby each taxpayer will pay the same percentage for taxes. This would be horrible for low and moderate income families. How can one justify such a scheme? To emphasize the point, note that a seven-member family household earning $50,000 a year would pay the same federal income tax dollar amount as a three-member family household earning the same.

Finally, Dr. Carson is no stranger to economic struggles. He attended Yale University as a recipient of a scholarship for minority individuals. He was reared by a single mother in innercity Detroit. His mother had a third grade education. Dr. Carson was motivated to excel academically, but he was supported by adults who wanted him to succeed. Seemingly, his background would have groomed him to become a champion for the disenfranchised.

Most Democrats find difficulty in making sense out of Dr. Carson’s positions. Yet, he has won the praise of ultimate conservatives: Rush Limbaugh, Sean Hannity and Neil Cavuto of Fox News. Reportedly, Dr. Carson has been offered a commentary position with the Fox News Network. On the other hand, some conservatives found Carson’s remarks inappropriate. Bob Beckel of Fox News said Carson’s statements were “extreme right-wing talking points.” He stated, however, he is not a member of any political party.

Perhaps, we must acknowledge the good doctor really has not lost his mind. Perhaps, we must consider that he has made supreme contributions to neurosurgery and the time has come for him to pursue new challenges. Perhaps, he wants to enter politics. Hannity, in an interview with Dr. Carson asked if he was interested in running for president. Carson responded, “If the Lord grabbed me by the collar and made me do it, I would.” Perhaps, he really is “testing the waters” for a presidential run and thus seeking Tea Party support. Perhaps, he is unaware that facets of the Republican Party believe, to win the White House, they must become more inclusive and seek the black vote. If so, Dr. Carson would be a Republican liability.

Actually, Dr. Carson is a mystery. Perhaps, all we can do is hope “the Lord does not grab him and pull him by the collar.”

Related

Category: National, Opinion