Fifty years ago Lyndon B. Johnson’s “Great Society” created a healthier nation when on July 30, 1965, Medicare and Medicaid — the two foundations of government health insurance — were signed into law. Since then, millions of poor and elderly have been helped from use of this government safety net to obtain medical care.

According to the The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, during their 50 year history, each of these programs has come to play a key role in providing health coverage to millions of Americans today and make up a significant component of federal and state budgets. Medicare, a federal government program, provides health insurance coverage for Americans age 65 and older, regardless of income, as well as those under age 65 with permanent disabilities.

Medicaid provides coverage for medical care and long-term care services to low-income people and is jointly financed by federal and state governments, with each state deciding how to structure benefits, eligibility, and care delivery within guidelines set by the federal government. Medicaid is also one of the primary ways the Affordable Care Act expanded coverage to millions more low-income, uninsured adults. Today, both programs cover 111 million Americans and cost an estimated $1,035 billion this year.

Before Medicare, almost half of all Americans 65 and older had no health insurance. Today that number is 2 percent.

Advertisement

These bold actions provided Americans a healthier existence and expanded lifespans.

Persons with mental illness as well as intellectual and developmental disabilities benefited from the creation of both Medicare and Medicaid. These programs transformed the way persons who are disabled, the elderly and low-income individuals received healthcare

Most of us know that medical bills can take a huge financial toll, but those at or near the poverty line are already struggling to make ends meet. For low-income individuals without insurance, a string of medical bills is often an irreparable blow. When President Johnson added Medicaid to the Social Security Act in 1965, millions of children, parents, pregnant mothers, seniors, and people with disabilities were able to receive consistent healthcare for the first time. If that isn’t an anniversary worth celebrating, I don’t know what is!

Investments in our children pay dividends to the nation as a whole. The positive statistics are worth noting: Within the first decade of Medicaid, African American infant mortality rates were cut in half. Current data shows that not only does Medicaid improve lifelong outcomes for children, academically, they are achieving better GPAs, experience fewer missed school days, have higher graduation rates and become higher-earning adults.

Over the decade, Medicare and Medicaid have been a lifeline to so many by providing healthcare assistance to those in need. But, as far as we have come over the past 50 years, we still have a distance to go. More needs to be done to help those with diseases of the brain: serious mental illness and substance use disorders.

Senator Debbie Stabenow’s Excellence in Mental Health Care Act, signed into law last April by President Barack Obama, is another example of how Medicaid can be used to help needy Americans. This legislation will ultimately increase access to community mental health and substance use treatment services, while improving Medicaid reimbursement for these services.

The Excellence in Mental Health Act initially provides $25 million in funding to states as planning grants to develop applications to participate in a 2-year pilot program. Eight states will be selected to participate in the program, and Michigan is working aggressively to be one of those selected, which will be revealed this September.

Members of the mental health community across the state are excited to partner with the State of Michigan to apply for these new federal funds to help create a better life for persons with mental illness and substance use disorders.

Dr. Herbert Smitherman, Jr., the Detroit Wayne Mental Health Authority Board Chairman and also concurrently serving as the President of the Wayne County Medical Society, understands the value the creation of Medicare and Medicaid 50 years ago has meant to the quality of health care for those that did without for so long. He inspires his board colleagues and staff at DWMHA to provide a system of care that is consumer and community focused, data driven and evidenced based.

Dr. Smitherman gets it right when he states, “Many a grandmother, grandfather and children with a disability and person living in poverty has been helped because our elected leaders created two federal programs, Medicare and Medicaid, a half century ago.”

He continues, “Our fellow citizens owe these leaders a debt of gratitude.”

We thank the leaders of the past for investing in the health of all Americans.

Tom Watkins is the president and CEO of the Detroit Wayne Mental Health Authority. He has served the residents of Michigan as state superintendent of schools and state mental health director.