CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Ask Ohio voters what they think about President Barack Obama, and you'll find most do not approve of his job performance.

Ask them about his health care program, which Republicans have been fighting him on since it passed in 2010, and you'll find even stronger opposition.

But ask generally, without mentioning the president, about Obama's proposal to raise taxes on the wealthy to provide tax cuts for the middle class?

Landslide support.

And that, in a nutshell, tells the story of Quinnipiac University's latest round of polling in Ohio and two other electoral battlegrounds. Obama is by no means beloved. Nor are his policies when clearly identified as being Obama policies.

As the response to the tax question suggests, it's the messenger, not the message.

The results, released Thursday, are the third part in a series of data the respected independent pollsters have shared this week. In Ohio, Quinnipiac surveyed 943 voters from Jan. 22 through Feb. 1. Among the key findings here:

42 percent approve of Obama's job performance; 53 percent disapprove.

38 percent believe Obama's policies have helped the nation's economy, 40 percent believe his policies have hurt and 19 percent see no difference.

55 percent oppose Obama's Affordable Care Act, but only 27 percent believe Congress should repeal the program entirely. Most favor minor or major changes. Eleven percent favor keeping the law.

51 percent oppose Obama's plan to provide free community college tuition.

61 percent responded that they would like to see the next president "generally" change direction from Obama's policies.

61 percent support "increasing taxes on high income earners to reduce the amount of taxes paid by the middle class." Unlike on other questions, this proposal was not described as being a policy that Obama favors.

In other areas, a majority of Ohioans are "very worried" or "somewhat worried" about Islamic extremism and about a possible terrorist attack in the U.S.

In Ohio, the poll has a margin of error of 3.2 percentage points.

You can see full results from Ohio, Pennsylvania and Florida here.

Other Quinnipiac Ohio surveys this week:

Hillary Clinton would run the table in Ohio -- except in a race with John Kasich.

Republican presidential race is wide open, but Kasich is a big factor in Ohio.