Tracy Gnadinger

December 16, 2014

A new policy brief from Health Affairs and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF) looks at the evolution and current development plans for Physician Compare, a website mandated by the Affordable Care Act (ACA). A simple version of the site first launched in 2010.

Since then the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) has slowly been adding limited sets of data listing the various physician groups participating in a number of Medicare quality improvement initiatives. In 2015 the site will expand to include more recent and extensive information about physician performance and quality of care, in a format that’s similar to the other ACA-generated websites — Hospital Compare, Nursing Home Compare, Home Health Compare, and Dialysis Facility Compare.

These sites, which encompass tens of thousands of facilities nationwide, are credited with advancing accountability and motivating improvements in care and quality. They are also faulted as poorly organized and inadequately audited when the data are submitted by facilities.

Meanwhile, beyond CMS, the number of other physician rating sites online has exploded. Public interest and engagement has grown as well: According to a 2012 survey, conducted by the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), one in four Americans had consulted a rating site when selecting a primary care physician that year.

What’s the Background and the Law?

The brief describes recent proliferation of public reporting of physician performance “report cards.” According to the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s directory, there are now some fifty efforts underway to assess and report on physician performance. The brief also explains the provision of the ACA requiring CMS to develop a plan by 2013 to “make publicly available…information on physician performance that provides comparable information on quality and patient experience measures,” and outlines CMS’s step-by-step approach in developing Physician Compare, gradually adding measures for different practices and specialties.

What’s the Debate?

As the brief states, CMS’s main challenge, beyond the logistical challenges of aggregating billions of bits of data, is gaining the trust of physicians and their trade groups, who are arguing that much physician performance measurement is still not “scientifically ready for prime time” and should not be used prematurely. The criticism from physician accountability and quality improvement advocates is that the measurements focus too much on processes of care and not enough on patient outcomes. The brief examines the elements of these debates, as well as CMS’s struggle to be a fair arbiter as it moves to honor the spirit and the letter of the law.

What’s Next?

As consumer-backed review sites continue to dominate the market, research has shown that the public’s trust in the data and information presented on many federal government websites is fairly high. Experts expect that consumers will accept the data on Physician Compare, although there is a risk that doctors could undermine that trust if they speak ill of the website to their patients. At the moment, Physician Compare remains a work in progress.

ABOUT HEALTH POLICY BRIEFS

Health Policy Briefs are aimed at policy makers, congressional staffers, and others who need short, jargon-free explanations of health policy basics. The briefs, which are reviewed by experts in the field, include competing arguments on policy proposals and the relevant research supporting each perspective.

SIGN UP FOR HEALTH POLICY BRIEFS

Sign up for an e-mail alert about upcoming briefs. The briefs are also available from the RWJF’s Web site.

Please feel free to forward to any of your colleagues who are tracking health issues. And after you’ve taken a look, we would welcome your feedback at: hpbrief@healthaffairs.org.