PR Web

Minneapolis, MN (PRWEB) July 09, 2014

The IHC Group is pleased to announce the release of Metal Gap,1 an innovative product that helps bridge the gap in insurance coverage for many with high-deductible health insurance plans.

"As Americans covered by 'Obamacare' policies begin to file claims under their new policies, it has become very apparent that many people will struggle to pay the out-of-pocket percentage required before their coverage kicks in," said Dave Keller , Chief Sales and Marketing Officer for IHC Specialty Benefits, which is a member of The IHC Group .

"The most popular plan level, the Silver Plan, could have a deductible of over $4,000 for an individual. For many, that type of expense is financially devastating or would, at a minimum, cause severe financial hardship. This is particularly true for those unable to work because they are recovering from an accident, receiving treatment for a life-threatening disease, or disabled by a heart attack. That's why The IHC Group developed Metal Gap – affordable coverage (in some cases as little as $1 per day) to pay for much of what the Obamacare 'metal' plans do not."

Metal Gap complements major-medical health insurance, providing between $3,500-$6,350 in accident coverage, $7,500 in critical illness coverage, an optional $500 in first-day hospital stay benefit, plus $500 a day for hospital confinements up to 10 days. Additionally, all Metal Gap plans provide discount vision and prescription drug coverage.

"Our Metal Gap cash benefit can be used for hospital bills, daycare, mortgage and car payments or anything else. The plans are designed to fill the gap, in many circumstances, between first dollar expenses and the maximum out-of-pocket allowed by Obamacare plans, but they can be used however the individual sees fit," added Keller.

To learn more about Metal Gap coverage or to contract as a licensed agent with The IHC Group contact 866-746-6610.

1 Metal Gap is not a comprehensive health plan and does not constitute "minimum essential coverage" as defined under the ACA. It is not intended to serve as a replacement for the comprehensive health insurance required under the ACA. Pre-existing conditions are subject to exclusion under the policy. Not all plan options available in all states.

About IHC Specialty Benefits, Inc.

IHC Specialty Benefits is a full-service marketing and distribution company that focuses on small employer, individual and consumer products. Products are marketed through general agents online, telebrokerage, advisor centers, private label and directly to consumers.

About The IHC Group

The IHC Group is an organization of insurance carriers and marketing and administrative affiliates that has been providing life, health, disability, medical stop-loss and specialty insurance solutions to groups and individuals for over 30 years. Members of The IHC Group include Independence Holding Company , American Independence Corp. , Standard Security Life Insurance Company of New York , Madison National Life Insurance Company, Inc. and Independence American Insurance Company . Each insurance carrier in The IHC Group has a financial strength rating of A- (Excellent) from A.M. Best Company, Inc. , a widely recognized rating agency that rates insurance companies on their relative financial strength and ability to meet policyholder obligations. (An A++ rating from A.M. Best is its highest rating.) Collectively, the companies in The IHC Group provide insurance coverage to more than one million individuals and groups. For more information about The IHC Group , visit http://www.ihcgroup.com.

Read the full story at http://www.prweb.com/releases/2014/07/prweb11996766.htm