Pat McCrory and Barack Obama have a testy relationship.

McCrory, since taking office as North Carolina’s 74th governor in January 2013, has repeatedly and publicly thumbed his nose at the 44th president of the United States.

And this week was no different, as a defiant McCrory, under pressure from the federal Justice Department not to enforce the controversial House Bill 2, which compels people to use bathroom facilities that correspond to their birth gender, responded by suing the federal government. On Monday, U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch announced a lawsuit aimed at McCrory and the state, saying HB2 amounts to state-sponsored discrimination.

Here are four times McCrory has bucked the Obama administration:

1) Unemployment benefits

In 2013, McCrory signed legislation that cut off emergency unemployment benefits to the state’s long-term jobless.

The unemployment benefits were pushed by the Obama administration as the country continued to recover from the 2008 Great Recession.

McCrory and the General Assembly cited the need to pay down nearly $3 billion in debt as its reason to cut off benefits.

2) No Medicaid expansion

McCrory joined a chorus of Republican governors in refusing to expand Medicaid as part of the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

McCrory and Republican leaders cited concerns of rising state costs. But critics said the refusal of states to expand Medicaid, which left hundreds of thousands of state residents without health insurance, was politically motivated.

The state to this day has not expanded Medicaid for low-income adults, according to the federal government.

3) Syrian refugees

Last year, McCrory asked the Obama administration to stop sending refugees fleeing the war in Syria to North Carolina, citing security concerns based on the state not receiving enough information about the refugees.

His stance was similar to those taken by Republican governors across the country.

While security was the stated concern by those governors, critics again called the moves politically motivated.

4) HB2

In a fight that will have national implications, McCrory has decided to fight the Obama administration over the controversial “bathroom law.”

The U.S. Justice Department, saying HB2 violated the Civil Rights Act, gave McCrory until Monday to say he would not enforce HB2 and threatened that billions of dollars in federal aid could be in jeopardy. He responded by suing the federal government.

“The Obama administration is bypassing Congress by attempting to rewrite the law and set restroom policies for public and private employers across the country, not just North Carolina. This is now a national issue that applies to every state and it needs to be resolved at the federal level,” McCrory said in a release.

On Monday, U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch responded to McCrory by filing her own suit, calling the law “state-sponsored discrimination.”

The matter is expected to go to federal courts and likely will end up in front of the U.S. Supreme Court.

Reporter Tim Buckland can be reached at 910-343-2217 or Tim.Buckland@StarNewsOnline.com.