Donna Frescatore, executive director of New York State of Health, as the exchange is called, said the state’s decisions had been vindicated by the fact that premium rates had dropped more than 50 percent from previous years.

Individual premiums for Manhattan residents, for instance, dropped from $1,534 for a standard health maintenance organization, or H.M.O., in 2013 to $621 for a comparable exchange plan now. “I think it has in part ensured that customers have affordable options,” Ms. Frescatore said.

Photo

Long before President Obama was elected, New York was a pioneer in requiring insurance companies to provide individual or small-group coverage to people regardless of existing illness, and to price it without regard to health, age, gender or occupation, core provisions of the Affordable Care Act.

And while the federal law allows children to be covered under their parents’ policies until they turn 26, New York already required offering coverage up to 30, and still does.

“So in those other states, you have health plans trying to figure it out,” said Peter Newell, an analyst for the United Hospital Fund, a nonprofit research organization. “In New York, you could sidestep a lot of problems.”

Still, the exchange had a rough start. Republicans in the State Senate tried to block it by refusing to support the creation of an independent authority to run it. New York could have followed 36 other states in simply joining the exchange set up by the federal government, whose numerous problems were not yet evident. Instead Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo established the state ’s exchange by executive order, deeding it to “seasoned stagehands,” as Mr. Newell put it, in the Health Department.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

About 508,000 of those who enrolled qualified for Medicaid and 63,000 for Child Health Plus, another government-subsidized plan; 363,000 bought private plans. The number who purchased private plans by March 31, the enrollment deadline for 2014 coverage, exceeded federal government predictions for New York by more than 60 percent. Nationwide, thanks to a last-minute surge, 7.1 million people signed up for private plans by the end of March, allowing the Obama administration to hit its goal of 7 million.

The Kaiser Family Foundation, a health policy research institution, has ranked New York’s exchange as the most competitive of seven states studied, based in part on the large number of companies participating and their relatively balanced market share.

In an unusual decision that had a strong impact on consumer choices, New York required insurers to offer the same type of coverage on the exchange as off.

The result was that none of New York’s insurers offered out-of-network coverage for individuals, except in a small part of western New York, because they wanted to hold down costs and avoid being swamped by sick people. So regardless of whether individuals buy their plans on the exchange or off, they cannot get coverage outside a fixed network of doctors and hospitals, even if they are willing to pay more for it.

With no out-of-network coverage, “New York is a real outlier,” said Mr. Scherzer, who advocates more options. “But they did it in part because they thought it would keep premiums down, which of course it does,” he said.

State officials say the decision served to level the playing field for insurance companies and consumers. But it has led to complaints from consumers who cannot go to the doctors or hospitals they want.

Photo

The sickest customers tend to be the most upset, like Abigail List, a 53-year-old therapist in Manhattan, who said she had to choose one of the most expensive plans, costing $300 more a month than others, so she could have coverage for her longtime cancer doctors at NYU-Langone Medical Center. “I’m being railroaded, that’s why I’m so furious,” Ms. List said.

The most prestigious and specialized hospitals tend to take the fewest plans on the exchange. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, the renowned cancer hospital, takes only two exchange plans for individuals, Health Republic and Oscar.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“It’s fairly difficult to take the pricing that some of the other insurers on the exchanges are proposing,” said John Gunn, the chief operating officer for Sloan-Kettering. “It was way below our cost of providing the service.”

He said Sloan-Kettering was working with about 100 patients to make sure they had access to the hospital if they needed it, either by being in network or by special arrangement.

Benjamin Lawsky, the state’s financial services superintendent, said that not requiring out-of-network coverage was strategic in the first year but was being reconsidered. “As we think about setting rates for Year Two, has the exchange matured enough that we think it’s wise to mandate an out-of-network benefit?” Mr. Lawsky said. “We’ll make that decision probably in the next few weeks.”

The exchange also benefited from the state’s refusal to reinstate canceled plans when President Obama said it could; state officials said restoring the plans would have caused chaos by upsetting insurance pricing.

The state’s rollout was not without snags. Its website was swamped on the first day but capacity was quadrupled over the next four days.

Some doctors have complained that they are mistakenly listed in plans they do not accept, or have been cut from plans they would like to be on. Empire BlueCross BlueShield, overwhelmed by early sign-ups, agreed to pay cash penalties to about 20,000 customers who did not receive their insurance cards in time for coverage in January.

But others were surprisingly willing to forgive the exchange its shortcomings.

Marilyn Miller, a retired ballet dancer who now runs Pilates on Hudson in Peekskill, N.Y., had her old plan canceled. But she is happy that her new one covers regular doctor visits, and she is putting money into a health savings account in case she ever needs to see a specialist outside of her network.

“It was well worth it to be able to get insurance and not have it tied to my business,” Ms. Miller said.

Malka Percal, 63, a copy editor who lives in downtown Manhattan, lost her freelancer’s plan and her “really wonderful” doctor. But she likes the promise of universal health care. “Is it Pollyannaish of me?” she said. “I have a really hopeful feeling.”