Highly-paid doctors make more money ordering multiple procedures for individual patients than they earn seeing multiple patients, according to a study released Monday by the UCLA Department of Urology and the Veterans’ Health Administration.

The findings, described as “very surprising” by UCLA researchers, suggest the payment reform many expected under the Affordable Care Act has yet to be realized.

“These data indicate that higher-earning physicians earn more not by treating more patients but by offering more services per beneficiary. The relationship between these additional services and any meaningful improvement in outcomes is undefined,” according to the report. “The goals of payment reform are currently unrealized, as evidenced in these data.”

Critics of the pay-for-procedure model have said that doctors have more financial incentive to spend their time ordering potentially unnecessary tests or procedures for a single patient than to efficiently treat an individual and move on.



[Study: U.S. Doctors Cutting Back on Painkiller Prescriptions]

The U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services adopted the Shared Savings Program as part of 2010’s Affordable Care Act as a transition into a payment system based less on individual procedures and more on individual outcomes. Many believed it would help shift health care spending away from pay-per-procedure and into a more outcome-based payment model.

“Our findings suggest a weakness in fee-for-service medicine,” said Dr. Jonathan Bergman, assistant professor of urology and family medicine at UCLA’s David Geffen School of Medicine and an urologist and bioethicist at the Veterans’ Health Administration in Los Angeles. “Perhaps it would make more sense to reimburse clinicians for providing high-quality care, or for treating more patients.”

But UCLA’s study suggests the nation’s highest-paid doctors still benefit from a fee-for-service payment model. The report created a ratio for the number of services provided to individual recipients compared to total Supplementary Medical Insurance payments from the 2012 calendar year, which cover physician visits, outpatient visits and procedures, and certain ongoing services like chemotherapy and laboratory testing. Ultimately, highly paid doctors were found to receive more payment for multiple tests on one patient than for treating multiple patients.



[ALSO: Few Depressed Americans Seek Care]

“Given the data on medical service utilization in the United States, it is likely that a substantial portion of these services is unrelated to improved outcomes,” according to the report. “In Medicare’s fee-for-service system, some physicians are collecting large fees by ordering services munificently.”

These additional tests may or may not be to the patient’s ultimate benefit. Medicare Accountable Care Organizations have been set up to reward health care professionals and organizations who treat patients efficiently, not just comprehensively and potentially unnecessarily.

Accountable Care Organizations do not inherently outlaw the fee-for-service model of payment. Instead, those enrolled in the program become eligible for shared funds resulting from saved health care costs, provided certain procedural savings requirements are met, according to the Office of the Federal Register. The Accountable Care Organizations are intended to provide a financial incentive to effectively and efficiently caring for patients.