A $20 million new facility, CommunityConnect Day and Destiny Point in this week's editorial roundup.

An artist’s rendering of the main entrance of the planned Riverview YMCA health facility in Wisconsin Rapids. (Photo: Contributed image)

This is going to be some YMCA. The brand new, $20-million facility announced this week will be a genuine attraction for Wisconsin Rapids.

The 100,000-square-foot facility is being built as the result of a partnership between Riverview Hospital Association and the South Wood County YMCA. The center will be directly adjacent to the medical clinic. That will allow Riverview to provide new rehabilitative services there including aquatic therapy and a medispa. There will be a walk-in clinic and a pharmacy there, and some nice amenities for visitors such as a coffee shop.

It is something like a community center. YMCA members can exercise there; Riverview patients can get needed rehabilitation; child care and 4-year-old kindergarten will help parents and young children.

The new YMCA facility will feature an aquatics facility. (Photo: Contributed)

Story: Riverview, YMCA leaders discuss center plans

And in the process, the construction and creation of the facility will be a boost to the local economy. It's a big project, and a great development for Wisconsin Rapids.

• • •

Opportunity Development Centers Inc. is well-known for helping people with disabilities and barriers to employment learn job skills and work in a supportive environment. It also offers programs for employees to learn life skills and to give back to the community.

Recently, ODC's CommunityConnect Day Services program participants in Marshfield came up with a new project. The Building Group started building toy barns for children who might not otherwise have such a grand toy. The Frederic Ozanam Transitional Shelter in Marshfield received the first one.

Story:State plan to serve disabled adults worries caregivers

Each week, the group members worked on the barn, learning skills such as measuring, drilling, hammering and painting. The group seeks sponsors to donate some small barn animals and tractors to complete the project.

What a neat way to learn and give back at the same time. We are thankful for the members who have participated. If you know an organization that would benefit from a toy barn donation, call Stacey Schultz, day services manager at ODC, at 715-996-1707 or email sschultz@odcinc.com.

• • •

Things are looking up for Destiny Point, a women's restorative home, which needed to find a new location.

It has been located in a former convent on the grounds of St. Philip Catholic Church in Rudolph, but the parish needs to use the building because the school no longer can be used.

Destiny Point will move to a home in Blenker, which has been donated. The property will need renovation to make it usable as a residential home for up to 14 women. Destiny Point provides a Christian-based environment for women ages 18 and older to recover from a number of problems, which may include co-dependency; substance, sexual and physical abuse; eating disorders; post-abortion trauma; unplanned pregnancies and more.

Story:Catching up with: Destiny Point on track to new home

The property also has available land to allow animals and gardens, and the potential for transitional housing in the future.

"It is so exciting. It's a miracle how this is all happening," said Julie Worzella, who founded the home in 2007.

How to help

• Material and labor donations are needed to get the home ready by Oct. 1.

• Go online to www.destinypoint.wordpress.com for an updated wish list of the home's needs or call 715-818-8391 to find out how to help.

Read or Share this story: http://wrtnews.co/VsLpys