Topics: Amy Schumer, health at any size, Love, Sex, Sports, weight, Life News, Entertainment News

Recently, comedian Amy Schumer said, “I’m probably like 160 pounds right now, and I can catch a dick whenever I want,” at the Glamour U.K. Women of the Year Awards. She followed this up in an interview for a Glamour cover story by saying, “I’m proud of what I said. I think it’s good to see somebody saying: I have a belly. And I have cellulite. And I still deserve love. And to catch the old D.”

Schumer was widely praised for advancing the conversation around size and body acceptance, as she should be. But what if you’re more than 160 pounds—like 500 pounds more? Do you still deserve love, whatever your size?

That’s the question I was thinking about when I came across headlines about Eric Hites, who launched the blog Fat Guy Across America to chronicle what he hopes to be a life-changing bicycle journey. His plan is to bike from the East Coast to the West Coast with the dual missions “to prove things to my wife and my love” and “to take back my health and to lose the pounds I have collected over the years.” For his pro-active approach, I applaud him.

But his story is a lot more complicated than his weight, or most of the news stories about him, would lead you to believe. An NBC News story was titled “600-Pound Man Bikes Coast-to-Coast to Save Marriage, Lose Weight.” People went with, “’Fat Guy’ Plans to Bike More Than 3,000 Miles to Get His Wife Back.” The New York Daily News wrote of Hites, “As his weight ballooned, his marriage was crumbling to pieces,” and quotes him saying, “I was just failing as a human being,” without any context about how, exactly, he was failing. The implication is that his weight is enough to let us know he was a failure—but the real story behind the issues in his marriage prove he had deeper issues. As he put it in a recent blog post (one that, I should note, was posted after the first flurry of media reports, in response to reader criticism of his wife), “I was not left because I was fat, it was because I was a jerk and lazy.”

Hites detailed some of his failings in that same post:

My wife and I separated last July for many reasons, money, issues at home etc. both of us were pains in the rear. I was a slob, borderline hoarder that was so over weight and unhealthy, I could not hold or get a job. I tried but, It would just not happen. So instead of working to get healthy, I tried to start businesses at the cost of my parents and eventually my father n law. I got sicker, grew depressed, kept secrets about money and kept things from her. I tried, but not as hard as I should. I should have tried to get healthy but I didn’t, I sat there and did nothing.

Yet it’s far easier to assume that his weight was the culprit, and that, by extension, once he loses weight, he will be worthy of love. According to activist Virgie Tovar, creator of the Lose Hate Not Weight hashtag and editor of “Hot & Heavy: Fierce Fat Girls on Life, Love & Fashion,” equating thinness with worth isn’t new. “The news coverage of Eric’s bike ride is in conversation with this bigger American redemption motif, which is grounded in some of the same belief systems upon which diet culture pivots,” Tovar told Salon. “The idea is that fatness is indicative of personal immorality, and that fat people need to redeem ourselves through weight loss. Discussions of marriage and discussions of weight loss share some of the same lexicon, such as ‘being good’ and ‘cheating’ (on a spouse or a diet). Cultural expectations around marriage and body size go back to the Protestant obsession with discipline, merit and morality. I think there is a strong cultural belief that an immoral person—in this case, a fat person—does not deserve to have access to love or the sanctity of marriage because those are things we ‘earn’ though discipline, merit and morality.”

While Hites is certainly media savvy enough to have crafted a plan both to capture his wife’s attention and the world’s, the way his story is being covered only emphasizes the dangerous idea that losing weight will make you happy, healthy and solve your problems. It’s a seductive narrative, of course, because who doesn’t want a happy ending? We love to see a hero go out on a quest like this; it speaks to pulling yourself up by the bootstraps—or in this case, bike pedals, and makes it sound like we should be nodding our heads and saying, essentially, of course a 560-pound man would have trouble keeping his marriage alive. But the subtext of stories that imply weight loss will “save” his marriage to both the Hites and the topic a disservice.

According to body acceptance coach Lauren Marie Fleming, these headlines aren’t actually supportive of Hites as a whole person. “’600 pound man bikes across country to save marriage’ puts his weight first, makes him a number, and dehumanizes him and his experiences,” said Fleming. “I’d love to see a headline that left out his weight and instead focused on his emotional, physical, and spiritual journey instead, something like ‘Man Rides Across Country to Overcome Obstacles in Love and Life.’ Now that’s something I’d read and share.”