Republican Reps. Michele Bachmann of Minnesota and Steve King of Iowa have been spending time at the southern border to highlight their opposition to the president's decision to unilaterally grant temporary amnesty to millions of illegal immigrants. According to CNN, the two arrived in Texas the day after the president announced his plans, using the destination to highlight their protest of his action.This is the second trip the two lawmakers have taken to the area. While they did not see any illegal border crossings this time, the first time they visited in July, they took video footage of a pregnant woman crossing the river."It just occurred to me," King said, according to CNN. "The pregnant mother who was put off on the side here, she surely had the baby. That little baby is an American citizen. Last night Barack Obama gave that little baby's mother amnesty. She now has amnesty."Lawless, unconstitutional amnesty."CNN pointed out, however, that Obama's plans to grant amnesty to the parents of American-born children would only apply to immigrants who had been in the country for a minimum of five years, meaning the woman would not qualify.Bachmann and King are pushing for Congress to pass a resolution of disapproval of the president's order, followed by a vote to censure him.They also want to pass a spending bill that would prevent funding for his plan, a strategy that has been floated as an option by GOP leaders in the House and the Senate.King hasn't ruled out impeachment , either."Let's hope that we never have to answer that question," King told CNN. "Let's hope that we can do the most reasonable things that we can do first."King has proposed a three-tiered fence system spanning the entire length of the 2,000-mile border as a way of stopping the national's illegal immigration problem. He personally designed a drawing of a concrete fence system."I constructed that fence on the floor of the House," he said, showing CNN the mock-up. "It's kicking around on YouTube."Critics have said that the border-length fence King proposes would be expensive and almost impossible to build, according to CNN. But King referred to the building of the Great Wall of China, constructed to protect against invasion, which cost the lives of thousands of Chinese workers in the building process."There were plenty of Chinese left over," he said.King did not offer a plan for what should be done about the estimated 11 million illegal immigrants currently in the country, but said it was not a matter for the government to give them legal legitimacy."We do not have a moral obligation to bring people out of the shadows," King told CNN."They came here to live in the shadows, that's their choice. So this idea that we've identified people that are living in the shadows and say, 'We're going to come find you and bring you out of the shadows' — we're not called to do that."