STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- Alexandra Porto believes in the premise of President Obama's Affordable Care Act -- to provide medical benefits for all Americans.

But when she, along with 13 of her colleagues at the Bloomfield-based Staten Island Economic Development Corporation (SIEDC), received letters stating that their Empire BlueCross/BlueShield health plan will be canceled, she started to have second thoughts about what is commonly referred to as Obamacare.

"The letter said Blue Cross/Blue Shield will be ending our current policy, and it will be replaced with a new policy. It said new premium rates will take effect April 1," said Ms. Porto, vice president of membership and outreach at the SIEDC.

"The problem is we don't know what the new policy is or what the new premium rates will be, and we are being told by Empire BlueCross/BlueShield that we won't have that information until Jan. 1," she added.

And the folks at the SIEDC aren't alone.





Need help navigating the New York State of Health

Marketplace? There are more than 12 Island navigators. There are more than 12 Island navigators. To reach the Jewish Community Center (JCC), which has five Staten Island navigator locations, call (718) 981-1400. For the Staten Island Chamber of Commerce navigator, call 718-727-1900. For a full list of Island-based navigators: Click Here Contact info: NY State of Health can be reached at (855) 355-5777 or by clicking here.

Ms. Porto said at least 13 SIEDC members -- all small business owners with less than 50 employees on Staten Island -- were informed that the health plans for their employees have been canceled.

More Questions

The confusion over the Affordable Care Act just got even more complicated when Obama announced late last week that he would let Americans keep the insurance polices that have been canceled.

But now it's unclear if insurance companies will reinstate those canceled polices; and, if they do, how high premiums will go.

"It is unclear how, as a practical matter, the changes proposed (last week) by the president can be put into effect," said Jim Donelon, president of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners. "In many states, cancellation notices have already gone out to policyholders and rates and plans have already been approved for 2014. Changing the rules through administrative action at this late date creates uncertainty and may not address the underlying issues."

Many fear that delaying the enforcement of the Affordable Care Act could hike up premiums even more.

"This decision continues different rules for different policies and threatens to undermine the new market, and may lead to higher premiums and market disruptions in 2014 and beyond," he said.







Meanwhile, many Staten Islanders have already received health care policy cancellation letters.

"No plan was being renewed as is ... and there are many insurance plans that said they were flat out being canceled on Dec. 31," said Anthony P. Carro, vice president of the Dongan Hills-based Point Vantage LLC, an insurance brokerage specializing in employee benefits for small businesses.

"There is going to be insurance available to all people. But it's not going to have the same premium cost or be the same type of plan that they had before. People thought they would be able to keep their insurance (under Obamacare) and the general attitude when the Affordable Care Act (ACA) was first rolling out was 'this probably doesn't affect me because I'm covered at work.' But that was a false sense of comfort," he added.

What most Staten Islanders are already facing are higher premiums and deductibles. This means, in most cases, more money out of pocket for monthly insurance costs, as well as for doctor and prescription co-pays.

"While premiums are going up 15 to 20 percent, that's coming with a 20- to 50-percent increase in deductibles, in some cases. The entire (health care) industry is in chaos," he added.

Insurance Giant Response

In response to the SIEDC's insurance plan cancellation, Empire BlueCross/BlueShield is discontinuing "its existing small group products as a result of changes made to its product portfolio in anticipation of the changing marketplace in 2014," said Deborah Wiethop, Empire's public relations director.

Empire has notified affected small groups that their current policies will end on their 2014 renewal date and is recommending new plans to the affected groups that will meet the ACA requirements, including provision of all essential health benefits," she added.

Concerning Obama's announcement on Thursday, Ms. Weithop said the insurance carrier would have no comment for several days.

It Hits Home



In addition to small business plans being canceled, many individuals have received cancellation letters from their health insurance companies.

Prince's Bay resident John Arout, who is a Medicare recipient but has a health care plan for his wife, received a cancellation letter from her insurance company. When he called, he learned her current coverage would stay in effect for one year. After that, the premium rate will change.

"It was scary getting the letter and hearing that rates are going up. I was hearing that people are getting $8,000 deductibles. The woman at the insurance company said she didn't know what the rate increase will be next October," he said.



N.Y. Marketplace



While the New York State of Health marketplace has enrolled only 50,000 residents in new health plans via its web portal at nystateofhealth.ny.gov, the federal government had hoped 500,000 people would have been enrolled by the end of October.

New York State of Health couldn't provide the number of Staten Islanders enrolled, but said 197,011 New Yorkers have completed the full application process and have been determined eligible for health insurance plans.

Many Islanders say the marketplace has helped them find low-cost health insurance.

"I'm paying $250 less per month in premiums than I was paying for my last policy (that was canceled)," said Castleton Corners resident Ronald Chironna, a freelance illustrator and teaching artist.

"I now have an HMO instead of a PPO plan where I'll have to get referrals from my primary physicians (to go to specialists), but my deductible is much lower that I have to meet for the year, so I won't have as much out of pocket expenses."



Unanswered Questions

One of the biggest questions for those shopping for health insurance via the marketplace is whether their current doctors will accept their chosen plan.

"There is a link on the marketplace website where you go in and type in your doctors' names, but I don't think it's all that comprehensive because when I call some of my own doctors' offices, they say they don't know yet. It seems that many doctors haven't made the decision if they will accept certain plans or not," Ms. Porto said.

Said Carro: "The panel of doctors that you're allowed to go see is changing in many cases. It's something you wouldn't know until you look at the doctors (affiliated with the plan)."

The marketplace's medical plans offer what are considered essential health care benefits -- including doctor's visits, prescriptions, emergency room visits, hospitalizations, maternal and infant care and preventative care.

Deadline Looming

Everyone must have insurance by Jan. 1, 2014, or face a fine. Fines start out small, at $95, but increase year to year. There will be exceptions for those who have a financial hardship.

While businesses with 50 employees or more have a reprieve until January 2015 to obtain insurance for their workers, owners of small businesses can utilize the web portal now.

New Yorkers have until March 31 to enroll, and the first round of coverage begins Jan. 1. To meet the Jan. 1 deadline, New Yorkers must enroll by Dec. 15.