Topics: 2016 Elections, 2016 Republican primary, Editor's Picks, Jeb Bush, Jennifer Rubin, Elections News, Politics News

Memo to Jeb Bush: Ignore mash notes like this one from Jennifer Rubin. Your presidential run is likely done.

Bush may not yet have packed it in, but we might as well start shoveling dirt on his campaign. The chances he can overcome poll numbers consistently stuck in single digits, the baggage of his last name and his near-daily gaffes, are slim to none. To paraphrase a famous comedy bit, his presidential ambitions’ metabolic processes are now history, they are off the twig, they have kicked the bucket, shuffled off this mortal coil, run down the curtain and joined the bleedin’ choir invisible. THIS IS AN EX-CAMPAIGN!

Not that any of this will stop him from shambling forward through Iowa and New Hampshire like the most preppily-dressed zombie on “The Walking Dead.” After all, zombies don’t know they are dead until you drive a stake through their brains. No one has done that to the JEB! 2016 campaign yet. (Note to conservative readers: THIS IS A METAPHOR. I am in no way advocating actual, real violence against the person of Jeb Bush.) The GOP establishment is nervous but has not completely abandoned him yet. And he still has quite a bit of money on hand, thanks mostly to his super PAC.

All that said, the signs of a flailing, fading operation are everywhere. Bush’s third-quarter fundraising haul was mediocre. Last week Politico published two stories examining the campaign’s financial problems. Together they wove a tale of monetary woe for a candidate who was once expected to be the most formidable in the race: Bush has had to eschew private planes and fly commercial! He has had to stay in cheaper hotels! Some on his staff are taking pay cuts! (Recall that stories about slashed and eliminated salaries hit the Rick Perry campaign right before the former Texas governor dropped out of the race.)

Bush’s backers are nervous. One of them complained to Politico – anonymously – that donors are not seeing much “bang for their buck.” A Republican political consultant, who also remained anonymous, likened Bush’s predicament to the moment in “Predator” when Arnold Schwarzenegger says of the mysterious and wounded creature killing his team of soldiers, “If it bleeds, we can kill it.” Inspiring stuff!

Above all, there is the inarticulateness that makes Jeb! Bush’s father and brother sound like Cicero. His unartful comments on a handful of subjects suggest a man either saddled with a patrician’s tin ear, or a guy trying on the persona of a hard-right Washington hater and failing miserably. Just in the last few weeks, he has dismissed the idea of enacting gun control laws to reduce mass shootings as worthless because “stuff happens.” He has accused African-American voters of only voting for candidates who will give them “free stuff.” (Very big on the word “stuff,” is old Jeb.) Just the other day he suggested he’d like to start a recession in Washington, D.C. because somehow that would grow the economy everywhere else.