Transcript for Princeton University Fights Meningitis Outbreak

He deserves the whole key. We're going to begin with a fright ing meningitis outbreak at princeton university. Abc's linsey davis is here with the very latest. Good morning, linsey. Reporter: Good morning, bianna. The most recent days at princeton was diagnosed last weekend. The number of students diagnosed with meningitis on campus has caused new jersey health officials to declare an outbreak. But it's what the cdc is doing that's unprecedented. State and federal officials are taking drastic measures to battle the outbreak of meningitis on the grounds of one of the nation's most distinguished institutions. Seven cases of the potentially deadly bacterial infection have been diagnosed at princeton university since march. It's very serious. Reporter: So serious, in fact, the cdc is taking the unprecedented move of importing emergency doses of bexsero, a meningitis vaccine not used in this country. It protects against meningitis b, which is the particular strain the students have been diagnosed with. Bacterial meningitis is a dangerous infection of the protective membranes that cover the brain and spinal cord. It's spread through respiratory droplets exchanged through close contact, such as coughing or kissing. You see someone saying I'm not feeling well. And they get sick very quick. Reporter: If the evacuation plan is rolled out, it could aim to inoculate 8,000 graduate and undergraduate students at princeton. University officials, however, would not say if the vaccination effort would be launched. The cdc tells abc news, the risk for princeton students is quite high. The fda has not approved a vaccine to combat meningitis b here. That strain tends to be more common in europe and australian. Symptoms of meningitis typically develop three to seven days after exposure. They include headache, fever, and stiff neck. They're often mistaken for the flu, which is obviously prevalent at this time of the year. Campus on high alert. Scary story. Working through the weekend

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.