The IRS has been accepting online and mailed tax forms since about mid-January – no delay this year – and tax preparers agree 95 percent or more taxpayers submit their returns online now.

Douville, Goldman & Allen

Michael A. Douville at Douville, Goldman and Allen said the U.S. Congress passed a bill of tax act changes last December called “Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes.”

He noted several provisions that affect individuals; and some of them were made “permanent” after repeatedly expiring and then being renewed one year at a time.

If a taxpayer owes no health insurance penalties for not having coverage, filing a tax return for 2015 income is easier. If the taxpayer has health insurance and can check that box for everyone on the tax return, that’s also easier.

“The penalties are increased this year and may surprise some people,” Douville said.

Last December’s legislation made permanent the $1,000 refundable tax credit per child.

The American Opportunity Tax Credit was made permanent, $2,500 per year for four years for qualified education expenses. For this tax credit, the employee identification number of the educational institution is required. This requirement is new.

The “above the line deduction” up to $4,000 for qualified tuition and related expenses was extended for 2015 and 2016 taxes.

Douville said the form 1098-T usually provided by one’s school has amounts in Box 1 and Box 2 for 2016 and beyond; and the dollar amount shown paid in Box 2 will qualify for taxes.

The earned income tax credit was made permanent.

The “above the line” deduction of $250 for educators is now permanent and starting in 2016 it will be indexed for inflation.

The itemized deduction for sale tax was made permanent. Douville said people have thought that was always there, but it’s available only for those who itemize for their tax return.

The direct transfer of up to $1,000 from an IRA to a charitable organization was made permanent.

The itemized deduction for mortgage insurance premiums was extended through 2016.

The credit for “nonbusiness energy property” such as weather-tight windows and doors was extended through 2016.

The new law allows a rollover from a 401K to a “simple IRA” plan. Douville said it previously only could be rolled to an IRA; the rules for the two kinds are different.

For businesses, Douville said last December’s legislation says the Section 179 expense deduction was made permanent on certain equipment up to $500,000.

“This deduction will be indexed for inflation now,” Douville said.

Also for businesses, the Bonus Depreciation Deduction was extended for new equipment through 2019.

“Most of these deductions expired in 2014 or before; and this act makes most of them permanent or extended them to 2016 or ’19,” Douville said.

Generally, Douville said the recent legislation requires the IRS Commissioner to have his employees answerable to taxpayers to get quality service; to be heard; to appeal and to have representation.

Douville said those who can file a simple tax return can do it online directly with the IRS, or with some companies such as TurboTax.

He said using a phone to call the IRS with questions always leads to at least a 30-minute wait, or to a recorded message saying the person should call back at another time or on another day.

“They don’t have enough people, period,” Douville said.

This CPA firm is at 313 Earl Garrett, and can be contacted at 257-3112.

H&R Block

Joe Reeh at H&R Block in Kerrville also noted the child tax credit is now permanent, saying this credit applies as long as the child or children are under age 17.

“And the American Opportunity Credit that is now permanent is for college or university students. A lot of people miss this one,” Reeh said.

“The Enhanced Earned Income Credit was made permanent with a higher credit for families of three or more children, with a maximum of $6,242. That’s based on the taxpayer’s income, for example, $53,000 for a married couple,” Reeh said.

He said the deduction for state and local sales taxes applies also if a taxpayer purchases a vehicle, boat or recreational vehicle or trailer, and this one only applies in states with no state income tax. He said this deduction averages $1,200 per taxpayer.

Reeh had several comments about Obamacare.

Under “Individual Shared Responsibility” penalties, the rules say beginning Jan. 1, 2014, individuals who do not meet certain exemption criteria must have “Minimum Essential Health Coverage.” For every month that a nonexempt individual or that person’s nonexempt dependents do not have MEC, a penalty is imposed.

The amount of any payment owed depends on the number of months in a given year an individual is without coverage or an exemption.

Reeh said some people are not subject to the penalties. They include:

• The individual cannot afford coverage – literally don’t have enough income to afford any of the plans even with a subsidy;

• The individual’s household income is below the tax filing threshold, figured on the federal poverty line chart for taxes figured in 2015;

• The individual is a member of a Native American Indian tribe;

• The individual has a “short coverage gap,” for example 10 months covered with health insurance and two months not covered.

Reeh said the exemption for unaffordable health coverage is claimed in Part III of Form 8965 filed with an individual’s tax return.

Reeh said the biggest exemption he uses for these taxpayers is when one is exempt from the penalty because their reportable household income is below the threshold to file a return.

The IRS has pages of rules about dealing with Obamacare and tax agents attended hours of classes on the subject. Reeh has a chart of “Applicable Dollar Amount” of penalties by year, for those 18 years of age or older and for those under 18.

In 2014, that penalty was $95 per adult without health coverage and $47.50 per child.

That penalty has risen for taxes filed in 2016 to $695 per adult and $347.50 per child. There’s a government formula for it that rose from 1 percent for 2013 or ’14, to 2 percent on 2015 income. That penalty will rise to 2.5 percent for tax years starting in 2016.

At one point, Reeh had a stack of tax forms on his desk for clients with no 2015 health care coverage, and their penalties are being deducted from whatever refund they are expecting.

“We discussed it with them, and the clients are saying they can’t afford monthly premiums for health insurance, for some of them $800 per month or more. They say paying this one-time penalty is cheaper than paying the monthly premiums,” Reeh said.

At H&R Block, Reeh said about 20 percent of their clients owe penalties because they have no health insurance. That includes working people at small businesses with no company plans, or the self-employed, he said.

He said everybody, especially people who bought health insurance on the federal Marketplace and do their own taxes, need to wait to get a Form 1095A. It’s usually sent by Jan. 31.

“If you filed early without that, any refund will be frozen six to eight weeks until the numbers are reconciled,” Reeh said. “Retired folks have insurance through Medicare. There’s a box on the form to mark if they have insurance and Medicare covers that.”

The Form 1099SSA form tells recipients who get Social Security, and it must be filed with other tax forms.

If one needs forms, the IRS will tell you to download them from the IRS website.

He recommends getting “Tax Guide for Individuals” online, a useful book of more than 270 pages that used to be available paperbound. Reeh said he now downloads it on his office printer and puts the pages in a three-ring binder. It’s written in “user-friendly language,” he said.

Another recent change is how many young people are operating paperless using “smart phones.” It’s possible to file a simple tax return on that phone, but Reeh recommends printing out at least one copy and keeping it for five years.

“I had one young man here talking about medical expenses, and I asked for his bank statement. He told me he banked online and it was a lot of work to print it out. I told him to print out his checks anyway. We needed them to figure his medical expenses,” Reeh said.

H&R Block has offices at 830 Sidney Baker N.; and at 3112 Junction Hwy., Ingram. Hours at both are 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Monday through Friday and 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday.

Liberty Tax Service

Deena Elliott, general manager at Liberty, said their preparers are dealing with several issues, including fallout from ID theft. She said if a person has been affected, they should get a federal IRS number to prove their identity, and bring it with them to the tax office.

Obamacare is an ongoing issue.

“People don’t realize how much money it is. It’s usually not a flat rate but a percent of income – 1 percent of adjusted income in 2014 and 2 percent on 2015 income,” she said.

And people who got health care credit last year have to do a new tax form and reconcile that using Form 1095A.

“I think people underestimated its impact. Some are paying $1,000-1,500,” Elliott said. “Some clients say they can’t afford health insurance. The deductible is too high, and the penalty is still cheaper.”

The penalty may seem small for children, but a household has to account for everyone’s income, including Mom’s Social Security, she said.

She also said the federal government placed explanations and enforcement on tax preparers’ shoulders.

She advised people to visit and ask about exemptions because there are about 18 of them. People who are doing their own taxes are missing a lot of them.

She said people who are doing their own returns are missing a lot of credits.

Elliott also said they’ve gotten troubling calls from clients who report scam calls from people claiming to be IRS who threaten them with arrest if they don’t immediately pay XX amount of back taxes. That’s a scam, she said.

“Please call us. If you can get caller ID, tell us; we’ll turn that in. The big tip-off is if they ask for your Social Security number after they claim to be from the IRS. Why would they have to do that? Don’t give them income information or anything personal,” she said. “People have told us the caller raises his or her voice if the person they call asks them too many questions.”

She noted education credits are still available and can be substantial for people in the first two years of secondary education. She also advises taxpayers check their retirement and savings fund records through work accounts, especially the larger employers.

Liberty offers “Appreciation Weeks” in which the first tax return prepared there for qualified people is free. The week of Feb. 21-27 is for teachers, coaches and school administrators; and Liberty continues with other groups through March 20-27.

Office location and hours are 409 Main St. in Kerrville, with hours 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. Monday through Friday; 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday; and other times by appointment. They also have a kiosk in Walmart, open noon to 8 p.m. Monday through Friday, and noon to 4 p.m. Saturday.