Your browser does not support inline frames or is currently configured not to display inline frames. Content can be viewed at actual source page: https://youtu.be/ETmDnc_cZ8A

Aired 2/1/16 on KPBS Midday Edition. What Issues Matter To You In The 2016 Election? GUESTS: Laura Wingard, news and digital editor, KPBS Megan Burks, reporter, Speak City Heights Transcript

Reporters from four California public media newsrooms — KPBS, KPCC in Pasadena, KQED in San Francisco and Capital Public Radio in Sacramento — are teaming up this election year to ask why some people don't cast their ballots and why others make it a priority.

The project is called California Counts.

In an interview with KQED, California Secretary of State Alex Padilla said there are 6.7 million eligible California voters who are not registered to vote, and that they are disproportionally minorities, young and from working-class families.

Padilla said immigrants and young people may not come from a family with a tradition of voting, and so he talks to high school and community college students about voting.

Video Small California Secretary of State Alex Padilla Your browser does not support inline frames or is currently configured not to display inline frames. Content can be viewed at actual source page: https://youtu.be/Zdk7HGJ-DwY

"My parents were immigrants to this country, and they didn't take me to vote, not because they didn't want to, but because they weren't eligible," he said. "I can imagine the millions of California children who were growing up without that experience. We have to get out there and increase civic education in our schools."

To start the California Counts project, the stations asked voters what issues are most important to them this election. People wrote the issues on their hands or held up signs with the issues, and posted them on Twitter using the hashtags #CACounts and #whatsmyissue.

At Cool Down Coffee in Chula Vista, Alex Lopez said his issue is education.

At All The Perks in La Mesa, Whitney Bautista singled out the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act, a bipartisan job training bill President Barack Obama signed into law.

Steven Belchamber of Santee said his issue is adherence to biblical principles.

And Hannah Fletcher of Santee said she's most concerned with the Affordable Care Act.

These issues and others are helping people decide who they’ll vote for in the presidential race on down, as well as on local and state ballot measures.

During the California Counts project, KPBS wants to hear what issues will influence your voting decisions. Take this survey to give us your answer.

We will also be bringing you stories about efforts to increase voter turnout in San Diego, including profiles of voters who never miss an election. And we’ll ask people who never vote why that is.