SOUTH BEND — The University of Notre Dame's Center for Ethics & Culture will award the 2016 Notre Dame Evangelium Vitae Medal to Mother Loraine Marie Maguire and the Little Sisters of the Poor, the university announced Monday.

Maguire is mother provincial of the religious order.

The Notre Dame Evangelium Vitae Medal is awarded annually. It is a lifetime achievement award for heroes of the pro-life movement, honoring individuals whose efforts have served to proclaim the Gospel of Life by steadfastly affirming and defending the sanctity of human life from its earliest stages, according to the university.

The Evangelium Vitae award consists of a specially commissioned medal and a $10,000 prize, to be presented at a banquet that will be held at Notre Dame in April.

The Little Sisters of the Poor are an international congregation of women religious dedicated to serving the elderly poor. Founded in 1839, the Little Sisters now operate in 31 countries around the world, with 30 homes in the United States that offer health care and assisted living for more than 13,000 low-income seniors. The sisters profess a vow of hospitality, living in community with their residents and ministering to their physical and spiritual needs.

During his recent U.S. visit, Pope Francis visited the Little Sisters of the Poor.

The religious order sued the federal government over the birth control provision in the 2010 Affordable Care Act. In August, a federal appeals court in Denver put on hold its ruling that the order must comply with a contraception mandate in the law, giving the group time to petition the U.S. Supreme Court.

“For more than 175 years, the Little Sisters of the Poor have dedicated their lives to humble service of the most vulnerable among us,” O. Carter Snead, director of the Center for Ethics & Culture, said in a written statement. “Their work and witness embody the goods at the heart of the Evangelium Vitae Medal. Their unwavering defense of the unborn in the HHS mandate litigation alongside their longstanding work to care for the elderly poor offers a beautiful and powerful witness to the unique, inviolable dignity of every person, from conception to natural death. Their work is a testament to the radical solidarity and hospitality at the core of the Gospel of Life.”

Notre Dame President Rev. John I. Jenkins said: "We are delighted to award this medal to the Little Sisters of the Poor to honor them for their inspiring efforts to build a culture of life where every member of the human family is welcomed and embraced. They are most deserving of this year’s Evangelium Vitae Medal.”