Buy Photo Former state Rep. Mike Endsley chats with attendees at a Sheboygan County Chamber of Commerce event in March 2011. Endsley said he enjoyed serving in the Assembly and would have run for reelection if not for a condition he developed affecting his memory. (Photo: SHEBOYGAN PRESS Media)Buy Photo

Three years ago, Rep. Mike Endsley had a myriad of tasks: calling constituents, reading through legislative bills, meeting with lobbyists, updating the Assembly GOP on his bills. It was work that he loved and relished.

Now, basic tasks can be a struggle. On a trip to the Sheboygan Falls library, Endsley, 53, made a point to organize some files he carried with him in a folder.

"I probably sat there for three hours and tried to put them in chronological order," Endsley said. "I tried six times, and I just couldn't do it. I just had to leave because I was so frustrated, I was going to put my head through a window."

A condition called Mild Cognitive Impairment has gradually sapped Endsley of his short-term memory and basic comprehension skills. A man whose longtime girlfriend described him as "the sharpest man on the block" found himself unable to remember appointments.

Endsley has a long — and uncertain — road ahead of him, but is hoping he can find his way back into public service, one way or another.

More than mere slips

Despite the name, Endsley's condition is not simply some slips of the mind. Mild Cognitive Impairment was first conceived as a separate disorder three to four years ago. In the simplest terms, it's more severe than normal aging-related impairment and not as severe as Alzheimer's — though about 40-45 percent of cases later progress into Alzheimer's.

Tom Hlavacek, executive director of the Alzheimer's Association of Southeastern Wisconsin, said that while some drugs can be prescribed to handle the memory loss component, the disorder cannot be reversed with medical treatment.

Experts recommend those with the disorder control any heart-health risks, exercise and try to mentally stimulate themselves to maintain their mental agility. Although the disorder can progress into dementia or Alzheimer's, the symptoms sometimes remain the same or improve. Given how new the diagnosis is to medical experts, it's hard to tell which way it will go.

Endsley is still in the early stages of his diagnosis, but fears that, based on early tests, he may have a higher likelihood to slip into Alzheimer's because of his symptoms.

But it wasn't too long ago that his symptoms were mere "slips of the mind."

Almost imperceptible

Few would have begrudged Endsley's departure from the Legislature. It came amid a record number of legislative retirements in 2014 and followed the explanation of many others. A press release from Endsley simply stated he wanted to return to the private sector.

But Endsley said the truth was that he loved the work. Constituent work, public service. He relished it all. He even described the debates he had with protesters during the height of the Act 10 protest as an exciting and engaging situation.

But around late 2011 or early 2012, something happened. It was almost imperceptible at first, but he could tell certain details were beginning to slip his mind.

"It was very mild," Endsley said. "I just knew that when I got up the next morning, the last bill that I read … I just knew that something had changed, I just had no idea what it was. It became much more evident that I was not retaining the information that I was reading. But almost to the point where I didn't even know it. Then, it just gradually got worse."

Roseanne Brandt, Endsley girlfriend of 15 years, said he has always been a perfectionist and so she regarded the initial signs Endsley mentioned as normal aging issues that he was blowing out of proportion.

"I'd say, 'Yeah, big deal, I found a [hair] dryer in the fridge the other day,'" brandt said. "I really literally blew it off, because I'm five years ahead of that age, I've seen all these issues relative to using your memory. That's what I said, 'Mike, you're just getting older.'"

But the signs started becoming more apparent and severe. He'd forget appointments, then he'd miss certain details in bills. Reading itself sometimes became a struggle when trying to comprehend more complex bills.

"There were points where I was literally having staff come up with cheat sheets with a lot of detail," Endsley said. "And of course, like anybody could understand, the more stuff you put on that, the more burdened you feel. And it just generates more anxiety and snowballs down the hill."

Major signs

The first major signs came the day before a committee meeting he was chairing. Endsley sat down to review details of the next day's hearing, but couldn't retain much of the information. After struggling through the night, he set an alarm for the next morning intending to get up early and review the details.

When the alarm went off, he woke up, realized he was late, and began to get dressed.

Except one part of that plan didn't work. He'd known how to tie a double windsor knot since his father drilled the information into his head at age 7. But those details were gone that day. After his first attempt to tie it, the tie fell off his neck. Further attempts had the same result.

"If I tied the tie 60 times, I tied it 100 times," Endsley said. "And I just couldn't do it."

Things came to a head when his blank moments came back during a meeting of the Assembly GOP Caucus. When asked to give an update on a bill he was working on, he realized that he barely remembered the details. After stumbling through a description and being peppered with questions by other representatives, he stormed out of the meeting. As he faced his staff in a panic, he told them simply: "I can't go back in there."

He later informed Assembly Speaker Robin Vos that he couldn't run for reelection because of the issues he had. He didn't know, however, what the issues were exactly.

'I don't like this'

The first test from Endsley's family doctor was simple — he would draw a doodle, show it to Endsley, and ask him to replicate it. Endsley did as told, made his doodle and gave it to the doctor.

"He just looked at the two, showed me both of them and said, 'Does this look even remotely like what I drew?'" Endsley said. "And he just said, 'Mike, I don't like this.'"

The visit led to several other trips to Froedtert Hospital in Wauwatosa, one of which featured a full psychological examination.

He didn't finish. While he can't remember everything he was asked to do, he remembers what stopped him — a simple puzzle that asked him to connect dots in a sequence. A1 to B2, and so on.

Eight dots in, Endlsey lost his concentration. The anger and frustration rose. The test was over.

Brandt, who took him to Froedtert, said she had started recognizing the mental slips when they first set this appointment. But as she looked at the results of Endsley's dot test, she realized how bad off he was. Endsley's doctor said his cognitive abilities were on par with another patient — who was in his 80s.

"It broke my heart," Brandt said. "Because some of the simplest tests, he just couldn't do them."

Endsley has expressed fear that going back into the public eye may lead to another public mental block.

Hlavacek, with the Alzheimer's Association, said that ties into one of the biggest concerns in MCI cases — and dementia-related cases in general: Many people simply shrink away from society because of that fear.

"What can happen is social isolation," Hlavacek said. "You quit your job, you're around the house and not having much to do. But sometimes, it's sad to say, family and friends can fall away, because they're awkward about the person and being around them."

Effectively disabled

Endsley's tried to avoid total isolation, but he has hit harder times. While his press release said he was going back to the private sector, he has mainly spent his days at the Sheboygan Falls Memorial Library trying to keep his mind active. His doctors told him that he has been effectively disabled and wouldn't be able to do the work he had been used to before.

On top of that, he separated from Brandt — though they talk regularly and remain close — and moved in with his parents given his uncertain future and finances.

Endsley admits he's in limbo. While he has been trying to keep his mind sharp and is taking medication that's helping his memory, he also has been researching volunteer and non-profit opportunities.

He still fears what might happen if he gets on a stage and forgets his words midstream, but he wants to find a way to give back to his community. He's started attending meetings of the Alzheimer's Association to help with their Walk to End Alzheimer's event. He's still unsure where he can be of help, but he wants to do what he can.

"When it's my time to check out, I want to feel good that it wasn't all about me," Endsley said.

But despite the hardship and upheaval in his life, one change has been for the better.

Endsley's temper — which raged during the height of his disorder and has persisted throughout his life — seems to have subsided. As Endsley describes his entire ordeal, he's open, honest and refreshingly optimistic.

He said he feels he's mellowed and started "caring more" about those around him. He's moved his finances around to take care of family should his condition take a turn for the worse. But he's also set aside money to make sure he can travel and enjoy his life while he is still able to.

Endsley said, "In a weird way, there's almost like a little bit of a feeling of freedom when you know there's something going on in your life that you don't have any control over."

Warning signs of MCI/Alzheimer's

While only some MCI patients are later diagnosed with Alzheimer's, both disorders can carry some of the same warning signs. Here are the 10 signs to look for if you suspect you or a loved-one has Alzheimers, according to the Alzheimer's Association.

Memory loss that disrupts life Challenges in solving problems Difficulty completing familiar tasks at home Confusion with time or place Trouble understanding visual images and spatial relationships New problems with words in speaking or writing Misplacing things or losing the ability to retrace steps Decreased or poor judgment Withdrawal from work or social activities Changes in mood or personality

Read or Share this story: http://shebpr.es/1MdTz2w