To the editor:

Trumpty Dumpty and his wall are set for fall as Republican powerbrokers plot behind his back to save their party by putting a real Republican in the White House through an end run. Conservative guru William Crystal, calling for an Independent run by a real Republican, met this week with Mitt Romney to convince him to run in hopes of stopping both Trump and Hillary from getting enough electoral votes to win. This will throw the election into the House of Representatives where Romney will be a shoe-in.

It's really a brilliant strategy. With a non-scary alternative to Trump, enough Berners will keep their promise never to vote for Hillary and instead cast their votes either for Romney or Jill Stein. After all, Romney is a known quantity with solid government experience and, as Governor of Massachusetts, he was not only a social liberal and environmentalist, but actually invented Obamacare. Moreover, unlike Trump or Hillary, he is neither a bloviating racist nor a corrupt warmonger. As a less frightening alternative, a Romney candidacy removes Hillary's only argument for Independents to support her: “Fear of Trump.” By the time November rolls around, Hillary will be damaged goods from Trump's daily hammering of her “pay-to-play” schemes to enrich the Clinton Foundation in exchange for approving foreign government projects while Secretary of State, her use of a private email server which put top secrets at risk in order for her to avoid detection of her conflicts of interest, and, last but not least, the accusations by her husband's sexual assault victims that she actively sought to silence them in order to protect his political career. Hillary will have nobody left in her camp by November but the Democratic party sycophants who she bought off and those who want a woman so bad they'll settle for any member of the gender.

The trouble for Trump is that he, himself, won't be the benefactor of all those Hillary defectors and Berners. Romney, instead, will win red states where real Republicans and disaffected Berners make up a plurality of the electorate, ensuring that both Hillary and Trump fail to gather the required 270 electoral votes necessary to avoid throwing the election into the House. Romney, who cannot lose in the Republican House, then walks into the presidency, saving the Republican Party from oblivion on the way.

The DNC can stop this by recognizing what Republican powerbrokers already know, that, because the real Republican Party can not survive either a Trump presidency or an open endorsement of Hillary, it must play this Romney card which, even if it failed, would still leave a viable conservative party intact, poised to recover. Once the DNC understands that this would turn the whole country even redder while also taking the White House, it will be evident that the only way they can combat it is to nominate Bernie Sanders, who polls demonstrate would win enough Independents and Democrats to take all the blue states and most of the battleground states. If the DNC and superdelegates fail to see the light by the convention in Philly, we Berners will be pushing Sanders to run his own end around as a write-in candidate, which he could still register for in 43 states up to a few weeks before the election. Then he is likely to win a plurality in enough states to close out the other three candidates with electoral votes. The only difference is that, if Berners are forced to win that way, we won't be pulling along any Clinton superdelegates. Their choice.

Romney was previously pulled in at the last minute by Republican powerbrokers to save them in Massachusetts in 2002. That's how he became governor. It worked for them then. They now have until July or August to get him on the ballot in the vast majority of states, plenty of time. Now we'll see if the DNC wises up in time to counteract it.

Theodore Bosen,

Berlin