This was Lulu City in 1889 well after it reached its peak. ( Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park )

Benjamin Burnett, a Fort Collins businessman, founded the town of Lulu City along the Colorado River and named it after his daughter. He also called for the eviction of eight Dutchmen from his town. (Fort Collins Public Library)

A popular destination for hikers is near the headwaters of the Colorado River at the ghost town of Lulu City.

It was founded in 1879, based on the discovery of low-grade silver ore.

The town was named for Lulu Burnett, a beautiful young girl with jet-black hair, black eyes and pale skin. Lulu was the daughter of Fort Collins merchant-prospector Benjamin Burnett.

Ambitious in its concept, Lulu City encompassed 100 blocks with 16 lots per block. The streets were numbered, but the avenues were called Mountain, Trout, Riverside and Ward.

Lulu City was near timberline at an elevation of 9,400 feet, and winters were difficult. On July 25, 1882, the town plat was officially entered into the records.

In the 1930s when this photograph was taken, there were still some buildings at Lulu City. (Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park)

The hotel was the largest structure in Lulu City and had a cellar dug into the rocky ground under the kitchen. Dances were held there, and the tables were covered with fine linen tablecloths. Place settings included crystal and silverware.

Godsmark & Company was the name of the general store, and the town's watering hole was called the Hally Saloon after its owner, J. S. Hally. Lulu City also had a drugstore.

The best years for Lulu City were from 1879 to 1883 with a peak population of several hundred. A post office was established in 1880, and just a half a dozen years later, it closed.

Like so many other mining towns, Lulu City was founded on dreams and hopes.

Advertisement

One discouraged prospector, about ready to leave, prophesied that someday there would be nothing but a foot trail along Lulu City's main street and that raspberry bushes would grow through the roof of the town's only hotel. His predictions came to pass.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.