Section Sponsored by: Affordable Care Act (ACA) is currently receiving mixed responses from top 2016 presidential candidates. To help keep track of their varying positions, here are the views of the top three Democratic candidates and top five Republican candidates for president, as of December 1, 2015.



Democrats



Hillary Clinton - No stranger to the fight for universal healthcare, Clinton has been making progressive strides since she chaired the Arkansas Rural Health Advisory Committee in 1979 as First Lady of the state. Since then, she has helped establish the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP), introduced legislation to reduce the cost of health insurance expenses and pushed for funding to address post-9/11 first responder healthcare effects.



If elected, Clinton says she will continue to defend the ACA against Republican repeal efforts. She intends to expand affordable coverage, slow the growth of overall health costs (including prescription drugs) and make it possible for providers to deliver the highest quality care to patients (http://bit.ly/1OCF6kg/).



Bernie Sanders - In a 2011 letter to President Obama, Sanders stressed that significant cost issues in America's healthcare system must be effectively addressed, and that they will not be remedied by cutting benefits for vulnerable Americans. Thus, although he initially voted in favor of Obamacare, Sanders now openly supports a single-payer, government-provided healthcare service.



According to the April 30, 2015, PBS News House, "2016 Candidate Stands" series, Sanders believes that the ACA law did not go far enough. Instead, he suggests that requiring a national board to oversee the budget of a more liberal, single-payer system, set up individually on a state-to-state basis, would be a more successful alternative (http://bit.ly/1PNM7Ma).



What sets Sanders apart from the other candidates is that he sees the ACA not as an unsuccessful, finished product, but as the first step on the road to a much more drastic overhaul of America's healthcare system. He believes the government should work toward eventually paying for everyone's healthcare services.

SEE ALSO: Speech Issues & the 2016 Campaign: Autism REPUBLICANS



Donald Trump - Trump told CNN that the ACA has "gotta go" and that he wishes to repeal and replace the law with "something terrific." He has gone on record stating that he does not support socialized medicine and by ridding America of the ACA, Trump believes he will help boost the economy and fix insurance exchanges.



According to an interview with Forbes' Dan Diamond, Trump intends to propose a health plan that will return authority to the states and operate under free market principles. He says that this plan will provide a choice to buyers, provide individual tax relief for health insurance companies, break the health insurance company monopolies, keep plans portable and affordable and allow citizens to buy across state lines (http://onforb.es/1nun6iz).



Trump's statements coincide with the thoughts in his best-selling book, The America We Deserve. Throughout this text, the Republican candidate calls for health market reforms that would be affordable, well-administered, provide freedom of choice and are market-based.



Ben Carson - Carson, a pediatric neurosurgeon, has completely rejected the ACA, instead voicing strong support for health savings accounts. While addressing the Values Voter Summit in Washington, D.C., Carson controversially compared the ACA to a 20th century suppression-enforced Nazi Germany, calling it the "worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery," and explaining its roots in control management (http://wapo.st/1ZNQjkd).



Although most Republicans want to completely dissolve the ACA and enact a new solution, Carson says it is imperative that the law be replaced with a viable alternative before its repeal. Although he supports universal healthcare, he also sees the government's current involvement as facilitating an atmosphere of distrust.



Marco Rubio - In a Fox News op-ed, Rubio expressed his belief that the downfall of the ACA was inevitable. He proposes repealing and replacing the act with a three-part post-Obamacare system of tax credits, federal coverage for patients with pre-existing conditions and reforms to Medicare and Medicaid. He stated in his 2015 book, American Dreams, that the ACA has created too much uncertainty.



To instead increase the certainty of success, the senator from Florida has suggested a market-driven strategy with high-risk pools and separate insurance subsidized by the government for people deemed too risky to buy insurance through the regular marketplace, according to The Hill (http://bit.ly/1F6CMsJ).



Ted Cruz - According to his campaign website, since Cruz took office as a U.S. senator in 2012, he has been a leading voice calling for the repeal of the ACA. The first piece of legislation he filed was to fully repeal the act. He also led an effort to halt the ACA's implementation and to defund it, filibustering passage of the legislation for a historic 21 hours.



Cruz believes the ACA puts the government "between you and your doctor," and that Congress should work to repeal Obamacare. At the Conservative Political Action Conference, he declared that "Washington wants Obamacare; the people want liberty." In its place, Cruz wishes to make more meaningful reforms to expand health savings accounts, allow consumers to purchase insurance across state lines and to make healthcare more personal, portable and affordable (http://1.usa.gov/1G7arr6).



Jeb Bush - Bush has outlined a thoughtful replacement for the ACA, which he describes as "flawed to its core." By reforming the tax treatment of health insurance, Bush aims to expand access to coverage and affordable healthcare costs, policies which he calls "consumer-directed healthcare." He also wishes to empower patients to be in greater control of their own care.



One of the factors fueling Bush's stance against the ACA is his claim that it has failed to do its job of making healthcare affordable. On his website Bush explained, "One of the biggest flaws of Obamacare is that it resulted in skyrocketing healthcare premiums across the country." He suggests that America could achieve improved quality at a much lower cost with free market principles (http://bit.ly/1SHebHh).



Lindsey Nolen is a staff writer. Contact: lnolen@advanceweb.com.

You Might Also Like... ADVANCE for Healthcare Careers A critical resource for your professional development. The Next Step An ending is always a new beginning. 10 Resume Myths The single most important document that one uses to market oneself. 5 Best Practices for Landing a Job The reality is healthcare jobs will be in high demand for many years to come.