Topics: 90s, Culture, Entertainment, Music, Video, Entertainment News

Several weeks ago, BuzzFeed ran a roundtable discussion of ’90s rock songs titled “38 Great Alt-Rock Songs You Haven’t Thought About In 20 Years.” The list was impressively thorough, covering the decade’s myriad fierce women and women-fronted acts (Juliana Hatfield, Poe, Letters to Cleo), musical obscurities (St. Johnny, Dig, Ammonia), oddities (Whale’s “Hobo Humpin’ Slobo Babe”) and great bands that should have been huger (Girls Against Boys).

But it’s a testament to the depth and breadth of the ’90s modern rock explosion that there’s so much music from that decade alone that time somehow forgot:

The Muffs, “Sad Tomorrow”

L.A. trio the Muffs covered Kim Wilde’s “Kids In America” on the “Clueless” soundtrack, which gave them a permanent spot in the annals of ’90s pop culture. But the group’s original song “Sad Tomorrow” (found on 1995’s “Blonder and Blonder”) is a far better representation of their melodic punk; frontwoman Kim Shattuck’s inimitable gravelly voice gives the ringing power-pop tune the perfect amount of grit.

Dambuilders, “Shrine”

Although perhaps best known today for being the first band of violinist Joan Wasser (a.k.a. Joan As Police Woman), Boston’s the Dambuilders maintained a unique sound that in hindsight presaged the ’00s indie-orchestral boom. “Shrine,” which features a humming bass underbelly and lovely string countermelodies from Wasser, is one of their loveliest moments.

Bettie Serveert, “Ray Ray Rain”

Dutch indie rockers Bettie Serveert fit in perfectly with the decade’s open-minded mentality. The early single “Ray Ray Rain” was introspective enough to fit in with delicate indie-folk acts — its chorus blooms with optimism and then settles into a sighing melancholic groove — but its strident guitar strumming and askew solo added welcome backbone.

Best Kissers in the World, “Miss Teen USA”

Seattle shoulda-beens Best Kissers in the World excelled at the type of off-kilter grungy power-pop that flourished during the decade. The single “Miss Teen USA” comes off like a Pacific Northwest Lemonheads, all distorted sweetness and burnt-sugar harmonies.

Material Issue, “Valerie Loves Me”



The Chicago trio Material Issue released three incredible records, including 1991’s “International Pop Overthrow,” which spawned this jangly power-pop classic. Deceptively upbeat, the sly song is from the point of view of a protagonist too shy (or too uncool) to catch the eye of a beautiful woman — who he then envisions growing old by herself; at that point, he has the last word: “But she can’t have me.”

Jellyfish, “All I Want Is Everything”

The late, great Jellyfish deserves praise for many things: pristine harmonies, intricate classic rock homages, ornate arrangements and a kaleidoscopic psych-rock bent. How the band interpreted this challenging music live is perhaps their biggest accomplishment; this Letterman performance of “All I Want Is Everything” is controlled chaos spearheaded by drummer/vocalist Andy Sturmer.