Topics: America, Editor's Picks, Fourth of July, I hate the fourth of July, Independence Day, July 4, Patriotism, Life News, News, Politics News

I have a confession to make, my fellow Americans. I love my country, but I really don’t like the Fourth of July.

Sure, I enjoy beer, hot dogs and fireworks as much as the next guy. But a holiday that used to commemorate our ongoing quest for freedom has become a banal exercise in gluttony and self-congratulation. For the first half of our history, July 4 called us to fulfill our national destiny. Now, for the most part, it calls us to dinner.

Remember, our country was founded on a radical premise: that all men are created equal. In the 1800s, then, the Fourth of July wasn’t just a day to celebrate “liberty.” It was also a time to demand it.

Start with black Americans, who used the occasion to underscore the contradiction between the country’s principles and practices. “What, to the American slave, is your Fourth of July?” asked abolitionist Frederick Douglass, in his famous address in Rochester, New York, on July 4, 1852. “I answer: a day that reveals to him, more than all other days in the year, the gross injustice and cruelty to which he is the constant victim.”

To slaves, Douglass continued, “your celebration is a sham; your boasted liberty an unholy license; your national greatness swelling vanity; your sounds of rejoicing are empty and heartless; your denunciation of tyrants brass-fronted impudence; your shouts of liberty and equality hollow mockery.”

Two years later, a Mahican Indian chose another Empire State location for his own Fourth of July speech. “While rejoicings to-day are commemorative of the free birth of the giant nation,” John Wannuaucon Quinney told an audience in Reidsville, New York, “they simply convey to my mind, the recollection of a transfer of the miserable weakness and dependence of my race from one great power to another.”

Likewise, Susan B. Anthony and other feminist pioneers marked the Fourth of July with rallies for their own rights. So did the country’s burgeoning class of factory workers. Textile laborers in New England called for a general strike on July 4, 1846, which they labeled “a second Independence Day.”

A half-century later, when federal troops broke the Pullman railroad strike, labor leaders in San Francisco refused to participate in the city’s official July 4 celebrations. “The Glorious Fourth! Hurrah! Fire off your guns and crackers,” a longshoreman’s magazine wrote, in a satirical vein. “Toot your horns, wave your flags, yell … What about the strike on the railroads? Hush! That’s anarchy.”