1st Congressional District Democratic candidate Pat Murphy, left, starts his opening statement as Republican candidate Rod Blum listens during the candidates’ second and final debate in the KWWL news studio in Waterloo on Oct. 18. (Photo: Matthew Putney/Waterloo Courier/Associated Press )

Two new faces are vying for an open seat in Iowa's 1st Congressional District, but only one of those faces would be new to elected office.

Rod Blum, a Republican businessman, touts his freshness to the political arena and criticizes his Democratic opponent, Pat Murphy, for being a "career politician." Murphy, who has spent 25 years in Iowa's House, says he has the savvy and experience working across the aisle that is needed to fill the vacant seat of U.S. Rep. Bruce Braley, a Democrat who is running for U.S. Senate.

The two candidates, both from Dubuque, differ on more than their political experience. While both list boosting the economy as a main issue in their campaigns, their approaches vary widely.

This is the first time the Democratic-leaning district has had an open position since 2006, when Braley began his tenure in Congress.

Polls show a tight race. A Loras College poll from early September had Murphy in the lead by less than 2 percentage points, with almost a third of voters undecided. A more recent poll paid for by the Blum campaign has Blum in the lead, 40 percent to 39 percent, with 19 percent undecided. The Murphy campaign provided no recent polling.

"The remaining challenge for the campaigns in these open-seat races is to convert the undecided into supporters," said Christopher Budzisz, director of the Loras poll. "It will be important to watch how the partisan advantages in these two districts play out."

RELATED:

Compare the candidates' stances on key issue

Blum, 59, and Murphy, 55, both say they are distinct enough from their opponent to make the choice clear.

Murphy's service in the Iowa House includes five years as speaker. The Dubuque native has made raising the federal minimum wage to $10.10 an hour one of the key issues in his campaign. He points out that his first bill passed while speaker of the House was to raise the state minimum wage to $7.25.

"We need to make sure families are self-sufficient," Murphy said. "It's not good enough to get a minimum wage where you get a full-time job and your kids qualify for free and reduced lunch at school, and you're on food stamps and Medicaid."

Blum is the founder of a software company and a real estate developer. He says the minimum wage is an issue that should be decided state by state, and a federal mandate would cause jobs to be lost.

"Minimum wage jobs are starter jobs," Blum said. "I hate to take away that valuable resume experience for young people."

ENDORSEMENT: Pat Murphy's leadership needed in Congress

The dispute over the federal minimum wage is "one specific flashpoint issue that clearly distinguishes Democratic and Republican candidates," said Mack Shelley, a professor of political science at Iowa State University. Polls suggest majority support for raising the minimum wage, Shelley said, "so this is an issue that Democrats like to emphasize."

To fuel the economy, Blum proposes lowering taxes on businesses and repealing the Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare, which he says creates an unstable environment for business. Murphy says he will defend the law.

"The government has a role to play in health care, that's no doubt, as a financier. They're good at taxing and writing checks," Blum said. "We should let the private sector do what they're good at," he added, saying individuals should have more choice among competing health care firms.

Both candidates also disagree on Social Security. Blum wants to raise the retirement age and allow people to opt into personal retirement accounts, "which, quite frankly, ruins Social Security," Murphy said.

But "if we don't do anything," Blum said, "by 2033, it's bankrupt."

On other issues

Social issues: Blum believes marriage should be restricted to a man and a woman, and that same-sex marriage is a decision better left to the people of each state. He also wants to ensure that no federal funds go toward abortions. Murphy says he is proud to come from a state that legalized same-sex marriage. He doesn't want to see any changes in federal abortion laws.

Education: Blum says the "one size fits all" education model is a failure, and that states, local school boards and parents are responsible for educating children. But Murphy says with cuts to public education budgets, federal Title I funding for low-income schools is needed.

Gun rights: Murphy says he would fight against "stand your ground" laws in Congress, and wants to see domestic abusers added to the list of prohibited purchasers of firearms. Blum says any federal laws that infringe upon the Second Amendment should be repealed.

Energy: Both candidates want to see increased development of renewable energy. Blum also supports the use of traditional energy sources like oil and gas, and doesn't want to see expanded regulations on energy companies. Murphy says the federal government should invest in renewable energy before it opens new areas for oil and gas exploration.

Top three issues for Murphy, Blum

MURPHY

Middle class: Work to raise the federal minimum wage to $10.10 an hour; fight to pass the Paycheck Fairness Act to ensure women receive equal pay for equal work.

Social safety net: Protect it, pledge to seniors who have worked hard and paid into Social Security and Medicare for decades that their benefits will be there when they need them. Defend Obamacare against Republicans' attacks to repeal it.

Education: Invest in good schools at all levels to maintain our edge in innovation and achievement. Fight for universal preschool; work to make college more affordable by controlling rising tuition costs and supporting the Student Loan Relief Act.

BLUM

Economy: Lower taxes on American businesses while eliminating all corporate tax loopholes. Cut the red tape that costs American businesses over $1 trillion every year and reduces economic growth.

Government spending: Freeze spending at 2014 levels until we have a budget surplus. Next, we should pass a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution that also caps federal spending at 18 percent of GDP.

Health care: Repeal Obamacare and implement patient-centered reform. Allow people to buy insurance across state lines, increase access to health savings accounts, encourage competition in the marketplace and eliminate government mandates that keep costs high.





About Pat Murphy

Age: 55.

Grew up: Dubuque.

Current home: Dubuque.

Education: Dubuque Wahlert, 1977; Loras College, bachelor's degree, speech communications, 1980.

Work history: Mercy Hospital Mental Health-Intensive Unit, security and communications, 1975-87; Cycare Systems, documentation specialist, 1987-90; Hillcrest Family Services, youth care specialist, 1990-92; Northeast Iowa Community College, adjunct professor of intermediary English, 1999-2003.

Political experience: State representative, 1989-2014; Democratic minority leader, 2003-07; Speaker of the House, 2007-11.

Family: Wife, Terri; four children, nine grandchildren.

Religious affiliation: Catholic.

Campaign website:patmurphyforiowa.com





About Rod Blum

Age: 59.

Grew up: Dubuque.

Current home: Dubuque.

Education: Loras College, finance degree; University of Dubuque, master's degree in business administration.

Work history: Eagle Point Software, CEO, 1990-2000; Digital Canal, owner, 2000 to present.

Political experience: Dubuque County GOP chair, 1995-97; Republican National Convention delegate, 1996.

Family: Wife, Karen; five children.

Religious affiliation: Christian, Episcopal.

Campaign website:rodblum.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1tUUwZb