Eddie Murphy has been cast to play Richard Pryor’s father in Lee Daniels’ upcoming biopic. Daniels confirmed the news on Entertainment Tonight that Murphy will play Pryor’s father, former boxer LeRoy “Buck Carter” Pryor, in the movie that has not been given a title or a release date.

Daniels went one step further with his announcement. He didn’t just make a statement that Eddie will star in the film. He also posted a selfie of himself and Eddie to Instagram with the caption, “Strap in and brace yourself. They done let me and him out of our cages! #idonteventhinkimreadyforthisone! #excited #proud #OMG.”

It is probably an honor and a privilege for Murphy to be part of the Pryor biopic because Murphy has been known to say that Pryor influenced him during his early years as a stand-up comedian. Murphy and Pryor starred together in Harlem Night that was released in 1989.

Pryor was a legendary comedian, whose real name was Richard Franklin Lennox Thomas Pryor. He was an actor, film director, social critic, satirist, and writer. Eddie, 53, has some of the same characteristics as Richard had, yet he is playing Pryor’s father instead of playing the role of Richard. E! Online reports that Mike Epps, who is a talented actor, is the one who has the honor of playing the part of Richard Pryor.

Kate Hudson is playing Richard’s wife, Jennifer Lee Pryor. It is interesting that Jennifer was Pryor’s fourth wife and also his seventh. Here’s the math: They were married in 1981 and divorced in 1982. Richard had another wife he married twice before remarrying Jennifer in 2001. She was his fourth and seventh wife and was married to him at the time of his death when he died in 2005, at the age of 65. Jennifer is a producer on the movie along with Bruce Cohen.

Oprah Winfrey is also a producer and has a role in the film. The Selma actress is playing Pryor’s grandmother, Marie Carter. Richard’s father and grandmother have pivotal roles in the biopic because they were intricate parts of the comedian’s life. Pryor grew up in his grandmother’s brothel, where his mother, Gertrude, was a prostitute. After his alcoholic mother abandoned him when he was 10, Pryor was raised primarily by his grandmother, who would beat him on many occasions.

Fans of Richard Pryor and Eddie Murphy are looking forward to seeing the movie when it is released. Are you interested in seeing Eddie Murphy play Richard Pryor’s father in Lee Daniels’ biopic?

[Photo via Getty Images]