On the very first day of November, a right winged anti-government man walked into the Los Angeles’ LAX Airport Terminal 3 with an assault rifle, shot up and killed a TSA agent and injured as many as five around 9:20 a.m. according to KPFK 90.7 F.M. Pacifica reporter. The shooter walked around with his rifle in his bag, asked people if they were TSA (Transportation Security Administration) agents.

NBC news stated that the shooter, Paul Anthony Ciancia of Los Angeles formerly from New Jersey, had a ‘new world order’ conspiracy theory tract. According to anti-government conspiracy theorists, the New World Order is a code word by George Bush Sr. to take over the world, create a one-world government controlled by Rockefeller, Rothschild and the Queen of England, reduce the population to 500,000 and to enslave the people.

This is the mental illness Ciancia is suffering. So where did this all come from? Alex Jones. According to Jones’ radio show, the Alex Jones Show, this is evidence that a liberal plot to control the population is at foot. Abortion and eugenics is done by Planned Parenthood. Jones states, “Margaret Sanger, the founder of Planned Parenthood, who during her lifetime extolled ‘The Eugenic Value of Birth Control Propaganda,” and its effectiveness at “[improving] the quality of the race.'”

Following the footsteps of Jones, Ciancia walked into terminal 3, specifically looked for TSA agents and had a gun battle, fighting the New World Order’s puppets. Currently, the TSA agents are unarmed, under-paid and lack the training needed to do what they are doing. Yet according to Ciancia’s madness, these are the people who are taking away our freedom in order to prepare us to go up against Rockefeller, Rothschild and the Queen of England.

And Republicans are against the Affordable Care Act?

Yet even more sickening are the right wingers who comment from the conservative rag the Washington Times:

Avatar

4TruthandJustice

• 6 hours ago It’s “interesting” to see that this isolated incident which unfortunately resulted in one death is being given news media attention on almost the same scale as the Sept. 11, 2001 terrorist attack which inspired the creation of the TSA. Clearly, the news media wants to do its part in distorting public perception. Kudos to the shooter’s father who attempted to alert police of his son’s potentially dangerous state of mind. But this case only shows that a few threatening individuals will evade attempts to stop them, leaving only disarmed-by-law Americans to “lie as flat on the ground as we can.” The scandal here is that, in an airport filled with people, everyone was forced into a state of helplessness and had to rely (as always) on late-arriving law enforcement to save them. America has been turned into an insane asylum and the anti-gun crazies are running the asylum. It’s time to put a stop to anti-gun crazies – which is the real message of this incident. It takes only one sheepdog to guard a flock of sheep. But in many places, sheepdogs are not allowed so the human sheep must die without human dignity or rights. Once again, the Democrats have helped a killer carry out his insane plan. Lets thank them all at election time.

What avatar got incorrect was that the TSA was started in 2001 when the Bush Administration created the obtrusive government organization with Michael Chertoff, former Homeland Security head. It helped Rapiscan, the X-Ray machine company get the contract, now defunct, at our airports.

Avatar blames the Democratic party for the shooting, but never admits that it was the Republicans who profited off of fear after 19 hijackers commandeered four jets on 9/11 killing more than 3,000 people.

So fear still grips the minds and hearts of the right wingers and when their gun-toting lifestyle is damaged by a fellow conspiracy theorist conservative, their lives are in shamble, their cognitive dissonance is in full gear and the Democratic Party is in full blame. Ironically, if the TSA is shut down and Homeland Security is history, every Republican will blame President Obama and the Democratic Party of being supportive of the terrorists.