Video footage shows a man purchasing the mystery Hot Lotto ticket. Authorities announced at a news conference Thursday that they have identified him as Eddie Raymond Tipton, an information-security director for a lottery vendor. (Photo: Iowa DCI/Special to the Register)

For four years, the identity of the man who purchased a winning Hot Lotto ticket at a Des Moines gas station was a mystery.

But state police now say they have identified the buyer as Eddie Tipton, a Norwalk man who has worked at the Multi-State Lottery Association since 2003. Most recently, Tipton was the association's director of information security.

But a larger mystery remains: How is it that a lottery vendor in charge of information security managed to score a winning ticket worth $14.3 million? Was it just luck, or was the lottery security system compromised in some way?

As a lottery vendor, Tipton was barred by law from playing the lottery and from claiming a lottery prize. He's accused of not only playing the lottery, but enlisting the help of others in trying to covertly claim the $14.3 million prize. That's why he now faces two counts of fraud punishable by up to five years in prison.

Tipton is not accused of manipulating the outcome of the lottery, but that's an issue that needs to be thoroughly investigated. Although every big lottery winner can be accurately described as extraordinarily lucky, the fact that someone in Tipton's job allegedly beat the 1-in-10.9 million odds is an enormous red flag.

For now, though, this case illustrates the importance of public disclosure in all matters related to the lottery.

Under Iowa law, the names of lottery winners are a matter of public record. Had this law not been in place, and had the state not insisted on knowing the true identity of the ticket buyer, the fraud might never have been uncovered.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Newly released surveillance shows the sale of a winning Hot Lotto ticket from Dec. 23, 2010, at the QuikTrip on East 14th Street. DCI officials are trying to identify the man who made the purchase. Iowa Department of Criminal Investigation

In addition, public disclosure of the security-camera video appears to have been the key to identifying Tipton. Investigators worked the case for almost three years before releasing the video and asking for the public's help. Just four days later, they received a tip from an employee of the Multi-State Lottery Association saying Tipton was the man seen in the video.

When it comes to government-run lotteries with multimillion-dollar payouts, the more information that's publicly disclosed, the better.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1BWyYOO