Bill Price of Price Auctions gets ready to auction off items Saturday to benefit the restoration of the Rialto Theatre. ( Sarah Rose / Daily Record )

Rialto Theatre Board President Richard Baker and chairperson Barb Brierley hold up a check Saturday that was given to the board to help restore the building. The Florence Steampunk festival that was in April provided the funds. (Sarah Rose / Daily Record)

One of the individuals who assisted Saturday with the Rialto Theatre's auction performed in it during the early 1980s.

"Back when the Re-2 school district owned this building, this is where we did all of our choir concerts and drama and band concerts and stuff like that," Rialto Theatre board member Todd Williams said. "This was our performing stage for high school."

Williams said he always has had a love for the building.

"I just feel that it needs to be used again," he said. "I want to hear the music through the halls again. I think this community deserves a place like this, something they can be very proud of, a place that a lot of people can call home for performances and what not."

President of the board Richard Baker said the building will be used as a performing arts center again once it's restored in the next two years or so.

"It will be a live stage," he said. "They can also have community events here."

The auction included a variety of items, such as fine china, records, household curios and artwork. He said money from the auction will go to the revitalization efforts of the theater.

The building already has gone through some revitalization in the past 12 years, Baker said.

"The electrical has been all done, the sprinkler fire system has been put in, the roof has been totally rebuilt, the structure of the beams have been reinforced," he said.

Advertisement

Williams said the Rialto Theatre hasn't been open for business for at least 15 years.

Historycolorado.org states the Rialto Theatre has a rich history.

"Constructed in 1923 of locally made yellow bricks, this two-story building features unusual multi-colored brickwork patterns enhanced by designs in natural colored slate. Between 1923 and 1975, the Rialto hosted numerous cultural events, plays, shows and melodramas," the website stated.

Sarah Rose: 719-276-7648, roses@canoncitydailyrecord.com