Readers sound off on same-sex marriage and the Supreme Court ruling.

Buy Photo Letters to the editor may be emailed to letters@tennessean.com, faxed to 615-259-8093 or mailed to Letters to the Editor, The Tennessean, 1100 Broadway, Nashville, TN 37203. (Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Heed dictionary and Bible

My Webster’s dictionary defines “sodomy” as abnormal sexual intercourse between persons of the same sex or between a person and an animal.

The dictionary also refers to Genesis 18-19 in the Old Testament of the Holy Bible, which explains the origin of the word “sodomy.”

So, since the Supreme Court has legalized marriage between persons of the same sex, they are making “sodomy” the law of the United States.

Sodomy is strictly forbidden by the Holy Bible and would be destructive to civilization.

For the sake of our country and future generations, it is my sincere hope that this is not allowed to stand.

Tennie Noble

Charlotte 37036

Love thy neighbor

Re: “Gay marriage opponents seek court ruling response,” July 21.

The Tennessean reports that Rep. Rick Womick and his Republican cohorts in state government are looking for a way to respond to the Supreme Court ruling which granted marriage equality to gays and lesbians.

Specifically, some lawmakers are trying to figure out a way they can enable any narrow-minded state employees to refuse providing services to same-gender couples.

Jesus has already given Womick, his fellow state legislators and any bigoted state employees the appropriate response: “Love thy neighbor as thyself.” (Matthew 22:39)

Those calling themselves Christians in our state legislature should get busy and do the Lord’s work by extending health-care coverage to their neighboring families who cannot afford healing.

That effort would be far more worthy of the special session they are urging our governor to call in opposition to social justice.

Alan Edwards

Nashville 37201

Business owners’ prerogatives

In the 1960s when the hippies began to come out of the woodwork, restaurant owners and other business establishments posted signs saying, “No shirts, no shoes, no service.”

Was that discrimination against the hippies? Or, did the business owners have the right to refuse service to those whom they chose not to serve?

What is the difference between that and business owners today (wedding chapels, bakeries, florists, etc.) refusing service to those seeking a same-sex wedding ceremony?

Do business owners not have the right to serve (or to refuse to serve) whom they will? Where does someone else’s “rights” infringe on my "rights"?

Incidentally, I still see signs saying, “No shirts, no shoes, no service.” More power to those business owners.

Hugh Fulford

Gallatin 37066

Violating one’s oath

Re: “Bill would ‘protect’ clergy from performing gay marriages,” June 26.

“There's nothing in state or federal law that requires clergy to officiate any wedding.”

ANY wedding, not just same-sex weddings.

And as far as I know, there never has been.

So why are all these Chicken Littles running around crying that the sky is falling? Are they so paranoid that if they don't have something real to be afraid of, they have to make something up?

Elected officials take an oath to obey the law.

If they feel their religion interferes with their ability to obey the law: 1) they were lying when they took that oath, 2) they need to find another job.

State employees are also expected to obey the law. If they can't, they need to find another job.

What if they decide they can't serve black people or Jews or Mormons or Muslims or Hindus or Buddhists or anybody else who isn’t a white heterosexual Christian?

Yes, you have to obey Supreme Court rulings, whether you agree with them or not. What other Supreme Court decisions do the legislators want to ignore?

Why don’t they just vote to secede from the Union and then they won’t have to obey the U.S. Constitution or the U. S. Supreme Court?

That would settle the issue once and for all, wouldn't it?

Elise Stevens

Nashville 37216

Hurdles after same-sex marriage ruling (Photo: Cagle Cartoons)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1S3u5Mu