By Vibhuti Agarwal, R. Jai Krishna and Santanu Choudhury

P. Chidambaram carried his briefcase as he arrived at Parliament in New Delhi on Feb. 17. Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

India’s Finance Minister P. Chidambaram delivered a budget on Monday with an eye firmly on national elections expected by May.

His measures to please consumers, particularly India’s growing middle class, will be implemented for the next three months and could be overturned by the next government. But until then, the Congress-led government hopes that moves to help the pockets of vehicle owners, those with student loans and the country’s vast defense personnel, will in turn help the party to gain votes at a time when it is flagging in the polls.

Here’s a link to the full budget speech and here are the highlights and what the measures it contains mean for consumers.

Vehicles

Mr. Chidambaram appealed to India’s growing number of vehicle owners by reducing excise duty on small cars, scooters, motorcycles, trucks and buses as well as sports-utility vehicles and mid-size and premium sedans.

The impact : Excise tax on small cars, scooters, motorcycles, trucks and buses reduced to 8% from 12%. On sports-utility vehicles the excise tax was cut to 24% from 30%, and on sedans and mid-size cars from 27% and 24% to 24% or 20%.

What he said: Mr. Chidambaram said the excise taxes have been lowered “to give relief to the automobile industry which is registering unprecedented negative growth”

Reaction: The move gave “much needed relief to the Auto sector at a time when demand is low,” according to Sachin Menon, head of Indirect Tax at KMPG India. Car sales in India are set to decline this fiscal year ending in March for the second year in a row.

Cellphones

Cellphones and smartphones by foreign companies will cost more after India’s finance minister restructured taxes on imported handsets, and allowed local companies to offset 6% or 1% of input taxes on their handsets depending on how much of the phone is made in India.

The tax structure was imposed during the current financial year, and Mr. Chidambaram has sought to continue it in his interim budget.

The impact: Electronics, especially cellphones are one of the largest items on India’s import bill, after crude oil and gold. The budget measure means that cellphones made in India by companies such as Samsung Electronics Co. and Nokia Corp, as well as by Micromax Informatics Ltd, and Karbonn Mobiles will be cheaper than imported handsets.

But those after smartphones will pay for the decision; most smartphones aren’t made in India so will likely become costlier.

What he said: “To encourage domestic production of mobile handsets (which has declined) and reduce the dependence on imports (which have increased), I propose to restructure the excise duties for all categories of mobile handsets. The rates will be 6 percent with CENVAT credit or 1 percent without CENVAT credit,” Mr. Chidambaram said. CENVAT is central value added taxes that is levied on imported goods.”

Reaction: Jaideep Mehta, vice president at International Data Corp. a technology research firm, says the tax “will be shot in the arm for domestic manufacturing of a critical consumer category.”

“It will encourage all vendors, especially the large international players, to evaluate India as a manufacturing destination and result in FDI as well a job creation,” Mr. Mehta said, “with this, there is a realistic possibility of a components manufacturing base also flourishing in India and driving the eco-system to a new level”

Education Loans

Students who took a loan for their studies before March 31, 2009 and had interest owed on it up to Dec. 31, 2013 will be cheering Mr. Chidambaram’s decision to impose a moratorium on the payment of interest on those loans.

But interest accrued on these loans after Jan. 1, 2014 would be borne by these students, Mr. Chidambaram said.

The government has allocated funds to the tune of 26 billion rupees ($419 million) to cover the interest on the loans. Mr. Chidambaram said the details of the plan would be announced soon.

Impact: The move is expected to benefit nearly 900,000 students

What he said: “My predecessor, Shri Pranab Mukherjee, had, in the Budget of 2009-10, introduced the Central Scheme for Interest Subsidy in respect of education loans disbursed after 1.4.2009 under which Government took over the burden of interest for the duration of the period of study and a little beyond.

“The scheme brought great cheer to student-borrowers and their families. However, I have noticed a sense of discrimination among students who had borrowed before 31.3.2009, struggled to pay interest during the period of study, and continued to service the loans afterwards. I think they deserve some relief. I therefore propose a moratorium period for all education loans taken up to 31.3.2009 and outstanding on 31.12.2013. Government will take over the liability for outstanding interest as on 31.12.2013, but the borrower would have to pay interest for the period after 1.1.2014.”

Defense Sector

Mr. Chidambaram raised the country’s defense budget for the next fiscal year, defying expectations there would be a drop in its military expenditure due to economic pressures. He increased the defense allocation for India’s fiscal year beginning April 1 by 10% to 2.24 trillion rupees ($36 billion) from the originally allocated 2.03 trillion rupees for the year ending March 31.

He also announced a move to “one-rank one pension,” which he said had been a long-standing demand among the defense services to ensure that retirees receive a pension to match the rank at which they retired regardless of when they leave the forces.

Impact: The government is expected to use the funds to spruce up spending on military equipment in India which is already the world’s largest importer of arms. The pension decision will affect the over one million people in the country’s military.

What he said: “We need a young fighting force, we need young jawans, and we need young officers. We also need to take care of those who served in the defence forces only for a limited number of years. Government has therefore decided to walk the last mile and close the gap for all retirees in all ranks.

“I am happy to announce that Government has accepted the principle of One Rank One Pension for the defense forces. This decision will be implemented prospectively from the financial year 2014-15. The requirement for 2014-15 is estimated at `500 crore [5 billion rupees] and, as an earnest of the UPA Government’s commitment, I propose to transfer a sum of `500 crore to the Defence Pension Account in the current financial year itself.”

Follow India Real Time on Twitter @WSJIndia.