Which? tries out the Silver Cross Pioneer pushchair Does the travel system live up to its claims?

The Silver Cross Pioneer comes with a lie-flat carrycot suitable for newborns

The Pioneer travel system is the latest pushchair from designer buggy brand Silver Cross. It's currently at the Which? test lab for full testing, but our expert has taken it out for a spin so we can bring you her first impressions now.

Priced £600, the Silver Cross Pioneer is a sturdy, stylish-looking pushchair which comes with a lie-flat carrycot, making it suitable for use from birth. Used as a travel system, the Pioneer is compatible with Silver Cross Simplicity, Maxi-Cosi Pebble and Maxi-Cosi Cabriofix child car seats.

Our pushchair expert took the Pioneer out and about, to preview whether it lives up to Silver Cross's claims that it's lightweight, durable and robust while we await full lab test results.

UPDATE 27/10/14: We've now fully tested this pushchair at the Which? test lab, so head straight to our full Silver Cross Pioneer review to see our definitive verdict.

Silver Cross Pioneer pushchair video

Our video below shows a few quick clips of the Silver Cross Pioneer in action, but for the full-length First Look video complete with expert commentary on the pros and cons of the pushchair, visit our fully tested: Silver Cross Pioneer review.

Please enable JavaScript to access this content.

Pushchair reviews

At Which? we've tested hundreds of pushchairs so we know exactly what to look for when we review and rate a new one.

A Best Buy pushchair will have passed our stringent safety tests with flying colours, and also earned the approval of our parent panel. It will be smooth to push on different types of ground, easy to steer around corners and a doddle to get up and down kerbs.

The best pushchairs we've tested are simple to fold and unfold, keep your little one comfortable, and have useful features such as lockable swivel wheels and adjustable backrests and leg support. The worst ones are awkward, tricky to use, and lacking in genuinely helpful features.

More on this...