WASHINGTON (MarketWatch)—The midterm elections are so Tuesday. Let’s talk about 2016.

Yes, 2016, when Hillary Clinton (or maybe, just maybe, Elizabeth Warren) will be the Democrats’ standard-bearer challenging GOP nominee Jeb Bush—or will it be Rand Paul?—for the White House.

Or say you’re a Democrat and want a Joe Biden face-off against New Jersey’s Republican Gov. Chris Christie? That could be in the cards, too. But please, don’t leave off Jim Webb (a former Democratic senator from Virginia) or current Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal (a Republican) from your long list.

It’s too early for official declarations, of course. But all those names, and more, are in the mix for the presidential election in 2016, a mere two years away. Some have made statements openly contemplating running—like Hillary Clinton and Jeb Bush. Others, like Massachusetts senator Warren, are being pushed to run by certain flanks of their party. Ted Cruz, on the Republican side, fits that bill (Need evidence? See runtedrun.com.)

A list of the potential Republican candidates for 2016 includes about a dozen names, some familiar to many voters, some not. Names like Jeb Bush are certain to ring a bell, given his famous family. Other potential GOP contenders aren’t as well-known. Those outside the Midwest, for instance, may have to stretch to place Mike Pence’s name. (He’s the governor of Indiana.)

There’s been at least one more Republican to float his name since Tuesday’s midterm elections: On Thursday, New York’s former Gov. George Pataki said “I’m thinking about it, because it really comes down to the future of the country.”

Kyle Kondik of the University of Virginia said how well any of those contenders do in 2016 hinges in part on congressional Republicans’ relationship with President Barack Obama.

He said Republicans actually have an incentive for more gridlock if it leads to Obama remaining unpopular. “If Obama’s approval ratings remain low, that will help the GOP presidential nominee,” Kondik, the managing editor of Sabato’s Crystal Ball, told MarketWatch in an email.

On the Democratic side, the list is smaller, with the brightest star undoubtedly Clinton. But others are dipping their toes in the water. Alternatives to the former secretary of state may include individuals like Martin O’Malley (the outgoing governor of Maryland) and even ultraliberal independent Sen. Bernard Sanders of Vermont. Sanders, who votes with Democrats, has said he’s weighing a bid as an independent or a Democrat.

All the names in the 2016 stew come with their own personalities, baggage and appeal to different voters. On the right, Cruz and ex-Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee are attractive to social conservatives. Warren is a hit with would-be tougher-on-Wall Street Democrats.

But who’s up there in terms of winning the nomination?

For Democrats it’s not even close. Hillary Clinton leads by more than 50 points in RealClearPolitics polling. Biden comes in second; Warren third; New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo fourth; and Sanders is in fifth. O’Malley and Webb bring up the rear.

But don’t count on the former New York senator being a shoo-in for the nomination, says Greg Valliere, chief political strategist at Potomac Research Group.

“Most Democrats are preparing to gear up for Hillary, but in private they worry that she hasn’t shown much on the campaign trail,” he wrote Monday. “She has made one gaffe after another in recent weeks and hasn’t found a message. There’s only one Democrat capable of snapping the party out of its funk this winter; all eyes will be on Elizabeth Warren.”

The Republican side is vastly different. Right now, it’s Rand Paul who occupies the top spot among possible GOP contenders, according to RealClearPolitics. But his numbers are about the same as Jeb Bush’s and Mike Huckabee’s. Jindal is dead last.