Boulder County officials: handicap-accessible housing 'non-existent' for displaced residents

Resources for ADA accessible housing Emergency Family Assistance Association: call 303-442-3042 or visit efaa.org Boulder County Affordable Housing: call 303-441-1000 or visit http://bit.ly/19FD9Rp Boulder Housing Partners: call 720-564-4610 or visit boulderhousing.org Center for People with Disabilities: Call the Longmont office at 303-772-3250 or the Boulder office at 303-442-8662 or visit cpwd-ilc.org

LONGMONT -- While Graham Steers rips mud-covered flooring and moldy drywall from his home, his wife, Rebekah, is working on getting from the bedroom to the bathroom on her own.

Rebekah Steers' body is weak from Lyme disease that left her in a wheelchair nearly four years ago, but she is hoping to build up enough muscle to maneuver around the couple's temporary home, a recreational vehicle.

"I'm hoping I can get to the point where I can go from the bed to the bathroom with a walker on my own," Rebekah Steers, 30, said, "otherwise, Graham will have to carry me."

The Steers and their dog, Quintus, are staying in an RV parked on the street outside their home while it is being gutted and repaired after floodwaters damaged the house last month.

Advertisement

The narrow structure of the RV is not wheelchair accessible under Americans with Disabilities Act standards. But neither were any of the other temporary housing options the couple found in Boulder County.

"I've been looking for weeks and there's nothing," Rebekah said. "We didn't find anything affordable, even that wasn't accessible."

With thousands of residents displaced from their homes following the flood, temporary housing is hard to come by, but ADA accessible temporary housing is non-existent, said Aaron Pasterz, an independent-living adviser at the Center for People with Disabilities in Boulder.

Graham Steers sits at a table in the RV he, his wife Rebekah Steers (not pictured) and dog Quintus are temporarily living in while their floodwater damaged home is renovated Thursday in the Bohn Park neighborhood in Longmont. ( Matthew Jonas )

"There are very few accessible places in Boulder County even though they're required to have a certain percentage of their rentals accessible," Pasterz said. "There are a few but it's hard to find them and there aren't enough, especially after the flood."

Low vacancy rates, high rental prices and lack of ADA accessible spaces are a statewide problem that has been amplified by the flood, Pasterz said.

Vacancy rates in Boulder County ranged from 1 to 3 percent before the flood, said Jim Williams of Boulder County Housing and Human Services, and only 60 available units have been identified for temporary housing since the flood. Williams said, he did not think any of the available units were ADA accessible.

Resources are available to help people with disabilities find an accessible and affordable home, Pasterz said, but advice about where to search is not much help if there isn't any housing available.

"What do you tell someone?" Pasterz said. "Do you tell them there's nothing there and to just give up or do you give them a glimmer of hope even if it's unrealistic? They might get lucky and so that's the best I can do at this point."

Despite the challenges that an RV presents, Rebekah Steers said, she was thrilled to stop imposing on friends and have a space of their own again.

"I didn't know they made RVs that nice," she said. "We ran a water hose from the house and plug-ins so we have power and water and everything we need."

Demolition, which included pulling up floors, sub-floors and drywall on the lower half of all of the walls, is complete but Graham, who works in construction, said the couple will be displaced for at least another month.

The construction zone is déj vu for the couple who bought the home, their first home, in the spring and finished remodeling in July, about two months before the flood.

Instead of focusing on the mud that is still splashed on their new kitchen cabinets or the ruined hardwood floors that they picked out this summer, the couple is staying positive.

"The house was already partially remodeled when we bought it and took over, so we just finished it up," Rebekah said. "Now, because we have to tear so much of it down, we can make it more accessible for my chair."

The kitchen counters will be lowered, the doorframes widened and the bathtub replaced with a shower Rebekah can roll into.

The couple learned a lot from their first renovation, which will make construction a little easier this time, Rebekah said. But the shock of the flood damage and unexpected costs are making it a more emotional experience the second time around, she said.

"This was supposed to be our shelter and our refuge and now we're dealing with feeling betrayed, as irrational as it is," Rebekah said.

Stress about the house is being increased by unexpected costs caused by the flood and difficulty getting Rebekah's 21 daily prescriptions.

The couple is hoping to move back into their home as soon as possible, but not before the home is inspected to ensure that there are no remaining health risks for Rebekah, Graham said.

"There's always something new and unexpected popping up," Rebekah said. "The challenges ensue, but that's life and we have each other so we'll pull through."

Whitney Bryen can be reached at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com.