In a pair of statements to POLITICO, House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) and Ways and Means Chairman Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) forcefully backed Boehner and called for an end to the intraparty warfare crippling the House Republican Conference as it faces a possible government shutdown on Oct. 1. "I support John Boehner as speaker," McCarthy told POLITICO in a statement. "We should be spending all of our time and energy confronting this administration’s disastrous policies," he added. "The intrigue and fighting amongst ourselves only makes it harder to get that done. It ought to stop immediately." Ryan was similarly dismissive of the threat by conservative hard-liners to oust Boehner. "The best person to lead the conference right now is John Boehner, and any attempt to remove him would be counterproductive," Ryan said.

Most members believe Boehner will have to face a motion to vacate the chair soon after the House votes on a continuing resolution that funds Planned Parenthood. Rep. Matt Salmon, R-Ariz., said Boehner's handling of the Planned Parenthood issue in the CR would be a defining moment in the future of his speakership "in some people’s minds." […] "I think it's the proverbial straw that breaks the camel's back," Salmon told reporters Thursday. "I think we've seen promises to fight tooth and nail on things in the past and it hasn't really materialized. I think there will be a point where, you know, the thin ice breaks."

House Speaker John Boehner is the target of open revolt in the House, with the extremists in his party continuously threatening a coup. The latest kerfuffle is over whether the House will allow the government to shut down on October 1 over the extremists' desire to defund Planned Parenthood. Now, Boehner loyalists and members of leadership are having to make public statements of support of Boehner to try to put down the rebellion.It's not working yet. In a closed-door meeting Wednesday night, one frustrated Republican complained that she's been bombarded by "would-be leadership candidates contacting her about supporting them," and wants it to stop. There seems to be little that Boehner can do about it, even if he ends up capitulating to the rabble-rousers and allows government to shut down.Another, Rep. Thomas Massie (R-KY) says he won't be mollified by anything Boehner does. "Going into another fake shutdown like he did on Obamacare," he said, "is not going to save his job." Just an aside, for the all the people who didn't work and didn't get paid for the 16 days of the 2013 shutdown, it wasn't fake. Just because it didn't end up succeeding in its goal of Obamacare defunding doesn't mean it wasn't very real. And shutting government down this time won't achieve the goal of defunding Planned Parenthood, either. So no matter what, Massie et al. are going to be disappointed and Boehner won't be able to fend off their coup attempt. He might as well give it up now, and just accept Democrats' help to avoid a shutdown disaster.