The president and chief executive officer of ProMedica discussed the future of healthcare locally and across the U.S. in a noontime speech to the Toledo Rotary Club on Monday, January 11, 2016 at the Park Inn in downtown Toledo, discussing the nonprofit health system’s strategic mission, innovation, and major investments in the community.

“More recently, we’ve become a lot more advocacy-focused, as far as people’s lives—especially as we look at people’s journey out of poverty,” said ProMedica CEO Randy Oostra. “Every one of our hospitals started the same way—and that’s with one mission in life to support people. Healthcare in a lot of communities has drifted far from that.” Mr. Oostra told the crowd that Ohio “is not a low-cost state” when it comes to healthcare, yet the state “does not have a healthy workforce.” He stated “there is a tremendous amount of work to be done” in that area—and he pointed out Toledo is no exception. “We don’t rank very well when you think about the health and well-being of our people,” Oostra said. “We focus a lot as a system on education.” But the head of ProMedica stated Ohio’s Medicaid expansion has been good for the Northwest Ohio economy, because the nonprofit health provider’s insurance arm has added a lot of new jobs. Paramount is one of the state’s five Medicaid insurance providers, helping to enroll an additional 600,000 previously uninsured Ohio residents under the Affordable Care Act. “This is a very positive thing in our community,” he said. “We’ve lowered the uninsured rate to about ten percent. From a moral standpoint, from the Affordable Care Act, we would argue that’s a very, very good thing to do.” Mr. Oostra pointed out that what doctors do in the clinical setting only affects about 20 percent of a person’s overall health. Another 20 to 25 percent is affected by genetics. The rest, he stated, is affected by what he called “social determinants”—a person’s job, whether or not they take drugs, housing, and other factors. He also called hunger “a health issue,” which happens to be an area of focus for ProMedica in Northwest Ohio. The ProMedica president/CEO stated there was “an obesity epidemic” several years ago that has shifted to a hunger problem across the region. But he pointed out there is “an interesting link between obesity, a lack of nutrition, and hunger.” “We now screen for food insecurity at all of our hospitals and all of our doctor’s offices,” said Oostra. “If they respond positively, we have some resources to help with their short-term needs and we try to line up ongoing areas to help them. We’ve created ‘food pharmacies,’ where doctors can write a prescription, so if you are a person who has a particular health issue, you can actually sit down with a dietician and walk out with short-term food needs.” ProMedica and ‘Food Deserts’ Mr. Oostra also mentioned so-called “food deserts,” places in Toledo where a lack of transportation forces people to shop in their own neighborhood, where fresh fruits and vegetables likely are not available to them. After the healthcare provider mapped the city in search of food deserts, ProMedica used a $1.5 million donation to form a unique market—called Market on the Green—at the corner of 18th and Madison in the Toledo’s Uptown neighborhood. “We may continue to do more of those as we get more nonprofit support,” he said. Oostra stated that ProMedica is active nationally in an effort to “raise hunger as a health issue” and encourage other healthcare systems to get more involved through a group formed called the Root Cause Coalition. There will be a national study in partnership with the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to examine hunger as a health issue. Seniors and single moms are particularly vulnerable when it comes to food insecurity, a term which means they run out of food at some point during the month. But the ProMedica chief executive also pointed out the region and state’s physical health is heavily affected by mental health and an infant mortality rate that ranks next-to-last in the nation. Oostra told the crowd more than 40 percent of adults and children in the U.S. suffer some form of mental illness, yet only two in five seek treatment. “So we think about people changing their lives. We think about people in poverty. How do you get out of that? A lot of it has to do with our underinvestment in mental health,” he said, pointing to a partnership with Harbor Behavioral Health to better coordinate mental health services with in the regular healthcare setting. ProMedica’s Downtown Headquarters and other developments The ProMedica chief told the Rotary gathering that some work is already underway inside the former steam plant and elsewhere along Summit St. as the healthcare system seeks to build a new downtown Toledo headquarters campus. The goal is to open the renovated structures by mid-2017 and move 1,000 employees to the centrally-located facility. Mr. Oostra hinted that another 1,000 ProMedica employees could eventually join their colleagues along the Maumee River. Oostra stated that planning for a new $350 million, 13-story healthcare tower at Toledo Hospital has been two decades in the making, in order to replace some buildings there that are 90 years old. The ProMedica CEO stated the healthcare system has bought and torn down 70 homes in the West Toledo to make room for the new tower and reconfigure the Toledo Hospital campus. “That will go up in 2019 and create about 1,000 construction jobs,” he said. Mr. Oostra stated ProMedica has opened two urgent care centers, with plans to open six total. “Urgent care has been around for a long time. People just never went there,” he said. “But now, with money coming out of people’s pockets, they’re shopping more. They want low-cost convenient care. The millennials don’t want to wait. They just want to look on their phone and wonder ‘can I go there right now?’ We’re seeing 30 to 40 patients per day. It’s the wave of the future.” But the ProMedica chief executive also focused on innovation during his speech, telling the 400 Rotarians gathered that one of the nonprofit health system’s doctors has formed a company called VentureMed that sells vascular catheters in Europe. The device is used by patients with peripheral artery disease. The devices are produced locally, but he stated ProMedica “is in active discussions” with several companies to take over production. One of those is from the Silicon Valley. “As they’ve come to Toledo, they’ve figured out the airport is closer and they can live cheaper in Toledo than they can in Silicon Valley, so we think they’re going to relocate to Toledo,” he said. Mr. Oostra stated his belief that pending patents for health information systems, devices, and other innovations could mean 300 new jobs in Toledo “in the next three or four years,” which would be jobs “we traditionally have not had” locally. Oostra also touched on ProMedica’s recent agreement with the University of Toledo Medical Center as another job-generator, a way to attract and educate “the best and the brightest” medical students and healthcare workers, with the hope of keeping them in Northwest Ohio. The nonprofit health system’s eventual hope, he said, is to create an academic medical center. “There’s no reason we can’t be an Ann Arbor, a Madison, Wisconsin, or an Iowa City, because all the pieces and parts are there,” he said, pointing to successful cities where healthcare systems and university medical centers have solid reputations as teaching hospitals. “When you take the clinical volume of what we have at ProMedica and what exists today at the (UT) College of Medicine, we exceed what you see at Ohio State and the University of Michigan. We just need to do that more uniformly.” The keynote luncheon speaker also noted the collaborative health care networking with other health care entities in the Midwest, including the Cleveland Clinic, Aultman, Ohio Health, Premier, and Tri-Health. The ProMedica CEO has immersed himself in the community personally, as well as professionally over the past two decades. Oostra is a board member of the Regional Growth Partnership, the Toledo Art Museum, and currently serves as the board chairman of the Toledo Symphony. Toledo Rotary The Rotary Club of Toledo is the eleventh largest such club in the world, and the 44th oldest, first chartered in 1912. On January 25th, at noon at the Park Inn, the Toledo Rotary will present as its luncheon speaker, Zuzanna Mleczak concerning its Youth Exchange program. On the Internet: http://www.toledorotary.org/