Photo: Getty Images As employers and insurers continue to navigate the intricacies of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, they’re finding that managing wellness programs and non-discriminatory incentives (or disincentives) can be tricky. “PPACA extended HIPAA non-discrimination rules as to what is considered a non-discriminatory incentive or disincentive,” explains Amy Gordon, a wellness benefits attorney with McDermott Will & Emery. “It used to be that the incentive was capped at 20 percent of the total premium — or total contribution if the employer is self-insured. But PPACA raised that 20 percent to 30 percent for most programs and up to 50 percent for tobacco cessation. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

“The challenge right now is that most employers are very compliant with the PPACA and HIPAA — every employer is following those guidelines to a tee,” she adds. “But the EEOC does not currently have guidelines or specific regulations around incentives, so there is confusion and mixed messaging being given to employers.” “While incentives are not the whole framework, they are foundational,” Dermer says. “The incentives provision was one of the few provisions in PPACA that was supported by both Democrats and Republicans.”

“Today employers are offering a variety of tools to help employees navigate the health care system and find the best combination of cost and quality in their doctors. Rewards and incentives tied to the use of those tools and finding the optimal resources to deal with those health issues is a win-win for all. Employers save money by employees using lower-cost and higher-quality options, and employees get better outcomes.” At a certain point, though, incentives can be taken too far — and employers shouldn't become dazzled (or blinded) by the possible impact of incentives or disincentives on their bottom lines.