This news just in: The percentage of people without health insurance held steady in 2015.

That, at least, was the finding of the Gallup polling organization, which last week announced that the un-insurance rate remained “essentially unchanged” throughout 2015, the second year of the law’s full implementation.

ADVERTISEMENT

That wasn’t good news for the administration, which had hoped the pollster would confirm that ObamaCare had significantly reduced the un-insurance rate in 2015. Instead, Gallup concluded that un-insurance rate was no better at the end of the year than at its beginning, and little improved over 2014.

Gallup’s data has always been a bit hinky, and it is almost certainly wrong about the leveling of the uninsured rate, as we explain below.

The polling organization reported an inexplicable spike in un-insurance rates among adults in 2013, just before a substantial segment of the population was made newly eligible for health insurance under ObamaCare through Medicaid expansion and subsidized insurance coverage.

When Gallup periodically released new data during 2014, administration analysts cited the findings as evidence that the un-insurance rate was plummeting, albeit from Gallup’s false, seemingly-inflated, peak. With last week’s release, its data have become a lot less attractive to ObamaCare enthusiasts. They will no doubt begin to look elsewhere for data that supports their narrative of the law’s success in expanding coverage.

Two older and larger government surveys—one conducted by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the other by the Census Bureau—often were given short shrift by the administration since their results did not corroborate the more headline-grabbing Gallup findings. Both of the federal surveys found that the un-insurance rate, far from shooting up, actually fell in 2013, providing a less attractive point of comparison than the Gallup figures.

Despite other differences between the CDC and Census data, the findings of the two studies regarding insurance coverage closely tracked one another over time. Between 1997 and 2014, their respective estimates of the un-insurance rate only twice differed by more than a fraction of a percentage point.

Both studies belie the myth that the ranks of the un-iunsured were swelling at an alarming rate prior to ObamaCare’s enactment. The studies show that the percentage of Americans with health insurance was in fact quite stable over time. Between 1987 and 2013, an average of 85.4 percent of Americans had coverage according to the Census Bureau survey, just a few ticks below the 85.7 percent average found in the CDC studies (1997-2013). The two surveys agreed that there was relatively little year-to-year variation in that rate.

ObamaCare’s full implementation changed that, as this chart shows. Based on CDC’s National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), it shows a generally flat trend from 1997 – 2013, followed by a fairly sharp bend that occurred in 2014, the year in which subsidized coverage first became available and most states expanded Medicaid eligibility. CDC found that the number of uninsured people dropped by 8.8 million in that year, from 44.8 million to 36 million. During the first half of 2015, the number of uninsured fell to 28.5 million.

In essence, the law’s first 18 months of full implementation has increased the percentage of the population with health insurance coverage from a 17-year average of 85.7 percent to around 91 percent, an improvement of 5.3 percent. While that’s a long way from universal coverage, it is substantial.

Calculating the cost of that progress is no simple matter. Some gains are directly attributable to the health law, like expanded Medicaid eligibility and subsidized insurance coverage. Others would have occurred even absent ObamaCare. Declining unemployment rates resulted in more people getting job-based coverage, others turned 65 and joined Medicare, while still others qualified for Medicaid under pre-existing criteria.

But even if we credit the new law for the entire net reduction in the number of uninsured, the costs of this expanded coverage were considerable.

The federal government in 2014 spent $18.5 billion on premium and cost-sharing subsidies. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) estimates that federal expenditures in 2014 on people who were made eligible for Medicaid by ObamaCare totaled $23.7 billion. The law also provided $7.9 billion in “reinsurance” subsidies to insurance companies in 2014, and the administration has declared an additional $2.5 billion in “risk corridor” payments to insurers to be an “obligation of the federal government for which full payment is required.”

That total of $52.6 billion helped reduce the number of uninsured by 8.8 million on net in 2014, an average per capita cost of nearly $6,000.

Of course, the government incurred other costs in getting ObamaCare up and running—financing the creation of exchanges, launching its website, bankrolling star-crossed co-ops, promoting enrollment, and undertaking other efforts to implement and hype the law.

Then there were the costs ObamaCare imposed on households and businesses—cancelled policies, premium hikes, higher deductibles, narrow physician networks, erroneous subsidy payments that resulted in loss of coverage among low-income households, a tax on the uninsured, and new levies on insurance premiums, drugs and medical devices—all of which have combined to make the law unpopular.

The eventual Democratic presidential nominee will nonetheless cite the reduction in the uninsurance rate as proof that ObamaCare has succeeded. That is a mistake. Though most Americans favor government intervention to make health insurance more widely available to people with low-incomes and pre-existing medical conditions, they chafe at the disruption the law has inflicted on their own coverage. They will likely be as skeptical of presidential candidates who declare the law a success as they are of those who merely insist on its repeal.

Democratic candidates have little choice but to minimize the law’s shortcomings, making them appear oblivious or insensitive to the concerns of tens of millions of voters. The challenge for the GOP standard-bearer will be to convince persuadable voters that he or she has a credible plan to make insurance more affordable and keep it broadly available, while providing relief from the law’s suffocating regulatory regime.

Badger is a former White House and U.S. Senate policy adviser and is a senior fellow at the Galen Institute. He can be reached at doug@dougsbriefcase.com.