Q. I'm following up on a recent column about changes to the reverse mortgage program. My husband is 85, and I am 72. Neither of us is in good health. When my husband took out a reverse mortgage, I was too young to qualify so it is in his name only. My earliest understanding is that once he died I would have to sell the home and leave. Due to health and finances, I am no longer in a position to do that. Is it my responsibility to sell the house when he dies? What can I do to remain in the home?

A. In June, the Federal Housing Administration issued revised guidelines aimed at providing some relief to spouses of reverse mortgage holders after the borrower dies. The provision had applied to new mortgages written after August 2014, but the guidelines in June expanded it to older loans.

Lenders are still working out details on how notifications are going to happen and other issues, but essentially a qualified non-borrowing spouse can now remain in the home without having to pay off the loan, said Odette Williamson, staff attorney for the National Consumer Law Center.

To qualify, spouses need to have been married to the mortgage holder when the reverse mortgage was first taken out, among other provisions, Williamson said.

If a borrower had defaulted on any property taxes or homeowner's insurance payments, those have to be cleared before a spouse can take over the reverse mortgage, she said.

Going forward, the remaining spouse must continue to pay property taxes and insurance and maintain the home with proper repairs.

And if a borrower was still receiving income from the loan, those payments stop at the borrower's death, Williamson said.

"The important thing is to make sure the non-borrowing spouse can continue to keep up the property," she said. Otherwise, you could face foreclosure.

Q. I saw your article on disputing a denied Medicare claim. Our problem isn't with Medicare but with my former employer's insurance carrier. After leaving that job, I went onto a COBRA policy with the carrier. The company called my wife in February to offer us a policy. On the COBRA plan I was paying $1,240 per month in premiums, and we were offered a plan through the Affordable Care Act for less than $500 per month. My wife was on the phone for about two hours looking into this and did explain to the rep our medical conditions and prescriptions we were currently taking. She was told that all would be covered just as it was with my COBRA coverage. They were told that I've had diabetes for more than 40 years, and we disclosed my wife's conditions. After we took the policy and started paying the premiums, I filled both of my insulin prescriptions at the same price of $45 each. Then in May, I processed an auto-refill and found out my cost was up to $400 for each. Where is the affordability in our Affordable Care Act policy? My wife was told I had to meet my deductible of $2,500 before my prescription prices would go into effect. How can we be told one thing to only find out something different? Is there anything that may be changed?

A. If you were misinformed about your plan by an insurance company, your situation might qualify you to make a switch without waiting for the next general enrollment period. Check out this link detailing the special enrollment process: healthcare.gov/sep-list.

Call 800-318-2596 (TTY: 855-889-4325) to apply for special enrollment. If your request is denied, you can appeal.

Share your journey to or through retirement or pose a question at journey@janetkiddstewart.com.