The first seven months of infant Lincoln Seay's life almost proved to be his last due to a rare heart condition, called Heterotaxy Syndrome. This caused his organs to develop on the opposite side of the body, including his heart. And despite multiple surgeries, Lincoln's heart was starting to fail him.

Thanks to the efforts of the Seattle Children’s Hospital and the tragically fortuitous donation of a heart, however, Lincoln’s life was saved right as he stood on the brink of death. On Feb. 19, after 89 days on the transplant list, Seay was prepped for surgery, just four days after he experienced a cardiac arrest. "He really started to decline. He had a cardiac arrest and they were able to revive him," Lincoln's father, Rob Seay, told ABC News. Seay's skin had additionally turned purple.

The procedure didn’t go off entirely smoothly. On the day of the surgery, Seay’s soon-to-be replaced heart stopped for the second time, sending him into cardiac arrest again and prompting the doctors to place him onto a heart bypass machine intended to be used during the transplant.

"The remarkable thing was we were able to get him on machine quickly," Dr. Michael McMullen, surgical director of heart transplantation at Seattle Children’s and Seay’s personal surgeon, told ABC. "It can take two hours and we did it in 12 minutes and doing CPR."

From there, the doctors were able to complete the hours-long surgery without complication, and with immediate results.

"His color is incredibly different, it’s pink and vibrant and he woke up with so much energy," Lincoln's mother Mindy Seay told ABC. "We joked, 'He woke up thinking he was the Hulk.'"

In the days since the surgery, Mindy has repeatedly expressed her gratitude towards the anonymous donor family, having penned an open letter to the mother of the donor child.

"I will treasure that heart more than I've ever treasured any gift," she wrote in a blog post, according to The Seattle Times. "I will care for that gift to the very best of my ability and will be sure we always give reverence and respect to the child and the family from which it came."

Seay's lifesaving operation is particularly miraculous in light of the growing gap between organ transplant recipients and donors, particularly when it comes to hearts. But he isn't the only person to have received this sort of gift. In early February, Medical Daily reported that the organs of Heather Clark’s infant son Lukas were used to save three lives, including one via a heart transplant.

Lincoln is still recuperating and he will likely endure a lifetime of powerful immunosuppressive medications intended to protect his new heart from being rejected, but it's a lifetime newly earned, with a heart that may last for decades.

"I hope he plays football or does whatever he wants to do," McMullan told The Seattle Times. "He’s supposed to live."

A fund for Seay’s ongoing treatment can be found on YouCaring.