GAINESVILLE, Fla -- Tax Day 2016 is creeping up for many in the U.S. TV20 sat down with one Gainesville tax expert to fill you in on some changes you should know about if you haven't filed your taxes yet.

"It'll be filed on Monday the 18th," said Gainesville resident Bob Franks when asked if he'd filed his taxes.

The good news for procrastinators, a federal holiday pushed the deadline back to April 18th for most of the U.S. Maine and Massachusetts were pushed back to April 19th.

But before you crunch those numbers, tax experts say there are some changes you should know about.

Tax penalties with Obamacare went up this year. For those adults who don't have qualifying health care coverage, the penalty went up to $695 dollars or 2.5 percent of income.

And if you were covered by Obamacare with too high of an income, well there's some bad news.

"If your income was too high, you might not be happy to find out that you would have to pay back some of that advanced payment that you received," said Gainesville Certified Public Accountant, Daniel Chalmers.

Another change, tax brackets went up.

"There's always an adjustment for inflation every year. And typically for most people, you're going to find yourself in the 10, 15, 25 percent tax bracket," said Chalmers.

Tax experts say it's not too late to file your taxes, but if they're not going to be in by the April 18th deadline, you need to make sure to file an extension. That will give you an extra 6 months.

"Failure to file your tax return on time, should you owe additional tax, is a 5 percent per month penalty, up to 25 percent," said Chalmers.

Even with an extension though, if you don't pay what you owe by April 18th, you may still be hit with a penalty.

And if all of this sounds confusing, it may be smart to turn to a professional.

"Creating that relationship with a licensed professional who can talk you through the rules and regulations... also kind of helps you figure out what tax bracket you might be in and perhaps what benefits might be available," said Chalmers who owns his own practice in Gainesville.

"It's nice to be involved with people that know what they're doing," said Franks.

Whether you file online or by mail, taxes or extensions must be in by April 18th.