News Report | March 27, 2016

By July 1, 2016, the Illinois Medicaid program will transition members of Care Coordination Entities (CCEs) and Accountable Care Entities (ACEs) to full-risk managed care plans. To do this the CCEs and ACEs will become a Managed Care Community Network (MCCN) or will create partnerships with managed care organizations (MCOs) to create full-risk delivery systems. Currently, the eight CCEs and nine ACEs receive fee for service (FFS) reimbursement, plus a per member per month (PMPM) payment for care coordination. The Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services (HFS) expects all CCE and ACE transitions to be complete by July 1, 2016.

Illinois Medicaid launched the CCEs and ACEs as part of a larger plan to enroll half of the state’s approximately three million Medicaid beneficiaries into a managed care entity that provided care coordination:

CCEs are provider-organized networks that provide care coordination to the population of Seniors and Persons with Disabilities (SPD) and the population of Children with Special Needs (CSN). CCE enrollment for the SPD population began in July 2013; enrollment for the CSN population began in August 2014.

ACEs are provider-organized entities on a three-year path to full-risk capitation payments; they manage care for the Family Health Plan (FHP) population, which includes children, parents and caretaker relatives, and pregnant women; and the population of adults newly eligible for Medicaid due to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA). ACE enrollment began in July 2014.

Enrollment in the CCes and ACEs began in July 2014. As of February 2016, there were 119,761 beneficiaries enrolled in integrated care plans, which includes people enrolled in a CCE that has not yet transitioned to full-risk managed care and nearly 1.9 million people who were enrolled in an ACE that had not transitioned or a managed care plan.

The majority of CCEs and ACEs have already transitioned their members to other full-risk entities. Only one CCE—NextLevel Health—has become an MCCN. Three have already transitioned their members to full-risk managed care entities and two will transition their members to a full-risk managed care organizations (MCOs) in the next few months. Additional details are as follows:

Be Well Partners in Health will transition its members to Cigna-HealthSpring EntireCare transitioned its members to NextLevel Health on July 1, 2015 La Rabida Children’s Hospital transitioned its members to CountyCare on August 1, 2015 Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago transitioned its members to multiple MCOs, and the members received a new enrollment period My Health Care Coordination transitioned its members to Health Alliance on July 1, 2015 NextLevel Health transitioned its members to NextLevel Health MCCN on January 1, 2016 for its members in the Seniors and Persons with Disabilities population and Affordable Care Act adult members. NextLevel Health MCCN will began serving FHP members on March 1, 2016. Precedence Care Coordination will transition its members to Health Alliance Together4Health transitioned its members to multiple MCOs, and the members received a new enrollment period

Of the nine ACEs, six have transitioned their populations to other managed care entities. As of January 2016, arrangements for three ACEs, Advocate Accountable Care, Community Care Partners, and SmartPlan Choice, had yet to be arranged. Six ACEs have transitioned their members to full-risk managed care entities. Additional details are as follows:

Advocate Accountable Care member transitions are TBA Better Health Network members will transition to Molina, but the date is TBA Community Care Partners member transitions are TBA HealthCura members transitioned to BlueCross BlueShield on December 1, 2015 Illinois Partnership for Health members transitioned to Health Alliance on November 1, 2015 in Central Illinois and on January 1, 2016 in the Quad Cities and Rockford. Members outside of Central Illinois, Quad Cities, and Rockford regions received a new Enrollment Period Loyola Family Care transitioned its members to Molina on January 1, 2016 in Cook County; members outside of Cook County received a new enrollment period MyCare Chicago transitioned its members to Molina on January 1, 2016 UI Health Plus transitioned its members to BlueCross BlueShield on January 1, 2016 SmartPlan Choice member transitions are TBA

A link to the full text of “Illinois HFS Provider Notice: Care Coordination Health Plan Transitions for Medicaid Participants in ACEs and CCEs” may be found in The OPEN MINDS Circle Library at www.openminds.com/market-intelligence/resources/010416ilhfsltraceccetransitionsmcomccn.htm.

A link to the full text of “NextLevel Letter to Current Members About Change to MCCN Status” may be found in The OPEN MINDS Circle Library at www.openminds.com/market-intelligence/resources/010116nextlevelccetomccn.htm.

OPEN MINDS has reported on the Illinois Medicaid gradual transition to full-risk managed care in the following articles:

“Illinois Governor’s 2016 Budget Proposal Cuts Medicaid By $1.3 Billion,” which published on April 5, 2015, noted that the governor’s budget eliminated care coordination fees to Accountable Care Entities (ACE) and Coordinated Care Entities (CCE), forcing those entities to become full risk plans, or to transition their members to a full-risk plan. The article is at https://www.openminds.com/market-intelligence/news/illinois-governors-2016-budget-proposal-cuts-medicaid-1-3-billion.htm/.

“Illinois Medicaid Mandatory Auto-Enrollment Launches July 1, 2014,” which published on August 24, 2014, described the differences between ACEs, CCEs, Managed Care Organizations (MCOs), and Managed Care Community Networks (MCCN). The article is at https://www.openminds.com/market-intelligence/news/illinois-medicaid-begins-statewide-managed-care-auto-enrollment.htm/.

“Illinois Medicaid Moving Toward Integrated Behavioral Health & Primary Care,” which published on March 30, 2012, described the state’s initial goals for its care coordination initiative that would include CCEs and MCCNs. The article is at https://www.openminds.com/market-intelligence/news/040212mhcd4.htm/.

Additional details on this topic are included in the OPEN MINDS Behavioral Health System State Profile Report series. The topics in each report present market data and behavioral health policy for Medicaid, Medicare, and commercial health plans operating in the state. Availability and purchase options for each state are posted online at https://www.openminds.com/downloads/category/state-profile/ (accessed March 10, 2016).

For more information, contact: