Dan Rylance (Photo: Submitted )

This summer has been the anniversary of wars. In June, we celebrated the 70th anniversary of D-Day. In August, we commemorated the 100th anniversary of World War I.

So I have decided to come clean with my war experience.

The photograph that accompanies this article is me. Gen. Danny Rylance. It was taken at my maternal grandparents’ hotel in Hope, North Dakota. The writing on the back says it was taken in 1943 and during the winter.

Oh yes, the winter of ‘43, I remember it well. Actually, I don’t remember it at all.

Yet every time I browse through old family albums, I always see myself dressed in one of those silly military uniforms. I guess it was the patriotic thing for my mother to do.

You see, I was one of those war babies: The World War II batch.

There is some writing on the back of the photograph. Something about “General Danny Rylance addressing his troops.” My mother had a great sense of humor.

I wonder how many people saw me in that outfit? The jacket is tolerable but too long and the hat doesn’t sit well at all. I don’t know how often I had to wear this uniform. But it was often enough. There are also unconfirmed family rumors that I did more than one “job” in that uniform. That’s old military slang.

I remember distinctly the day my father came home. I was 4 years old and didn’t remember him. My mother and I were living on the north side of Fargo, North Dakota, with my maternal grandmother.

It was a warm autumn Sunday and both my grandmother and mother told me early that this was to be the day. The day my father was coming home from Germany. Yes, they dressed my up in another military uniform, and ordered me to stand at attention on the front porch, for his arrival.

They also instructed me on what to say. They told me to tell my Dad first, “I love you.”

Second, I was to ask, “Did you shoot Hitler?”

I waited on that front porch of what seemed to be an awfully long time. Finally, a yellow cab arrived with a man in an Army uniform.

I ran and hid.

I didn’t greet him. I didn’t follow the prepared script, either. And I think everyone was disappointed with my performance.

I blew it.

I will never forget that day. It didn’t turn out the way it was suppose to. I didn’t know that man who stepped out of the cab, and no prompting from the two people who did could change my my mind.

I simply could not to it.

It wasn’t the easiest way for a 4-year-old boy to meet his father.

Yes, I did learn later to know and to love my father. But not with that damn uniform on.

At the same time, I knew little if anything about my father’s service in Germany. I learned after his death that he served under Gen. George Patton with the rank of sergeant major, I was also told by a relative that my father was in charge Patton’s headquarters since he had a degree in accounting before the war.

Many war records were destroyed by a huge fire in St. Louis years ago so there is no documentation of many of the soldiers who served in the war.

I don’t know what happened to my uniform, but I still have part of his and the Bronze star that was pinned on it.

Northwestern Community Columnist Dan Rylance is from Oshkosh.

Read or Share this story: http://oshko.sh/1w48oPb