Linebacker Marcus Trotter reacts after making a stop during the third quarter. His return helped solidify the Badgers’ defense. Credit: Mark Hoffman

SHARE Video Loading... Postgame Video Loading... Badgers Chat Monday, Oct. 27

UW FOOTBALL

Jeff Potrykus, beat writer

Read Transcript

PLAYER OF THE GAME

Senior linebacker Marcus Trotter and senior defensive lineman Warren Herring share the game ball.

Just about every player Wisconsin defensive coordinator Dave Aranda used Saturday performed well as the Badgers suffocated Maryland's offense — 10 first downs, 175 yards and 3.1 yards per play.

But it was no coincidence UW's best performance came the same week Trotter returned after missing the last seven-plus quarters because of a groin injury and Herring was back for the first time since suffering a knee injury in the opener.

Trotter's football IQ is high and his presence in the lineup is critical. He finished with two tackles for loss and six total tackles.

"I just think I am juiced up all the time," Trotter said. "I like having a lot of swagger out there...just trying to lead the team and be a senior."

Herring didn't record a tackle and came out on obvious passing downs, but his ability to clog the middle allowed Trotter and fellow inside linebacker Derek Landisch to flow to the ball. Also, Herring just has a feel for how to play and how to adjust on the fly.

"I didn't even have an offensive lineman touch me for like three quarters," Trotter said.

OFFENSIVE PLAY OF THE GAME

UW entered the day with no pass play of more than 25 yards to a wide receiver.

Joel Stave and Alex Erickson needed three plays to surpass that dubious mark.

After UW's defense held on downs at the Badgers' 35, Melvin Gordon had runs of 9 and 7 yards. On first down at the Maryland 49, UW deployed three tight ends, Erickson and Gordon.

Stave faked a handoff to Gordon and rolled to his right. He fired a bullet to Erickson, who went up high over cornerback William Likely to make a contested catch at the 6 for a 43-yard gain.

Gordon scored on the next play and UW was off and running with a quick 7-0 lead.

"To hit the first pass attempt of the game," Stave said, "(and) to be a deep one down the sidelines to Alex, it was good to see.

"We work on it a lot. We have worked on catching contested balls all through the bye week and all through last week. I think it really paid off for us."

DEFENSIVE PLAY OF THE GAME ►

UW linebacker Vince Biegel gladly accepted the gift fumble recovery he received late in the first quarter.

Maryland trailed, 10-0, and took over at its 25 after the kickoff. Four plays later, junior tailback Brandon Ross took a handoff from quarterback C.J. Brown and headed left.

Ross appeared to have room to run but forgot one thing — the ball.

He dropped the ball without being touched and Biegel, lined up on the left side of the UW formation, shot into the backfield and made the recovery at the 29.

He bounced up and rumbled to the end zone for an apparent touchdown, but the replay official overturned the call because Biegel's knee was down when he recovered the ball.

UW took over at the 29 and scored six plays later to build the lead to 17-0.

"I was responsible for the QB," Biegel said. "He didn't have the ball and all of a sudden I see the ball right down there....

"Being in the red zone it is a smart idea to fall on the ball. But I would have loved to scoop and score."

SPECIAL TEAMS PLAY

OF THE GAME

Maryland entered the day with the reputation for outstanding special-teams play, but UW's punt unit burned the Terrapins with a terrific fake in the first quarter.

UW faced fourth and 9 from the Terrapins' 36 when the punting unit came on the field.

Maryland's players didn't know it at the time but UW was about to pull off a big play, designed by special teams coach Jeff Genyk and safeties coach Bill Busch, who coached special teams at Utah State before coming to Madison.

Punter Drew Meyer fielded the snap cleanly and started running up the middle. He got to the 40 and executed a jump pass into the middle of the field to tight end Troy Fumagalli.

Fumagalli was tackled at the Maryland 19 after a 17-yard gain.

The drive stalled at the 18, but Rafael Gaglianone hit a 36-yard field goal to give UW a 10-0 lead.

INSIDE THE HUDDLE

■ UW called its first timeout of the game with 16 seconds left in the opening quarter and the Badgers facing first and goal from the 1. Why? Because UW wanted Andrew Endicott to be able to kick off with the wind at his back. The strategy did not work, however, because Corey Clement was stopped for no gain on the next play and the quarter ended.

■ Maryland came close to hitting a big play in the second quarter to cut into a 17-0 deficit. The Terrapins faced third and 27 from their 34 when wide receiver Jacqille Veii got behind cornerback Darius Hillary near the UW 30. However, Brown's pass sailed deep and landed out of Veii's reach. The Terrapins punted on the next play and UW drove 65 yards for a touchdown and 24-0 lead.

QUOTABLE

"Well, it's simple. Give credit to Wisconsin. We got outcoached, outplayed today. Didn't do a real good job." — Randy Edsall, Maryland head coach

BY THE NUMBERS

8 Three-and-outs forced by the UW defense.

18 Tackles for loss by UW in its last two games.

20% Maryland's third-down conversion rate (3 of 15).

46 Rushing yards by Maryland.

311 Rushing yards by UW.

GORDON BY THE NUMBERS

2,109 Ron Dayne's Big Ten record for yards in a season (1996).

1,168 Melvin Gordon's total through seven games.

942 Yards Gordon needs to break Dayne's mark.

157.0 Yards Gordon must average per game (six games) to break Dayne's mark.

UP NEXT

UW (5-2, 2-1 Big Ten) at Rutgers (5-3, 1-3), 11 a.m. Saturday

The Scarlet Knights, whose lone Big Ten victory came at home against Michigan, suffered a 42-24 loss Saturday at Nebraska. They gave up 292 rushing yards, including 225 by Ameer Abdullah on just 19 carries.

Jeff Potrykus