Buffs defensive lineman on academic fast track despite loss of loved ones

Colorado starting defensive end Derek McCartney has completed 88 credit hours toward his degree in integrative physiology as he nears the end of only his second year on campus. ( Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer )

A large, strong hand nervously fiddles with a ring dangling from a chain around Derek McCartney's neck. It's as if he's searching for something only the ring can give him.

While others marvel at how quickly McCartney is progressing toward a college degree, the redshirt freshman and starting defensive end on the University of Colorado football team worries he's falling behind. He wants to be a doctor, maybe a surgeon, and has years of schooling still to come.

"I guess it's just the way I'm wired," he said. "I kind of just like to help people."

McCartney stood near the entrance to the Dal Ward Center last week patiently answering questions about how he has managed to complete 88 credit hours toward his degree in integrative physiology as he nears the end of only his second year on campus.

He's not blitzing his way through school on an easy track tailored toward keeping an athlete eligible. He's a workhorse, and he has managed to keep up the pace in the face of devastating grief.

In the past two years, McCartney has watched two of the most important people in his life lose prolonged battles for their lives. His grandmother, Lyndi McCartney, died in May 2013 after battling emphysema, and his high school sweetheart, Kaylee McBeth, died early last year from a heart tumor.

"It kind of made me lose motivation in a way," McCartney said. "I just didn't know where I was headed anymore. That was really difficult for me and I'm still kind of fighting through some of that."

Advertisement

McBeth used to wear the ring each day as a reminder of her father, who died from a heart condition when she and McCartney were only in middle school. When McBeth died, McCartney asked her mom, Jana McBeth, for the ring. It helps him feel close to her and push himself when he feels like he can't keep going.

"It's very honoring," Jana McBeth said.

The CU athletic department recently celebrated McCartney with one of its most prestigious academic honors, the Clancy A. Herbst, Jr., Student-Athlete Achievement Award, which is given annually to a student who has overcome personal, academic or emotional challenges to succeed in school and competition.

Unprecedented pace

It's no surprise that someone with aspirations to save lives would be diligent with his studies and equally committed to the academic side of being a student-athlete. But McCartney is setting a pace few have seen before in the CU athletic department. McCartney, the grandson of former CU football coach Bill McCartney, will be a third-year sophomore on the football field in the fall -- he redshirted in 2013. It will be his final season as an undergraduate.

Derek McCartney, left, a starting defensive end for the Colorado football team, pressures UCLA quarterback Brett Hundley last season. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

"It's incredible," his mother, Kristy McCartney, said. "Who does that? I know there are some kids who excel in that way and it's just incredible. You've got to balance a lot and really prioritize a lot to be able to do something like that. I really don't know where he got it."

Kris Livingston, CU's associate athletic director for student services and director of academics, said McCartney began working on his college degree even in high school. A grayshirt season, a redshirt year and two summers at CU allowed him to rack up 76 credits before he played his first game for the Buffs last season.

"While we've had many other very high-achieving and accelerated learners, I can't think of anyone in the past who has earned this many credits prior to competing," Livingston said. "Even though a combination of things have led to this, one thing to not discount is that he has never shied away from taking full case loads, either in the fall or spring semesters or in the summer, in a very demanding, science-based major. Derek has high goals, high standards, and he doesn't cut corners. He attacks his academics the same way I've seen him attack opponents on the football field."

Strong role models

While Kristy McCartney says she doesn't know where her son got the drive to take on such a heavy workload, Derek McCartney credits her and his grandparents for showing him the way.

He grew up in a one-parent household, but his grandparents lived right next door. He said he watched his mother struggle to stay on top of all her responsibilities and saw how his grandparents helped care for him and his older brother, T.C., who now works for the San Francisco 49ers in the NFL.

"I think it gave me a good work ethic just seeing her growing up and seeing her work ethic," he said.

The McCartney boys spent hours with their grandparents each week and pieces of Bill and Lyndi rubbed off on them. McCartney said he could talk to his grandmother about anything and they often laughed together at stories that caught their attention on the Internet. Men in the McCartney family are intense, but they noticed early in Derek's life he was more laid-back and thoughtful. He credits his grandmother.

"She really impacted who I am," he said.

Bill McCartney said he recognized a conscientiousness in Derek from a young age and he and his wife simply tried to encourage him at all points along the way.

"When someone is genuinely humble, they listen, they're coachable, they're teachable, but that is not enough," Bill McCartney said. "If you don't have extraordinary resolve, if you don't have fresh fire, it doesn't matter. If you have just fresh fire, you'll wear people out. They'll run from you because you're not humble. The combination of humility and resolve, when you see that in somebody, that person is a shooting star. And that's what Derek is.

"He's genuinely humble and he works. He puts in the time."

Helping people

Those are some of the qualities McBeth says her daughter found so appealing about McCartney when they met and became friends in middle school and later became a couple in high school.

"He was just very good to her and treated her so well," McBeth said. "I know he's not perfect, but he was just really perfect for Kaylee. I'm glad he's having a lot of success at CU. He deserves some big blessings."

Some people don't find the love of their life until their 30s, 40s or even later. McCartney said he found his before he could legally drive. It has been 15 months since Kaylee died and two years since he lost his grandmother. He could have fallen behind or even faded away trying to deal with the loss. Instead, he is steadfast in knowing he wants to help people.

So he pushes himself, even when he doesn't have to.

"Honestly, it's a day-to-day thing. I wouldn't be able to do it without Jesus because he just gives me strength every day," McCartney said. "I just have to look to him for everything that I go through, every success and every difficulty I look to Jesus and he fills me with his grace. That's really what gets me through everything that I do."

Kyle Ringo: ringok@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @kyleringo