If you want to work in state or local government in Ohio, there’s a good chance you’ll have to pay a labor union.

Under state law, Ohio teachers, police, firefighters and other public employees can be forced to pay union “fair share” fees as a condition of employment.

Employees in 623 Ohio cities, school districts, state agencies and other government workplaces are subjected to fair share fees. See the complete list.

How does this affect public employees who opt out of union membership?

Whether mandatory fees are called fair share fees, “agency fees” or “administration fees” in a union contract, the result for workers covered by the contract is the same: having a job means paying the union.

Fair share fees — often hundreds of dollars per year — can be as expensive as regular union dues. The mandatory fees are deducted from workers’ paychecks automatically.

Greg Lawson, a policy analyst for the free-market Buckeye Institute, told Ohio Watchdog fair share fees are “unfair” to workers who don’t want to join a union.

Public employee union fair share fees are unfair to taxpayers, too, Lawson explained in an email.

Automatically deducting union fees from public workers’ paychecks forces taxpayers to support union bosses who negotiate — often with public officials the unions helped elect — for more taxpayer money.

“This means that taxpayer interests are not being considered,” Lawson said.

Unions defend fair share fees as necessary to give workers a voice in the workplace and prevent workers from freeloading on the union’s representation.

The “freeloader” argument sounds compelling, but it’s not convincing when weighed against individual workers’ rights, Lawson opined. Why, then, are fair share fees commonplace for Ohio public employees?

“Unions still have a lot of clout, which makes policy changes difficult,” Lawson said.

Officials in multiple localities where public employee unions take fair share fees failed to respond to requests for comment.

RELATED: Labor unions fund 22 of 23 Ohio Senate Republicans

Federal law forbids unions from spending fair share fees on politics. In Ohio, public-sector fair share payers must follow their workplace union’s rules to request a rebate for union political activity.

The union calculates the rebate, and any fair share payer who wants to dispute the rebate amount has just 30 days to do so.

Last fall, the Ohio Education Association — Ohio’s largest labor union — settled a lawsuit brought by fair share payers who said OEA and several of its affiliates didn’t calculate fair share fees properly.

At the end of a legal process lasting three years, the teachers who filed the complaint won partial fair share refunds and reduced OEA fees until 2040.

Among the 50 states, Ohio is in a shrinking minority where public employee unions are concerned.

Even after Indiana, Michigan and Wisconsin enacted right-to-work laws, there’s little enthusiasm in the Republican-dominated Ohio General Assembly for tackling the problem of forced union fees.

This is partly because Ohio Senate Bill 5, a 300-page bundle of changes to the state’s public employee law, was overturned by voters in 2011 after unions spent $40 million campaigning against it.

Supporters of SB 5 failed to adequately defend the law against union ads warning it would destroy public services throughout the state.

But “fair share” is mentioned only once in the Ohio Revised Code. Public employees throughout the state could be protected from forced union dues with simple changes to a single section of state law.

Ohio’s rules for public employee union fair share fees are defined in ORC 4117.09(C):

“The arrangement does not require any employee to become a member of the employee organization, nor shall fair share fees exceed dues paid by members of the employee organization who are in the same bargaining unit.”

And:

“The deduction of a fair share fee by the public employer from the payroll check of the employee and its payment to the employee organization is automatic and does not require the written authorization of the employee.”

A January poll from free-market think tank Opportunity Ohio indicated 75 percent of Ohioans are against automatic dues deduction for public employee unions, and 52 percent support ending forced union dues for all workers.