Republican presidential candidate Sen. Marco Rubio (R., Fla.) on April 15, 2015 at the Heritage Foundation in Washington. Associated Press//Molly Riley

Florida Republican Sen. Marco Rubio on Wednesday named Nevada Lt. Gov. Mark Hutchison as his Nevada presidential campaign chairman, the latest evidence that the Silver State’s nominating contest is heating up.

Nevada is in line to be the fourth state to choose in next year’s nominating competition — after Iowa, New Hampshire and South Carolina. As the first Western state and the first with a sizable Hispanic population to choose, candidates already are giving it careful attention.

Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton campaigned in Nevada Tuesday, announcing she would back a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants in the U.S. Mr. Rubio traveled to the state earlier this year and plans to return later this month to campaign, a spokesman said.

Mr. Rubio took to Twitter to tout his choice of Mr. Hutchison: “I lived in Las Vegas for a few years growing up, and still have great memories. This is a state I want to win. So, no pressure @Hutch4Nevada!”

Mr. Hutchison was a first-term state senator before his election as lieutenant governor in last year’s Republican sweep of statewide offices. He is a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and could help Mr. Rubio’s outreach to Mormon voters, a key constituency in Nevada’s caucuses.

In an interview, Mr. Hutchison said that Mr. Rubio’s “American dream” immigrant story would connect well with voters in the state.

“He can unite the party and inspire the country,” Mr. Hutchison said. “He is somebody I have been watching for quite some time and I really feel inspired by him.”

The lieutenant governor also has close ties to Hispanic Republican Gov. Brian Sandoval who handpicked him as lieutenant governor candidate last year. Mr. Hutchison heads a large law firm in the state and was appointed by Mr. Sandoval to lead the state’s constitutional challenge to the Affordable Care Act.