Welcome to Capital Health Care, an early-morning email full of scoops and storylines that will inform the daily conversation in New York among health-industry insiders and high-information consumers. Sign up for our morning newsletters here.

FOLLOW THE MONEY –- New York State spends more than $55,000 per capita on its highest-need Medicaid patients each year, Capital's Laura Nahmias reports. That’s one reason the state has the costliest Medicaid program in the nation. Patients who ranked within the top one percent of all Medicaid expenditures cost the program an average $94,821 a year, according to a newly released GAO report. Not surprisingly, the big expense is people who have an underlying condition coupled with a mental disorder. http://capi.tl/1d19Khy

A-PLUS AT HHC –- MetroPlus reported Wednesday that it has enrolled more than 32,000 New Yorkers in its insurance plan through the health exchange. That means 25 percent of all New York city residents and 8 percent of all state residents who have purchased an insurance plan through the Affordable Care Act's exchange have chosen MetroPlus. Most important, MetroPlus is reporting that nearly half of all enrollees are under age 35, the so-called young invincibles. http://capi.tl/1eTCDMg



NOW WE KNOW –- Frank Zappa now has a bacteria named after him, according to an article in Molecular Biology and Evolution. Researchers say they named the particularly nasty, acne-inducing bacteria after the Italian term "zappa," meaning hoe, as well as a tribute to the composer, who once penned the lyrics "sand-blasted zits." "This bacteria is so unconventional in its behavior, and its new habitat is so unexpected that we thought of Frank Zappa,” the authors said. http://bit.ly/1cqKft8

WE'D LOVE TO HEAR FROM YOU: This roundup is for you so please tell us how we can make it even better. Send tips, news, ideas, calendar items, releases, promotions, job postings, birthdays, congratulations, criticisms and corrections to dgoldberg@capitalnewyork.com.

WANT MORE HEALTH CARE INFO THROUGHOUT THE DAY? Get bite-size “whiteboard" alerts that focus specifically on health care issues sent directly to your inbox. Please contact Lauren Englander at lenglander@capitalnewyork.com to learn more.

CUOMO DOESN'T KNOW –- Governor Andrew Cuomo said Wednesday he doesn't know if Long Island College Hospital and Interfaith Medical Center will remain open as full-service hospitals, as the state uses an $8 billion federal infusion to its Medicaid program to “rationalize” health care in Brooklyn. The proposals SUNY is considering for LICH do not envision a full-service hospital, and Cuomo must know that. But, really, this is semantics. The waiver money is meant to reduce inpatient admissions by as much as 50 percent during the next decade. That means fewer beds, as Cuomo correctly explained on WNYC last week. In this new world, the hospital is not the center of the patient experience. If it all works, New Yorkers won't need as many full-service hospitals and that's really the state's goal.

THE ELEVENTH HOUR -– As of late last night, about the time when it is no longer polite for a reporter to bug sources, SUNY attorneys and the lawyers representing labor unions and community groups were still negotiating terms of a possible settlement that would avoid a contempt hearing. The two sides are due back in court this morning. Jim Walden, the attorney representing the community groups, has said his clients deserve their day in court and that he has plenty of evidence to show SUNY violated the court’s order to keep the hospital open. On Tuesday, attorneys for 1199 SEIU and NYSNA intimated a deal was close at hand. Only a few sticking points remain. Many in the community want SUNY to reopen the RFP and call for brand new proposals. SUNY would prefer to avoid that outcome, but if it has to reopen the RFP, the question will be for how long and what new criteria will be used to judge proposals.

STATE GRANTS –- Governor Cuomo announced on Wednesday that $9 million would be given to local organizations trying to reduce tobacco use. The state's health department is now accepting applications from community organizations. The money will be spent over a five year period. http://bit.ly/1h7XGOu

PUBLIC SERVICE ANNOUNCEMENT -- It appears AARP New York’s twitter account was hacked, @AARPNY.

MAKING ROUNDS –- Politico's Jason Millman is headed to The Washington Post to take over Sarah Kliff's spot on Wonkblog. Kliff is off to join Ezra Klein's new venture at Vox Media. Millman is a must-follow if you want quality health journalism - @JasonMillman.

DISSSED ADVANTAGE -– A bipartisan group of 40 U.S. Senators, including both New York Senators, sent a letter to CMS, questioning the impact cuts to the Medicare Advantage plan would have on seniors. Within the next few weeks, CMS is expected to release MA payment rates and could cut them dramatically. That could lead to premium increases. The cuts are part of the ACA, and included in the $716 billion the law took from Medicare to help pay for Obamacare. Trudy Lieberman at CJR reminds us that despite the political talking points, we are talking about reduced payments to providers, not a cut in benefits to seniors. She points out the cuts finance the ACA, which provides benefits for seniors such as free preventive care. http://bit.ly/1bmNa7F

HAIL TO THE CHIEFS -– Mount Sinai Health System has named four new hospital presidents, part of the ongoing effort to absorb what was once Continuum. Dr. Evan Flatow, an expert in shoulder surgery, will take over at Mount Sinai Roosevelt next month. Arthur Gianelli, who was pushed aside at NuHealth, takes over Mount Sinai St. Luke’s. Lin Mo, leaves his job as president and CEO of New York Community Hospital, part of the New York-Presbyterian Healthcare System to serve as president of Mount Sinai Beth Israel Brooklyn. Susan Somerville comes from North Shore University Hospital and will become president of Mount Sinai Beth Israel. http://bit.ly/1crYTQO

CME -– Medscape is offering 1 CME credit for an online course geared toward small practices that will help them better manage the ICD-10 transition. http://bit.ly/1bMSQs9

HOSPITAL BANKRUPTCY –- Long Beach Hospital has filed for bankruptcy, according to Newsday. The hospital has been closed since Hurricane Sandy, more than a 14 months ago and the move was expected, the article said. http://bit.ly/1nP9Rli

JOB OPENING –- Albany Medical Center announced a career fair for nurses on Feb. 27 from 4 p.m. to 7 p.m. http://bit.ly/ObxBWC

WHAT WE’RE READING -- Dan Diamond’s piece for California Healthline, which takes a look at the number of young invincibles signing up for Obamacare across the nation. So far, about 1 out of 4 enrollees are under 35. That’s well below the 40 percent the administration had hoped for. Diamond offers some reason why the numbers have lagged behind expectations and argues it is unlikely they will catch up in 2014. But that’s fine, he writes, for the first year. Even though the percentage is lower than anticipated, it is high enough to avoid the dreaded “death spiral.” One other point worth mentioning: there is no national risk pool. Because states run their own exchange, there are 51 separate risk pools and each needs a good mix of young, health enrollees to remain viable. http://bit.ly/1jJAGHh

BILL TRACKER -– Check out Capital's bill tracker, a daily guide to the flow of the New York state Legislature. http://capi.tl/1aqE6OB

TODAY'S TIP –- Comes from Blue Cross Blue Shield of Western New York, which reminds us that “cold temperatures can be damaging to our skin. Here's 10 simple tips for protecting your skin this winter!” bit.ly/N3bZKS

STUDY THIS:

- LOCATION, LOCATION, LOCATION –- Researchers at Columbia's Mailman School of Public Health found that LGB individuals who lived in communities with high levels of anti-gay sentiment had a shorter life expectancy. They lived, on average, 12 years less than their peers, according to an article published in Social Science & Medicine. “Our results for prejudice were comparable to life expectancy differences that have been observed between individuals with and without a high school education,” Dr. Mark Hatzenbuehler, assistant professor of Sociomedical Sciences, said in a press release. The study also demonstrated that suicide, homicide/violence, and cardiovascular diseases were all substantially elevated among sexual minorities in high-prejudice communities. http://1.usa.gov/NcamdC

-POSSIBLE CURE –- Researchers at Memorial Sloan Kettering found that 88 percent of patients with advanced leukemia experienced complete remission after being treated with a genetically modified version of their own immune cells. The results were published Wednesday in Science Translational Medicine. The researchers found that a patient's T cells could be reprogrammed to attack cancer cells that contained a protein called CD19. “These extraordinary results demonstrate that cell therapy is a powerful treatment for patients who have exhausted all conventional therapies,"Dr. Michel Sadelain, director of the Center for Cell Engineering at Memorial Sloan Kettering and one of the study’s senior authors, said in a press release. http://bit.ly/1h7IZuE

MISSED A ROUNDUP? Get caught up here: 2/19. 2/18, 2/14, 2/13, 2/12