SurfKY News Print

Print Email

MURRAY, Ky. (5/3/16) — Every year, National Nurses Week focuses attention on the diverse ways America's 3.1 million registered nurses work to save lives and to improve the health of millions of individuals.

This year, the American Nurses Association has selected "Culture of Safety – It Starts with YOU" as the theme for 2016. The ANA supports and encourages National Nurses Week recognition programs through the state and district nurses associations, other specialty nursing organizations, educational facilities, and independent health care companies and institutions.

Annually, National Nurses Week begins on May 6, marked as RN Recognition Day, and ends on May 12, the birthday of Florence Nightingale, founder of nursing as a modern profession. At Murray-Calloway County Hospital, several events and recognitions are planned. The main celebration will be a luncheon on Wednesday, May 11 for all nursing staff. Each nurse will receive a gift and drawings will be held for additional gifts. A uniform sale will also be held during the week.

Traditionally, National Nurses Week is devoted to highlighting the diverse ways in which registered nurses, who comprise the largest health care profession, are working to improve health care. From bedside nursing in hospitals and long-term care facilities to the halls of research institutions, state legislatures, and Congress, the depth and breadth of the nursing profession is meeting the expanding health care needs of American society.

As the Affordable Care Act is fully implemented, nurses will be more crucial than ever, leading efforts to expand primary care at community-based clinics and deliver more efficient and cost-effective care as members of collaborative health care teams. Consider that:

• Nursing is the nation’s largest health care profession, with nearly three million employed professionals.



• Nursing is projected to grow faster than all other occupations: The federal government projects more than one million new RNs will be needed by 2022 to fill new jobs and replace RNs who leave the profession.



• Demand for nursing care will grow rapidly as Baby Boomers swell Medicare enrollment by 50 percent by 2025 and millions of individuals obtain new or better access to care under the health care reform law.



• Nurses are rapidly creating and expanding new job roles – such as nurse navigators, care coordinator specialists, and nurse wellness coaches -- to help patients secure resources, obtain seamless comprehensive care, and develop healthy lifestyle practices.

Wherever health care is provided, a nurse is likely to be there - hospitals, ambulatory care centers, private practices, retail and urgent care clinics, nurse-managed health centers, homes, schools, nursing homes, and public and nonprofit agencies.

SurfKY News

Information provided by Madison Utley

© Copyright 2008 - 2016 SurfKY News Group, Inc. All rights reserved.

This material may not be published, broadcast, or rewritten without permission.

Click here to subscribe to receive daily updates by email.