With her party in disarray at the national level, New Hampshire Republican Party Chairwoman Jennifer Horn is holding fast to her belief that whoever wins the GOP nomination will win the presidency in November.

Horn on Friday declined to address former New Hampshire Sen. Judd Gregg’s blast of Sen. Ted Cruz a day earlier. Gregg called Cruz “a demagogue’s demagogue,” “a person of little character” and someone the lifelong Republican would not support in a general election.

Gregg said that he could bring himself to vote for Donald Trump in the general election, but not Cruz. If the Texas senator is the nominee, Gregg said, “I’d write in (U.S. House Speaker) Paul Ryan before I’d vote for Ted Cruz.”

After reviewing Gregg’s comments, as first reported by WMUR.com, Horn gave a measured response that deflected to criticism of Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton.

While Gregg blasted Cruz, Horn has in the past been deeply critical of GOP frontrunner Trump.

In December, she labeled as “un-American” Trump’s call for a temporary “total and complete shutdown” of Muslims entering the United States.

Last November, she said Trump’s “bombast and divisive rhetoric” would probably fail in New Hampshire. Trump won the New Hampshire primary.

In August, when Trump made controversial comments about Fox News debate moderator Megyn Kelly, Horn called him “disrespectful to women.”

And in July, when Trump said Sen. John McCain was “not a war hero,” Horn called his comment “disgraceful.”

But as an unbound delegate to the Republican National Convention in July, Horn said she will remain neutral until she gets to Cleveland, and perhaps even until the first ballots for a presidential nominee are cast.

Gregg has decided not to go to the convention, telling WMUR.com on Friday he is “not excited about the direction the convention is going.”

A Cruz New Hampshire campaign co-chairman, former New Hampshire House Speaker William O’Brien, brushed aside both Gregg’s comments and those of former U.S. House Speaker John Boehner, who on Wednesday described Cruz as “Lucifer in the flesh.”

“Unfortunately in this cycle, we’ve come to a point where name-calling is substituted for political analysis and substituted for policy analysis,” O’Brien told WMUR political director Josh McElveen during a taping of this week’s “CloseUP” program, which airs on Sunday at 10 a.m.

O’Brien and Ovide Lamontagne, state chairman for Carly Fiorina’s former presidential campaign, praised the new alliance between Cruz and Fiorina, in which Fiorina agreed to become Cruz’s running mate should he win the nomination.

Lamontagne and O’Brien said the two comprise a ticket rooted in principled conservatism.

“We’re having a very robust conversation within the family of the Republican Party,” Lamontagne said. But he said that if Trump wins the nomination, “I’m going to get behind him.”

O’Brien would not go that far, calling Trump “erratic, impulsive, ill-informed."

Sen. Kelly Ayotte, ramping up a tough re-election campaign, wanted no part of name-calling.

“When you have a vigorous primary, it’s not uncommon for people to have these kinds of fights,” she told McElveen on Friday.

Ayotte noted that she has had disagreements with Cruz, particularly on the 2013 government shutdown, which was fueled by Cruz’s insistence that President Obama agree to defund the Affordable Care Act.

“I’ve directly addressed Senator Cruz” on the shutdown, Ayotte said. And, she said, she will not hesitate to be “very clear where I agree or disagree” with the eventual nominee and president.

Ayotte also stood by her earlier comments on support for the nominee.

“I said from the beginning that I plan to support the Republican nominee,” she said, while also stressing that she’s focusing on her re-election bid.

Horn said that despite the party infighting at the national level, her party’s Senate nominee will defeat Democratic Gov. Maggie Hassan in November. She said Hassan has been a failed governor “and has not earned a promotion.”

WMUR.com spoke with another veteran traditional New Hampshire Republican about the current state of affairs in his party.

Former U.S. Rep. Charlie Bass said, “I don’t think there has ever been a nominating process like this, in which two such unusual individuals have turned out to be the frontrunners.”

Bass said that while the “establishment” is being criticized by both Trump and Cruz, “I define the establishment as the people who go to the meetings and volunteer for campaigns. The establishment is not the elites. It is the people in every town and city in New Hampshire who are making the party work. And these candidates seem to have no respect for the work of these people.”

Bass said Trump and Cruz “are the consequences of our own weakness. The Republican Party has not been what the people have expected from us. It started with the Tea Party movement, and now we have what I call the ‘I Can’t Take it Anymore’ movement.”

“I think Ted Cruz defines raw ambition,” Bass said. “He never cared about establishing relationships in the Senate. His agenda has been about him.”

Bass said he is supporting Kasich, but he said, “I’m a Republican and I’m going to support the Republican ticket, be it Cruz or Trump or Kasich.”

Bass’s advice to Ayotte and other New Hampshire Republicans who run on the ticket with Trump or Cruz is to be “your own candidate.”

“You don’t pick the Republican nominee. You support the nominee because he is part of the team, but you don’t have to agree with the nominee up and down the line.”

“She’s going to weather the weather,” Bass said of Ayotte. “She has her own record to talk about and the voters will decide. It’s a game of draw poker and you don’t get to pick the cards you draw.”