Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Although Democrats in blue-leaning Michigan are hoping to oust Republican Governor Rick Snyder, a USA TODAY/Suffolk University poll shows he is in a statistical tie with Democrat Mark Schauer. VPC

Democratic ex-congressman Mark Schauer, left, is challenging incumbent Republican Gov. Rick Snyder. (Photo: AP)

Michigan voters think the state's economy is improving, but that doesn't seem to be benefiting Republican Gov. Rick Snyder, whose re-election race is a tossup, a new USA TODAY/Suffolk University poll shows.

The poll of 500 likely voters, released Thursday, shows Democrat Mark Schauer leading Snyder 45% to 43%, a statistical tie.

In the state's race for an open U.S. Senate seat, Democratic Rep. Gary Peters has a 9-point lead over former secretary of State Terri Lynn Land, a Republican, 46% to 37%.

Democrats would really like to oust Snyder, a governor who won blue-leaning Michigan in the Tea Party wave of 2010. Calling himself "one tough nerd,'' he promised to improve Michigan's economy and passed a right-to-work law and a tax on some pensions. Schauer, a former state legislator and U.S. congressman, argues that Snyder's reforms have not benefited middle-class residents. He says he will deliver a middle-class tax cut and increase spending on education.

Just over half of poll respondents, or 51%, think Michigan's economy is improving — which should be good news for Snyder. The fact that the governor's race is still so tight "tells me he hasn't connected effectively with likely voters,'' says David Paleologos, director of the Suffolk University Political Research Center.

New USA TODAY/Suffolk University poll on Michigan's Senate and governor races. (Photo: Frank Pompa)

Republicans would like to take the Senate seat left open by the retirement of Democratic Sen. Carl Levin. The GOP needs to add six Senate seats to take the majority — and Michigan voters seem well aware of it: 63% of the respondents in the poll said control of Congress is a factor in their choice.

Mary Kiser, 71, of Dearborn Heights, says she is voting for Land because the Affordable Care Act, championed by Democrats, is causing changes to Medicare that affect her. Co-pays are higher, she said in a telephone interview after the poll was conducted. "They're cutting back on old people. You don't realize it, but if you 're watching it you can see what 's happening. We're paying for drugs now that were covered before,'' she says.

Peters leads Land 52%-32% among women in the poll, not unusual for a Democratic candidate. Land leads among men 42%-39%. "Peters is holding his own among men,'' Paleologos says.

Wayne Wilbert, 52, a union worker at the Canada border crossing who lives in St. Clair Shores, says he voted Republican from President Reagan to President George W. Bush but will vote for Peters this November. "I just began to realize, wait a minute, these (Republicans) do not have my interests at heart. They're screwing me while they're just giving everything to big business and the rich.''

The poll was conducted Sept. 6-10 and has a margin of error of 4.4%.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1rYgBVH