A large crowd of county workers on strike shut down public libraries Wednesday afternoon and descended on the Solano County administration building in Fairfield, demanding a new labor contract.

Sheriff’s deputies estimated the crowd at 700 to 1,000 people, but not all were county workers. The county’s human resources director said about 500 people did not report to work Wednesday.

The workers, represented by Service Employees International Union, said they have been in negotiations with the county since July.

“We’re trying to get a fair contract for our members, and we want them to bargain with us fairly,” said Nadeen Roach, an SEIU member who said her job at the county is to help people wanting to enroll for a health plan under the Affordable Care Act.

Solano County’s Human Resources Director Marc Fox said there are six sticking points in the negotiations, but the workers have been offered a fair contract.

“The county has offered a 3-percent wage increase immediately and a 3-percent wage increase in October of next year,” he explained. “The union has asked for more. The county has offered continuation of health insurance with inflation factored in for 2016 and 2017. The union has asked for more.”

The full impacts of the strike were difficult to measure Wednesday. Some of those protesting were social workers who tend to the elderly and disabled and check on at-risk children.

“Right now, all my clients are aged, blind and disabled,” said Akbar Bibb, a social worker who is also president of the local SEIU chapter. “So, right now, me being out here, I’m not able to serve my clients.”

Some county residents trying to use the Fairfield Civic Center Library Wednesday were not happy with the strike. Because of a lack of workers, the branch and four other libraries in the county were closed.

“They shouldn’t be doing this,” said Fairfield resident Bob Albrecht, who was able to return books, but couldn’t check any out. “They should allow people to get books all the time.”

The strike was a one-day event and workers will report to work Thursday, union representatives said.