One of the unintended, but not surprising, impacts of millions more people covered under the Affordable Care Act is the shortage of doctors to treat everyone. Many more people are also eligible under expanded Medicaid coverage, but the number of doctors that accept it is even smaller. For people in rural areas, the challenge is greater as there is often not a doctor in town and they must travel long distances to see one even if they are able to get an appointment. This has led to a rapid expansion of the use of telemedicine across the nation.

Telemedicine has been in existence in some form for approximately 40 years. As defined by the American Telemed Association, telemedicine refers to “the use of medical information exchanged from one site to another via electronic communications to improve a patient’s clinical health status.” The form of electronic communication has evolved from a simple phone conversation to current technologies of closed circuit video conferencing, laptop computers and smartphone apps.

Telemedicine allows for consultations between medical professionals as well as with patients. It provides convenient access to experts, delivery of vital medical information, and for patient follow up. It is used by the military to treat soldiers with traumatic injuries and allows patients in China to have access to expert medical teams in the United States.

Two major health insurers are joining the push by expanding their already existing telemed services. UnitedHealth Group and Blue Cross-Blue Shield will offer non-emergency, 24 hour services to 40 million more people by the end of next year. This will give their customers access to such things nurse lines, often as an included service at no charge. Registered nurses, who are available 24 hours a day, will be able to discuss symptoms over the phone and offer advice, including going to the nearest doctor or emergency room if necessary. They also follow up with the patient to make sure their issue was resolved.

Currently 25 states allow the use of telemed, with many requiring services to be covered by insurance. However, even without insurance, using the service can be a substantial savings to an office visit. The extent of the types of services available to patients varies by state. Doctors in some states are permitted to prescribe medications, while others don’t or limit the kinds that can be prescribed. Others only allow the use of these services during follow up appointments, requiring that the doctor sees the patient in person for initial diagnoses.

In December, Walgreens began testing a telemedicine smartphone app which linked participating doctors and patients via the telehealth service provider MDLIVE. The pilot program began in California and Michigan and allowed patients 24/7 access to U.S. board certified doctors. This month, Walgreens announced that the app is now available on laptops and tablets and will expand to the all 25 states that allow the use of telemedicine by the end of this year. Legislation has also been introduced in Congress to have telehealth services covered under Medicare, as well as for veterans.

While telehealth services expands access, it is not appropriate in all cases. Furthermore, in most cases, follow up is required with an office visit. However, being able to consult with a nurse or doctor via webcam or phone can improve patient health and safety in many areas, especially for chronic conditions. It can improve relationships with healthcare providers, much like house calls did decades ago.

Photo credit: Thinkstock