Buy Photo Megan Ryan, a senior at University of Wisconsin-Green Bay, holds a sign as she participates at a March rally against proposed cuts to the UW System. (Photo: Evan Siegle/Gannett Wisconsin Media)Buy Photo

In all of the debate over the cuts to the University of Wisconsin System in Gov. Scott Walker’s budget plan, the group that has the most at stake is the most often overlooked:

Students.

Walker has proposed cutting state funding for the UW System by about $300 million over the two-year, 2015-17 budget. That’s about 13 percent of the current $1.2 billion yearly state funding. State money makes up about 20 percent of the System’s $6 billion budget, although about $3.7 billion is restricted funding, such as federal grants or student loans.

In exchange, the governor said, he wants to create a public authority, which would give UW more autonomy to manage its budgets and freedom from legislative mandates. And he would extend the two-year tuition freeze another two years.

Since Walker announced his budget plan in early February, the UW cuts have been the hottest topic and have led to further developments:

Walker’s plan initially changed the language in state statutes about the mission of the university, stressing career readiness but also taking out wording that reflected the time-honored Wisconsin Idea — that it should “extend knowledge and its application beyond the boundaries of its campus” and that “basic to every purpose of the system is the search for truth.” After public outcry, the governor backed off, saying his instructions had been misinterpreted when the budget bill was written.

Many UW System chancellors pushed back at the cuts, particularly UW-Madison Chancellor Rebecca Blank, who said they would damage the university’s reputation and further hinder its ability to attract and retain faculty.

The UW Board of Regents pushed back, too, with Regent Margaret Farrow — a former Republican legislator and lieutenant governor and the mother of state Sen. Paul Farrow, a Republican leader — saying, “It’s been cut, cut, cut and now this enormous hatchet job.”

UW System President Ray Cross walked a narrow line between a governor and legislators he doesn’t want the System to further alienate and the campuses he oversees. But he, too, bristled at Walker’s suggestion that UW professors need to work harder and teach more classes. And he recently said he’ll resign if the $300 million cut is in the final version of the budget, along with the end of tenure, shared governance and academic freedom.

Meanwhile, legislators of both parties are saying the cuts are wrong (the Democratic view) or cut too deeply (the view of some Republicans). Both Senate President Scott Fitzgerald and Assembly Speaker Robin Vos have expressed concerns about them.

It’s not that students have been totally forgotten in all of this. But if the primary goal of public higher education in Wisconsin is to give as many students as possible the ability to get a high-quality education as affordably as possible — and it should be — that goal can help guide these UW budget decisions.

No, now is not the time to cut state funding of the UW System that deeply, even though it’s a small percentage of the overall budget. We want — we need — more college-educated adults in Wisconsin, which still trails the average percentage among states.

The cuts would be particularly impactful at the two-year UW Colleges, like UW-Fox Valley in Menasha. These are our most cost-efficient campuses for students. UWFox’s budget is 96 percent personnel costs. A cut would mean staff losses, bigger class sizes and, perhaps, fewer course offerings.

Vos has said one of his concerns about the proposed cuts is that it would make it tougher for students to graduate in four years. It’s a valid concern.

It’s also a fact that UW faculty pay, particularly outside of Madison, is below the pay at their peer-group colleges. That has an impact on educational quality, as well as the UW-Madison research that’s invaluable to the state’s economy.

Yes, reducing or eliminating the UW cut means that money will have to be cut somewhere else in the budget.

Here’s one suggestion: The Manufacturing and Agriculture Tax Credit, which was part of the 2011-13 budget, is projected to cost the state more than double what originally projected, according to the Legislative Fiscal Bureau. Because of its structure, it’s been called “a total giveaway to the wealthy.” The added cost in the next budget? About $275 million.

There’s one more factor in Walker’s plan that could have a negative effect on students. The intended flexibility for the UW System to manage its own budgets would include — at this point, at least — the ability to set its own tuition after the 2015-17 budget.

If that results in a large tuition increase to make up for four years of freezes, it would show that the governor and Legislature were wrong to trust UW with its new freedom.

It would also show that whatever savings the state is able to make — or whatever funding the System is able to salvage — was achieved on the backs of those who could afford it least:

Students.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1bFn1T3