Tony Wolters attended Big League U for six days, taking a crash course on the major leagues. The Rockies rookie catcher sat in the dugout, studiously taking notes on a pad of paper, waiting for his turn behind the plate.

His chance came Sunday. Wolters, the 23-year-old former infielder who had never played above Double-A, started his first game. He passed.

“That first pitch, my knees were shaking,” Wolters said. A single to right field off San Diego’s James Shields in the fifth inning marked Wolters’ first hit.

But his throw to second to catch Alexei Ramirez trying to steal in the seventh was the highlight in Wolters’ mind.

“I loved it. If I have a chance, no one will steal on me,” he said.

Wolters helped Rockies right-hander Chad Bettis work through seven innings in shutting down the Padres, after they collaborated for two days on a gameplan.

Two years ago, Wolters was a minor-league middle infielder, until Cleveland manager Terry Francona convinced him to change. He flashed a shortstop’s hands twice in the second inning, tracking back to catch two pop-ups, from Wil Myers and Ramirez.

“He took control,” Bettis said. “There weren’t many shakes. We clicked well together.”

De La Rosa struggling. The Rockies somehow made it through nine innings Saturday in a blowout loss to the Padres — a minor miracle in itself when you’re on the wrong side of a 16-3 score — but it left them with plenty of pitching problems going forward.

No. 1 starter Jorge De La Rosa struggled again, throwing just four innings. In two starts this season, De La Rosa allowed 12 runs in just 8 2/3 innings.

“He didn’t look like himself,” manager Walt Weiss said. “The fastball command was very un-typical. His velocity looked a tick down. He went very soft, a lot of changeups.”

De La Rosa, who walked five batters in the loss, left the clubhouse Saturday night without speaking. Weiss insisted the left-hander was healthy and strong after throwing 97 pitches, even if his velocity was down.

“It just looked like he was laboring from the get-go,” Weiss said. “I guess you can say he got stretched out a little bit, but that’s not the formula we’re looking for here.”

De La Rosa in his career struggles out of the gate. He has a 4.96 in the first half of seasons, but 4.19 in the second half. “He’s a notoriously slow starter, so we’ll keep that in mind,” Weiss said.

De La Rosa’s abbreviated outings left the Rockies with a ragged bullpen. They used four pitchers in relief Saturday, forcing Chris Rusin and Miguel Castro to throw two innings apiece. Castro, though, bounced back for another scoreless inning Sunday.

“The last couple nights, we were just trying to get through the game,” Weiss said. “We have the pieces to match up, but you have to get into a position to do it.”

Bergman in the rotation. Right-hander Christian Bergman is penciled in to start Thursday for the Rockies against the Giants, moving from his long-relief role in the bullpen into the rotation. He would be the Rockies’ fifth starter — but only if they don’t need him in relief before then.

Jon Gray (abdominal strain) pitched 4 innings Sunday in a rehab start for Single-A Modesto, giving up two runs on four hits. If another rehab start goes well, Gray will take back Bergman’s place in the rotation.

Footnotes. James Shields had won four consecutive games against the Rockies before losing Sunday. He’s now 6-2 with a 4.75 ERA in nine starts at Coors Field… Carlos Gonzalez extended a hitting streak, dating to last season, to 16 games. Trevor Story has hit safely in all six games this season (seven home runs, two singles).

Looking Ahead

Monday: Off

Tuesday: Giants RHP Jeff Samardzija (0-0, 5.06 ERA) at Rockies RHP Tyler Chatwood (1-0, 1.42), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Giants RHP Jake Peavy (0-0, 7.20) at Rockies RHP Jordan Lyles (0-1, 13.50), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Thursday: Giants RHP Matt Cain (0-0, 3.00) at Rockies RHP Christian Bergman (0-1, 12.00), 1:10 p.m., ROOT