This post has been updated.

“It’s been said that our military has basically become a pension, benefit, health-care company that occasionally fights a war,” Jason Grumet commented this week on C-SPAN, discussing the newly released report from the Military Compensation and Retirement Modernization Commission.

It may have been said, but it’s inaccurate. In his comment, Grumet, president of the Bipartisan Policy Center, mangled a quote from combat veteran Arnold Punaro, now a defense consultant and advocate of military reform. What the retired general has said in various interviews is this: “If we allow the current trend to continue, we’re going to turn the Department of Defense into a benefits company that occasionally kills a terrorist.”

Punaro’s statement is a warning for the future, not an assessment of the present. He has also said that reforms to military compensation should not reduce benefits of troops currently serving. This concept doesn’t get quoted nearly enough.

The findings of the MCRMC, a nine-member panel created by Congress, are being discussed this week on social media, around military family tables and on Capitol Hill.

In hearings before the Senate Armed Services Committee on Tuesday, members of the panel set the record straight about more widespread misinformation concerning military benefits.

“There’s a huge misunderstanding as to how much is really being spent on our military personnel as part of the defense budget,” said Dov Zakheim, commissioner and former Department of the Defense comptroller. “People think it’s 50 percent. It’s not. It’s 29 percent.”

The commission’s purpose was to suggest benefit reforms that would aid recruitment and retention in the military, not to cut costs. However, the panel estimates their 15 recommendations could save the government $5 billion next year, and possibly $10.4 billion a year by 2020.

Another commissioner, former Sen. Bob Kerrey, added that Social Security and Medicare, not military compensation, are the “crushing” spenders of federal dollars. “It would be unfair to identify military retirement as the big problem, because it isn’t,” Kerrey said. “To address military retirement without going after Social Security and Medicare is basically saying we would balance the budget on the backs of our military retirees, and that would be the wrong thing to do and send a terrible signal.”

My initial reaction to the MCRMC findings was positive. Most of their conclusions speak to my experiences, either in my own military life or as an observer and reporter of this way of life. The recommendations include giving more choices to military members about their pensions and health care, consolidating exchanges and commissaries, streamlining various GI Bill provisions and offering more options for survivor benefits and Space-A travel. Current active-duty pay structures would be left intact.

The panel suggests a new retirement structure that would include individual investment and portability, as well as federal contributions. Instead of an automatic system that offers a pension at 20 years and not a minute sooner,servicemembers would have a stake in their own retirement planning.

If the MCRMC recommendations become reality, Tricare would be effectively dismantled. Military families would choose their health-care coverage and providers based on the needs of their own families. Active-duty members would receive a basic allowance for health care to cover premiums and some out-of-pocket costs.

Under the MCRMC plan, military members would be free from Tricare and could cover their adult children up to age 26 at no extra cost, as mandated for private insurance by the Affordable Care Act. Since Tricare is exempt from the ACA, military members currently must pay thousands yearly to cover adult children.

The commission’s findings, based on two years of research that included surveys and input from 150,000 military members and installation visits, are just suggestions for now. Before these measures can change military life, they will have to be written into legislation, approved by the House, the Senate and the White House — formidable barriers indeed, particularly since President Barack Obama released his own budget this week, revealing different ideas about military benefits.

Obama’s budget includes a revamped Tricare that, like the MCRMC plan, would require more out-of-pocket costs for military families, especially for retirees. The president’s plan did not include any changes to military pensions, but would reduce the commissary budget and the already-shrinking housing allowances for active duty.

Some of the recommendations, from the president and the congressional panel, seem more likely to save money for the government than for military families, notably the changes to retiree health care. While the MCRMC’s new pension plan would grandfather in military members currently serving and retirees, their health care plan does not, nor does the president’s.

In the MCRMC plan, retirees under age 65 would pay incrementally increasing premiums. The president’s plan would require substantially more premiums for retirees, as well as copays, even for using military treatment facilities.

At the same time, Obama’s budget calls for some cuts to Medicare, but no real changes to Social Security.

Think of the headlines, if cuts — similar to those proposed for military families — were being applied to civilian entitlements. We’d see much more news coverage than we will ever see about potential cuts to the already-earned pensions and benefits of military members. Our leaders say they want reforms that aid recruitment and retention. Perhaps they don’t consider treatment of retirees essential to that purpose, but it is. Reducing benefits for those who have already served sends a clear message to present and future military members, that promises were made to be broken.

The proposals of the MCRMC appear grounded in good research and offer much more flexibility for military families in their active-duty lives. However, any changes that reduce benefits should not be applied to those who have already paid for those benefits with years of service

As our leaders consider these recommendations, they should remember those who have already borne the battle. If the way forward for military compensation involves breaking promises to those who’ve already served, it will certainly discourage new recruits from trusting their future and their families to a shiny new set of promises.