Attendance on Demand The deadline is quickly approaching and many facilities are still unclear about their PBJ reporting strategy

Attendance on Demand, Inc. is pleased to announce a new solution for Payroll-Based Journal (PBJ) reporting. Beginning in July 2016, long-term care (LTC) facilities will be required to report staffing and census information quarterly through PBJ to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS).

“The deadline is quickly approaching and many facilities are still unclear about their PBJ reporting strategy,” said Beth Baerman, Director of Communication at Attendance on Demand, Inc. “Attendance on Demand can help remove the burden of PBJ reporting. It also automates status determination for the Affordable Care Act (ACA), and ongoing evaluation of variable hour employees – common in healthcare.”

In addition to census data, CMS expects detailed accounts of each employee’s service, including job title, services performed, and daily number of hours worked. As a registered vendor with CMS, Attendance on Demand automatically collects the required reporting information and meets the PBJ’s technical specifications for successful submission. It produces the formatted upload file, which includes:



Employee ID

Hire Date

Termination Date

Work Type

Pay Type

Hours Worked

Job Title and Labor Category Code

With the reporting deadline looming, LTC facilities need to begin preparing for PBJ reporting. Rather than opting for error-prone manual entry, facilities are wise to choose data upload from a time and attendance system—the most reliable way to generate the daily worked-hours information required.

About Attendance on Demand

Attendance on Demand supports the labor management needs of thousands of companies and more than three-quarters of a million employees across North America. Launched in 2006, Attendance on Demand is a rapidly deployed, cloud-based solution that minimizes a company's risk and technology investment while providing advanced features for securely managing labor data—calculating pay rules, scheduling employees, budgeting labor, automating recordkeeping for labor law compliance and managing employee status and reporting for the Affordable Care Act. With standard uptime over the industry average of 99.995% and above average customer retention rates, Attendance on Demand removes the worry of maintaining expensive infrastructure. An extensive North American distribution network helps organizations use Attendance on Demand to reduce labor expenses and improve decision making.

http://www.attendanceondemand.com

800-465-9980