A group of some of Colorado’s most enthusiastic aerospace evangelists took to the road this week to spread the gospel of the state’s space business economy and all the opportunities it offers to even the smallest communities in the state’s most remote areas.

The Colorado Space Business Roundtable road trip takes place a couple times per year, visiting rural areas of the state to bring together aerospace business leaders, state eco/devo folks and STEM advocates with small businesses owners, college students and entrepreneurs. This week’s tour is traveling throughout southeastern Colorado to Trinidad, La Junta, Lamar and Limon.

We arrived Tuesday evening in Trinidad, a town of about 9,000 people located about 13 miles north of the New Mexico border. One of the first things that happened: Getting scolded by Trinidad Mayor Joe Reorda for using my phone for research while folks were milling around prior to the Colorado Space Business Roundtable presentation. Of course, at the time, I didn’t know he was the mayor. I just thought he was a guy who doesn’t like phones.

Turns out he likes phones, but doesn’t quite understand technology — he said he had to have a kindergartner explain how to use his new laptop. He’s also committed to bringing industry to the town. In the short time we spent together over the last two days, he’s mentioned his strong support of both fracking (“I realize that fracking is going to cause pollution — we’re all that smart. So we have to decide if we’re going to starve to death or get a little pollution.”) and legal marijuana (“It’s medicine,” he said, citing the examples of successful treatment of seizures with the high-cannabidiol strain Charlotte’s Web).

Those industries aren’t common bedfellows. But the town has taken some hits, the most recent being the layoff of 100 Pioneer Natural Resources oil workers in May.

People here work hard to survive: The director of the ambulance service is also the country coroner; an independent news publisher also works with an interactive media company that creates virtual reality experiences. Career multi-tasking is a way of life, a mode of survival, and driven by a sense of commitment: it seems everyone who lives here loves this town, which creates a sense of togetherness and unity.

But back to the space stuff: One of the stops along the way was at Topar Racing. Topar’s 50-plus employees manufacture parts for dirt bikes and racing motorcycles and anything else anyone needs. The company has grown into a full-scale machine shop that ships products to seven countries. And they’ve worked with aerospace giant Lockheed Martin — whose Space Systems division is headquartered in the Denver metro area — on some small contracts.

“You know how it is in a little town: you have to do a lot of stuff to stay afloat … pretty much anything you want, we can get,” said Tony Paradisa, owner of Topar Racing.

One of the purposes of the road trip is to show companies that aerospace work doesn’t have to always take place in Denver and that they, too, can get into the industry’s supply chain. In a place like Trinidad, this could make a big difference.

“The gas industry in Trinidad probably isn’t going to sustain a whole lot of people right now because it’s like a big roller coaster,” Paradisa said. “Trinidad needs to get something steady … I think that it would be really good to get something so you can hire more educated, quality people in Trinidad.”