Good Thursday Morning, Fellow Seekers.

For roughly the 2,347th time, the Republican-controlled U.S. House of Representatives has voted to repeal Obamacare, bravely flinging itself upon the battlements in a gesture so futile and pointless that they might as well be fighting in France c. 1914.

Shocking exactly no one, the House's 240-181 vote on Wednesday broke down along mostly party lines.

And, shocking exactly no one either, President Barack Obama has vowed to veto the bill. The bill had earlier passed the Republican-controlled Senate in a process known as "reconciliation" in order to duck a Democratic filibuster.

As an added bonus, the bill also bars any federal money for Planned Parenthood, as Congressional conservatives had been vowing to do ever since a series of heavily edited, though nonetheless appalling, videos on the sale of fetal tissue touched off a new fight in the Culture Wars.

As CNN reports, Planned Parenthood has denied any wrongdoing.

Because we're a full-service operation, here's how your members of Congress voted on the lightning-rod legislation. You can send brickbats or laurels, according to your conscience:

Voting aye were Republican U.S. Reps. Lou Barletta; Charlie Dent; Mike Kelly; Tom Marino, Glenn G.T. Thompson; Scott Perry; Mike Fitzpatrick; Pat Meehan; Bill Shuster; Tom Marino; Keith Rothfus; Ryan Costello; Tim Murphy and Joe Pitts.

No votes were U.S. Reps. Brendan Boyle; Bob Brady; Chaka Fattah; Mike Doyle and Matt Cartwright.

The rest of the day's news starts now.

Something something something controversial Kathleen Kane something something.

State Sen. Rob Teplitz is running for re-election in what's expected to be a hard fought race.

And this year's special elections, thankfully, will coincide with the spring primary, saving the taxpayers some dough.

No, you didn't win Powerball. But no one else did either, PhillyMag reminds us this morning.

PennLive's Candy Woodall looks at how much new regs will cost the Shale industry.

It could be a while before we see any progress in the corruption case against ex-Harrisburg Mayor Steve Reed, WITF-FM reports.

Here's all need to know about Big City politics: Get criticized for being bad at your $136,161-a-year job - keep it anyway. NewsWorks/WHYY-FM has the story.

The FBI probe of Allentown City Hall has cast a shadow over the hiring of a new arena chief, The Morning Call reports.

PoliticsPA rounds up Congressional reaction to the POTUS' executive action on guns.

With gas prices dropping, cities are embracing big-ticket transit projects, Stateline.org reports.

President Barack Obama has burned through more chiefs of staff than any of his predecessors. Politico explains why.

Here's The National Journal on the six questions that will decide the 2016 election.

WolfWatch.

With nothing much else going on, Gov. Tom Wolf heads to Pittsburgh today for a 1 p.m. appearance at AlphaLab Gear to tout his "Jobs that Pay" initiative.

Heavy Rotation.

Here's an old favorite from Crowded House that popped up on the way to work this morning. It's "Weather With You," caught live on UK TV.

Thursday's Gratuitous Hockey Link.

We stayed up late for this? Vancouver edged Carolina 3-2 on Wednesday in goaltender Eddie Lack's first appearance since being traded from the Canucks to the 'Canes last year.

And now you're up to date. See you all back here in a bit.