By William Haupt III | Watchdog Arena

“What good is reading the bill if it’s a thousand pages and you don’t have two days and two lawyers to find out what it means after you read the bill?” ~Congressman, John Conyers, D-MI

When a thousand people die in a natural disaster, it’s a tragedy that grabs world-wide headlines.

Retelling stories of these catastrophes is big news. Reporters around the globe arrive within hours. Capturing an exclusive for the API or “catching-a-video” for nightly news keeps advertisers happy. But this media attention is short-term. Once the panic over, it is old news. The real story begins with rebuilding these areas and the new confidence the people have gained, knowing they will be better prepared for the future.

“The biggest emotion in creation is the bridge to optimism.” ~B. May

These disasters are shocking because they descend upon the defenseless and innocent. That makes headlines. But as millions of people die slow, painful deaths in our great country, few take notice. This is ignominious!

Most of their ailments can be treated if they had access to medical care. These are not homeless paupers, or uninsured derelicts. These are middle class, gainfully employed citizens and responsible senior patriots. They are innocent victims of a progressive scam to dismantle our healthcare system and limit freedom of choice in our free market republic.

“The American people are being victimized more than any free market would warrant.” ~G. Smith

Yes, that’s exactly what’s happening today under our new drugs-and-denial for “sick care” system called Obamacare. This contrivance was intentionally developed to redistribute the health benefits of the middle class to progressive supporters. Under the guise of increasing health opportunities for all, and lowering costs, they simply bought more dependents and votes.

Under Obamacare, patients are remaining sick and diseased and worse since. Strategically vital health benefits they accessed freely before are limited or no longer available. Our medical system is now steeped in government mandates that forces denial rather than treatment for fear of federal reprisal for non-compliance.

“One practices medicine as a Hippocratic dedication, not as a federal dictation.” ~Tom Delay

These numbers dwarf the tragedies reported in the headlines when national disasters occur. The news media is still searching for obscure stories about how Obamacare saved some poor ol’ soul’s life. But they will never report the growing numbers who have had their lives cut short due to faulty healthcare.

They will keep up this charade until the entire system collapses. And it will! Obamacare is an “anti-free market mandate in a free market.” Americans must now buy insurance from a cabal of medical conglomerates fixated on profits over healthcare. They limited choice by destroying our local medical practitioners.

“Today in America free choice only applies to abortion.” ~W. Howel

We have all heard Obamacare has caused insurance prices to skyrocket, and how employers are cutting full-time jobs to avoid paying health benefits. We have also been alerted of the predicted shortage of physicians due to this crisis facing new medical school graduates. Our most adroit and brightest students are avoiding medical careers like the plague.

But the most serious consequence of Obamacare is the damage it has inflicted on our local doctors. And this has adversely affected thousands of patients. By imposing strict mandates and costly bureaucratic procedures on them, they are forcing private practice doctors out of business.

“Whatever you want to call it, fines, taxes, or penalties, it’s a big punch in the stomach for all doctors and patients.” ~Will Stephens

For decades, local community doctors were a pillar of strength in America. They freely accepted patients and answered emergency calls for the ill. Most insurance was accepted and payments were reduced for services not covered. No loyal patient was denied treatment.

Doctor-patient relationships lasted through life until death. They delivered a brand of medicine you could not buy at any pharmacy: Care, concern, and compassion. But on Christmas Eve 2009, this changed forever when an atomic bomb was dropped on our healthcare system by Horrible Harry and Nurse Nancy who announced:

“This bill is a Christmas present for the American people!”

Like it or not.

Since the passage of “ObamaScare” primary care physicians are evaporating faster than the Edsel. Older PCPs are retiring early while others are closing shop to work in hospitals. Since this monster passed, only 30 percent practice primary care and a fraction own their practices. To cut costs and meet federal demands local PCPs are forced to join forces to survive!

This has not only ruined primary care, it has vastly limited free choice and services. This consequently has also consumed most of our specialists. Due to this “act of Congress”, it is impossible to get a 2nd opinion since most work for the same company. When this was pointed out as a resulting failure of Obamacare to Nurse Nancy she retorted:

“I said better health coverage. I never said anything about more doctors.”

Amazingly, in one of our states, all oncologists now work for the same corporation. And once you are assigned to a physician it is for life! If you want a 2nd opinion, there is no place to go but the county hospital or the one teaching hospital they don’t control. And that is impossible for all rural residents.

If you choose to seek another opinion at one of these hospitals, they will not permit you back into their practice! For those with cancer in need of constant treatment and those seeking other life saving services, this can be fatal! One patient who needed urgent hematology waited 4 months only to be denied treatment without explanation. Dr. David Agus said:

“We may never understand illnesses such as cancer. But an ounce of prevention is worth more than a million pounds of cure.”

There has always been a shortage of good physicians, especially those providing primary care. This is especially true in rural areas. And this percentage is shrinking steadily.

As the shortage of primary care providers worsens it will literally drive the structure of medical practice closer towards “no choice” medicine daily. It will destroy the doctor-patient relationship and quality of service. We will be like all socialist-democracies; you are put on a waiting list to see a specialist and you must get a referral from a clinician if you are lucky!

This is a “Vegas crap shot” since you never know who you will see at a public infirmary. The clairvoyant Ben Franklin obviously saw this coming when he predicted:

“In this world nothing can be said to be certain, except death and taxes.”

Is it happenstance or a contrived reaction that more states are passing physician assisted suicide bills now since Obamacare passed?

California just signed a bill last week making them the fifth state to offer legal suicide, and there are half dozen more with bills pending. Are they now telling us it might be easier to die than find good medical care?

“Assisting a suicide is like taking a student out of school before finals. That’s not love; it’s projecting your own unfinished business” ~E. Ross

Now Obamacare has only one last burden to leave society: massive funeral debt. Undertakers are in such great demand; funeral expenses have skyrocketed in the past 5 years. Increased government regulations have even forced cost effective ‘Neptune Societies’ to raise prices.

With rising funeral costs and fewer undertakers, baby-boomers are caught in a life-death quagmire. With less chances for good medical care and increased burdens of debt facing their families, it costs too much to live and too much to die. One of Nurse Nancy’s claims about Obamacare came true: We now need more undertakers. “Democrats believe we must create jobs, not protect the special interests.”

This article was written by a contributor of Watchdog Arena, Franklin Center’s network of writers, bloggers, and citizen journalists.