Sadly, everything old is new again in race relations in America. Tuesday the headquarters of the Colorado Springs NAACP was bombed. The new movie “Selma” dramatizes the Civil Rights movement of the 1960s. Police are killing unarmed black Americans. The mayor of New York City, Bill de Blasio is at war with his own police officers because he advised his mixed-race son to be wary of them. The majority whip in the House of Representatives, Steve Scalise, a Louisiana Republican, is under fire for speaking at a meeting of a supremacist group associated with Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke.

Race never pops up on the radar as a priority in national polls. But racial attitudes add to the polarization of American politics because people use those beliefs to define themselves ideologically. If you ask people why they consider themselves conservatives, they often complain about government handouts to undeserving people. People won’t admit to racism, but you don’t have to probe very deeply to figure out that "welfare cheats" is code for blacks. And when I have discussed Obamacare with people in focus groups, a big concern has been a belief that undocumented Latino immigrants would be eligible for the benefits.



[SEE: 2014: The Year in Cartoons]

Racial issues deeply divide Americans. The country is split down the middle on questions dealing with the relationship between minority communities and police departments. Last month, pollsters for ABC News and the Washington Post asked people whether police departments treated minorities the same way as whites. Just more than half (53 percent) of the public is confident blacks receive the treatment as whites while just under half (46 percent) isn't.

The split along racial lines is dramatic. More than 6 in 10 (63 percent) whites think minorities are treated fairly but only a fifth (21 percent) of blacks do. When an important arm of local government engenders so little trust, conflict is inevitable.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Immigration]