With more than 25 years of experience in the marketing field, Longmont native Lori Jones is a marketing integration guru. The president and CEO of Avocet Communications has knowledge and experience in all aspects of marketing, advertising, PR, Internet and social media.

Her experience with national and local brands such as Big O Tires, Pentax Imaging, Papa John's Pizza, Arc Thrift Stores, Hain Celestial, Massage Envy and Orange Glo are proof of her strong understanding of today's consumer and marketplace.

We spoke with Jones at Avocet's newly renovated offices at 425 Main St. in Longmont. During the course of renovations, Jones and her team discovered long hidden art on the old brick walls that had been covered for decades.

Lori Jones is the president and CEO of Avocet Communications in Longmont. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

1. You've been in this business 25 years. How has the communications and marketing business changed during that time?

Drastically. I reckon it perhaps to when radio was first produced, or television was first produced. What we now have available to us via online channels has far surpassed what I think anybody in the early years of advertising would have expected.

2. So in terms of the bottom line, how has this affected your business, compared to five or 10 years ago?

The online channels are absolutely growing our business, just as they're growing marketers. Years ago, in 1989 when I got into the business, the rule of thumb was that somebody needed to see your marketing message three times to be impacted by it and begin a buying decision. Now that number is 20. And that number is 20 because of the social channels, the digital channels, because of content marketing, email, all those additional media types have totally changed the face of marketing as we see it today.

3. Let's take a step back. How did your company get started?

My father started the company. I was in school and he started his own agency, operating out of the basement of my parents' home. He asked me to join his firm. We had been working out of the home for about three months and we had been pitching a regional rental car agency, and we got a call telling us we were a finalist for that piece of business and this call came in on a Thursday. They said they wanted to come by the office and meet everyone, and then they'd make their final decision. So I'm looking down at the orange shag carpet in the basement office, and I'm thinking to myself we can't have this meeting at my parents home. So we went and found office space on Fourth Avenue right around the corner from where we are now, we signed a lease, bought some desks, we moved in on Sunday. We got family members to come in to the business to make us look larger than we actually were. We had the meeting Monday morning and we landed the business and worked with them for 15 years.

4. Are you what we would call a full-service communications company?

We are a full-service, integrated marketing communications company. By integrated what we mean is we provide services for every kind of marketing and media type out there. From branding to public relations and publicity, even crisis management, to traditional advertising development such as television spots, radio spots, print ads, to Internet marketing, all the different online channels, and of course social marketing.

We have 12 people that are diagonal thinkers, and that is very important to the success of a small firm.

5. How competitive is the business, the business you are in, in Boulder County?

It's very competitive. Smart companies always are going to understand that they need marketing. So they have two choices they will either handle it in-house or they're going to hire a marketing firm to do that. There are a lot of reputable, solid firms in the area that do a great job, and we're one of them.

If you were to ask me what the impact I want the agency to make, the impact I want our team members to feel as though they're making, it's really about making people's lives better. We are very active in the disability community. We donate about $100,000 in services a year to the disability community, in helping them develop campaigns. Seeing the impact we make on these individuals is amazing.

Reach Vince Winkel at 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel