Buy Photo The Jerry Stergios Building in the Desert Regional Medical Center complex is where the Desert Healthcare District is located and where the board of directors meets. The west valley district and its foundation have spend sending more money toward valleywide health efforts. (Photo: Richard Lui/The Desert Sun)Buy Photo

The Desert Healthcare District, approved by west valley taxpayers in the 1940s to create a Palm Springs hospital, today has invested interests in many of the Coachella Valley's main wellness initiatives — from addressing an extreme primary care shortage to creating the CV Link pathway.

A Desert Sun review of district finances and audits — in light of a new legal battle between a sitting board member and district leadership challenging such valleywide efforts — shows the agency has been wielding more influence outside of its borders in recent years than some might realize.

The special district covers more than 457 square miles of five Coachella Valley cities west of Cook Street, but district board members work to increase access to more nutritious produce in food banks, reduce high obesity rates, and donate to cancer, cerebral palsy and AIDS charities throughout the region.

"The lines get blurred between Palm Springs, Indio, Cathedral City," said Michael Harris, professor of practice for health administration and health policy at the University of Southern California — and a part-time valley resident. "I see how that can happen very easily in the desert where people can say, 'It's for the whole Coachella Valley.'

"Well, it really isn't."

Property owners within the district pay $24 a year in taxes to support the Desert Healthcare District's goals. That amount added up to $5.2 million in revenue in the 2013-2014 fiscal year for the agency that has more than $71 million in total assets, including Desert Regional Medical Center in Palm Springs.

The district also operates a separate nonprofit foundation originally created to support Desert Regional Medical Center's activities. That foundation, whose board was dissolved in 2003, is now run by district CEO Kathy Greco and the five-member district board. Originally the operator of charity projects such as a wellness park and mobile dental clinic, the nonprofit relinquished control of its projects to other groups and reached its current incarnation in 2012, when it expanded to reach across the entire Coachella Valley. Its valleywide goal is to be a "fiscal sponsor and incubator of new collaborative projects."

"Communities are not easily contained within jurisdictional boundaries," the district said in a recent legal response to the challenge board member Michael Solomon filed. "Residents of the District work outside the District, and visa versa. Residents from throughout the Coachella Valley use Desert Regional Medical Center. And the underlying health issues do not respect jurisdictional boundaries.

"Accordingly, even assuming that DHCD funds provided services that benefited residents outside of the district, DHCD did not violate (the law) as long as DHCD funds are primarily targeted to benefit people who reside, work and/or seek health care services within district boundaries."

The nonprofit foundation spent about $2.3 million in grants and services in fiscal year 2013-2014, up from $270,489 the previous year, according to nonprofit financial documents.

Among the dozens of grants issued each year, the Desert Healthcare District unanimously committed $700,000 to its nonprofit foundation in fiscal year 2013-2014, its grant schedule for that year shows. The bulk of that — up to $650,000 — went to a large-scale push to inform residents on the controversial, then little-understood, federal Affordable Care Act and sign them up for health insurance through the new Covered California insurance exchange or an expansion of Medi-Cal.

A nearly $1.2 million valleywide effort, the foundation lumped the district money together with $534,924 from the California Endowment, which has a strong presence in the eastern Coachella Valley. Together, they placed 25 health navigators at public health sites and clinics throughout the Coachella Valley to sign up as many desert residents of the 90,000 estimated to qualify for coverage under the ACA. This included $188,095 in grant funds to Clinicas de Salud del Pueblo, a federally qualified health center that runs clinics in the eastern Coachella and Imperial Valleys but none in the west valley. It also provided similar grants to Borrego Community Health Foundation, Planned Parenthood, FIND Food Bank based in Indio, Catholic Charities and Urban Community Action (Health to Hope clinics for the low-income and homeless).

Borrego operates clinics within district border cities — Cathedral City and Desert Hot Springs — as well as in the east valley and further away in Riverside and San Diego counties. Catholic Charities runs a range of services throughout Riverside and San Bernardino counties but its main Coachella Valley offices are based in Indio. The other grant recipients also offer services both inside and outside of the healthcare district.

"In the Foundation, District money is pooled with outside grants to serve the broader Coachella Valley community," the healthcare district's legal counsel said in its official response to the unusual and rare internal conflict.

Harris said the district can certainly spend money through its foundation, but it has a responsibility to make sure it's staying in the bounds of its service area. That could be particularly tricky, for example, with enrollment counselors who are incentivized to enroll anyone and are fulfilling the law to sign people up for health insurance from their perspective, he said.

At least one former lawmaker — representing an agency that received funding for ACA navigators — thinks the spending model was forward-thinking. V. Manuel Pérez, a Coachella councilman and former state assemblyman who now works for Borrego Community Health Foundation, said this issue begs the larger question of expanding the district toward the east or creating a new one there.

There has long been discussion about a health district for that part of the region, which includes federally underserved, mostly low-income communities with low rates of insurance, but no action has taken place.

Pérez said the district's enrollment efforts and partnership with the California Endowment to reach struggling valley areas, including Desert Hot Springs in the west, were helpful with the possibility of improving public health valleywide.

"We can't continue, in my opinion, to think about the valley in a very compartmentalized, fragmented way," he said.

"We're one valley."

That valley is extremely diverse, spanning hundreds of square miles that include resorts, golf courses, LGBT-friendly areas and migrant farmworker communities.

Greco said the Affordable Care Act campaign had been very successful and that the foundation had been used to bolster collective impact, build momentum and create a "culture of coverage" partnership. It would not have been as effective without it, and though the agency could have run its own initiative, the Endowment could not have donated to the district because it is a public agency. Using the nonprofit encourages other individual donors and agencies to match their funds and leverage the dollars that come in, she said.

"To me, I see it as a really important tool to continue to do health and wellness work in the district," she said. "And it allows us to work with other partners in a more collaborative way across the Coachella Valley.

"We have so much crossover now, it's important to have the same messaging going across the whole population," she said.

The Desert Healthcare District also unanimously paid $50,000 in 2013-2014, in partnership with the California Endowment, to the foundation for a valleywide collective fund for physical activity. That fund includes an effort to look at expanding shared-use agreements across all three valley school districts, which would give people more of a chance to exercise in pockets of the valley with fewer parks and gyms.

The foundation also gave a $200,000 grant for swim lessons that same year, an audit from Moss, Levy and Hartzheim showed. The healthcare district's legal counsel said the nonprofit funded "Ready, Set, Swim — Coachella Valley," a new collaborative program designed to teach Coachella Valley third-graders across the school districts how to swim, in order to encourage exercise and pool safety. Half of those funds came from the district and the other half from Palm Springs Mayor Steve Pougnet's Healthy Planet, Healthy You race.

The nonprofit Desert Healthcare Foundation voted unanimously in November 2013 to approve $100,000 for a physical activity fund with this type of swimming lesson as a potential program. Other similar votes were 5-0, including Solomon's approval, according to board meeting minutes.

So far this year, the public agency has also paid thousands to its foundation for a similar collective fund — this time based on a partnership to stabilize the Desert Hot Springs Boys and Girls Club within its borders.

In one of its more controversial moves, the agency also unanimously pledged $10 million, a major commitment, to the widely debated Coachella Valley Link plan, a massive network of wide desert pathways that would connect eight cities from Palm Springs to the Salton Sea for pedestrians, bicyclists and low-speed electric vehicles. Though the path itself would be spread over a large landscape, the Coachella Valley Association of Governments insists it would only cover the area they serve.

The Coachella Valley Volunteers in Medicine clinic, a free primary care clinic in Indio for the low-income and uninsured, also gets money from the healthcare district directly. This included $125,224 pledged in 2013-2014 for core operating support. Some of that grant amount was carried over into 2015, its current grant payment schedule as of Jan. 31 says. It received a further grant pledge of $151,479 this fiscal year for "evolution in the era of the ACA," of which nearly half has been paid.

Opinions differ on whether anything is illegal

An independent audit of the district by Moss, Levy and Hartzheim insisted "The District administers grant and preventative health initiatives programs that donate a significant portion of the District's annual property tax revenues to health-related programs serving residents ... (west of Cook Street) and unincorporated areas of the County that are within the District's boundaries."

A government code claim filed in January by Solomon, a pain management specialist who has been on the district's board since 2008 and served last year as president, said the district is spending money through its foundation outside of its borders, a move that he often voted for but now questions. He claims it's illegal, unethical and a violation of both public trust and legal codes that require it to primarily serve the taxpayers who fund it. The district and its legal counsel insist the agency is not violating any laws and is supporting the health mission in the community that it was created for.

"The district never puts money in the foundation with the purpose of investing it outside — that's not part of the process," Greco said.

Solomon said that as the law is written, it is not open to interpretation — and insists the district is giving the money to the foundation just so it can be funneled outside. He also said many were done in closed session.

"Most of these expenditures to the Desert Healthcare Foundation, a nonprofit private corporation, were made in closed, private, non-public session so that the expenditures would not be disclosed to the public," the claim says.

The healthcare district said in its release of the claims that closed session conversations were confidential and any unauthorized disclosure of them is a breach of the law.

Health care and public district experts stressed that there is a lack of regular oversight of such special districts. Throughout the state, the agencies, many of which no longer run hospitals, and their spending have been challenged in recent years in grand jury reports and by health care professionals.

Harris said healthcare districts, including the desert's, have to go back and review to make sure they are fulfilling their position as elected officials and are "laser-focused" on their obligations for taxpayer money within the geographic area.

"The question is, 'Is the board well-informed given changes in health care as to what their mission and call of duty is to taxpayers?'

"Health dollars are scarce," he said. "Is that the best place for healthcare responsibility to be had?"

Jon Coupal, president of the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association, who is unfamiliar with the case, said the funding issues did not seem like "an egregious waste of taxpayer funds as long as taxpayer dollars are being expended for things related to the core mission of the district."

But concerns about the Desert Healthcare District and its foundation sharing leadership are "well-founded," he said.

"That is a legitimate issue," he said. "They're separate entities. You've got to be careful within those situations."

When Greco interviewed and accepted the position of CEO for the district in 2011, she was asked to explore and revitalize the nonprofit wing, which had grown dormant — except for starts and fits of projects — since it stopped raising money for Desert Regional.

Since then, the foundation has quietly taken on a "very strong" role in the community.

"What I did was sort of wake it up and see what its role could be today," Greco said.

Board member and current vice-president William Grimm said he has never seen any issue with the transfer or spending of funds. On the board for the past two years, Grimm sees the foundation as a solution to keeping taxpayer dollars in the district while still working to ease healthcare disparities that are often in the east valley and is part of the agency's strategic plan.

"We've been very clear about trying to build the foundation up in order to serve more valley residents without district funds because of the ongoing issue of the borders of the district," he said.

Grimm said he has never seen the divide cause problems nor had any ethical issue with the board's decisions because the board knows what they are doing with each agency.

"Everything has been perfectly appropriate and without conflict," he said.

Even when they combined resources with outside agencies such as with ACA enrollment, he said he felt the ratios were appropriate between the district's west valley service base and the Endowment in the east.

New board member Carole Rogers also expressed support for the health effects of the district's efforts and reach.

"Since I was elected, I am overwhelmed with the reach and effect of the District's efforts to promote the health of our residents and beyond," Rogers said in an email. "As a Public Health Registered Nurse, I look at the effect of the broad spectrum of preventative programs that will make a difference in the lives of our People. Happy to make a difference."

Both Grimm and Solomon said conditions started changing with the nonprofit when Greco took the helm and made it a "living, breathing entity."

But while Grimm supported those changes, Solomon in his claim called for Greco's termination, among other demands, believing her to be most at fault for what he believes to be ethical breaches.

"That's pretty unusual to have the same board for a public entity like the healthcare district to be affiliated with also sitting on a private nonprofit board like the foundation — the similarities between the two really stops with the name," he said. "It's a huge problem, the crux to the entire problem."

Victoria Pelham is The Desert Sun's health and wellness reporter. She can be reached at Victoria.Pelham@DesertSun.com and on Twitter @VPelham.

About Desert Healthcare District

•The district was created in the 1940s to start a Palm Springs hospital.

•A CEO and five-member board oversee the district and its nonprofit foundation.

•The Desert Healthcare District covers 457 square miles that span five Coachella Valley cities — Desert Hot Springs, Palm Springs, Cathedral City, Rancho Mirage and Palm Desert — as well as the unincorporated community of Thousand Palms.

•The rest of the Coachella Valley cities are outside of the district, including La Quinta, Indian Wells, Indio and Coachella.

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/1AphjZT