Suzanne H. Bauknight, chief of the civil division of the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Eastern District of Tennessee, is slated to be the next U.S. Bankruptcy judge, pending clearance by the FBI.

Bauknight, picked by the Sixth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals in Cincinnati several weeks ago, would succeed Richard Stair, who retires at the end of the month after 28 years.

Stair confirmed Friday that Bauknight has been selected, “subject to a background investigation by the FBI.” He said he is among people whom agents have contacted.

Bauknight, who has bachelor’s and law degrees from the University of South Carolina, said she is unable to discuss the appointment.

“I am a candidate, but I’m not at liberty to comment on the position,” she said.

Bauknight was one of five candidates selected by the Sixth Circuit Merit Selection Panel for the bankruptcy post.

MORE ON AG: Tennessee Supreme Court Chief Justice Sharon Lee continues to defend the court’s choice of Herbert Slatery as the new attorney general. Key Democrats are critical of the choice, while key Republicans are happy.

“We pledged to be nonpartisan and that’s what we did,” she said Friday in response to a question on whether she had comments on Democrats’ criticism of not reappointing Robert Cooper, a Democrat.

Slatery, a Knoxville lawyer, has been Republican Gov. Bill Haslam’s chief legal counsel.

Justices Gary Wade, Connie Clark and Lee were appointed by then Gov. Phil Bredesen, a Democrat, and faced opposition in a recent retention election from Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey, R-Blountville, who was unhappy that Cooper did not join lawsuits on “Obamacare,” among other issues. Haslam was publicly neutral.

Two Republicans, Jeffrey Bivens and Holly Kirby, are new Haslam appointees and were not on the retention ballot for the Supreme Court. During the campaign, the Democratic justices said the next attorney general would be appointed in a non-partisan manner. Lee initially said she would work with Republicans to select the best applicant and later modified her position to mean she would work with the other four justices, including the new Republicans.

After the election, Wade and Lee met with Ramsey, essentially to move on, Ramsey said. He also asked them to appoint a conservative attorney general.

At her investiture ceremony Wednesday, it was clear Haslam and Lee had known each other for a long time through her sister, the Rev. Charla Lee Sherbakoff. Sherbakoff and Haslam were in the same class at Webb School.

Lee said the Supreme Court made its own decision about selecting Slatery.

Georgiana Vines is retired News Sentinel associate editor. She may be reached at 865-577-6612 or gvpolitics@hotmail.com.