LEADVILLE, Colo. (AP) — A small hospital in Leadville that has served Lake County since 1879 is closing its doors.

St. Vincent Hospital, a 25-bed hospital at 10,152 feet, announced Saturday it will phase out services over the next few months.

The decision came after Lake County voters this month rejected a property tax hike to support the struggling rural hospital, the Summit Daily reported (http://bit.ly/1vp56Z4 ).

The hospital was founded by a group of nuns from Kansas who arrived in Leadville to provide medical services to the booming mining town. But the hospital struggled to stay viable for the county population of about 7,300 people.

About a dozen elderly patients living at the hospital have been moved to other nursing home facilities.

The surgery department will close this week, and the hospital’s home oxygen, home health and physical therapy services and its general practice clinic will close in January.

The entire building should be shuttered by March 31, the newspaper reported.

“I’m shocked by the number of people who have come up to me since the vote and said, ‘I didn’t believe it would happen,” said Karen Rinehart, the hospital’s director of community relations.

Hospital administrators are talking with local governments to see whether they can take over ambulance services. St. Vincent’s emergency department and its support services will be the last to shut down.

“It’s a very sad thing,” said Sarah Vaine, CEO of the Summit Community Care Clinic. “The community really needs those resources.”

Dr. Jim Oberheide, a Care Clinic founder and family practice physician who has worked at St. Vincent, called the closing bad news for Leadville, but not unexpected.

“The days of small rural hospitals having full facilities and expecting to do everything is not realistic,” he said.

The clinic and St. Anthony Summit Medical Center in Frisco expect to see more people from those areas because of the closure, the newspaper reported.

The Leadville hospital has been grappling for years with high workforce turnover, deteriorating facilities, outdated equipment and locals who’ve chosen to use medical services farther away.

“It’s been struggling for a long time,” Vaine said. “It’s a testament to their commitment to the community that they’ve stayed open as long as they have.”

The hospital now employs 107 full- and part-time staff members.

In 1988, voters created a taxation district to support St. Vincent. That tax rate hasn’t been raised since, and a ballot question to raise the mill levy to give the hospital another $1.6 million a year failed.

Rinehart said the hospital’s message to voters was clear that voting no on the tax increase would mean the hospital would close.

“It’s mind-blowing that people would allow, that the citizens would allow this to happen,” she said.

———

Information from: Summit Daily News, http://www.summitdaily.com/