You don't need to sit through "The Wolf of Wall Street" to get the message "Hang up on cold calls," but it doesn't hurt.

Martin Scorsese's new flick on the illicit exploits of Jordan Belfort, who ran the pump-and-dump penny stock boiler room Stratton Oakmont, is a three-hour lesson in who might be on the other end of the phone line, but in glamorizing the bad guys it also completely ignores the victims, which virtually guarantees that there will be more of them in the future.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

How can I be so sure?

The cold call I got in my office from a broker with a firm called Rockwell Securities just a few days before the movie opened is sufficient proof for me.

He did something I thought impossible, alienating me on the very first word by greeting me with a derivative of my name that no one calls me; let's just say it's a variation that's not just "too familiar," it's rude.

As I tried to clear that up, he plowed ahead with the sales pitch. Even as I tried to explain that he had insulted me, he just prattled on about how it was mostly because he was so excited about his current opportunity. When he stopped long enough to take a breath and actually heard me say that no one calls me what he did, he said we were going to be such great buddies if I would buy into his current deal that I would wind up being happy no matter what he called me.

No matter what I said, he had a response. I knew he would. The Scorsese movie shows a "script," but regulators that have busted real firms typically call it a "rebuttal book," literally a tabbed resource so that when you give a reason to not be interested, the broker has a retort ready and waiting to redirect the conversation in the way they want it moving. Once they have made contact, their effort is focused on not losing it.

Of course, today — unlike in the era when Stratton Oakmont was thriving — the threats aren't mostly coming at the other end of the phone line. Trouble arrives via the Internet, by text message and email, in chat rooms, through social networks, and much more.

Anyone who saw "The Wolf of Wall Street" will have an annoying feeling the next time they get any sort of securities sales pitch, no matter how legitimate. But the reason they keep making movies like this is that people keep falling for the same old tricks.

The most legitimate complaint about financial regulators is that they are too slow. They get after the bad guys as quickly as possible, but they're not always getting complaints or tips until it's too late, at the point when it's too late to get full restitution no matter what securities agents do.

So the moral of the story for investors is to protect yourself, and how to do that was not part of the message of the movie.

That said, here are some tips that will make sure you are never on the other end of a story like "The Wolf of Wall Street:"

1. Hang up the phone. The easiest way to avoid a fraudulent sales pitch is to not let it happen. Signing up for the National Do-Not-Call Registry can eliminate most miscreants, but you need to look at every other way that you can be pitched — hang up on the emails, the texts and any other pitch that comes out of the blue.

2. If you are not willing or able to ignore the pitch, don't swing at it out of impulse.

Many legitimate brokers and financial advisers start their career trying to build a book of clients, and cold-calling remains something they do. Having them select you as a client — rather than you proactively shopping for proper financial counsel — is far from ideal, but those advisers are not looking to make the quick buck but are trying to get you as a long-term client.

A sales pitch designed to make you act now coming from someone you don't know is a universally bad idea. If they don't want you taking your time, coming to their office, doing your due diligence, they're the bad guys.

3. Do a background check. When I told my recent cold-caller that I wanted to do a background check, he told me how the deal would be gone in that kind of time. When I said that I wanted his CRD number — for the Central Registration Depository —- he told me he did not remember it because no one had ever asked him. When I asked for his Social Security number, which I could also use to look him up in the CRD files, he acted insulted.

Beyond using the broker check function from FINRA —- the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority —- available at brokercheck.finra.org, be sure to contact your state securities administrator, as well. You want to look not only at the big boys investigating the major crimes, but you also want to hear from the cop on the beat, which is the state guys. (Find your state securities administrator's contact details at NASAA.org, the website for the North American Securities Administrators Association.)

4. Learn what's in it for them. You always want to know what any stripe of financial adviser is getting paid for their services, whether they are making a commission, getting a piece of the assets you put into their care or something else.

In the short verbal joust with my recent cold-caller, I asked what was in the deal for him and he told me it was "unimportant" because all that mattered was what was in the transaction for me.

Bzzzt. Wrong answer.

5. When something appeals to your greedy side, be fearful. Investing is a constant struggle between fear and greed. Scammers are trying to overwhelm your fear and skepticism, to get you to go for the greed. The more they push for you to be greedy, the more scared you should be.