“No one goes there anymore. It’s too crowded.” That pearl of wisdom comes courtesy of Yogi Berra, the recently departed Yankee legend and master of malaprop. The reference was to some now-forgotten New York restaurant, but he might just as well have been speaking about urban planning.

We could take his paradoxical maxim and apply it to certain Dallas neighborhoods — Uptown, in particular. By Dallas standards, it is pedestrian-friendly and human in scale, but lately the pace of development, almost all of it undistinguished, has become so intense that whatever character it once had is being lost. In other parts of the city, despite a desperation for investment, the concerned are looking toward its bro-filled bars and shivering.

First on that list is Bishop Arts, the Oak Cliff enclave in the midst of a gentrification that is only accelerating, with an attendant loss of that nebulous quality known as “authenticity.” At the end of July, the mom-and-pop ice cream shop La Original Michoacana shut its doors, and this past week, the restaurateur Jay Jerrier announced he would be closing his pizza parlor, Zoli’s, and moving it elsewhere. Its billboard read: “Future home of Bishop Arts Spray Tan and Manscaping.”

It would be funny if it weren’t so close to the truth. But Zoli’s is departing to make way for one of two massive developments that will soon rise in the area. The first, from the developer Alamo Manhattan, made its second appearance before the city’s Urban Design Peer Review panel last week, having already been sent back to the drawing board once, rejected as out of scale and incommensurate with the neighborhood. Within Bishop Arts, it had been welcomed with all the enthusiasm of Obamacare at a tea party rally.

With good reason. That initial scheme, produced for the developer by the architects Good Fulton & Farrell, was nothing more than a three-dimensional maximization of zoning allowances, an attempt to wring as much short-term profit as possible from the site without concern for its long-term impact. That’s the Uptown way: stack ’em and pack ’em.

Credit Alamo Manhattan for taking its plans back and making an honest effort to work with the neighborhood. The second attempt does a better job of engaging the street, and its hodgepodge loft aesthetic at least mitigates the scale of the project.

Overall, however, it is timid and lacking in imagination, a surrender to some banal idea of historical contextualism instead of a creative response to the site and its opportunities.

If you’re thinking, hey, it’s a private development, how they build it is their business, you might consider that the shaping of public space is something in which every citizen has a stake and that this project, like so many others in this city, is subsidized through tax increment financing (TIF) dollars. Which is to say, it is effectively being built with your money.

Another TIF-funded development in the area, the 42-acre Bishop Arts Village, is far more impressive in both its planning and aesthetics.

Designed by Gensler for the Nazerian family, it is respective of the scale of neighboring buildings but is decidedly modern and unfussy in its execution. Acting as something of a link between West Davis and Jefferson Boulevard, it will offer both retail spaces and introduce open public areas — spaces that a more short-sighted builder might have built out to maximize density. The effect here will, instead, serve the community for the long term, thereby only reinforcing its own value.

That suggests another reason for concern. Both the Alamo Manhattan and Nazerian projects, as a condition of their TIF funding, reserve 20 percent of their units as affordable housing. But those numbers are relatively small, and it is reasonable to worry about the gentrifying effect of such projects, both in Oak Cliff and other parts of the city, in particular nearby West Dallas: an escalation in land values that displaces indigenous families while stripping neighborhoods of character, both architectural and otherwise.

Properly controlled, gentrification need not be evil. Rising land values can be a benefit to minority populations, just so long as there are protections for low-income renters and against draconian tax assessment increases. Meanwhile, far greater emphasis must be placed on the rehabilitation of neighborhoods before “settlers” arrive, as the city’s ambitious Neighborhood Plus plan promises to do.

If Dallas wishes to become a more diverse and integrated city, gentrification is a process the city will need to manage, like it or not.

The alternative, as Yogi would have it, is “déjà vu all over again.”