Traveling across the country on a bus with her fellow lobbying nuns, Sister Simone Campbell has picked up a few tricks of the trade in attempting to change the world for the better.

The religious leader, lawyer, lobbyist and poet is the executive director of NETWORK, a progressive Catholic organization that pushes for justice and peace through social and economic change. She has fought for an increased minimum wage, immigration reform and the Affordable Care Act.

Campbell shared her peace-making philosophies from her book, "A Nun on the Bus: How All of Us Can Create Hope, Change, and Community" with a multi-faith crowd at Pacific University April 6. Here are four of her tips for changing the world.

Leadership comes from "We the People"

Waiting for federal leaders to make social change on their own doesn't tend to yield significant results, Campbell said.

To free the folks in Congress "from the fear they have for the other," she suggests taking matters into your own hands by simply talking about important issues.

She advocates for what she calls "grocery store missionary work," an approach in which you might turn to a person in line at the grocery store and ask his or her views on a given political issue.

While this stranger-to-stranger approach may not have worked out for Starbucks' attempt at discussing race, the benefit, Campbell said, is that the conversation doesn't have to last long if it goes sour.

If in-line awkwardness isn't your thing, though, approaching friends and loved-ones with a sincere desire for understanding can't hurt your cause.

Hope is a communal virtue

When hope is in low supply, ruminating alone on whatever impending defeat you face rarely generates much of a moral boost, Campbell said.

Especially in the slow-moving world of politics, she said, "You can't do it alone." Getting together with like-minded people helps foster hope in a way one typically can't alone, she said.

Fight for, not against

In politics, you're bound to come up against some opposition. The natural response is to push back, but Campbell said it's best to channel that energy into fighting for, rather than against, something.

In other words, try to identify some common goal that you and your opposition can work toward together.

Campbell gave the example of a meeting she had with a group of CEOs in Chicago. The CEOs brought up their $10 million average salaries and how they were pushing to reach $11 million.

Were they not getting by on $10 million, Campbell recalled asking, perhaps with a helping of sarcasm?

It turned out, as one CEO put it, they were all competing with each other, trying to win in a realm where the measure of victory is how much money one makes. They wanted to compete with each other, and Campbell wanted them to spread the wealth.

Rather than pushing back at them for wanting to win, Campbell thought it better to try changing the measure of winning to something a bit more universally beneficial for society. The CEOs would still get to compete, and the social causes she supports might see some help.

Humor is key

Campbell relies on humor when making her case to political opponents. It helps people relax, she said, allowing them to hear the serious parts of her argument on a deeper level than if they were being barraged by hardball assertions.

A bit of laughter and joy can make all the difference, she said, because it helps build a community. As long as respect for everyone's humanity is there, a well-meaning joke will, ideally, not fall on unwilling ears.

In short, getting a laugh can help get your point across. Just ask Jon Stewart, Stephen Colbert and Bill Maher, each of whose political satire shows Campbell has appeared on.

--Dillon Pilorget

dpilorget@oregonian.com

503-294-5927

@ForestGReporter