HARLINGEN, Texas, May 18, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Nestled within its 900-plus pages of legalese, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, or ACA, requires healthcare providers participating in federal programs to have an effective compliance program in place. For providers without deep pockets, the burden of this mandate is tremendous – a full-time compliance officer typically earns a six-figure salary.

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150515/216345

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150515/216346

To help these smaller providers meet the ACA's strict standards, Star Compliance Services and Texas Dentists for Medicaid Reform are hosting a series of Medicare and Medicaid Compliance Seminars in Texas cities; registered attendees will receive a free, comprehensive Compliance Starter Kit valued at approximately three hours of consultation with a compliance attorney. Upcoming dates include June 12 in Houston, June 26 in San Antonio and July 17 in Dallas. Leading these seminars will be attorney and compliance expert Gregory Ewing, who is also the president of TDMA.

"If providers do not have their practices or businesses in full compliance, they are at significant risk of being snared in an investigation. We want to make it as easy as possible for providers to come into compliance," said Ewing.

The horror stories emerging in the wake of new, stronger regulations are giving everyone pause. Prosecution of non-compliant providers has risen 78% since the rollout of the ACA, and with the feds collecting $7 in fines for every enforcement dollar spent, going after the little guy appears to be big business.

"Many providers simply do not have the resources to have a full-time compliance officer or the know-how to implement such a program themselves. Thus the purpose of the kit and seminars. We learned from our first seminar that providers want more than just information. They want instruction and something they can implement right away, and that's what the Compliance Starter Kit offers," explained Ewing.

This summer's Medicare and Medicaid Compliance Seminars follow on the heels of a hugely successful, sold-out gathering in Weslaco in February. With confusion and anxiety within the dental and medical communities at high tide, Ewing and his associates decided to host more seminars to reach more providers throughout Texas.

About Star Compliance Services

Star Compliance Services is the host and organizer for Medicaid and Medicare healthcare compliance seminars in Texas, and a repository of knowledge and trends on the evolving issue of regulatory compliance in the wake of the Affordable Care Act.

About Texas Dentists for Medicaid Reform

Texas Dentists for Medicaid Reform (http://www.tdmr.org/) is organized by dentists who are concerned about the future of dental care for the over three million Texas children eligible for Medicaid. TDMR was founded in 2012 to press for due process rights for Medicaid providers after Medicaid dentists were unfairly accused of Medicaid fraud and massive payment holds were implemented with little recourse.

Contact:

George Ewing

956-365-9694

Email

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/star-compliance-services-texas-dentists-for-medicaid-reform-responding-to-tough-new-regulatory-environment-with-compliance-starter-kit-and-informative-seminars-for-smaller-healthcare-providers-300084512.html

SOURCE Star Compliance Services