The Tulsa World has your tickets to some of the hottest shows in town. Here’s how you can win.

‘Sesame Street Live’

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

Enter to win a family four-pack of tickets to see “Sesame Street Live” when it comes to the BOK Center on April 10-13 by snapping a picture or taking a video of your little fan doing his or her best character impression. Then send it to us at scene@tulsaworld. com or post it to our wall at facebook. com/tulsaworldscene. Or buy tickets now at bokcenter.com.

The Avett Brothers

See one of the hottest acts touring right now at the Cox Business Center Arena. The Avett Brothers with special guests Langhorne Slim & The Law play June 21. Tickets go on sale Friday at the Arby’s Box Office at the BOK Center, by phone at 877-TULSACC or online at coxcentertulsa.com.

Or try to win them by going to facebook. com/tulsaworldscene, finding a post about The Avett Brothers and telling us why you want to see them. Then share the post.

St. Vincent

St. Vincent, aka Annie Clark, grew up in Tulsa before moving to Texas. She remembers Tulsa fondly and looks forward to playing Cain’s. And we look forward to seeing her there again, especially so soon after the release of her fantastic self-titled album.

The show is set for Saturday at Cain’s Ballroom. The show kicks off at 7:30 p.m. with Noveller set to open. Go to facebook.com/tulsaworldscene or facebook.com/tulsaworld, share the post about the contest and comment on the post.

Tickets, while available, start at $20 at cainsballroom.com.

Kings of Leon

Kings of Leon will be at the BOK Center April 8 with the Klipsch Audio Kings of Leon 2014 Mechanical Bull Tour, and we have not only tickets to the show but also backstage meet-and-greet passes to give to you.

Just go to facebook.com/tulsaworldscene or facebook.com/tulsaworld, share the post about the contest and comment on the post, telling us what you’d like to ask the Kings of Leon.

Clay Walker

Country star Clay Walker is headed to Tulsa to play the Osage Event Center on March 24.

General admission tickets are $45 each at the Osage Casino Gift Shop or Box Office at 951 W. 36th St. North. Guests must be 18 and older.