A dovish Draghi promises that the ECB will do what it must to raise inflation, China cracks down on moving money abroad and the fate of Obamacare is called into question yet again. Here are some of the things people in markets are talking about today.

Dovish Draghi

In a speech in Frankfurt this morning European Central Bank President Mario Draghi said that the ECB will do what it must to raise inflation as quickly as possible. In the immediate aftermath of the speech the euro weakened and short-dated euro-area sovereign touched record low yields (on the flip side, US two-year yields are above 0.90 percent today, their highest since May 4, 2010). The ECB's next monetary policy meeting is scheduled for Dec. 3.

China crackdown

Chinese authorities said that they have closed the nation's biggest “underground bank” which had handled 410 billion yuan ($64 billion) of illegal foreign-exchange transactions and arrested or charged 370 people in the case. The crackdown comes as PIMCO foresees a further decline in the yuan over the coming year as China's post-devaluation policies allow for greater adjustment in the currency. In stocks, China's securities regulator has allowed the IPOs of 10 companies to go ahead, the first since the freeze on new entrants began five months ago in response to the market crash. The Shanghai Composite Index closed 0.4 percent higher.

Obamacare

The fate of Barack Obama's signature health-care law may be in the hands of Anthem Inc. and Aetna Inc. following the announcement by UnitedHealth that it may quit the program entirely in 2017. While this is a blow to the health plan, Anthem and Aetna are by far the biggest players in this market and the future of Obamacare will be decided by those companies, neither of whom count the program as a financial success yet.

Some life in commodities

There is some relief for commodities this morning, with zinc rallying as much as 6 percent after refiners in China announced an output cut of 500,000 metric tons next year. Gold has held on to gains from a five-year low as markets seem to have factored in an interest rate rise from the Federal Reserve in December. Oil is still struggling to recover after WTI futures briefly dropped below $40 a barrel this week.

Goldman's EM call

Emerging markets are about to turn the corner, following years of disappointing performance, according to Goldman Sachs. The bank says it thinks Russia, India and Poland (RIP?) are among the best positioned to rally in 2016. Goldman is not alone in seeing opportunities in 2016, as our survey of some of the top financial minds shows.

What we've been reading

This is what's caught our eye over the last 24 hours.

Want to receive this post, and more, into your inbox every morning? Sign up here