| Posted by



Jennifer Hudson is stepping down from her role as a Weight Watchers spokesperson after losing about 80 pounds with the program.

The former “American Idol” contestant announced her enrollment in the weight loss program about four years ago but now she’s ready to call it quits.

Although she didn’t give a reason for stepping down as the Weight Watchers ambassador, it seems as if she is ready to shift her focus back to her music.

It’s been quite some time since anyone has heard new, original music from the powerhouse vocalist, and according to her statement—the wait may be over soon.

“I have chosen to step away from my role as ambassador and I am excited for the year to come, with many new projects and lots of new music,” Hudson told People. “My experience with Weight Watchers has truly been life changing. I am grateful for what I have learned through the process and will always take it with me.”

It was back in 2010 that Hudson opened up about being motivated to shed some pounds.

She recalled a time when she couldn’t even recognize herself .

“I didn’t realize it was me,” she said at the time. “I was like, “Who?… Oh, my God, this is me.’ And now when I look back, wow, look at the difference from then to now.”

She also sat down with talk show host Ellen DeGeneres in 2011 and revealed she had already slimmed down from a size 16 to a size 6.

She also said that her focus was to just get back her body and get back to a healthy lifestyle.

“I just wanted my body back,” she told DeGeneres. “Whatever body that was.”

Although Hudson is stepping down, the weight loss company will still have another major star boasting about its product.

Jessica Simpson is still the face of the company and has dropped 70 pounds since 2012.

Simpson’s weight loss journey has been a bit of a rollercoaster ride as she struggled to lose her pregnancy weight.

After teaming up with Weight Watchers, however, Simpson has managed to kiss the extra pounds goodbye.

Earlier this year Simpson posted a picture of herself in a fitted white dress to celebrate her new figure.

“First time rocking a white dress this year…but not the last!!” The caption read. “Thanks @weightwatchers.”

Weight Watchers also said they believe Hudson will continue using their product even though she has stepped down from the ambassador position.