TVHS senior wins battle of two-time state champs

Berthoud's Jimmy Fate, left, grabs hold of Parker Simington's leg in their 160-pound title match during the Northern Colorado Christmas Tournament on Saturday at the Budweiser Events Center. Simington turned the hold into his favor, leading to a 9-4 victory in a matchup of two-time state champions. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The shot was the one Jimmy Fate wanted, resulting in nearly perfect position.

The Berthoud senior hit a single leg on Parker Simington and had it up in the air, leaving Simington looking for a way out. At one point, Fate not only had Simington's leg in the air, but was supporting the entire weight of his longtime workout partner.

Fate put him down twice, but never secured a takedown, and the second time on the floor of the Budweiser Events Center gave Simington the opening he needed.

As he kicked his leg free, it left Fate stomach-down on the mat, and Simington swooped around for a takedown and a lead he would never relinquish in taking a 9-4 decision in a matchup of two-time defending state champions in the 160-pound title bout of the Northern Colorado Christmas Tournament.

"That was a huge scramble, just because it was so early on," said Simington, who was named the outstanding wrestler of the tournament for the upper weights. "He was in pretty deep on my leg. Initially I was trying to get out of it and fight it, then somehow I was able to get behind him. That was a huge two for me to get and it started me off in good shape."

Even a half hour later, Fate was trying to figure out how his golden chance was flipped against him.

"I had a single leg up in the air. I didn't finish it and he finished it," Fate said. "When you make mistakes like that against great wrestlers it really changes the flow of the match. It swung his way, and I couldn't get it going back my way."

In fact, Simington was more than happy to spend most of the match on his feet. When he did get a takedown, he didn't really bother with trying to hold Fate down. One, it expends a lot of energy. Two, it's not always a safe place to be.

"A lot of time I feel better on my feet; I'd rather be on my feet than on top, especially against somebody as good as him on the mat if I ride him," Simington said. "He's really dangerous; a dangerous, strong wrestler. I was happy to just wrestle on our feet and settle it from there."

Which Simington did.

He hit another takedown in the second period, entering the third with a 4-3 lead. He hit two more in the third period, the final one when Fate had to become over-aggressive and hit a throw, walking into another double-leg takedown by Simington. The only points Simington gave up were on escapes.

"I tried to work my offense the whole time, and I got a few takedowns in there, hit some really good shots," said Simington, now 18-0 on the season. "We both scrambled out of some pretty dangerous positions, so overall I was happy with how I did on my feet."

The loss was tough for Fate, who hadn't dropped a high school match since state of his freshman season. Now 17-1 on the campaign, losing to Simington was easier and tougher for different reasons.

Loveland's Charles Dunkelman, right, and Fort Morgan's Alex Mai tie up in their 220-pound title match on Saturday. Mai avenged a loss in a tournament last week with a 5-3 decision. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"I think it's a little bit of both. You don't want to lose to somebody you see every day," Fate said. "I love Parker. He's a great kid. I'm glad it was both of us in the finals."

Simington's victory helped the Eagles finish in fifth place with 147 points as Pueblo County ran away from the field with 227. For Eagles' coach Dave Juergensen, it was a successful showing in the field of 59, finishing with five placers. Vlad Kazakov (126) took third, Kasey Gault (106) and Patton Graff (195) fourth and Zach Kennison (132) took seventh.

Berthoud had one other finalist, and Chad Ellis was leading in his bout at 195 with Legacy's Nolan Funk when Funk caught Ellis off balance and turned it into a pin at the 2:54 mark. The Spartans finished 12th with 120 points as heavyweight Jared Hennig placed fourth.

Loveland had one placer as Charles Dunkelman took second, dropping a 5-3 decision in the 220 final to Fort Morgan's Alex Mai, a foe he beat last weekend for the Roosevelt Invitational title. As frustrating as that turnaround was, he said the key is turning it into something positive.

"Since I lost, I learn from experience," he said. "I'll just have to practice it out and do better next time. It will help in the future."

Mountain View coach Scott Barker hoped his team would perform better in the field, but did feel his Lions learned the necessary lessons, primarily not to relax, as his squad dropped too many matches in the third period while leading. They came away with one placer in the field, Braden Perkins at 132. He took fifth when he pinned Cherry Creek's Jakob Otto in 2:35.

But nobody left the building feeling better than Simington. He had a trophy in tow, and pretty broad smile. He and Fate are likely to meet again later in the year, but that was for another day.

On Saturday, he was feeling pretty good. Because the only way to guarantee you get what you want under the tree is to go out and get it yourself.

"It was the best Christmas present I could ask for," he said. "I'm thrilled about it."

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/rhpreps

Northern Colorado Christmas Tournament

At Budweiser Events Center

Team scores — Pueblo County 227, Legacy 187.5, Pine Creek 165, Greeley Central 153, Thompson Valley 147, Poudre 127, Mesa Ridge 126.5, Brighton 125, Valley 124.5, Cheyenne Mountain 123, Lakewood 121, Berthoud 120, Discovery Canyon 119, Adams City 118.5, Windsor 110, Centauri 102.5, Fort Morgan 93, Castle View 86.5. Also: 22. Loveland 74, 35. Mountain View 51.

Local Results

Championship matches

160 — Parker Simington, TV, d. Jimmy Fate, Berthoud, 9-4.

195 — Nolan Funk, Legacy, p. Chad Ellis, Berthoud, 2:54.

220 — Alex Mai, Fort Morgan, d. Charles Dunkelman, LHS, 5-3.

Third-place matches

106 — Devan Cogil, Legacy, d. Kasey Gault, TV, 1-0.

126 — Vlad Kazakov, TV, d. Job Greenwood, Poudre, 7-2.

195 — Zach Garrard, Cheyenne Mountain, p. Patton Graff, TV, 4:14.

Fifth-place matches

132 — Braden Perkins, MV, p. Jakob Otto, Cherry Creek. 2:35.

Seventh-place matches

132 — Zach Kennison, TV, d. Owen Lamb, Poudre, 6-4.

285 — Devon Chacon, Centauri, p. Jared Hennig, BHS, 1:41.