States with full practice authority have a statistically significant higher percentage of women than those with restricted practice.

By Jill Harpst-Rodgers, Donna Falsetti and Joyce Penrose

A number of publications, including The Wall Street Journal, have been providing information about nurse practitioners -- largely spurred by rising concerns about the access to primary care services anticipated with the Affordable Care Act.

Many of the articles, have dealt with increasing the autonomy of nurse practitioners so they can practice, using the phrase in a recent Institute of Medicine report, "to the full extent of their education and training."

Nursing organizations have been proposing changes in state licensing laws that would permit "full practice authority" but only 19 states and the District of Columbia have achieved it.

According to the American Association of Nurse Practitioners, full practice authority is achieved when "state practice and licensure law provides for nurse practitioners to evaluate patients, diagnose, order and interpret diagnostic tests, initiate and manage treatments—including prescribing medications—under the exclusive licensure authority of the state board of nursing."

This is the model recommended by the Institute of Medicine and National Council of State Boards of Nursing.

Much of the opposition to this change has been attributed to medical organizations and, while organizations such as the American Medical Association have voiced their opposition, we propose another explanation: the social injustice that continues to typify American business and politics, the repression of women.

Social injustice is a relative concept about the claimed unfairness or injustice of a society in its divisions of rewards and burdens and other incidental inequalities based on one's worldview of humanity.

Social injustice, as we are using the term, means the unfair distribution of advantages, disadvantages and protection of opportunities and responsibilities.

In this case, it means the repression of nurse practitioners and their ability to be fruitful in healthcare business and practice related to the inability to pass full practice authority legislation.

We believe that this unfairness stems from the fact that most nurse practitioners (96 percent) are women while most of those who make decisions about the legal basis for their practice are men (76 percent).

Across the country, the percentage of women legislators is not representative of the number of women they represent or who vote. The United States ranks 69th in the world in terms of the percentage of women in government.

Nurse practitioners' authority is regulated through legislative action state by state. We continue to see women disadvantaged in government representation as well as disadvantaged in areas such as earning potential compared to their male counterparts performing the same work, especially in professional roles.

Traditionally, the nursing role is viewed as complementary to that of medicine; nurses care for patients, physicians cure them.

This worldview goes back to nursing's inception in the Victorian period of the 19th century. Originating then, it was inevitable that nursing would evolve separately from medicine, a male-dominated occupation.

The traditional nurse's role encompasses following doctors' orders, administering medications, caring for patients, making beds, dressing wounds, and assisting patients with the activities of daily living.

The contemporary nurse performs patient assessments, develops care plans, communicates with and educates patients and families, administers medications, manages medical technology, and serves as a patient advocate.

The nurse practitioner's role varies widely from the traditional and contemporary nurse. Nurse practioners are educated to serve as independent comprehensive "practitioners" and "providers" of primary care services.

Nurse practitioners complete a master's degree, and for many, a doctoral degree that educates them to conduct history and physical examinations, diagnose illnesses, order lab tests, prescribe treatment plans and medications, and perform office procedures such as suturing and colposcopies.

Research has demonstrated that the nurse practitioner's expanded role has resulted in comparable and sometimes better patient outcomes than those of physicians.

American society views nurses historically as women, givers of care that has been ordered by a physician, a typically subservient role fueled by the historic duties and roles of a nurse.

Although this is accurate when considering traditional nursing practice, the role of nurses, specifically nurse practitioners, has changed dramatically over the past years.

No longer subservient, nurse practitioners assume responsibility for the overall health care of patients without the requirement of physician orders and direction.

In our current health care system, there is a shortage of primary care physicians and, with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act, which is providing access to health care to millions who were previously uninsured, it will be impossible to meet the health care needs of so many individuals in the delivery of their healthcare services.

It is estimated that the country will need 40 percent, or roughly 50,000, more providers by 2020.

A recent study by the Physicians Foundation found that 81 percent of physicians describe themselves at full capacity or over-extended, thus unable to add more patients to their practices.

Today, politicians are oppressing nurse practitioners by preventing them from fully performing to the advanced level of their training and education.

The state elected officials who fail to move bills that call for updates to outdated laws regarding the scope of a nurse practitioner, are not only contributing to the social injustice of these nurses but are also failing to provide the resources associated with healthcare to their citizens.

This lack of action prevents society from obtaining and receiving timely primary care, also unjust.

The update in nurse practitioner legislation allowing for full practice authority is supported by the AARP, Federal Trade Commission and the Institute of Medicine as well as many other organizations.

Some state lawmakers have updated their laws to allow nurse practitioners to practice to the full extent of their education and training; however, many lawmakers have allowed Bills, proposing full practice authority for nurse practitioners, to die in committee or they fail to support the passage of such bills.

Those states with full practice authority NPs have a higher percentage of women in legislature who are voting on bills supportive of women.

In 2013, states with full practice authority had an average of 29.29 percent representation of women in their state legislature and those states without full practice authority had 20.87 percent representation of women in their state legislature.

States with full practice authority have a statistically significant higher percentage of women than those with restricted practice.

Would we see the same phenomena in restricted states if nurse practioners were primarily men? What is the real reason that these legislative restrictions continue to be imposed on nurse practitioners' practice, thus failing to support America's healthcare system?

Is it really about concern over a patient's care or the social injustice directed toward a profession primarily dominated by women?

It is obvious in states with fewer women in the position to make legislative changes in support of women that these bills are less likely to pass.

Without legislative support, these vital changes in the practice of nurse practitioners cannot be made.

Social justice calls for nurse practitioners to be permitted to practice to the full extent of their education and training.

Jill Harpst-Rodgers and Donna Falsetti are respectively an assistant professor of Graduate Nursing and an associate professor of Graduate Nursing at Carlow University in Pittsburgh. Joyce Penrose is professor emeritus at Slippery Rock University.