I was expecting white-out conditions in Hollywood this weekend.

Since the Golden Globes, fashion experts have predicted quite a bit of white on the red carpet during Sunday night's Oscar telecast. It wouldn't have been that much of a shocker, considering past female Oscar winners who have worn white. But it would've been a bit of a disappointment, as a little of one thing can go a long way — and a lot of one color on any red carpet can make for a boring fashion discussion.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

Thankfully, this year's ceremony — or, at least, the most high-wattage stars — were awash in a variety of colors and frequently glittered in gold, with refreshing takes on the not-so-little black dress.

Before the first statuette was handed out, I was already in love with Lupita Nyong'o's low-cut "Nairobi" blue Grecian-like gown by Prada.

"I wanted to have a little bit of home," said the Oscar-winning actress, who has Kenyan and Mexican citizenship.

Beautiful in color

E!'s "Fashion Police" officers seemed close to giving Jennifer Lawrence a citation for wearing red again (how dare she, apparently); but they came to their senses halfway through their back-and-forth banter, rightfully praising her red strapless Christian Dior gown. Much, much bigger improvement than the odd, white gown she wore at the Globes.

Also improved since then was fellow nominee Julia Roberts in a lacy black floor-length gown.

As I've already gone over to the dark side, others looking bombshell in black included past Oscar-winner Charlize Theron, Anne Hathaway in mirror-like pailettes sewn into the bodice and, perhaps most interestingly, Anna Kendrick. The "When I'm Gone" singer and "Perfect Pitch" actress wore a really cool J. Mendel gown with pleated, asymmetrical hem and red beadwork on a sheer midriff panel - and, best of all, an amazing clutch that looked like an emerald-cut ruby.

Bejeweled

Speaking of jewelry terms, quite a few starlets took a gilt trip on the red carpet in gold tones. Among my favorites were Broken Arrow's own Kristin Chenoweth in gold-beaded Roberto Cavalli.

Also channeling Oscar gold was past winner Cate Blanchett in a glorious Giorgio Armani that — OK, this is weird, I admit — reminded me of golden, crystalized ginger. Just yummy. Sarah Paulson from "American Horror Story" and "12 Years a Slave" was lovely in golden Elie Saab.

Wasn't feeling Oscar nominee Sally Hawkins' gold gown with heavy beadwork, though. I wanted to like it, as it seemed vintage; but the long sleeves, length of the gown and, again, heavy beadwork almost seemed dowdy on her.

On a brighter note, albeit darker in tone (literally), Tony-winning actress Idina Menzel was fetching in dark green strapless Vera Wang, Sandra Bullock was fabulous in an aubergine-esque navy Alexander McQueen, and June Squib was matronly marvelous in green beaded Tadashi Shoji. Oh, and don't forget Amy Adams in navy Gucci and Tiffany jewels.

White winners

Those who lived up to the show's white expectations were host Ellen DeGeneres' wife, Portia de Rossi, in a beautiful, sheer halter gown with cut outs. Kristin Cavallari wore white Alexander McQueen with gold cap sleeves, and the divine Bette Midler in a red-accented Reem Acra made just for her.

But my favorite in white might be Naomi Watts in Francisco Costa for Calvin Klein — and a gorgeous spiderwebby collar-like necklace.

Suit up

Among the best-dressed guys were nominee Chiwetel Ejiofor in a classic tux, as well as musician John Legend. My favorite suits, though, were the blue ones — specifically, Kevin Spacey and Jason Sudeikis. Also liked Joseph Gordon-Levitt's tux, which seemed to have metallic thread woven into the fabric.

Although I'm not fond of white tux jackets, I liked the ivory ones over bright white shirts on Ryan Seacrest, Matthew McConaughey and, popping his with a red bow tie, winner Jared Leto.

But what was up with presenter Jim Carrey in a too-blue tux? Also wasn't fond of fellow funny man Bill Murray, who looked a bit disheveled. And I wanted to like Kellan Lutz's tux because it was made partly from recycled plastic bottles. But the sleeves looked badly wrinkled, and it was distracting. Nothing should ever be distracting on Kellan Lutz.

The worst dressed was Pharrell Williams, who looked awesome from the knees up — until you realized the knees were as far as his pants went. Grammys? Go for it. Oscars? Not a good look.

Love them, not the dresses

Julie Delpy looked dowdy, and Meryl Streep — who's my favorite actress on the face of the planet — was ho-hum in her gown. Love her more than ice cream, but Ellen DeGeneres' opening outfit — the weird Col. Sanders-ish white tie/cravat or whatever it was — stood out in a bad way. But loved her in white. I oohed along with the audience when she came out in her second outfit.

Also wasn't a fan of E!'s Kelly Osbourne's dress during pre-show commentary. Didn't like most of the commentators' choice in wardrobe, actually. But I'm sitting here writing this in sweatpants and a Bass Pro Shop hoodie, so who the heck am I to judge. (They were white, though - once upon a time, anyway).

Best dressed Women

» Lupita Nyong'o

» Jennifer Lawrence

» Portia de Rossi

» Charlize Theron

» Cate Blanchett

» Kristin Chenoweth

» Anna Kendrick

» Amy Adams

» Idina Menzel

» Kristin Cavallari

Best dressed men

» Matthew McConaughey

» Jason Sudekis

» Kevin Spacey

» Chiwetel Ejiofor

» Joseph Gordon-Levitt

Worst dressed

» Pharrell Williams

» Julie Delpy

» Jim Carrey

» Kelly Osbourne