Questions about Detroit's financially ailing public schools, losses of manufacturing jobs

Buy Photo Republican presidential candidate John Kasich speaks during the Fox News GOP debate on Thursday, March 3, 2016, at the Fox Theater in Detroit, MI. (Photo: Salwan Georges, Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

The city of Detroit finally took center stage at its own debate for the 2016 Republican presidential race with questions about the city's financially ailing schools and the loss of thousands of manufacturing jobs in the Motor City.

Moderator Megyn Kelly from Fox News asked Ohio Gov. John Kasich about the state of Detroit's public schools. She asked whether the solution offered for the city of Detroit's financial problems - municipal bankruptcy filing in 2013 funded in part by a government bailout - wouldn't also be appropriate for its indebted public school system.

At first, Kasich appeared a bit confused by the state of the city schools

"I think the mayor now is controlling the schools," Kasich said.

But that isn't correct. The school district remains under the control of a state-appointed emergency manager.

On his first full day leading Detroit Public Schools earlier this week, retired U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Steven Rhodes laid out his vision for launching a financially sound school district that will be able to aggressively compete for students.

His top goals include addressing a severe teacher shortage, restoring local control as soon as August and ensuring that pending education reform legislation gets passed.

Some of those issues were picked up by Kasich, who talked about Ohio's work to aid the struggling public school district in Cleveland, which like Detroit has seen a population loss from its aging industrial city.

"Cleveland is coming back," he said, adding that cities like Detroit could rebound as well with local and state support. He also advocated school choice and vocation educational as being important parts of any successful urban school district.

Immediately afterwards, moderator Chris Wallace asked Texas Sen. Ted Cruz about the loss of manufacturing jobs in cities like Detroit and what could be done to bring more of those jobs back to urban centers.

Cruz at first blamed the loss of jobs in cities like Detroit on "60 years of failed left-wing policies." He chronicled the city's population and economic decline, blaming in large measure unsuccessful liberal mandates including high taxes and onerous regulations.

To turn the fortunes of the nation's lagging cities around, Cruz said the country under his leadership would move to reduce unneeded regulations and reduce taxes that are "killing small businesses," saying he would repeal President Barack Obama's health care system known as Obamacare.

Contact Matthew Dolan: 313-223-4743, msdolan@freepress.com or on Twitter @matthewsdolan.

Detroit Republican Presidential Debate coverage roundup:

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1oTF2n2