Gallery: Nancy Schned's highlights the graphic stripes of zebras in this image of two males getting ready to do battle in Tanzania.

Gallery: This stylish photo by Ken Hiller shows the exhilaration of the dancers in Tallinn, Estonia, but also doubles as a zigzag design.

Gallery: Manarola, one of the villages that make up Italy's Cinque Terre, teeters on the edge in this lovely image made by Diane Burns.

Gallery: Nhat Dang captured a colorful scene while visiting the Mui Ne fishing village in Phan Thiet, where fishermen use floating baskets to carry their harvest from the boats to shore.

Gallery: The camel-ride vendors in the foreground of this photo by Maxine Saul lend scale and humanity to the stunning Treasury building in Petra, Jordan.

Gallery: This photo by Lynn Cornell zooms us to Antarctica with its Gentoo penguins populating the foreground while an icy scene looms behind.

Gallery: Trees in a swamp emerge from the mist during a foggy morning near Old Town, Miss., in this photo by Kevin Hawkins.

For a decade, readers have been sharing their photographs of the world with Star Tribune Travel — and we, in turn, have printed the best each week in “Viewfinders.” Here are the most spectacular reader photos of 2015, including pictures of a quiet morning in Petra, a suckling giraffe and a Michigan lake in autumn.

The images we receive span the globe, from the Dakotas to Antarctica. No matter their location, the best photos stand out for their artistry, careful composition, great timing and ability to draw us into a scene. We can’t show all of our favorites, which collectively show Minnesotans’ shooting skill and breadth of travels, so please go to startribune.com/travel to view the online photo gallery.

As we began work on this, our 10th anniversary “best reader photos of the year” feature, we noted that three locals share their photographs again and again, each displaying their own distinct style. Meet these three Viewfinders regulars — exceptional photographers all — see their work and read their advice about taking great travel photographs on G6. Then send us your own photographs, too.