SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Carly Fiorina has been off the main stage–and back and off again–and CARLY for America, in support of the 2016 presidential candidate, is making a last-minute parody video pitch to get her back on again at Saturday’s ABC debate by releasing the ABC–“Anybody but Carly”–network debate promo.

“Tune in as we exclude Carly Fiorina, but include people she beat,” begins the video. “On Anybody but Carly, we rig the game.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Anybody but Carly from CARLY for America on Vimeo.

Fiorina has been fighting for a position on the main debate stage since early in the race for the GOP nomination. The video argues that she beat Ohio Governor John Kasich and New Jersey Governor Chris Christie in Iowa, and that she is tied with establishment darling Jeb Bush in delegates. A portion of the video declares she takes on Democratic party presidential candidate Hillary Clinton “like nobody else can,” perhaps a reference to Fiorina’s status as the only woman in the race for the GOP nomination.

Using Disney references, the video says, “We’ve FROZEN Carly Out.” The ABC logo later appears with a Disney Mickey Mouse hat and the word “Rigged,” with a narrator saying, “All part of our Mickey Mouse operation.”

The video ends with the hashtag #LetCarlyDebate.

CARLY for America Executive Director Stephen DeMaura said upon the release of the video:

We made a parody of ABC and Disney just like they made a parody out of our debate process. The arbitrary standards set by ABC lack grounding or knowledge of the political process or respect for the role New Hampshire voters play in the First in the Nation Primary. Despite not being included in the last debate Carly beat two establishment favorites and she will do so again on Tuesday. The standards set by Disney’s ABC are so arbitrary and nonsensical, one is left to believe they must be purposeful to protect Hillary Clinton from her most effective critic. The Manhattan media executives need to swallow their pride and do what is right by voters. Disney, ABC, and the RNC need to stop rigging the game and must listen to voters and include Carly.

Follow Michelle Moons on Twitter @MichelleDiana.