TRENTON — Gov. Chris Christie criticized the U.S. Supreme Court ruling Thursday upholding the federal subsidies 6.4 million people use to buy insurance through the Affordable Care Act, and, adding "Obamacare must be replaced."

In a tweet, the Republican governor wrote: "This decision turns common language on its head. Now leaders must turn our attention to making the case that ObamaCare must be replaced."

The U.S. Supreme Court voted 6-3 to uphold the federal subsidies that enable 6.4 million people to buy heath coverage, including 172,345 in New Jersey.

Chief Justice John Roberts wrote the majority opinion and was joined by Anthony Kennedy, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan. Justice Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito dissented.

MORE: What politicians, experts are saying about the ruling

"Congress passed the Affordable Care Act to improve health insurance markets, not to destroy them," Roberts wrote in the majority opinion in the case, King v. Burwell.

"If the statutory language is plain, the Court must enforce it according to its terms," the opinion says. "But often times the meaning — or ambiguity — of certain words or phrases may only become evident when placed in context."

Christie, who is expected to announce his candidacy for president on Tuesday, echoed the dissenting opinion in the King v. Burwell decision.

In his dissent, Scalia said the plain language of the law should have prevailed. The law says the subsidies are legal through online marketplaces established by the state.

"Words no longer have meaning if an exchange that is not established by a state is 'established by the state,'" he wrote.

The governor's statement today differs from his position earlier this month. He told reporters that Congress "should just fix" the law if the court decides the 34 states that did not created their own health exchange are not entitled to subsidies.

The average New Jersey policy holder receives $313 a month to keep their premiums low

New Jersey was one of the 34 states that would have been affected by a ruling against the Obama administration, because Christie let the federal government run the state's health exchange, at HealthCare.gov.

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.