Zack Trobaugh

It took Pope John Paul II High some time to fill its head-coaching vacancy for the girls soccer program, but the Lady Knights have a new leader in Zack Trobaugh.

A White House native, Trobaugh played for the Blue Devils from 2005-08 and went on to play at Young Harris (Ga.) College for the next two seasons before completing his final two years of eligibility at Trevecca Nazarene University.

He takes over a Lady Knight team that will have had its fourth different head coach in four seasons. Sterling Nabours coached the team last year, after Megan Forester led the Lady Knights during the 2013 season. Mike McLaren had been the team’s only head coach through the 2012 season, when he stepped aside and recommended Forester for the job.

“You want to build some consistency, and having four different coaches in four years hurts a little bit,” Trobaugh said. “But the girls haven’t really let that take them a step back. They’ve really put in a lot of work, and whoever their coach is, they’re going to give everything they’ve got to that person.”

Before Trobaugh’s hiring, which was made official last week, PJP II athletic director Alan Mila – who also coaches the school’s boys soccer program – was running the Lady Knights’ practices while the hiring process was being completed.

“I’ve been running practices myself,” Mila said. “It’s one of those things where having knowledge of the sport is helpful, but at the same time, we were trying to get a coach in the position.”

Now that Trobaugh is running the program, his focus is on moving the Lady Knights closer to a berth in the state’s final four. Last year, PJP II’s season ended with a 5-2 loss at Father Ryan in the state quarterfinals. The Lady Knights finished the 2014 campaign with a 7-10-1 record.

“From the limited time I’ve had with them, they’re a great group,” Trobaugh said. “They put in a lot of hard work, and they listen. I’m excited about them and about this year.”

An aggressive mentality will be the focal point of Trobaugh’s coaching style.

“To build a good program, you want to be a bit attack-minded,” Trobaugh said. “We’re going to try to implement that kind of system where we dominate the tempo of games, create (scoring) chances and be solid defensively. The formation can always change depending on who we’re playing, but the mindset is always to put the other team on their back foot.”

Trobaugh said he would like to try to play against his alma mater at some point as well.

“At some point, if we can get that set up, I’d like to play (White House),” Trobaugh said. “I came in pretty late, so I didn’t really have much to do with the schedule this year. For me, the way you measure yourself is to play the best teams around, whether it’s Division II teams or public schools. There’s a lot of great competition locally, and I’d like to put the girls up against anybody and see how they compete and hopefully watch them do well.”

Seeing the Lady Knights is Trobaugh’s primary goal.

“I have pretty high expectations,” Trobaugh said. “As a player, I always wanted to be the best that I could be at whatever I did. Now as a coach, I try to have that same mindset. I want to have the best team out on the field, every time.”

The Lady Knights are slated to open the regular season on Aug. 18 at St. Cecilia.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1TcihZ9