Two of the Chicago area's biggest health systems have a lot to prove if they want to successfully challenge federal regulators' objections to their proposed merger.

Experts say Advocate Health Care and NorthShore University HealthSystem can improve their odds if they show that their marriage won't diminish competition with other hospitals and that they're more efficient together than apart.

“If they can demonstrate to the court that if they merge, competition really won't be harmed, that's very powerful,” says Martin Gaynor, professor of economics and health policy at Carnegie Mellon University and director of the Federal Trade Commission's Bureau of Economics from 2013 to 2014.

A spokeswoman for Advocate declines to comment, as does a NorthShore spokesman.

Downers Grove-based Advocate, with 12 hospitals the largest network in the state, and Evanston-based NorthShore, with four hospitals, want to create a powerhouse system that would stretch from north suburban Libertyville to downstate Normal. Its combined annual revenue totaled $7.16 billion in 2014. Federal regulators say the merger would create the 11th largest nonprofit hospital system in the nation and command 55 percent of the North Shore market.

After a lengthy review, the Federal Trade Commission decided in December that the deal would substantially reduce competition and cause significant harm to consumers by hiking prices and decreasing quality, according to the agency's complaint. For example, pairing up could increase the systems' bargaining power with insurance companies to get higher reimbursement rates, which would force the carriers to pass on those costs through higher premiums, the complaint alleges.

The FTC lost a string of cases against hospital mergers in the 1990s because federal judges accepted hospitals' broad definitions of their geographic markets and the argument that the mergers wouldn't weaken competition because patients could go to other hospitals if they desired, experts say.

But regulators started to revisit mergers once hospitals combined and they since have become more successful. Among their most notable local cases was one against Evanston Northwestern Healthcare, now known as NorthShore. The FTC found that after Highland Park Hospital became part of the system in 2000, the system raised its prices.

Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Illinois, the dominant insurer in the state, balked at the increase, and the system withdrew it, federal records show. But for another insurer, UnitedHealthcare, rates for narrow network HMO plans climbed 52 percent at Evanston Hospital. Rates for broader PPO plans increased 190 percent at Evanston and Glenbrook hospitals. Ultimately NorthShore was forced to negotiate rates for Highland Park Hospital separately from others in the system.

In another local challenge, the FTC blocked a merger between Peoria-based OSF Healthcare and Rockford Health System in 2012. In that case, the combination would have left only one other hospital competitor in the Rockford region, the FTC alleged. OSF backed out of the deal, and Rockford since has merged with Janesville, Wis.-based Mercy Health System.

Nearly 300 hospital mergers and acquisitions were announced from 2012 to 2014, according to the American Hospital Association. That includes several deals in the Chicago area that have not attracted the ire of the FTC.

Streeterville-based Northwestern Memorial HealthCare has tripled its number of hospitals since 2014, to six, after acquiring Winfield-based Cadence Health and DeKalb-based KishHealth System. West suburban Edward Hospital & Health Services and Elmhurst Memorial Healthcare created one of the biggest health systems in the Chicago area when they merged in 2013.

How can Advocate and NorthShore prevail in federal court? Experts say the systems need to show that the Chicago market is vast and fragmented, with 95 hospitals in the six-county area and lots of empty hospital beds.

That gives patients options.

They could argue that their partnership allows them to better coordinate care and reduce hospital admissions, hallmarks of Obamacare, and that they couldn't accomplish those feats as separate systems.

They also could reduce costs by downsizing their facilities and staff, experts say. That could involve closing some hospitals, but consolidating services now performed at facilities that are geographically close is more likely. NorthShore Glenbrook Hospital in Glenview and Advocate Lutheran General Hospital in Park Ridge are just 5 miles apart, for example.

“You could make the argument that by combining these hospitals and strategically reducing capacity, they're able to raise the quality of care in the remaining units rather than having to make significant investments” in both systems, says Allan Baumgarten, an independent health care consultant based in Minneapolis.

They also could sell a hospital, but Richard Feinstein, who led the FTC Bureau of Competition from 2009 to 2013, says such a move would satisfy the government only if it doesn't leave the market worse off competitively.

This surely will be Advocate and NorthShore's battle in 2016, and one its rivals will watch closely.