Nine agonizing months after the head of the city’s ailing public hospitals buzzed the mayor’s pager, Dr. de Blasio is transfusing cash into to a hemorrhaging public hospital system.

Rapid changes in health care delivery, including Obamacare, have put the New York’s 11 municipal hospitals into increasingly critical condition. The mayor’s belated response has been to prop them up with money.

His latest financial plan calls for supporting the Health and Hospitals Corp. with an immediate $337 million and $1 billion more over the next five years.

At best, he’s struggling to keep the doors open without confronting economics that will inescapably force HHC to undergo significant changes.

De Blasio should have learned a painful lesson in health care realities from his losing battle to keep open Brooklyn’s Long Island College Hospital. There, a venerable local facility fell victim to the flight of patients to medical centers affiliated with major institutions like Mount Sinai and New York University.

While running for mayor, de Blasio pledged to stop closure of LICH, in the process making a splash by getting arrested at a protest and wearing handcuffs as a badge of honor.

Once in office, he wound up with a deal that shuttered the hospital in favor of a walk-in facility and real estate development.

Many of the same forces that doomed LICH, plus some, are buffeting the city system. As more patients obtain health insurance under Obamacare, they’ve been leaving the public system in droves, with a 2.5% drop in visits last year alone.

Adding to HHC woes, Obamacare cut funds that had been used to treat the uninsured — patients who account for 1 of every 4 outpatient visits.

Meanwhile, world-class private health systems like NYU compete aggressively to lock insured patients into their doctor networks. You may have seen the ads on TV and in the subways.

HHC’s president, Dr. Ram Raju, last year plotted a plan to compete with those private giants for patients’ loyalty, aiming for an audacious 43% increase by 2020.

He’s moving to bulk up outpatient care, improve the patient experience and convince New Yorkers by the hundreds of thousands to forego nearby world-class private health systems and go to the public facilities instead.

Could happen. By most measures, public hospitals’ care is now on a par with private counterparts . But Raju is competing with private-sector sharks and their advertising budgets.

Sooner or later, there will be a reckoning as the hospitals demand large city subsidies. Now is the time to start honestly taking stock of the hospital system’s place in a fast-evolving health system.