James Comer, a Republican gubernatorial candidate, addresses supporters at McD Concrete Enterprises, Erlanger. At right behind is has Lt. Gov, candidate, Chris McDaniel, president of the concrete company. (Photo: The Emquirer/Patrick Reddy )

ERLANGER -- More than 200 Northern Kentucky Republicans Wednesday cheered in a warehouse in the middle of a muddy field to welcome local Sen. Chris McDaniel and Agriculture Commissioner James Comer.

A day earlier in southern Kentucky, Comer launched his 2015 campaign for governor on the Republican ticket and chose Taylor Mill resident McDaniel as his running mate.

Comer and McDaniel spoke before the crowd at the new headquarters of McDaniel's business, McD Concrete in Erlanger.

Comer hopes McDaniel's spot on the ticket will bring out more voters in Northern Kentucky, a region that has historically lower voter turnout in statewide elections.

"One thing about Northern Kentucky, this is a sleeping giant," Comer said in a press conference afterward. "When Northern Kentucky starts turning out at the same rate of Louisville and Lexington, not the same number but the same percentage, this is a conservative, pro-business state over night. I believe with Chris McDaniel on the ticket, we're going to get that turnout rate up in Northern Kentucky."

The Rolling Stones' "Start Me Up" blared from the sound system and the crowd rose to its feet in a standing ovation as McDaniel took the stage.

McDaniel and Comer both hit Republican talking points about being business-friendly and taking on the administration of President Barack Obama.

Health care reform will likely be a big issue in the 2015 races.

Republicans have railed against the Affordable Care Act and expressed their desire to dismantle it. But the health care exchange and Medicaid expansion in Kentucky led by Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear remain popular among many who have received health insurance through it.

The question of what Comer would do with the health care act came up in Tompkinsville and again in Erlanger.

Both times McDaniel and Comer wouldn't commit to what they would do, saying too many variables remain unanswered. Whether Republicans will take over Congress and what will happen with court challenges to the Affordable Care Act remain unknown, Comer said.

"We're going to look at everything," Comer said. "I'm not going to give you a reckless, irresponsible answer and say we're going to do this. We don't know what the world will look like in a year-and-a-half."

McDaniel promised a "solid, measured response once we have all the information" from a Comer-McDaniel administration on what to do about health care reform.

"A lot of these mandates unfortunately have been accepted by the Beshear administration," McDaniel said. "And once you accept those, you also accept a bill that is frankly higher than anyone knows how to pay for."

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1tyiJzs