Topics: Earth Island Journal, Haiti, Osprey, Port-au-Prince, Sustainability News, Life News

In early February as Haitians took to the streets of the capital city of Port-au-Prince in violent protest against the government, a quieter political drama of international consequence unfolded in a far away village in the Central Plateau where a man held a migrating raptor for ransom hoping it would be his ticket out of the country.

The man and his neighbors mistook the bird, an osprey, for an eagle — a well-known symbol associated with the United States even in this remote village. The bird carried particular weight because it had a metal band on its leg that listed an eight-digit number — 788-10910 — and had “Washington, D.C.” inscribed on it.

“They’d assigned guards to this bird. Everyone wanted a piece of this bird and thought they were going to get a reward because it was a bald eagle,” said Kelly Crowdis, a Port-au-Prince-based American veterinarian who traveled from the capital — driving for hours, taking two boats, and walking more than two-and-a half miles — to examine the bird after she heard about it.

Local police and politicians, representatives from Haiti’s Ministry of Agriculture and many others tried to no avail to take custody of the bird, but the villagers and the bird’s captor would not surrender the bird.

“They thought because the bird had a band on it that it had a specific owner,” Crowdis told me over the phone from Port-au-Prince. “You can’t blame them. We tried to explain to the people and the entire community that this was a migratory bird.”

The osprey did not have an owner, exactly, but the number on its band did lead to clues about its origin. It was banded in 2001 as a nestling in Massachusetts under a federal permit belonging to one Norman Smith, who works for Mass Audubon.

Reached by phone, Smith said the osprey belonged to an ongoing study begun 35 years ago in which more than 6,000 birds were given unique tracking numbers. This particular bird was banded in the last week of June of 2001 at two weeks old, just two months before it would make its first solo journey to South America. (The average lifespan of an osprey is 15 to 20 years.)

Ornithologists, biologist and other researchers have been tracking and studying birds for about a hundred years, primarily through a federally mandated program that has been in operation since the signing of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918. An estimated 2 to 3 million birds have been banded as part of the North American Banding Program, explained Jo Lutmerding, a biologist with the USGS Bird Banding Laboratory, which operates in partnership with the Canadian Wildlife Service.

The bird lab maintains a database receiving some 85,000 “recovery” reports annually — mostly from hunters who have killed geese and ducks. The lab forwards this information to biologists and others who have tagged birds for studies on issues such as population dynamics, species longevity, spread of disease, and migration.

Raptors, which include osprey, peregrine falcons, eagles, and other meat-eating birds that share hooked beaks, keen eye-sight and eight sharp talons, came close to extinction in the 1960s and ‘70s because of pesticides, including DDT, which was banned in 1972. “That’s what stopped the use of DDT,” said Smith, adding that since then raptors’ numbers have rebounded. (These birds of prey, however, are still at risk from widely used, second-generation rat poisons.)

The ospreys tagged in Smith’s study began arriving back in Massachusetts last week, where between 200 and 300 nesting platforms have been constructed along the coast. The ospreys return annually to nest and breed, typically with the same mate. Sadly, this year, No. 788-10910, or “TenTen” as it the captured bird was nicknamed by another American veterinarian, Myriam Kaplan-Pasternak, who tried to negotiate for its release, will not make it back.