Topics: Louie, Louis CK, Rape, Sexual assault, TV, Entertainment News

During “Pamela 1,” the last of two episodes of FX’s “Louie” that aired back-to-back last night, Louie C.K. corners a woman in his apartment and repeatedly attempts to physically overpower and force himself upon her. The fact that the woman is his longtime friend and occasional romantic interest Pamela (Adlon) is, for some fans, enough to disassociate the incident from an attempted rape. For others who watched along in horror, it most certainly is not:

Any reviewer who doesn't call what just happened between Louie & Pamela on #LouieFX sexual assault needs to quit their job. That was awful. — Katie Hegarty (@HegartyKatie) June 3, 2014

Even Louis C.K., as the show’s primary writer, acknowledges that a line, however blurry, has been crossed. As she successfully wrestles away from his attempts to drag her to his bedroom, yank her shirt up and kiss her, Pamela remarks, “This would be rape if you weren’t so stupid. My god, you can’t even rape well.” I almost wrote “bumbling attempts” in the previous sentence, but that would have been apologetic bullshit. The simple truth is that Louie is a rather large man, and Pamela is a very small woman, and, though she managed to squirm out of his grasp, it could have easily gone the other way. In the end, she consents to a kiss — although, I don’t know of too many women who would consider cowering in a doorframe begrudgingly allowing physical contact so that they can safely leave as “consent.”

The scene, while funny in fragments, is disturbing. What is also disturbing is that, minutes earlier, we are asked to believe that Louie is heartbroken, struggling to get over a mostly chaste, exceedingly sweet, month-long (six episode) affair with a woman who just returned to Hungary. Indeed, we see him walking alone in the cold, pining for her, at the beginning of this episode. And, so, unless the character is an emotional infant whose affections realign in an instant, Louie’s romantic aggression toward Pamela cannot possibly be construed as anything remotely genuine — not that that would absolve him anyway.