The Latest on a standoff in northeastern Mississippi that ended with gunfire that killed the suspect and a law enforcement agent, and the wounding of three others (all times local).

10 a.m.

Mississippi Gov. Phil Bryant is calling on his state's residents to pray for the family of a state narcotics agent killed when a standoff at a Tishomingo County home ended in gunfire.

Tishomingo Coroner Mack Wilemon says 44-year-old James Lee Tartt of Grenada was part of a SWAT team that was forcibly entering a home where a domestic dispute had resulted in an hourslong standoff. The man believed to have fired at police -- 45-year-old Charles Lee Lambert of Iuka -- also was killed.

Both men had multiple gunshot wounds. Autopsies were planned.

The shooting happened early Saturday. Of the three other law enforcement officials who were wounded, two had injuries that were not life-threatening.

9:25 a.m.

A coroner in Mississippi has identified a law enforcement agent and a suspected gunman who were killed when a standoff in the northeastern part of the state ended in gunfire.

James Lee Tartt of Grenada, a 44-year-old Mississippi Bureau of Narcotics Agent, was killed. Also killed was the man said to have shot at police officers: 45-year-old Charles Lee Lambert of Iuka.

The shooting happened around 12:30 a.m. Saturday in rural Tishomingo County. Coroner Mack Wilemon says it followed an hour-long standoff that developed as a result of some kind of domestic dispute. Members of a state SWAT team had been called to the scene.

Three other law enforcement agents were injured -- two with wounds that were not life threatening.

8:30 a.m.

Law enforcement authorities say one officer is dead and three are hospitalized with gunshot wounds after a standoff in northeastern Mississippi.

Department of Public Safety spokesman Warren Strain says the standoff ended in gunfire early Saturday at a home near the town of Iuka, Mississippi.

Strain says the man who shot at officers is also dead. The wounds of two of the officers are not life-threatening.

A woman and a girl inside the house are alive.

The state's SWAT team was called to the scene Friday evening by local authorities to respond to the standoff.

Strain declined to identify the officers and the suspect. He also did not identify the agency for whom the deceased officer worked.