The paper continued:

“The 35 murders through last Friday represent a 94 percent jump compared to the same period in 2014.”

Landrieu was struggling to find the best way to make more people sit up and take notice of these deaths. He felt a moral obligation to do everything in his power to fill these books with fewer pages.

His motivation to me seemed honest and earnest, and also frustrated. How to value the merits of the case against structural injustices, while still addressing on-the-ground, widespread carnage? How to honor the incredible coverage and movement around the “Black Lives Matter” mantra, where people feel black lives are affected, destroyed or completely taken by institutional forces, while also halting the impact on other black lives taken in less newsworthy ways?

This is a conundrum that many big cities face.

While I was talking with Landrieu in New Orleans, Chicago was experiencing a particularly gruesome Fourth of July weekend, with 10 people killed and another 55 wounded, according to The Chicago Tribune. Remarkably, as The Tribune points out, that toll was actually “lower than last year.”

A closer look at violence like this reveals a complex web of connections between victims and perpetrators of such violence.

A 2013 study by the Yale sociologist Andrew Papachristos examined “police and gun homicide records from 2006 to 2011 for residents living within a six-square-mile area that had some of the highest rates for homicide in Chicago.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

He found that:

“Six percent of the population was involved in 70 percent of the murders, and that nearly all of those in the 6 percent already had some contact with the criminal justice or public health systems. In addition, those in the 6 percent had a 900 percent increased risk of becoming a victim of gun homicide — suggesting that being part of a risky network might offer more insight into one’s chance of becoming a victim than other risk factors.”

But this small ecosystem of violence sprawls out onto city streets — and into families — populated by innocent people who sometimes, also, become its casualties.

One of the people killed in Chicago was 7-year-old Amari Brown. As The Chicago Tribune put it, “Police Superintendent Garry McCarthy on Sunday said the bullet that killed Amari was likely meant for his father, describing Antonio Brown as a ‘ranking gang member’ who has been uncooperative in the investigation into his son’s slaying.”

This has fueled something of a debate about whether all black lives matter — including those taken by community violence — or whether that designation is reserved only for lives taken by state violence.

But this is a wedge in search of a crack. To me, there is no discontinuity between these lives because there is no way to separate structural violence from community violence.

Concentrated poverty is a direct result of structural inequity, and that concentrated poverty is attended by hopelessness and desperation, all of which are a prime breeding ground for violence.

People didn’t simply wake up one day with a burning desire to live in the poorest, most violent parts of our cities. Generations of discriminatory housing, banking and employment practices created those powder kegs. And then we blame racial culture rather than racist culture for their constant explosions.

We say that community violence doesn’t get the same attention as state violence, but we don’t register that “stop the violence” rallies and pitches have been a staple of many of these communities for decades, so much so that news people rarely find them newsworthy. That is a corporate media issue more than a community commitment issue.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In truth, these arguments are simply another iteration of the reductive either/or argument, with personal responsibility on one side and structural oppression on the other.

Actually, the more nuanced and sophisticated position is that personal choices are made within a social construct, and that construct is heavily influenced by oppressive forces — interpersonal biases, structural inequities, aversion to otherness.

More people are now opening their eyes to the totality of this image, realizing with supreme frustration that one can’t simply earn one’s way up out of oppression, that oppression must be dismantled from the top down.

More people are realizing that in a moment of greatest distress and danger, nothing else you have ever done will matter if all the person who poses the threat sees is a body not to be valued. When he pulls a gun, you can’t pull a résumé.

The structure itself is robbing a people of what I would call “trickle down optimism,” the ability of people who do all the right things and make all the right choices to say: “See, this works. This is the path to safety and happiness and freedom.”

Instead, they are developing a rage at the realization that no amount of acting right and doing right can completely protect them.

There is no disconnection between the people in Landrieu’s binders of dead bodies and those who are alive but nonetheless feel bound by bias.

All of those lives matter, and they are all being affected by the same structural forces.