Yoga is good for the mind, body, and soul.

The word yoga is derived from the Sanskrit word that loosely translates into “to unite,” representing yoga’s uniting of mind, body, and spirit. The practice is based on a combination of breath control, simple meditation, and the adoption of specific bodily poses. Whether you are an avid yoga follower or simply curious of what it’s all about, here are some inspirational yoga quotes to get help you find your inner peace.

1.”Yoga teaches us to cure what need not be endured and endure what cannot be cured" — B.K.S. Iyengar, founder of Iyengar Yoga, and considered one of the foremost yoga teachers in the world.

2. "Yoga is the perfect opportunity to be curious about who you are” — Jason Crandell, natural teacher and yoga instructor.

3. “Yoga is not about touching your toes. It’s about unlocking your ideas about what you want, where you think you can go, and how you will achieve when you get there.” — Cyndi Lee, founder of OM yoga, an internationally recognized method of yoga.

4. “Yoga is like music. The rhythm of the body, the melody of the mind, and the harmony of the soul create the symphony of life.” — B.K.S. Iyengar

5. “Yoga is the journey of the self, through the self, to the self.” — Excerpt from ancient Indian text, The Bhagavad Gita.

6. “Yoga is not a religion. It is a science, science of well-being, science of youthfulness, science of integrating body, mind, and soul.” — Amit Ray, enlightened spiritual master in Himalayan Yoga and author.

7. “Yoga is 99 percent practice and one percent theory.” — Sri Krishna Pattabhi Jois, developer of Ashtanga Vinyasa Yoga.

8. “Yoga is not about self-improvement, it’s about self-acceptance.” — Gurmukh Kaur Khalsa, teacher of Yogi Bhajan and pioneer in the field of pre-natal yoga.

9. “The true purpose of yoga is to discover that aspect of your being that can never be lost.” — Deepak Chopra

10. “Yoga is about remembering that we are already one with the divinity and we’ve left it.” — Rolf Naujokat, past student of Sri Krishna Pattabhi Jois and current Ashtanga Yoga instructor.

11. Yoga is essentially a practice for your soul, working through the medium of your body.” — Tara Fraser, founder/co-director of Yoga Junction, where she teaches regular classes and courses.

12. “Yoga teaches you how to listen to your body.” — Mariel Hemingway, American actress and holistic/spiritual author.

13. “Yoga doesn’t take time, it gives time.” — Ganga White, founder of the White Lotus Foundation and recognized as an outstanding teacher and exponent of yoga.

14. “Yoga is a powerful vehicle for change. As you build strength you start to believe in your own potential.” — Tiffany Cruikshank, international yoga teacher, author, and health and wellness expert.

15. “The success of yoga does not lie in the ability to perform postures but in how it positively changes the way we live our life and our relationships.” — T.K.V. Desikachar, one of the world’s foremost teachers of yoga and a renowened authority on its therapeutic uses.

16. “Yoga is a mirror to look at ourselves from within.” — B.K.S. Iyengar

17.” Body is not stiff, mind is stiff.”— Sri Krishna Pattabhi Jois

18. “Yoga is the fountain of youth. You’re only as young as your spine is flexible.” — Bob Harper, personal trainer featured on the U.S. version of The Biggest Loser.

19. “Yoga has a sly, clever way of short circuiting the mental patterns that cause anxiety. “ — Baxter Bell, yoga instructor and founder of Baxter Bell Yoga and Therapeutics

20. “Yoga is almost like music in a way; there’s no end to it.” — Sting, English musician and former lead singer of the band The Police.