Topics: Al Gore, Hillary Clinton, Media Matters, Wall Street Journal, Politics News

This article originally appeared on Media Matters

Somewhere Al Gore is probably experiencing painful campaign flashbacks. Like if he heard NBC’s Andrea Mitchell ask Hillary Clinton in a recent interview, “Does it hurt you when people say you are too lawyerly, you parse your words, you are not authentic, you’re not connecting?”

Or when the Wall Street Journal published a piece suggesting so much of what Clinton does sounds “scripted and poll-tested.” Or when Politico declared she’s a White House hopeful “with an authenticity problem.” Or when the Washington Post reported, “Her campaign has struggled to present her as authentic and relatable.” Or when McClatchy Newspapers asked “Is Hillary Clinton Authentic Enough for Voters,” and likened her to Richard Nixon.

“Authenticity” has clearly become the Beltway media’s latest buzzword to describe what’s supposedly wrongwith Clinton’s campaign, even as she continues to have a sizeable national lead over her Democratic competitors.

The answer: She’s a phony.

Why is this all likely ringing in Gore’s ears? Because the last White House campaign that the Beltway press openly waged war against (the way it’s now openly waging war on the Clinton campaign) was Gore’s 2000 push. The Beltway elites hated Gore and didn’t try to hide it, just like so many journalists seem to openly despise Clinton today. (“Reporters liked Bush and didn’t like Gore,” observed Paul Krugman at the New York Times.)

In 2000, Gore was widely ridiculed in the press as the wooden, over-calculating, poll-driven phony who was running against the epitome of true authenticity: George W. Bush. Sure, Gore knew his stuff cold and Bush seemed wobbly on the facts, and forget that Bush’s entire campaign turned out to be built around the staged-crafted prevarication known as “compassionate conservativism.” The press loved the Bush image and couldn’t stand the Gore persona — The New York Times mocked him as “Eddie Haskell,” the neighborhood brownnoser from Leave It To Beaver.

The press dutifully spent the entire campaign regurgitating the Republicans’ playbook on Gore: he’s a phony who can’t be trusted. Fast-forward and the Republican playbook reads the same on Clinton: She’s a phony who can’t be trusted. So yes, the media’s current authenticity chatter plays right into the GOP’s hands. It perfectly coincides with conservative talking points about how to undermine the Democratic frontrunner.

But the authenticity math doesn’t seem to add up.

In 2008, Clinton tallied 18 million votes during the Democratic primary season. Obviously, she lost to Barack Obama but how did she win a whopping 18 million votes if, according to the press, she can’t connect with people due to her utter lack of authenticity? (Reminder: Clinton won her 2000 New York Senate race in alandslide.)

The recent “authenticity” wave began with a New York Times article that claimed “there will be new efforts to bring spontaneity to a candidacy that sometimes seems wooden and overly cautious.” The piece came complete with the mocking headline, “Hillary Clinton to Show More Humor and Heart, Aides Say.” (Punch line: Clinton’s handlers have to instruct her be warm and funny?)