With gun violence ripping Chicago apart, resulting in about 2,400 shooting victims so far this year, the question of how to address the crisis will take center stage later this month at a conference of more than 13,000 public health experts.

The American Public Health Association, which represents thousands of health professionals and advocates, will hold its annual meeting Oct. 31 to Nov. 4 at McCormick Place.

Many public health officials are studying mass shootings and gun violence with the goal of trying to understand those issues and influence public policy.

More than 30 papers and panels at the conference will deal with firearms, including gang violence, hospital treatments, gun fatalities by race and ethnicity, the role of social networks, police use of force, suicide and gun control policy. Research papers will not be made public until the program, but a list of topics is available on the organization's website.

Researcher Harold Pollack of the University of Chicago's School of Social Service Administration, will discuss trace data analysis of recovered crime guns in Chicago. Pollack also will present findings from a survey of Cook County gun offenders.

Multiple shootings and deaths haunt Chicago, including two straight weekends in September when more than 50 people were shot. In August, more than 40 people were shot on four consecutive weekends.

According to a Chicago Tribune tally, 2,399 people in Chicago were shot through Oct. 13.

Mayor Rahm Emanuel has said he is fed up with the gun violence. "Enough is enough," he said last month after six people were killed and at least eight were wounded, including two toddlers.

Black aldermen, frustrated by violence in their wards, called for Police Superintendent Garry McCarthy to be fired. But last week Emanuel gave McCarthy a vote of confidence and defended the leadership of his police force.

Other topics to be discussed at the conference include e-cigarettes, TV binge-watching, grocery store accessibility, climate change, breast-feeding, cancer research, immigration policies and the Affordable Care Act. More than 1,000 scientific sessions will be held.

Prominent speakers include U.S. Surgeon General Vivek Murthy, actor and environmental activist Ed Begley Jr. and educator Freeman A. Hrabowski III.

jrussell@tribpub.com

Twitter @johnrussell99