Queensland

Entertainment

Exxopolis at South Bank. Photo: Rob Shakespeare

It's one of the most intriguing, colourful and imposing attractions of the 2014 Brisbane Festival.

But at its core, Exxopolis is nothing but air.

Exxopolis, a creation of the Nottingham-based Architects of Air, will be a feature of the South Bank cultural forecourt for the duration of the Brisbane Festival.

Exxopolis at South Bank. Photo: Rob Shakespeare

Architects of Air exhibition manager Jonathan Gatt said the a walk-through air sculpture was a place to experience "a world with no white light".

Advertisement

"The only light that comes in is daylight, and it passes through the translucent coloured PVC," he said.

"Most of the structure is made of silver PVC that is opaque and that lets no light in whatsoever.

Exxopolis at South Bank. Photo: Rob Shakespeare

"Once you're inside, you don't see any of this silver at all because it works on reflection."

While Exxopolis, a 10 metre-high and 50 metre-long series of interconnecting domes, may look from the outside a little like a bouncing castle, Mr Gatt said it was no children's playground.

"In a jumping castle, you're on the outside of the balloon," he said.

Exxopolis at South Bank. Photo: Rob Shakespeare

"But with Exxopolis, you're inside the balloon and you're bathed in colour."

Another way Exxopolis differed from a jumping castle was that physical play was actively discouraged, with children younger than 16 not permitted unless they were accompanied by an adult.

It was a long way – just shy of 16,500 kilometres – to bring Exxopolis from Nottingham to Brisbane, which Mr Gatt said came with some logistical challenges.

"It does become very expensive when we come as far as this – I don't really think we can go much further than Australia or New Zealand," he said.

"But the main body is actually air – all I'm doing is encapsulating air in a PVC membrane, so it all packs down into six pallet-sized cages and I think the whole structure with all its ancillary equipment weighs about 2½ tonnes.

"So when we come somewhere as far out in the world as this, we wouldn't just come for one event."

Exxopolis has already been in Sydney and Melbourne on this tour and will head to Bangkok at the conclusion of the Brisbane Festival

Adult tickets for Exxopolis are $14 online through the Brisbane Festival ticketing website, brisbanefestival.qtix.com.au, or $16 at the box office (children $7/$10).

The Brisbane Festival, which kicked off on Saturday, will run until September 27.