<p>STOCK PHOTO Water.</p>

By Erik Kiffe And Jill Santos Eye On The Environment

We have entered the fourth year of exceptional drought conditions. Before investing in expensive and controversial alternative water supplies, such as desalination and increased importation, municipalities have historically relied on water conservation ? a proven tool for communities to live within their means.

In the past four years, local and state officials have increased conservation incentives and recommendations, from reduced shower lengths to improved sprinkler systems.

Considering more than half of residential water consumption occurs outdoors, officials have focused on restricting water use there. Some communities in California have seen nearly a 30 percent reduction in water consumption based on this one effort. State regulators also have updated rules on the use of gray water and rainwater for gardens.

It is understandable that some people are experiencing "conservation fatigue." As the drought wears on, residents find it difficult to continue making significant changes to their lifestyles. In response, cities and water providers have offered new incentive programs.

The Metropolitan Water District of Southern California implemented the largest turf-rebate program in the county, leading to the removal of 170 million square feet of turf so far. But due to its overwhelming popularity, the funding has been exhausted. Customers can get on a waiting list, and additional funding may become available in the fall.

Serving the eastern part of Ventura County via public agencies and water districts, Metropolitan Water still offers incentives for high-efficiency clothes washers, toilets, rotating sprinkler nozzles, rain barrels and irrigation controllers. Each of these countywide programs provides a method to save both money and water. To participate, contact your local water provider.

Ventura Water, which serves the city of Ventura, is currently the only local water provider offering a cash rebate for turf removal. Its Water Wise Incentive Program also offers cash for investing in efficient irrigation devices and measures. If you live in Ventura, apply soon because funds are limited.

The state recently announced a program dubbed the "turf and toilet rebate," which offers financial incentives for turf removal and installation of high-efficiency toilets. For more information on this program, visit http://saveourwaterrebates.com.

Hundreds of residents will continue to make changes, with or without financial rewards. Even though you may not earn a direct refund, you will save money on your water bills while promoting the sustainability of our natural and limited resources. Some studies have shown that replacing lawns with a California native garden reduces outdoor water use by as much as 70 percent.

The cost of water will continually increase as our sources are stressed. Simple changes can make an essential difference. For example, by simply cutting shower times to 5 minutes, up to 160 gallons of water can be saved per month. Investing in a "smart controller" can save nearly 30 percent.

Some changes, such as landscape investments, might seem daunting, but all the municipalities in Ventura County collaborated on a website that offers a wealth of information and ideas. The Water Wise Gardening in Ventura County site, www.venturacountygardening.com, features garden tours, installation and design ideas, a water calculator and a plant database. It also contains a specific set of resources for lawn-to-garden retrofits.

Keep your eye on the environment by conserving water. Every drop we save today is a drop we can give to future generations.

Erik Kiffe is an intern with Ventura Water and Jill Sarick Santos is an environmental sustainability specialist with the city of Ventura. Representatives of government or nonprofit agencies who want to submit articles on environmental topics for this column should contact David Goldstein at 658-4312 or david.goldstein@ventura.org.