Related: Baystate Health CEO defends Medicaid budget reimbursement request, says financial stability no reason to 'punish

In this Q&A, Dr. Mark A. Keroak, president and chief executive officer of Baystate Health, was asked to expand on why Baystate Health will continue to lobby Massachusetts legislators for additional money to offset Medicaid reimbursement loses. The legislature failed, in passing the recent supplemental budget, to include a Senate provision that would have given Baystate Health $5 million.

Why was Baystate seeking the specific amount of $5 million in the supplemental budget?

Baystate Health loses $45 million a year due to under reimbursement for Medicaid services. We didn't request a specific dollar amount — we simply requested some short-term remedy to the fundamental unfairness of Baystate's long-standing exclusion from the program that supports large providers of Medicaid services for fulfillment of their mission.

We are one of the largest providers of these services in the state, yet the only organization that doesn't receive some offset to those losses, and we're disappointed that we were again excluded.

According to one set of statistics, the percentage of Medicaid/Medicare patients treated at Baystate Medical in 2014 was 68 percent. This qualifies Baystate Medical as a disproportionate share hospital. However, the center was disqualified because Baystate Health earned a $96 million operating profit margin that year. Why does this profit margin not cover Baystate Health's losses from Medicaid's low reimbursement rates?

There are three important points of clarification here.

First: the notion of 'profit.' We are a not-for-profit organization. Any positive operating margin we record is directly re-invested in the organization's facilities, programs and services: for example, buying a new CT scanner, or fixing the air conditioning at the hospital, or funding a new program to help diabetes. That's where the margin goes.

Second: The margin of Baystate Health vs. Baystate Medical Center. Baystate Medical Center recorded a $96 million operating margin last year. But that's only one part of our overall financial performance. Many other parts of our system operate at a loss.

Baystate Health's overall margin for last year is expected to be zero or slightly below. That has serious implications for our overall financial stability, and our ability to invest in new facilities and equipment, while sustaining the level of sponsorship of community activities that we have traditionally funded.

Third: There is no connection between operating margin — positive or negative --and eligibility for the Medicaid waiver. The formula for eligibility for these supplemental payments to large Medicaid providers was devised many years ago, with a few updates since then. It takes into account providers' share of both Medicaid and commercial-paying patients.

It was written to reward those hospitals who disproportionately care for higher Medicaid patient populations — which is certainly true of Baystate Medical Center - under the premise that hospitals with more private-insured patients are more self-sustaining. The idea here is that profits from one will offset the losses of another, and all hospitals will succeed.

However, this approach is tailored to Eastern Massachusetts, where there are several large health systems whose market power has been demonstrated to get them higher commercial payments. In Western Massachusetts, we are the only major medical center that serves both Medicaid and commercial patients for many types of high-level care. The Eastern Mass.-based formula simply doesn't work here.

According to one study of the state exchange, between 2010 and 2013, Brigham and Women's in Boston was the most expensive hospital. It had an average insurance payment per-in-network hospital admission of $23,278, while Baystate was seventh, with an average insurance payment per-in-network hospital admission of $13,715. Interestingly, Baystate's severity index for patients was similar to Brigham's. What is at work here in terms of payments for such similar patients at two different hospitals?

Large systems in Boston have the ability to leverage insurers for significantly better rates than we do in Western Mass. The severity index is the same - patients in Eastern Mass. are generally not sicker than patients in Western Mass.

While Medicaid and Medicare reimbursements do not significantly vary by provider, Medicaid waiver dollars are distributed, per recipient, at four times the rate in Boston as they are elsewhere in the state.

Historically, underpayments from Medicaid have been offset by higher commercial rates of reimbursement. While many Boston-based health systems have continuously raised rates over the years, Baystate rates have been marginally increased by under one percent over the last five years, despite skyrocketing expenses.

We are committed to delivering maximum value in healthcare for patients as well as payers, and we remain the lowest-cost teaching hospital in the state, but we can no longer sustain these continuing losses from Medicaid underpayments.

This disparity in payments between East and West directly affects our ability to fulfill our charitable mission - to sustain the only level 1 trauma center, the only level 3 NICU (neonatal intensive care unit), the only heart-surgery program, the designated heart-attack center, the only around-the-clock neurosurgery center in the region.



How would reforms of how payment is made to providers through MassHealth help?

There is nothing definitive in the MassHealth reform arena, yet. The Primary Care Payment Reform Initiative of two years ago was the last attempt at this, and it was accurate in concept but fell short with rates. Therefore, like most other entities across the state, we passed. Again, we are not-for-profit.

Who sets the qualifications for getting money from the Delivery System Transformation Initiatives Trust Fund? Do you have to qualify as a disproportionate share hospital for these trust funds, and, if excluded, are you excluded by the state from all disproportionate share hospital funds?

Secretary of the Executive Office of Health and Human Services Marylou Sudders will be responsible for negotiating with CMS (Centers for Medicare/Medicaid Services) on the next round of the waiver dollars, and I have met with her regarding our need to be included. She is sympathetic to the situation that we are in, and understands how these ongoing inequities can negatively impact our entire community.

It will be up to the administration to establish the new formula for disbursement of the funds. The disproportionate share funds are independent of the waiver dollars and are not affected by inclusion or exclusion from the waiver.

How has the Affordable Care Act made it more difficult for insurers and hospitals to be profitable?

We agree with the notion that everyone deserves access to insurance and good healthcare. However, the Medicaid program is significantly underfunded, and the consequences of adding substantial numbers of new patients at this reimbursement level, without accommodations to offset the impact on resources, are very serious for organizations such as ours. We've done our part to reduce expenses, but 80 cents on the dollar in payment for 25 percent of our patient population presents real challenges.