Matias, 9, and Loic Betschen, 9, of Switzerland tinker with disassembled electronics at the Fort Collins Museum of Discovery booth at the Maker Faire on Saturday at the former Agilent Technologies campus in southwest Loveland. ( James Garcia )

Forget Legos and electronics when there's a floor covered in cardboard perfect for fort making.

Nine-year-old Ethan Altemose, with the help of his parents, Glenn and Deona Altemose, built an old military fort out of odd-shaped cardboard pieces while the sounds of technology bleeped around him.

"It's ironic, we're here and he's playing with cardboard," Glenn said.

Ethan, along with his brother Jacob, took on the cardboard challenge to play and create with cardboard during the inaugural NoCo Mini Maker Faire Saturday at the Rocky Mountain Center for Innovation and Technology.

Attended by thousands of people, the all-day faire, a smaller version of the annual Maker Faire in the San Francisco area, brought together local and national innovators, entrepreneurs, scientists, manufacturers, producers and artists. These makers and creators showed off, explained and, in some cases, sold their innovations, creations and inventions at hands-on booths and displays.

Every half hour, individuals, groups and companies gave presentations on using clean energy, the meaning of intellectual property, doing precision metal casting, writing comic books, using lasers in inventions and printing in three dimensions.

The more than 100 hands-on booths spanned across two large rooms with one side focused on engineering, science, robotics and product development, while the other side focused on arts, crafts and school programs in Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics, or STEM, and other subjects.

Abby Schriber, 11, locks eyes with R3-T2, a remote-controlled model of the R2 robotic units from the Star Wars franchise created by Devin Dyke of the Mountain States R2D2 Builders Club at the NoCo Mini Maker Faire at the former Agilent Technologies campus on Saturday. ( James Garcia )

On the tech side, the booth for the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder presented a craft lesson in making dropsondes -- small instruments that record condition throughout the atmosphere -- out of cone cups, straws, spoons, pipe cleaners and tissue paper. The test of the instruments' effectiveness was dropping them in a wind tunnel, where they had to stay suspended for 30 seconds.

"We try to get them to think from an engineering perspective," said Matthew Paulus, an intern with Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science, or SOARS. "Mostly, it takes a couple of tries."

Across the makeshift aisle, children and their parents got on hands and knees to pet and communicate with a bright pink robot dog, created by Road Narrows Robotics.

"It acts like a puppy at first," said Jessica Trujillo, who works in business and engineering for the Loveland company. "It will grow older and learn new tricks."

Nine-year-old Gina Curtis rubbed the robot dog's back, chest and head sensors.

"It will actually tell you it's mad with its eyes," the Fort Collins girl said. "It acts like a real dog."

Engineers with the Boulder Engineering Studio demonstrated what the engineering design company can do to move an idea into the prototype stage, such as hula-hoops and staffs that light up with LED lights powered by circuit boards.

"We don't come up with amazing new ideas," said Mark Mulrooney, embedded engineer with the company. "We apply the technology in a useful manner. It's applying what's out there."

Kanawha Automation in Loveland had a few products on display, including a hybrid Computer Numerical Control 3-D printer and scanner that scans, prints and machines parts.

"It can do additive or subtractive machining in the same unit," said Eric Griffin, founder and engineer of Kanawha Automation. "People are surprised that all of it's in one unit. We're doing it."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm.