By U.S. Senator Debbie Stabenow

Mental illness touches every family – and mine is no exception.



As a child growing up in Clare, I was fortunate to grow up in a very loving family. But I remember the times my dad stayed up all night, endlessly talking about big ideas. My family knew that he needed treatment, but in the 1960s, doctors' understanding of mental illness was limited, so my dad was misdiagnosed and given drugs that made him unable to work or function.



One day while I was sitting in my psychology class at Michigan State University, my professor began describing something called manic-depressive disorder (later called bipolar), and I knew he was describing my dad's illness. With a correct diagnosis, he finally received the right treatment and the difference was night and day for him and for my family.



I saw firsthand the difference an accurate diagnose and treatment makes for people living with mental illness and their families. It is the difference between hope and despair.



This May – Mental Health Awareness Month – we are launching a new initiative to expand community mental health services based on my bipartisan Excellence in Mental Health Act, which was signed into law last year. Michigan, and other states, are starting the process to be selected for a new eight-state demonstration program that will offer patients increased services like 24-hour crisis psychiatric care, counseling, and integrated treatments for mental illness.



Community mental health centers, Federally Qualified Health Centers, VA clinics, and mental health groups across our state are already working together on a Michigan proposal.



It's time to treat illnesses above the neck the same way we treat illnesses below the neck. Doctors are now able to manage a chemical imbalance in the brain for a patient with bipolar disorder just as they can manage sugar for a diabetic patient.



Unfortunately, fewer than half of all Americans living with a mental health condition received treatment in the past year.



Someone who needs to see a doctor shouldn't have to pay a higher co-pay or deductible just because the visit is to treat depression instead of a broken bone. That's why I authored the mental health parity provisions in the Affordable Care Act to stop discrimination in coverage between physical and behavioral health services.



The Excellence in Mental Health Act puts behavioral health centers on a more equal footing with other health centers by increasing funding, improving quality standards, and expanding access to services.



For too long, mental health has been stigmatized and has taken a back seat to physical health care. Now we are finally ensuring communities in Michigan and across the country have the resources they need to help individuals living with mental illness live long, healthy, successful lives.

For more Kalamazoo Gazette opinion pieces and letters, visit http://www.mlive.com/opinion/kalamazoo/. To submit a guest column, email tmills1@mlive.com. Readers are also encouraged to discuss this column in the comment section below.