The Affordable Care Act's second open enrollment period began on Saturday. Two recent Gallup polls show that America hates the act more every day but still loves what it does.

The first poll aggregates public opinion toward the act itself. As the ACA begins its second year, 37 percent of Americans said they approve of it. That is one percentage point lower than the previous low of 38 percent in January 2013, right after the new policy canceled the old healthcare plans of millions of Americans.



The second poll aggregates public opinion from citizens who have purchased healthcare policies through the government exchanges. Seventy-four percent of these Americans said their coverage was "excellent" or "good." Seventy-five percent are satisfied with the cost of their policies. Only 2 percent plan on dropping their health coverage.

So why the paradox? How can Americans hate a government policy but love what it does? The answer, said Massachusetts Institute of Technology Professor Jonathan Gruber, is simple: Sick people benefit by getting subsidies from healthy people through the individual mandate. In other words, costs go down because everyone has to buy a plan, so those who use coverage are satisfied with the costs. But not everyone wants to buy a plan through the government exchanges, which is why so many who do not need coverage oppose the law.

Basically, Americans do not so much oppose the ACA as the individual mandate. This is why Gruber believes the law would not have passed had the individual mandate been explained properly by the Obama Administration.

In 2013, while participating in a panel at the Annual Health Economics Conference, Gruber said that the Congressional Budget Office should have classified the individual mandate as a tax. Since the Obama administration did not classify the individual mandate as a tax, it did not clearly state that the new law would basically be healthy people paying and sick people getting subsidies from those payments. If the law had been explained this way, it would not have passed, Gruber said.

Gruber's comments became ammunition for opponents of the act who want to repeal it, like Fox News and Rush Limbaugh. But even Gruber said that now that the law has passed, both parties should work to make it better, not repeal it. "I'd rather have this law than not," said Gruber at the conference last year.

Most Americans agree with Gruber, according to a March Bloomberg survey. Only 34 percent of Americans want to repeal the act while 51 percent want to make small modifications, according to the poll.

The study also found that most Americans support the law's other major provisions. Only 38 percent want to repeal the elimination of lifetime caps on how much an insurance company must pay for a person's healthcare. Sixty-five percent want to keep the provision that prevents insurance companies from denying coverage based on pre-existing conditions. Seventy-three percent want to keep the provision that allows children up to 26 to remain on their parents' policies. The only provision in the act that respondents do not support is the individual mandate, which 51 percent want to repeal, according to the poll.

Despite opposition, the individual mandate is essential to the ACA because none of the other provisions work without its financial backing, said Washington Post columnist Catherine Rampell in a column Monday. This is why Rampell believes that the paradox of opposition to the law and support for its provisions will continue for a little while longer.

But, since most people support most of the provisions, Rampell thinks that they will grow to support the one that holds it all together, the individual mandate. It is just going to take time.

"All of this makes me wonder if Obamacare will eventually follow the same political arc as Medicare: fiercely opposed by conservatives until they realize people really like it, leading both parties to become champions of its expansion," said Rampell.