Columbia Academy (20-9) could not overcome a six-run fifth inning by Summertown (20-9) falling 8-5 Saturday at home.

A pair of home runs by the Eagles in the top of the fifth would be enough for Summertown to hold off CA who fought till the bitter end.

“We had a chance,” Bulldog second baseman Will McCall said. “We have just got to not lay down and just keep fighting. We had like three or four more innings left of baseball. It’s not over until it’s over.”

The Eagles were powered by the big bat of cleanup hitter Konner Ambrose who was 2 for 3 with four RBIs including a three-run homer in the fifth.

Early on, this game was tight as both teams traded runs like punches for a 3-2 CA lead after four innings until Summertown’s haymaker of six runs in the fifth that put the Bulldogs in a hole that they could not climb out of.

“A couple of innings we had bases loaded and couldn’t get them in,” McCall said. “We have just got to execute that. The main part was we left too many runners on. We have got to get those in.”

Columbia Academy had went up 1-0 in the bottom of the first thanks to an RBI single by Regan Chaney that scored the Bulldogs’ starting pitcher Scott Lentz.

The Eagles would tie the game in the top of the second for a 1-1 score.

The top of the third inning also proved fruitful for Summertown who took the 2-1 lead when Ambrose knocked in leadoff hitter and pitcher Bryce Giles with a two-out RBI single.

CA was quick to answer in the bottom half of the third however, as the Bulldogs tallied a run to knot game at 2-2 when catcher Noah Brock came in to score when the ball escaped the reach of the Eagle catcher.

A throwing error by Summertown’s third baseman allowed Lentz to reach with two outs and for McCall to score after doubling to lead off the frame.

The Bulldogs were up 3-2 after four complete and appeared in control of the game.

The three-run blast to right field by Ambrose and a two-run shot by Bailey Burleson in the fifth inning would swing the pendulum Summertown’s direction though for an emphatic 8-3 advantage.

Columbia Academy had to get to work if the Bulldogs wanted to overcome this sizable deficit.

A pair of RBI singles by Billy Thurman and McCall in the bottom of the fifth cut into the Eagles’ commanding lead for a 8-5 score.

In the latter innings of the game, the Bulldogs would continue to threaten, sending the tying run to the plate in the sixth and seventh innings but strikeouts would negate a shot at completing a rally.

“I can’t be mad because they competed to the end,” CA head coach Richie Estep said. “That’s just how the game goes. You have got to put the bat on the ball in situations. At least make them do the work and not go down with strikeouts.”

Columbia Academy has two more games left in the regular season starting with a Monday matchup at Spring Hill at 6 p.m. followed with a home game against Grace Christian Academy on Tuesday at 6:30 p.m.

These games hold a measure of importance for CA in order to stay sharp with the district tourney looming on Friday.

“Just to stay fresh,” Estep said. “You don’t want to sit a week and play the district tournament. Especially at the plate, you can get off at the plate real easy.”