Of the 124 House lawmakers, only nine managed to not miss a day or show up late during the legislative session from January 2015 to July. More than half of the representatives missed one to nine days during the session, with congressional hopeful Rep. Jenny Horne, R-Summerville, acquiring the second-most-days absent, primarily for family medical reasons.

COLUMBIA — Summerville Republican Rep. Jenny Horne was the second-most-absent state House lawmaker in 2015, but, like others, she doesn’t expect juggling family, work and legislative obligations will interfere with her 2016 congressional campaign.

“I’ve been doing it for eight years. I can certainly do it,” Horne said. “I’ve juggled a lot of different responsibilities over the years, and I’m looking forward to my campaign for Congress.”

Absences and late arrivals are the norm for most state House lawmakers who travel to the capital city weekly and work Tuesday through Thursday from January to June or longer. But changing that norm was part of a shift by Speaker Jay Lucas, R-Hartsville, in his first year leading the House.

“Punctuality should be a cardinal virtue,” Lucas told The Associated Press before leading the 2015 session. “It’s the people’s time. Let’s make sure we use it wisely.”

Attendance votes alone don’t show the full story. While lawmakers like Rep. Joe Neal and Rep. Mia McLeod missed 44 and 40 attendance votes, respectively, by signing in later in the day as present, the House journal shows Neal absent 6 times and McLeod once. Besides establishing a quorum, the attendance votes note whether a member qualifies for the $140 per diem for their daily expenses.

Most senators have similar attendance records to their House peers, but Senate record-keeping makes a direct comparison to House records difficult.

Out of 64 House attendance votes, between Jan. 13 and July 9, Horne missed 8 and had 14 excused absences. Aging family members with medical problems caused an increase in absences for Horne, as well as a planned trip to New York with her daughter during the last week of session in early June.

Horne, a third-term delegate, is challenging Republican U.S. Rep. Mark Sanford for the 1st Congressional District seat. Sanford won a 2013 special election for the seat and was re-elected in 2014.

“Certainly I’m going to be busy running for Congress and I’ll be doing a lot of campaigning,” Horne said. “But I always try to be there and I always take my job very seriously.”

As a lawyer, Horne said occasional court appearances prevent voting present during a roughly 30-minute window at the start of session. She isn’t alone; several other lawyer-lawmakers — such as Richland County Democratic Reps. Chris Hart, Todd Rutherford and James Smith — show up late more often than their peers, on average.

Rep. Leon Stavrinakis, D-Charleston, said it was tough handling similar responsibilities along with his Charleston mayoral run in 2015.

“There were a lot of demands on my time; between running my law practice, my commitment to serve in the Legislature, trying to campaign and balancing it all to make sure Charleston was taken care of,” Stavrinakis said.

With announcements, bill introductions and recognitions occurring at the start of the daily session, many lawmakers know they have wiggle room to finish up constituent or committee meetings. Stavrinakis said that mentality shifts for a week in early March when the budget is debated, something he thinks could be replicated other weeks of the session, especially if it were shortened.

“I’m sure we could. There are some ceremonial things that are part of any legislative body, so you’re not going to eliminate that completely,” Stavrinakis said. “Shortening the session would force us to streamline the use of our time and I’ve supported that.”

Stavrinakis missed four days, as did fellow Lowcountry colleagues Democrat Rep. Wendell Gilliard and Republican Reps. Jim Merrill and Seth Whipper.

But even if lawmakers clock in on time or late, they may also leave early.

Horne, for example, voted present the morning of May 28 and Stavrinakis came later, but neither were still around for the afternoon vote to send the criminal domestic violence bill, which they both supported in prior votes, to Gov. Nikki Haley’s desk.

Lawyer and Rep. Chris Murphy, R-North Charleston, who missed 17 days, also came late and left early, missing the same vote.

Medical issues and court appearances were given for his multiple absences, according to the House journal.

A severe spinal cord injury put Myrtle Beach Republican Mike Ryhal out of office for the first two months of 2015 contributing to the 23 days he missed — just a day more than Horne.

Only seven lawmakers had double-digit absences, whereas only nine out of 124 House lawmakers were present for all attendance votes and had no excused absences during the 2015 session.

Reps. Stephen Goldfinch, R-Murrells Inlet, and Mike Sottile, R-Isle of Palms, were among the nine. Sottile, an insurance agent serving his fourth term, said his flexible schedule allows him to manage obligations and maintain the punctuality he learned in the military.

“We go in about 10 o’clock in the morning and sometimes by the time you take roll call and get a quorum it’s 11 o’clock before we do anything,” Sottile said. “We just need to make an effort to be there and be there on time.”