If not inevitable, an affiliation between New London’s century-old Lawrence + Memorial Hospital and the ever-growing Yale-New Haven Health System has long appeared highly likely. And while the parties have not reached a final agreement, all signs are that the association between Lawrence + Memorial Healthcare and Yale-New Haven is imminent.

Connecticut’s nonprofit hospitals long served their communities well as independent entities with local control and local focus. It is OK to look back wistfully at this passing era, but it is not OK to cling to it.

Stand-alone hospitals cannot compete in the current health care environment. L+M already recognized this in pursuing a series of affiliations — the purchase and operation of The Westerly Hospital, and the management of the Visiting Nurse Association of Southeastern Connecticut and the L+M Medical Group (doctors). Now it prepares to be joined with a larger, dominant partner.

Multiple factors are driving this affiliation trend. The Affordable Care Act and Medicare policies are tying reimbursements to total care and outcomes, rather than the number of individual procedures and office visits. A larger network can often better integrate services and provide specialized care more quickly and efficiently.

Adding to the fiscal pressure has been reductions in Medicaid reimbursements and increases in state taxation on hospitals. Economies of scale, along with the stronger bargaining position of a large network, can lower purchase costs for goods and services. Larger provider groups have more leverage in negotiating reimbursement rates with health insurance companies. And they can find savings by reducing staffing redundancy, particularly in administration.

It is better for the community to see L+M affiliate with a respected nonprofit partner such as Yale-New Haven than be consumed by a for-profit network. It is fitting given that L+M Healthcare already has several partnerships with Yale-New Haven, including for stroke assessment, cardiology, angioplasty and vascular surgery, and pediatric emergency services. It also makes sense geographically, with Yale-New Haven’s network spreading west and east along the Interstate 95 corridor.

In many ways, the pending affiliation should strengthen patient services.

The challenge will be to maintain that special bond between a community hospital and the public it serves, including maintaining local charitable support. According to L+M Healthcare President and CEO Bruce Cummings, his organization would retain much of its independence.

On balance, the pending affiliation is a positive development.