The U.S. Supreme Court in early June. Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg News

The Supreme Court sure knows how to put an eager audience on edge.

The justices are wrapping up their 2014-2015 term and issued four decisions Monday, but none were in the half dozen biggest cases still pending. As in prior years, it looks like the court is saving the best for last.

Cases still outstanding include those dealing with the legality of Obama administration health insurance subsidies under the Affordable Care Act, same-sex marriage and EPA regulations on power plant emissions. Also pending are important cases on housing law, lethal injection and congressional redistricting.

Seven cases remain in total, and the court is scheduled to decide them no later than next week. The justices will next announce opinions on Thursday.

In Monday’s rulings, the court in an opinion by Chief Justice John Roberts faulted a Department of Agriculture requirement that raisin growers set aside a portion of their crop in some years for use by the government to maintain an orderly market. Among the other decisions, the court struck down a Los Angeles ordinance that required hotel operators to make their guest registries available to the police on demand.

Monday’s court session did clarify some mysteries about the remaining cases.

For instance, it appears likely Justice Antonin Scalia will be writing the court’s ruling in a case examining the validity of EPA regulations requiring power plants to cut emissions of mercury and other toxic air pollutants. He is the only justice who hasn’t written an opinion from the March oral argument session when that case was considered.

Each justice usually writes at least one opinion from each argument session, and the EPA case is the only one from that session that remains outstanding. Justice Scalia at times was critical of the government’s position during oral arguments in the case.

Court watchers are also speculating on which justice may be writing the majority opinion in the blockbuster health-care case on the legality of insurance subsidies received by more than 6 million Americans.

Three justices representing a range of ideological leanings haven’t written opinions from the session in which the health-care case was considered: Chief Justice Roberts, Justice Anthony Kennedy and Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Only one other case besides the health care matter remains pending from that session, a closely watched dispute about whether states can use independent redistricting commissions to prevent lawmakers from drawing congressional maps to maximize their partisan advantage.

Also still unclear is who will be writing the marriage ruling, though many observers expect it will be Justice Kennedy, who has written the court’s prior gay-rights decisions.

Chief Justice Roberts’ raisins decision Monday came from the same argument session as the marriage case, making it less likely that he would be the author of the court’s marriage ruling.