The right to an abortion is a right protected by the United States constitution. The Supreme Court made that clear more than four decades ago when it ruled in Roe v. Wade that a woman's decision to seek the medical procedure falls within her right to privacy.

But to women living in Tennessee, that right may as well not exist.

This week governor Bill Haslam signed a bill that requires women to wait 48 hours before ending a pregnancy. (The law does not apply to over-the-counter birth control used to prevent pregnancy immediately after sex.) Last week, he signed another bill that subjects clinics providing more than 50 surgical abortions annually to operate like hospital-style surgery centers. That is no small request; critics of the bill say such guidelines are medically unnecessary and would cost clinics millions of dollars.

See also: 'Girls' star Jemima Kirke speaks out about her abortion in reproductive rights PSA

Such laws make abortion nearly or completely impossible to obtain, and they don't just affect Tennessee women. In the first three months of this year, state legislators introduced more than 300 bills to restrict abortion access, according to the Guttmacher Institute, a reproductive health advocacy organization.

An analysis by the institute found that in 2000, only 31% of women lived in a state considered hostile to abortion rights. By 2014, that number reached 57% and included a new severe degree of hostility. It appears legislative opposition to abortion is only becoming more virulent.

Put another way, if you're a woman counting on a constitutional right to an abortion, your access to one may increasingly depend on your county or zip code, and whether you can drive to the only open clinic in your state or to a nearby state where abortion care is still widely accessible.

"This is not the promise of our constitution," says Amanda Allen, state legislative counsel for the Center for Reproductive Rights. "Everyone should have equal constitutional rights. The way these state laws have been working, [access] really depends on where you live."

Waiting period laws, for instance, vary by state. Thirty-five states require women to receive counseling before receiving an abortion, and 26 of them mandate a certain time to lapse before the procedure.

If a woman lives in California, Alaska or Colorado, she is not prevented from immediately seeking an abortion. Oklahoma lawmakers, on the other hand, just passed a 72-hour waiting period bill and North Carolina politicians are considering the same requirement. Florida legislators await the governor's signature on a 24-hour waiting period law.

Advocates of waiting periods argue they benefit patients, though there is no research to suggest that is true. They do, however, force women to miss work and lose wages, and pay for expenses like childcare, gas and hotel accommodations when the only clinic is many miles away.

Patients are not legally required to reflect on any other medical decision for a certain period of time, including life-changing operations like a vasectomy, mastectomy or cosmetic surgery. In fact, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends that states stop passing mandatory counseling and waiting period legislation, and repeal those laws already on the books.

"The reality is that these forced delay periods have no basis in medicine whatsoever," Eric Ferrero, vice president for communications at Planned Parenthood Federation of America, told Mashable. "These are laws cooked up by politicians who insist on inserting themselves between women and their doctors and are committed to a misguided and dangerous agenda of rolling back access to safe and legal abortion all together."

We are #ProudToProtect preborn children AND their mothers from an #abortion industry that is unregulated, unsafe and unrepentant #ProLife — AUL (@AUL) March 10, 2015

Mashable contacted Americans United for Life, a pro-life organization that has crafted anti-abortion legislation used by state lawmakers, but did not receive a reply.

A waiting period by itself would be a significant obstacle to abortion access, but that is not the only barrier women encounter these days.

"I think this [legislative] session we’ve really seen an avalanche of restrictions and they’re targeted at the patients," says Allen.

More than two dozen states have forbidden state-regulated health insurance plans, available through the Affordable Care Act, to cover abortion. More than 20 states have implemented policies that require clinicians to have admitting privileges at local hospitals, or to operate like an outpatient surgical center or hospital.

Image: Guttmacher Institute

While those guidelines seem to hold patient safety paramount, critics say they simply make it impossible for clinics to operate through bureaucracy or cost. In Virginia, for example, new requirements mean that clinics must comply with prohibitively expensive hospital-based standards, like room and corridor dimensions, and parking lot and ventilation rules.

Taken together, these restrictions create one barrier after another for women who seek a constitutionally-protected medical procedure.

As lawsuits challenging these restrictions wend their way through the court system, with different outcomes depending on geography, it has become clear that only the Supreme Court can truly address the growing disparities in access to abortion.

Image: Guttmacher Institute

The numerous and many-layered restrictions appear to constitute an "undue burden" on patients, says Allen. That concept is a guiding principle for the Supreme Court, which has historically used it as a test to determine whether or not a particular law is too burdensome on a person's fundamental rights.

The Court could choose to deliberate on one of several federal lawsuits and reaffirm or dismantle the right set forth in Roe v. Wade. The soonest it could rule, however, would be early 2016.

Until then, women across the country will find themselves subject to wildly different abortion laws.

Low-income women, who are more likely to experience unintended pregnancy and less likely to have private insurance, and women in the midwest and south, where the new restrictions are concentrated, will be most dramatically affected.

"Women who have decided they need abortion care will do what they need to do, but it’s not going to be without financial hardship or crossing state lines," Allen says. "I certainly think we are really getting into a place where access is getting harder and harder to obtain."

Have something to add to this story? Share it in the comments.