Paul Weber, the new CEO of the Springfield Family YMCA. Bill Lackey/Staff

By Andrew McGinn

Staff Writer

From the time he was 16, when he became a lifeguard at his hometown YMCA in Youngstown, Paul Weber knew he’d never get bored working at the Y.

That’s held true — at 51, he’s been employed by a YMCA somewhere ever since.

With Weber’s hire late this summer as CEO of the Springfield Family YMCA, he’s in charge of his own Y for the first time.

The opportunity to lead what’s believed to be the second-oldest YMCA in Ohio was actually the big draw for a man who believes wholeheartedly in the movement started nearly 170 years ago as the Young Men’s Christian Association.

During a recent interview, he was quick to marvel at the fact that Springfield’s YMCA will celebrate its 160th anniversary in 2014, making it among the oldest YMCAs in the U.S.

“That was an attractive and interesting piece of me coming here,” Weber said.

But, despite its storied past, Weber wants to give the Springfield Family YMCA a brighter future than it has at present.

The facility’s run of five CEOs in three years — Weber is No. 6 — resulted at one point in a $29,000 drop in United Way funding. On top of that, the roof still leaks.

“The change in leadership is unsettling for folks,” Weber explained, sitting below a water-stained ceiling tile in his office.

Weber’s immediate plans are to give the facility, located at 300 S. Limestone St., a blitzkrieg makeover later this month in the vein of TV’s “Extreme Home Makeover.”

“This Y’s got really good bones,” he said. “It just needs some leadership from someone who’s been in the movement for 30-plus years.”

He also wants to grow the facility’s collaborative ties to other local organizations.

And, now that the Affordable Care Act is being implemented, Weber envisions the YMCA helping people lower future insurance costs by focusing on preventative health issues.

“When there’s one Y in a town,” he said, “there’s so much potential there.”

Weber last served as district vice president at the YMCA of Central Ohio in Columbus, where he oversaw four branches with 22,000 members and a budget of $8 million.

In all, the YMCA of Central Ohio has 14 facilities, 60 child care sites and two campsites, he said.

By comparison, the Springfield Family YMCA has little more than 4,000 total members, a budget of $1.4 million and one building.

Lowell Nees, interim CEO locally before Weber’s arrival, told the Springfield News-Sun this summer that Weber is well-suited to meet the local Y’s challenges.

“The responsibilities here will include strategic planning and establishing what needs to be done,” he said, “and what directions the YMCA wants to take.”

Weber also came to Springfield in part because it reminds him a little of his hometown, he said. It was there that he found his calling at the local Y.

“It was everything to me,” he said.

A graduate of Youngstown State University, he went on to work at YMCAs in Wooster, Des Moines, Iowa, and Austin, Texas.

The YMCA in Austin, in particular, had an interesting mix of members, including former Texas Gov. Ann Richards, during Weber’s tenure.

Austin’s most colorful resident, Willie Nelson, was also a member. Weber only saw him work out a few times.

“That was ugly,” he said with a laugh.