HOUSTON, February 17, 2014 — With the Affordable Care Act in a state of complete collapse, Democrats know they are in for a ballot box bloodbath in 2014. Nancy Pelosi and other Democrats in safe seats will continue to tout the success of Obamacare as vulnerable red state Democrats try to find her a muzzle.

Democrats have used up the race card, the war on women, and every other divisive arrow. The only thing left in their quiver is their own quivering.

Attempts to declare every failure a mere prequel to success are being met with deaf ears. Concepts such as smoothing out wrinkles, fixing glitches, and easing the transition are rightly becoming synonymous with words that rhyme with fustercluck.

The newest talking point is so desperate that it probably comes with free pills that are equally hard to swallow. Democrats are trying to convince Americans adversely affected by Obamacare to celebrate “healthcare freedom” from “job lock.”

Any day now Democrats will declare that death brings freedom from life lock. After all, people who kill themselves do not have to worry about paying expensive healthcare premiums to evil insurance companies.

Liberal politicians are not stupid. They just fail to grasp that the rest of us are not stupid either. Their line of thinking, if one can call it that, is Americans should be grateful for losing their employer-provided insurance coverage because now they have no reason to stay at their jobs.

Like high speed rail, this train of thought is derailed from the start.

.@NancyPelosi calls #Obamacare “fabulous.” In what world? RT if u agree this law = #trainwreck that must be stopped! pic.twitter.com/tAY72fylRS — Diane Black (@RepDianeBlack) July 15, 2013

The liberal premise was that most people hated their jobs and their insurance coverage, and are better off without them. Security and stability is too large a price to pay for freedom. This argument would be plausible if it was coming from conservative Republicans, but liberal Democrats are married to big government.

The safety net is at the heart of everything liberalism stands for. Liberals are the people who demonize conservatives for wanting to privatize Social Security because a safe negative return from Treasury Bills is supposed to be superior than the “risky scheme” the rest of us call the stock market.

Except for abortion, liberals do not want people to have the choice to do anything. Liberals believe government should make the choices.

What liberals want is not what most people want. Before Obamacare, 85% of Americans were happy with their health coverage. They did not want to lose their doctors or their plans. Many people also liked their jobs, and did not want to become underemployed or unemployed because of government meddling.

Even people who did want to leave their jobs know that it is virtually impossible to make a lateral move much less an upward one when the government is going out of its way to depress hiring.

Being free from a good job with good benefits makes about as much sense as when liberal news anchor Tom Brokaw stated he was envious of homeless people because they did not have to get up early to go to work.

The reason limousine and lear jet liberals keep making such obtuse statements is because they do not live under the conditions that they wish to foist upon the rest of the peasants. Congressional liberals exempted themselves from Obamacare.

Pelosi has her cushy taxpayer funded healthcare coverage along with her generous pension. Like many liberals, she has been in Congress since the Founding Fathers. She has no desire to end her own job lock dilemma. The rest of us can eat cake.

Ivory tower liberals will never understand how the real world works until they are forced to live in it. Legislation should immediately be passed forcing every politician who voted for Obamacare to be subjected to it. Barring that, congressional liberals should be freed from job lock in 2014. Their pensions should be suspended until the unemployment rate drops below 5% with a labor participation rate (currently at a horrific low of 63%) of 75%.

When corporations lay off workers, liberal politicians blame all of corporate America. Until Americans who want to work are able to do so, those who truly destroy jobs should not be able to keep their own. Liberal politicians created the ACA mess, and they should be forced to clean it up with their own money, not the few dollars the rest of us tried to save despite their destructive interference.

At the very least, Pelosicrats should replace job lock with jaw lock and just stop talking.

[youtube]http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cYJB632ohu8[/youtube]