Offering its first public tour of its newest facility, Coordinated Health officials introduced the features of the latest campus to join the organization’s growing health care business.

At 3100 Emrick Blvd. in Bethlehem Township, the facility offers orthopedics, cardiology, primary care, physical therapy, spine services, imaging and foot and ankle services.

The three-story facility aims to bring a different approach to health care by integrating comprehensive medical services and specialty care in one outpatient site, making health care more simple, accessible and affordable, according to officials. Coordinated Health does not offer surgery at the site, although it offers surgery at its hospital locations.

Coordinated Health vacated two clinics, one across the street at Emrick Boulevard and one clinic on Greenwood Avenue in Palmer Township, to combine services into the new facility, where 100 employees are on site.

With the Affordable Health Care Act or Obamacare, it’s timely now that people have accessibility with medical services, particularly on a regional level, Dr. Emil DiIorio, CEO of Coordinated Health, said Thursday.

“We have a problem with complexity, and the root of the problem is it’s very difficult to be cost-conscious. It is the job that the patient is asking us to do,” DiIorio said. “Listening to the patient and trying to get done what the patient is asking you to do, that as an organization is the focal point of our integration. When quality goes up, the cost goes down as well.”

This building offers a primary care division with family doctors, easy access and cardiology services on the first floor, he said.

Health care in the U.S. and Europe tends to have a culture where institutions try to be everything to everyone. The clinics are the solution shops, the areas where diagnoses are made and rehabilitation is given, DiIorio said.

“It’s a matter of bringing all these pieces together; the complexity is what causes quality problems,” DiIorio said. “You have to start at the root.”

Converting to electronic health records is also a major focus of Coordinated Health. It can be costly and painful, but it remains the central nervous system of any health care organization, he said.

“Ultimately what will be needed is portability with the patient for the electronic health record,” DiIorio said.

Several officials were on hand.

“Dr. DiIorio has been a health care innovator for a long time,” said U.S. Rep. Charlie Dent. “He delivers care on a regional level, how to integrate primary care. I suspect as health care continues to change, and I suspect it will, we are going to need people like DiIorio to help us sort it out.”

Coordinated Health has been a part of the Bethlehem Township family for many years, said Thomas Nolan, president of the township board of commissioners. As the population increases and continues to age, facilities such as Coordinated Health are welcome to the township, Nolan said.

This year represents the 25th anniversary of Coordinated Health, and the new company logo signifies the continuum of care that it strives to offer patients, from concierge to integrated clinic, according to Jim Tsokanos, president of Coordinated Health.

“They [patients] want to go to one location in the community,” Tsokanos said. “It’s all integrated in several locations connected to our hospitals. We can keep overhead down; they get better faster.”

Coordinated Health is adding to its New Jersey presence, as well. In the first quarter of 2015, it is scheduled to open a health care facility in Lopatcong Township, near Phillipsburg.