HAUPPAUGE, N.Y., Sept. 29, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- HIA-LI, the recognized voice for business on Long Island, will host its Annual Health & Wellness Conference providing information and education for all Long Island businesses on Tuesday, October 6, 2015 from 8:00 AM to 12:30 PM. During an Executive Breakfast session, an expert panel will provide perspectives on Affordable Care Act regulations, alternative options and what to expect in 2016. The day will feature an exhibit hall to meet with healthcare and wellness vendors and complimentary seminars providing employee-focused health and wellness guidance covering emotional, physical, financial and nutritional well-being. This has become a "must attend" annual event for Long Island business leaders responsible for healthcare strategy and compliance within their organizations. Registration and additional information can be found at http://hia-li.org/event_detail_wf2.cfm?eventid=680

Logo- http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150928/271332LOGO

"The HIA-LI Health & Wellness Conference provides expert perspectives that Long Island employers need to implement beneficial healthcare insurance policies and health coverage for their employees," says Terri Alessi-Miceli, President of HIA-LI. "We encourage all Long Island business leaders to come and learn the latest about how healthcare requirements and well-care options can impact their organizations."

The HIA-LI Health & Wellness Conference kicks off with an Executive Breakfast panel moderated by Christine Ippolito, Principal, Compass Workforce Solutions. Panelists include:

William McDonald, ESQ , Campolo, Middleton & McCormick, LLP

, Campolo, Middleton & McCormick, LLP Kathleen Brennan , President, 360 Insurance Services, LLC

, President, 360 Insurance Services, LLC Betty Heiman , CEO & Founder, Transparent Health Network

, CEO & Founder, Transparent Health Network William Friedman , VP of Commercial Sales, Health Republic Insurance of New York

Registration and additional information can be found at http://hia-li.org/event_detail_wf2.cfm?eventid=680

Event Sponsors: Compass Workforce Solutions, LLC; Signarama of Hauppauge.

Throughout the event, a series of featured seminars led by industry experts will provide insight and guidance across a wide range of healthcare and wellness topics.

Featured Seminars – Session 1 (10:30 AM – 11:15 AM)

Eldercare Resources for Working Caregivers

Hear about the legal, financial and caregiving resources that can help employees who are dealing with elder care challenges.

Garbage in, Garbage Out: Rethinking How Food Impacts Your Workplace

Learn about the employer's rationale for healthier meeting food choices.

Fit in 20

Discover simple exercises you can do at your desk and understand the health effects related to office ergonomics.

Improving Workforce Productivity Through Financial Wellness Education

Hear about important financial topics such as taxes, investments, insurance, retirement, estate planning, etc.

Featured Seminars -Session 2 (11:30AM – 12:15PM)

An Ounce of Prevention: Fostering a Healthier Workforce By Maximizing Preventive Care

See how maximizing preventive benefits can positively impact employer costs and employee productivity.

Mental Health, Mental Illness and Your Employees

This discussion will include emerging policy, science, healthcare trends and evidence-based practices associated with promoting and ensuring personal mental health and wellness.

2016 ACA Requirements and Rating Changes that Impact Businesses with 50-99 Employees

Learn about the impact on 50-99 employee size businesses with health plan changes and options to minimize your exposure.

Stop Worrying & Start Living: The Mind/Body Connection and its Impact on your Work

Learn valuable tools and strategies to reduce stress and worry, as well as ways to maximize your mind/body connection to increase focus, productivity and overall health.

About HIA-LI

HIA-LI helps Long Island businesses prosper. For over 30 years, we have been the recognized voice for business on Long Island and a powerful force and economic engine for regional development. We provide a forum for business leaders to network, problem solve and obtain advice on critical issues facing their businesses. Our member companies represent tens of thousands of business professionals. We're headquartered in and support one of the largest industrial parks in the United States. HIA-LI programs and events promote strategic partnerships, targeted networking, and information sharing and business advocacy. Members benefit from our committees, educational programs, career resources, research capabilities, mentoring opportunities and business advisory services. For more information, visit http://www.HIA-LI.org or call 631-543-5355.

HIA-LI CONTACT:

Terri Alessi-Miceli, 631-543-5355, talessi@hia-li.org

MEDIA CONTACT:

Lisa Hazen, Communication Strategy Group; 1-866-997-2424; lhazen@gocsg.com

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/hia-li-hosts-annual-health--wellness-conference-for-long-island-businesses-300150624.html

SOURCE HIA-LI

Related Links

http://www.hia-li.org