Florence Huskies junior Dustin James wrestles Xavier Manzaneras during the Class 3A Region 2 wrestling tournament at Florence High School. (Tim Brown / Special to the Daily Record)

FLORENCE — The Huskies qualified four wrestlers for next weekend's state tournament with their performance on Saturday at the Class 3A Region 2 tournament at Florence High School.

Junior Dustin James emerged as the only regional champion from Florence. He defeated Colorado Springs Christian School's Connor Craddock 9-6 in the finals.

Joining James at the state tournament will be 126-pound freshman Ty Addington and 182-pound senior Lane Masar, who both lost their finals match and placed second. Senior Kameron Parker also qualified for state, placing fourth overall at 170 pounds.

For James, winning a regional title and qualifying for state is a lot better, he said, than the wrestle-back scenario he faced last year to earn a state berth.

"Last year, I was one point away from placing at state," James, 42-3, said. "(By winning regionals) I should get a better shot at state. The sky is the limit if I wrestle well."

James looked like he might win handily against Craddock. He recorded a pair of near falls in the first period and led 7-0. But Craddock wouldn't go away and cut the deficit to 7-4. Both wrestlers earned a reverse in the third period.

"I just wanted to play it safe and not give him any chances, because he's good at cradles," James said of his strategy in the second and third periods.

Florence coach Bob Masse said James has done a great job this season.

Advertisement

"He's put in the time and it pays off," Masse said. "He didn't cut weight as much this year and that helped him. When he cuts weight he gets sick, so it was good that he didn't have to."

Addington ran into a two-time state-placer in his final match against Lamar's Michael Johnson, losing by technical fall in the third period, 16-1.

"He was just better than me in all areas," Addington said. "We knew going in that he was pretty good."

Johnson, a junior, praised Addington.

"For a freshman, he did well to make it to the finals," Johnson said. "He'll be there next year."

Masse said Addington deserves a lot of credit.

"He's put in the time in the offseason, stayed after practice," Masse said. "That kid he faced pinned a lot of our veterans when he was a freshman, so Ty did a good job. Getting to the state tournament will give him some great experience."

Masar squared off against Salida's Nate Lowe in the finals. Masar rallied to tie the match at 6-6, but lost in the last minute 8-6.

"It was a tough, hard battle," Masar said. "He's a good kid. I just need to be smarter about my moves and use the time more wisely.

"I had several shots out there that if I would have finished it would have been a much-easier decided match."

Masar finished second last year at regionals and won one match at state.

Parker lost in the semifinals, but won his first consolation-round match en route to the third-place showdown against Lamar's Mario Morales. Morales won the match 8-2.

Florence finished sixth out of 13 teams with 113.5 points. Lamar won the tournament with 268.5 points.