Children's Hospital Colorado research study will look at the effects of therapeutic horseback riding on children with an autism spectrum disorder

Thirteen-year-old Cameron Duran rides a horse named Blanca around an outdoor track with assistance from volunteers John Pettibon, left, and Chris Price during a therapeutic riding class Saturday at Hearts and Horses in Loveland. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Rebel is the perfect name for the horse 11-year-old Abby Richardson is riding for a research study on horseback riding and autism.

The Denver girl has been called rebellious, a misunderstanding of her autism diagnosis, according to her mother Jodi Lovejoy, who has a doctorate in behavioral health. She sometimes lacks the ability to readily show empathy in social circumstances and is seen as being resistant, she said Saturday during a riding lesson for the study.

"Abby is much more calm when she's around animals," Lovejoy said. "She's less anxious. She's less argumentative."

Lovejoy signed Abby into a 10-week study conducted by Children's Hospital Colorado at the Hearts & Horses Therapeutic Riding Center, 163 N. County Road 29, on the potential benefits of therapeutic horseback riding on children ages 6 to 16 with an autism spectrum disorder.

The therapy, which uses horses to help at-risk youths and people with disabilities improve their physical, social, cognitive and emotional well-being, is a popular but not well-researched type of treatment.

"We're super excited this kind of research is being doing in therapeutic riding because it hasn't been done before," said Jan Pollema, executive director of Hearts & Horses. "It's going to give real data to support the benefit of therapeutic riding for this population of kids."

The First Lesson

The study at Hearts & Horses is the final segment of a four-year study funded through the National Institutes of Health from 2010 to 2013 that looks at agitation behaviors and level of communication skills and if actual contact with horses is necessary for children with autism to improve.

Advertisement

The Hearts & Horses study will be conducted over a 10-week therapy program, which began Saturday, March 7, with one-hour lessons. Sixteen participants are taking part in the lessons in groups of four with two barn and two riding sessions each day.

The barn group learns about the parts of the horse, horsemanship skills and barn activities and gets two free riding lessons at the end of the study. The riding group participates in warm-up activities, learns riding and horsemanship skills and rides in the arena and on trails on the property, working through obstacles.

After her first lesson, Abby said she thought it was unfair the program ended in 10 weeks, Lovejoy said. Lovejoy asked why the night before the second lesson, and Abby said she won't be able to see "her" horse.

"She was able to anticipate in six days how much she wanted to see her horse," Lovejoy said.

Jeron and Crystal Jackson of Fort Collins signed up for the study to help their son, Boe, 9, who has autism, find a coping mechanism for his anxiety.

"Kids with autism usually make really good connections with animals," Crystal said, adding that after Boe's first lesson, "He loved it. He really loved the horse and telling the horse to trot."

Study Measures

The first part of the multi-year study, which involved a control group that learned about horses in a barn setting and a second group that participated in therapeutic riding activities, found that the children who worked directly with the horses showed a decrease in irritability and hyperactivity behaviors and increased in their social behavior and communication skills.

A speech therapist working with the research group found that the children who rode the horses spoke more words and more new words, said Robin Gabriels, doctor of psychology, principal investigator and director of the neuropsychiatric special care unit at Children's Hospital.

Parents filled out parent report forms, or behavior checklists, which also demonstrated the children who rode showed a decrease in behavioral issues and hyperactivity levels, Gabriels said.

The next step of the study at Hearts & Horses is to take physiological measures from the participants in the riding and barn groups to measure the level of cortisol for the presence of stress hormones, Gabriels said. The measure, which is more objective than observation, is taken before the participants get on the horse or engage in barn activities and 20 minutes after, she said.

"Our hope is to see the kids who rode the horses have lower levels of cortisol, and they're less stressed," she said.

Other measures for the study will include behavioral coding of observed social behaviors before and after the participants ride, a social responsive scale and parent reports.

Gabriels theorizes the benefits of therapeutic riding may be coming from the human and horse interaction.

Children with autism experience difficulty with joint attention skills, a preliminary communications skill that involves interacting with a creature with thoughts and feelings separate from their own, Gabriels said. A horse is sensitive to the subtle changes in the rider's movement and will adjust, or look where the rider is looking, she said.

"The attunement the horse has to the rider might be helping the children with autism," Gabriels said. "There's a sense of teamwork."

After the research at Hearts & Horses, the researchers will write up the results for publication.

"We've gotten a lot of good feedback from parents about improvements in their children, everything from communication to just confidence," said Briar Dechant, research coordinator at Children's Hospital.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm