'C'mon guys, I'm going to church': Obama dodges questions about Obamacare website deadline as he walks to mass with family



The Obamas attended mass at St. John's Episcopal Church in Washington, D.C today

President Barack Obama refused to respond to media questions about the Obamacare website as he walked to church

The family rarely attend church

The president's advisers say his deep spirituality grounds him in tough times

U.S. President Barack Obama refused to answer questions about the beleaguered Obamacare website as he walked to church with this family this morning.



The Obamas attended the 11am service at St. John's Church Lafayette Square, an Episcopal congregation, about a block from the White House, The Hill reported.



When a reporter asked if the troubled Healthcare.gov website will be fixed by November 30, Obama responded: 'C'mon guys, I'm going to church'.

Family outing: The Obamas attended mass at St John's Church in Washington, DC on Sunday

Obama is not an overtly religious man. He and his family rarely attend church, and he almost never elaborates in public about his own relationship to his Christian faith.



But far away from the public eye, his longtime advisers say, the president has carefully nurtured a sense of spirituality that has served as a grounding mechanism during turbulent times, when the obstacles to governing a deeply divided nation seem nearly insurmountable.

Every year on August 4, the president's birthday, Obama convenes a group of pastors by phone to receive their prayers for him for the year to come.



During the most challenging of times, prayer circles are organized with prominent religious figures such as megachurch pastor Joel Hunter, Bishop Vashti McKenzie of the African Methodist Episcopal Church and the Reverend Joseph Lowery, a civil rights activist.



Devout: The Obamas farewell Reverend Luis Leon, center, after service at Saint John's Church in Washington on Sunday

And each morning for the past five years, before most of his aides even arrive at the White House, Obama has read a devotional written for him and sent to his BlackBerry, weaving together biblical scripture with reflections from literary figures like Maya Angelou and C.S. Lewis.



'I've certainly seen the president's faith grow in his time in office,' said Joshua DuBois, an informal spiritual adviser to Obama who writes the devotionals and ran Obama's faith-based office until earlier this year. 'When you cultivate your faith, it grows.'



Obama is particularly moved by theories that draw connections between biblical themes and the personal journeys of historical figures like Abraham Lincoln and Martin Luther King Jr., DuBois said.

He added that the president's spiritual strength is his belief that God will carry him through to see another day — even amid crises like the debt-and-spending debacle that's ensnared Washington for the last month.



'Because of these grounding aspects of his life, he doesn't let the day-to-day challenges really shake him,' said DuBois, a former associate pastor at a Pentecostal church.