As the general election takes shape between the two presumptive nominees, health care reform will undoubtedly and appropriately remain an issue. Unfortunately, what should be a serious discussion about how to effectively reduce health care costs as a whole has devolved into a demagogic attack on the companies that research, develop and produce life-saving and life-improving drugs.

Both presumed nominees address rising health care costs by focusing their attention almost singularly on prescription drug prices. Both propose the same misguided approach to the issue, namely greater government involvement in the marketplace. Hillary Clinton campaigns on a plan to scrap the current prescription drug program and instead increase the federal government's role by having it negotiate drug prices with pharmaceutical companies. In January, Donald Trump joined Clinton when he began advocating greater government interference.

Clinton and Trump justify having the federal government negotiate deals with prescription drug companies by promising savings and lower prices for consumers. Trump goes so far as to claim such a move would save taxpayers an astounding $300 billion a year, an amount The Washington Post's fact checker describes as "a nonsense figure."

We have seen firsthand, however, the effects of greater government involvement in health care. High prices, lower quality care, fewer choices and less innovation have been hallmarks of Obamacare.

While health care decisions should center on patients, value the relationship between doctor and patient, and seek to provide the best possible outcome for the patient, this fundamental approach is not a given with Obamacare. Instead, the law's mandates have undermined the indispensable decision-making process between a doctor and patient.

Obamacare's top-down, Washington-knows-best approach has resulted in myriad mandates that work against patients. One Obamacare regulation requires health insurers to cover a variety of products and services that fall under the banner of "essential health benefits." To keep premiums costs as low as possible while still adhering to this Obamacare mandate, insurance companies have been forced to adopt cost-saving measures.

One such measure is the insurance industry's expanded use of specialty-tier cost sharing, which requires patients to pay a higher percentage of their drug costs instead of a flat copayment. This approach has increased patients' out-of-pocket costs. As medical policy scholar Scott Gottlieb of the American Enterprise Institute observed to CNBC, "What we have is an under-insurance problem. People are now under-insured, especially for catastrophic drugs if they get a disease like cancer or something like that because of these new [narrow] formulary designs … popularized by the Affordable Care Act."

Real health care reform not only honors the trusted relationship between doctor and patient, but also fosters innovation and competition in insurance so that consumers can choose plans that best meet their needs, including covering high-cost but life-saving drugs.

RELATED CONTENT RELATED CONTENT Trump's Health Care Lies Matter An analysis of his ridiculous health care plan shows one more way his rhetoric is totally detached from reality.

And we know that such an approach can effectively lower patients' out-of-pocket costs for prescription drugs. In 2003, Congress created a prescription drug program for seniors. Light on regulatory mandates and heavy on competition and choice, the result is a program that has made prescriptions affordable for millions of seniors. In fact, monthly premiums have been essentially flat for five years, and seniors report that they are overwhelmingly satisfied with the program.

In addition to controlling costs and unleashing competition, Grace-Marie Turner, a leading health policy scholar and president of the Galen Institute, writes that "health-care markets must be able to continue to innovate to improve the quality of care." And there is one solution that could be undertaken almost immediately to deliver greater innovation. In "Replacing Obamacare with Consumer-Centered Health Reform," a policy briefing book in the Conservative Reform Network's "Room To Grow series," Turner writes, "At the federal level, significant streamlining of the FDA drug-approval process is essential." The FDA's current process results in delays in approval for generic drugs and has created a substantial backlog, effectively denying patients timely access to more affordable versions of originator drugs. Instead of seeking to implement price controls, the FDA should streamline its approval process to usher more generics into the marketplace, thereby increasing competition and reducing costs.