Imagine feeding a family of six with just one packet containing 21 vitamins and minerals, white rice, fortified crushed soy, dehydrated vegetables, vegetarian seasoned vitamins and mineral powder.Providing all the nutrients of a six-serving meal in one fortified package like this to those in need is exactly what the non-profit organization Kids Against Hunger does. Putting the package together, however, requires the aid of local volunteers. Kids Against Hunger Utica Michigan Satellite will host a food packaging event at St. Isidore Catholic Church in Macomb Township on Nov. 1 from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. The event is sponsored by St. Isidore Catholic Church’s Knights of Columbus Council 7200, Clinton Township Kiwanis and Division 14 Key Club of Dakota High School.Volunteers can bring their children with them to volunteer, provided that the children are at least 7 years old. Walk-in availability is limited. Shifts on Nov. 1 will be from 9 a.m. to 11 a.m., 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and 1 p.m. to 3 p.m. To volunteer for this event, visit signupgenius.com/findingasignup and click “search here” to find a specific sign up and enter the email address: Kelli.bischoff01@att.net Macomb Township residents Scott and Kelli Bischoff have been instrumental in bringing the Kids Against Hunger event to St. Isidore.“How this all evolved is my husband and I went to a Kids Against Hunger Utica Michigan Satellite event in the spring. … My husband and daughter and I went to the event,” Kelli Bischoff said. “We were amazed at how kids were involved and touched by the whole thing.”Scott Bischoff is a part of the Knights of Columbus at St. Isidore and brought the idea of bringing a Kids Against Hunger Utica Michigan Satellite packaging event to St. Isidore before the Knights.”“It was a great experience for our whole family, for my daughter, who is 10, and to us, being involved,” Scott Bischoff said about his participation in the packaging event last spring. “I decided to bring it to the Knights of Columbus. I brought it to the council and presented it.”Kids Against Hunger is headquartered in New Hope, Minn., and partners with Kids Against Hunger Coalition of Michigan, a regional division. The Utica Michigan Satellite is one of several satellites in the Kids Against Hunger Coalition of Michigan, according to the Kids Against Hunger website that mentions since its inception in 1999, Kids Against Hunger has provided over 100 million meals for children and their families in more than 40 countries through the efforts of over 200,000 volunteers.A Kids Against Hunger satellite is a mobile packaging center where all the materials, such as tables, bins, scoops, sealers, bags and other items are brought to a sponsor’s location by Kids Against Hunger managers at a prescheduled date and time, according to the website. Sponsors must provide funding, a location and volunteers to complete the packaging event. Kelli Bischoff said that she and Scott Bischoff organized a bake sale at St. Isidore Catholic Church to raise some of the necessary funding and that the sale netted more than $2,000. Scott Bischoff said that sponsors of the event have all contributed to the fundraising, and Kids Against Hunger will match up to $5,000.To sponsor or donate to the event, contact the Bischoffs at kelli.bischoff01@att.net

Imagine feeding a family of six with just one packet containing 21 vitamins and minerals, white rice, fortified crushed soy, dehydrated vegetables, vegetarian seasoned vitamins and mineral powder.Providing all the nutrients of a six-serving meal in one fortified package like this to those in need is exactly what the non-profit organization Kids Against Hunger does. Putting the package together, however, requires the aid of local volunteers. Kids Against Hunger Utica Michigan Satellite will host a food packaging event at St. Isidore Catholic Church in Macomb Township on Nov. 1 from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. The event is sponsored by St. Isidore Catholic Church’s Knights of Columbus Council 7200, Clinton Township Kiwanis and Division 14 Key Club of Dakota High School.Volunteers can bring their children with them to volunteer, provided that the children are at least 7 years old. Walk-in availability is limited. Shifts on Nov. 1 will be from 9 a.m. to 11 a.m., 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and 1 p.m. to 3 p.m. To volunteer for this event, visit signupgenius.com/findingasignup and click “search here” to find a specific sign up and enter the email address: Kelli.bischoff01@att.net Macomb Township residents Scott and Kelli Bischoff have been instrumental in bringing the Kids Against Hunger event to St. Isidore.“How this all evolved is my husband and I went to a Kids Against Hunger Utica Michigan Satellite event in the spring. … My husband and daughter and I went to the event,” Kelli Bischoff said. “We were amazed at how kids were involved and touched by the whole thing.”Scott Bischoff is a part of the Knights of Columbus at St. Isidore and brought the idea of bringing a Kids Against Hunger Utica Michigan Satellite packaging event to St. Isidore before the Knights.”“It was a great experience for our whole family, for my daughter, who is 10, and to us, being involved,” Scott Bischoff said about his participation in the packaging event last spring. “I decided to bring it to the Knights of Columbus. I brought it to the council and presented it.”Kids Against Hunger is headquartered in New Hope, Minn., and partners with Kids Against Hunger Coalition of Michigan, a regional division. The Utica Michigan Satellite is one of several satellites in the Kids Against Hunger Coalition of Michigan, according to the Kids Against Hunger website that mentions since its inception in 1999, Kids Against Hunger has provided over 100 million meals for children and their families in more than 40 countries through the efforts of over 200,000 volunteers.A Kids Against Hunger satellite is a mobile packaging center where all the materials, such as tables, bins, scoops, sealers, bags and other items are brought to a sponsor’s location by Kids Against Hunger managers at a prescheduled date and time, according to the website. Sponsors must provide funding, a location and volunteers to complete the packaging event. Kelli Bischoff said that she and Scott Bischoff organized a bake sale at St. Isidore Catholic Church to raise some of the necessary funding and that the sale netted more than $2,000. Scott Bischoff said that sponsors of the event have all contributed to the fundraising, and Kids Against Hunger will match up to $5,000.To sponsor or donate to the event, contact the Bischoffs at kelli.bischoff01@att.net “It is a bag of almost like, Rice-A-Roni,” Kelli Bischoff said of the packaged meals. “We assemble the bag. It contains rice, soy powder, nutrients; dried vegetables. Putting the bags together is like an assembly line. It is fun for kids. Each table has a team number, and you compete as to how many you have bagged.”She said completed bags need only boiling water to cook.The Nov. 1 goal is to package 40,000 meals at a cost of 28 cents per meal.“What happens is any given packaging group that does the packages decides where they want the food to go. In this case, the groups decided they wanted a lot to remain in Macomb County. They are going to give mostly to the Macomb Food Program,” Greg Smith, treasurer of the Kids Against Hunger Utica Michigan Satellite, said.Scott Bischoff said that some of the food packages will assist St. Isidore Catholic Church’s Rev. Sama Muma in his international relief efforts.Nicole Tuttle is a freelance reporter. She can be contacted at ntuttle.reporter@sbcglobal.net