Topics: 2016 presidential election, Chicago, Chicago Trump rally, Donald Trump, Elections 2016, News, Politics News

On Friday, Donald Trump brought his political road show to the University of Illinois at Chicago Pavilion in Chicago. The Trumpeteers were enthusiastic and ready. The cult leader was scheduled to appear and offer them blessings. The Trumpeteers waited for hours in line. They would soon be disappointed, saddened, angry and in shock. Trump would lie and say that the police advised him to cancel his rally. The facts seem to suggest otherwise. In reality, “Black Lives Matter!” “Si Se Puede!” “Feel the Bern” and thousands of other people said “No!” to Donald Trump.

Trumpmania would not be allowed to run wild in Chicago. Trump and his zealots would be denied a premature victory lap in President Barack Obama’s adopted hometown.

* * *

I have written many essays on Donald Trump. However, I have never had an opportunity to attend one of his rallies. Friday’s Chicago event was an opportunity to experience what I have described as “Trumpmania” in person.

I waited for several hours in a long, yet orderly line, with thousands of other people who for reasons of curiosity, support or protest wanted to attend Donald Trump’s Chicago rally. It was a political circus. The crowd was more akin to that of a sporting event. The signs and costumes were the only tell that this was a political rally; the American flags and mindless chanting of “USA” would likely be common at both types of events.

The narration for my political rubbernecking was provided by a group of men from the Chicago suburbs or Indiana. They read the signs aloud of the Trump protesters, Bernie Sanders supporters, and the occasional member of the Communist Party. One, the loudest and most vocal of the brood, would make comments about lazy people on welfare, why America needs a wall, and crude jokes about a lesbian who walked by costumed as Donald Trump. “Black Lives Matter” signs were met with comments such as, “Why don’t white lives matter too?”

The narrator did this while he chewed tobacco and spat it near my boots in an act of crude alpha male behavior. The wad-chewing Trumpeteer was also a militant nationalist. He argued with a fellow veteran who supported Bernie Sanders and waved an American flag in protest of Donald Trump. Apparently, the American flag is the exclusive property of Trump supporters and other conservative-authoritarians.

Capitalism crosses the color line. I smiled at the 20-something black men who were selling T-shirts that somehow connected Hillary Clinton, Monica Lewinsky, Donald Trump and fellatio. I took a picture of the African immigrant who spoke with a Nigerian accent while he sold “Donald Trump ‘16” T-shirts to white Trump supporters. I wondered if he appreciated the irony of making some money off of a political candidate and a public that likely has no use for people like him. There were also some sad and tired-looking white folks selling Donald Trump pins, hats and other regalia. A Trumpeteer asked the worn-down (albeit proud and dignified) man if Trump received a percentage of the sales. I could not hear the response. His body language suggested that the answer was “no.”

There were likely many more protesters outside of the University of Illinois at Chicago Pavilion than inside.

After two hours in line, I navigated the heavy security, the pat-down by the heavily armed secret service agent, and close scrutiny of my wallet and other property.

There was tension in the air. A political car accident was going to occur; the rumble would soon be on. The only questions remaining were, “Between who?” and “When?”

The Trump supporters, who could be featured as pictures in an encyclopedia entry under “white working class,” were concentrated near the front of the podium. The late-arriving Trumpeteers looked uncomfortable as they sat scattered among black and brown students wearing “Black Lives Matter” shirts, holding protest signs, and carrying pro-immigrant and anti-racism flags toward the back of the arena and near the exits.

So it began. Accompanied by a soundtrack pumped into the UIC Pavilion that consisted of the theme song from the recent movie “Joy,” Italian opera and Elton John, anti-Trump protesters would stand up. The Trumpeteers would heckle and boo them with chants of “Trump, Trump, Trump!” and “USA! USA!” The police would surround the protesters and escort them out. From Trump’s mosh pit near the stage, to the cheap seats in the rear of the pavilion, young men and women made their grievances known. The police would swarm. The Trumpeteers would boo and cheer. The protesters would counter with, “Let them stay!”

Some of the Trumpeteers were bold. They moved in a group, leaving their “safe space” near the front of the floor, and went to confront the anti-Trump protesters near the rear of the venue. The police intervened again. There was pushing, grabbing and shoving. The event had not yet begun. Cheers would erupt to greet the imminent arrival of Il Duce Trump. The cheers would rise and then quickly dissipate in disappointment.

One of Trump’s spokesmen approached the podium. He announced that Donald Trump had canceled the event because of “security concerns.” The Trump protesters, black, brown and white, began to crowd the floor. They took a victory lap. They chanted, “Bernie, Bernie, Bernie”; “Black lives matter!”; and “Si se puede!” The Trumpeteers were shocked. Their hero and champion would not appear to save them. They were left to fend for themselves. The Trumpeteers would have to walk through a gauntlet of people who believe that Donald Trump is a racist, bigot and xenophobe. The Trumpeteers were angry and embarrassed. There were scuffles. A very agitated and arrogant-looking white college-age student grabbed at and pushed a young black woman who was standing near me. Her friends intervened. A scuffle took place. The police began to force people out. There were other moments of roughhousing throughout the UIC Pavilion as the defeated met the victorious.

As I watched the mayhem, I was treated to a verbal epilogue from the Trump supporters sitting behind me. They were pissed and angry. Frustrated whiteness is scary; frustrated and likely a bit drunk whiteness and conservative-authoritarianism is even more so. These three young men grumbled about how the Trump protesters were “animals,” “undesirables,” and didn’t know that “the government is soon going to control all of them if they don’t vote for Trump.” The trio uttered some other vitriol and curses toward the people who were protesting the bigot Donald Trump before they skulked away.

I looked at the group of Trump supporters seated in front of me–a father with his daughter and two sons. The daughter, a child of 7 or 8, looked dejected. Donald Trump, he who is a political Santa Claus for the American right wing, was skipping her house this year. The sons, a young teenager and his even younger brother (the latter wore a U.S. Navy Seabees hat and a “Star Wars” jacket that was patterned with Chewbacca’s fur and bandolier), also looked disappointed. The father was unhappy too. He had spent all that gas money for nothing.