Clemson senior defensive tackle D.J. Reader is set to return to team practices Monday, according to the school.

Reader missed his sixth consecutive game Saturday night for the fifth-ranked Tigers (5-0, 2-0 ACC) against Boston College. He took a personal leave of absence for undisclosed reasons on Aug. 25.

“He’s going to be back Monday. Found out on Thursday, I believe, that he’s ready to rejoin us. Excited about that,” head coach Dabo Swinney said following the Tigers’ 34-17 victory. “We’ll get him back to work on Monday. I have no idea what to expect. I haven’t seen him. No idea where he is football-wise. Obviously it’s been a while since he’s practiced, much less played. The team knows he’s coming back, we’re excited to get him back out there to work, and we’ll evaluate him as we go through the week.”

Reader’s father, David Sr., passed away at age 51 from complications of kidney failure on June 30, 2014. It is not known whether that loss was related to D.J. Reader’s decision to step away from the team in late August.

Asked the day of Reader’s departure if the senior was being disciplined after a series of Reader-related inquiries, Swinney bristled and refused to answer further questions. Swinney said Saturday night Reader has been in school, and is on track to graduate in December.

“I have not had much contact with him. (Defensive tackles coach Dan) Brooks has been in contact with him. He’s done some training, not here. But I know he’s been working out,” Swinney said. “I texted with him the other day. That’s about the level of communication we’ve had right now. But he’s excited. He’s been focused on what he needs to focus on. Still got a lot of ballgames left, so hopefully he can have a strong, positive finish to his senior season.”

Reader has played in 38 career games, starting four, from 2012-14. He has 110 tackles, including 7.5 tackles for a loss and 4.5 sacks with 21 quarterback pressures. Reader’s best year so far was his sophomore season of 2013, when he made 43 tackles and 5 TFLs while playing 342 snaps for the Tigers, who won the Orange Bowl that year.

Reader, listed at 6-2, 325 pounds in the team’s media guide, represented the Tigers’ defense at the 2015 ACC Football Kickoff in late July.

His absence has not been felt significantly to this point by the Clemson defense, rated No. 13 in the country in total yards allowed.

Reader’s roommate, junior Carlos Watkins, has started every game at defensive tackle as planned, and the combination of redshirt sophomore Scott Pagano and true freshman Christian Wilkins has not faltered through five games.