This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... in due ... I'd kill market is hot this year King Digital debut notwithstanding ... and no sex for the market spotted and health care Grand rounds CEO Owen trapeze here on the MoneyBeat sec to talk about this topic ... on the Oval when you look at the IPO's this year ... when reporter on this as the biggest year for IPO since two thousand you have all went to them so far first couple months of the year ... and they are predominantly ... in the healthcare biotech sector alot IPO's there ... do you see the numbers right there and we'll have more than half of them ... so far ... off what is it about this sector in this year was going on now too marvelous for health care and biotech it licenses started the parade and January was all about life sciences ... I think we are seeing now is more of digital data companies coming online to why ... last year lot of turmoil around regulatory changes this year we see the ocean smoothing Out lexical of these companies have really strong fundamentals ... and a strong story going forward are saying it now serves on the ... and then let's work to get political here but the class is this ... a situation of the new company fits into all digital and health care bill ... this is Jerry us of of this evolution ... or is the Obamacare law Qantas is sparking something their server using for the change ... I think Obamacare is providing access from one to companies that ... previously had to stand silent U K companies like mine encompass the Cass Lake where we wanted access today that we wanted to reroute a patient access great health care in the country ... and I think Obamacare is ... is a catalyst that but expects this that the fundamental oil of these businesses ... were already conceived of an arty dissuading on the sidelines see where the debate is settled now ... how are you have these guys fearing hike did what it is ... on digital ... you're given on one side cover for doctors and patients get ... high mark for my IV on my first thought was ... I'd I don't want a doctor online ... I ... but that was my first look up how in finding the acceptance from customers that it was the good news for you is and people like you that it's not just online we actually have provide access to thirty thousand recommended positions across the country so for us ... it's all about quality when one access the highest quality one make sure you're getting the best care from the start it you do that ... two good things when you get a better outcome that to the company is paying for your for your health care ... is conceivable much money and that's a big part our business model doesn't fueling our growth the time this year ... now the job of digitizing Healthcare although record keeping the pro life that ... I've been hearing about this for a long time for a least a decade or so ... wouldn't you need to do to really accelerate the whole process ... yet I think we have to get people to agree to a couple things one that that not everybody is as high Claudia somebody else's his U S medical school called the doctor doesn't in fact the you are the expert but to ... bed now we have more portability Rover hit by that famous law there's DOT's devotees portability so what you could transmitter teacher cell phone number from one cared another care you can see teacher medical record holder cajole or faxed ... to another doctor in your network and were facilitating the change we can really see freedom of records I last question do you dream about yourself being on the for the NYSE ringing the opening bell one that I think that we are really focus on building an amazing experience for customers and and and we know that's enough to walk into them ... but the rain hours took some profits ... the answer right and I don't think about that preceded it ...