The attorney for the Bergen County man charged with sucker punching a man in Manhattan who later tried to escape at the New Jersey Turnpike tollbooths in Secaucus will waive extradition back to New York.

"My hope is to have the New York matter heard as soon as possible," said attorney William C. Saracino as he stood beside his client, Corey Pohan, 32, of Bergenfield, today in Hudson County Superior Court.

With disheveled blonde hair and wearing the green garb of the Hudson County jail in Kearny, a handcuffed Pohan made his first court appearance yesterday on the fugitive-from-justice warrant issued in New York.

He appeared stunned by the news video cameras and the rapid clicks of press photographers as he entered the court. Pohan was silent throughout the hearing.

Hudson County Superior Judge Mitzy Galis-Menendez informed Pohan that he will have to resolve the trespassing charge in Secaucus Municipal Court before he can be returned to New York.

An official in Secaucus Municipal Court said a date has not been set yet, but Pohan's lawyer said he will likely appear in Secaucus on Monday via video link from the Hudson County jail in Kearny.

Until then, Pohan will be held without bail.

Pohan, a suspect in the attack that left a 55-year-old man with head injuries, was apprehended Thursday at his mother's home in Lakewood, police said. The incident allegedly occurred earlier this week near the victim's home in Hell's Kitchen.

But when New York Police Department detectives were bringing him back to New York, he left the unmarked NYPD car at the 16E/18E toll plaza in Secaucus, police said. Pohan allegedly ran to the top of the toll plaza and hid there, police said, before he was eventually tracked down by State Police Trooper Christopher Durning, of Kearny, and charged with trespassing.

While being processed in Newark, troopers learned Pohan was wanted on the New York warrant. The trespassing charge is a disorderly persons offense and not a criminal charge.

Pohan's mother was in the Jersey City courtroom yesterday, but she declined to comment.

The incident in New York on Tuesday was captured on video and made available to the media. Saracino said Pohan "was advised that there is more to the video than what was shown to the news and the preceding portion may be exculpatory."

The attorney said Pohan is a graduate of Johnson and Wales University in Rhode Island and is a professional.

"My understanding is that this is a first offense for him and his only blemish," Saracino said.

When asked how Pohan was holding up, Saracino said "He is upset that he is sitting in jail, especially in New Jersey, on a disorderly persons offense."

Saracino said he will represent Pohan in the Secaucus courtroom, but that Pohan will have a different attorney in New York.