By Rob Nikolewski │ New Mexico Watchdog

SANTA FE, N.M. – The glitch-filled healthcare.gov website has caused plenty of problems across the country, but now a new headache has emerged in New Mexico.

Some 1,500 customers in the state’s high-risk insurance pool must change their coverage over to Obamacare by end of the year.

But since the federal website has had such chronic technical problems processing enrollees, New Mexico officials worry whether many of those people will be stuck without policies by the time the Dec. 31 deadline passes.

“It’s what keeps me awake at night. God forbid there is someone who needs a transplant or something like that,” Jason Sandel, the vice-chairman of the New Mexico Medical Insurance Pool told members of the Legislative Health and Human Services Committee Thursday.

Established in 1987, the high-risk pool provides access to health insurance for those who have been denied health coverage because they are considered uninsurable. Sandel said about 10,000 New Mexicans are in the pool and of that number, the federal policies of about 1,500 will be terminated at the end of 2013 because of the Affordable Care Act.

“These are (people needing) kidney transplants, these are hemophiliacs, these are HIV patients,” Sandel said. “If they lose coverage, their situation is going to turn grave immediately.”

Those 1,500 policyholders must transfer their coverage to the individual policies offered by the ACA.

“The most immediate focus we have is making sure those folks don’t lose that coverage,” Sandel said.

With the Dec. 31 deadline coming in little more than seven weeks, Sandel said it’s essential the problems with the healthcare.gov website get fixed.

When asked what kind of frame is needed, Sandel told New Mexico Watchdog, with a rueful laugh, “Yesterday. The federal site needs to be up and running as quickly as possible.”

Sandel also serves on the board of the New Mexico Health Insurance Exchange, which launched on Oct. 1, the same day as the healthcare.gov site.

The NMIX website has not reported any appreciable problems, but the state health care exchange can be used only to sign up small businesses and their employees. Individual claims, such as the ones needed to sign up the 1,500 high-risk customers, must go the federal site.

Sandel said the NMIX board sent a letter to U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius complaining about the Obamacare rollout and emphasizing how important it is for New Mexico to see technical problems at the federal site get fixed.

In addition to signing up the high-risk pool participants, Sandel said the website needs to be running smoothly so that the NMIX can reach its goal of signing up at least 84,000 in New Mexico by October 2014.

“If we don’t get people enrolled we are going to fail,” Sandel told the committee.

With each day the federal website is down, health care professionals and economists say the potential increases for “adverse selection.”

That is, that older and sicker customers will doggedly return to the site to sign up because, due to their health issues, they have more motivation to get covered. Younger and healthier customers, meanwhile, will be less like to come back to a website that’s experiencing technical issues and won’t sign up at all.

If young and healthy people don’t enroll, the ACA won’t work economically.

“There are significant claim dollars (in the high-risk pool) that need to be offset with good dollars coming into the system,” Sandel said.

As for the 1,500 who must switch by the end of this year, Sandel said they won’t be left out in the cold.

“At the end of the day, we’ve got critically ill people who need to maintain health insurance coverage and there’s a commitment to the pool to make sure that happens,” he said.

But the bills still have to be paid and that could mean taxpayers picking up the tab if the problem isn’t fixed by Jan. 31.

“That’s exactly correct,” Sandel said. “So those are some of the discussions that we’re having.”

Here’s NM Watchdog video of our interview with Sandel:

Contact Rob Nikolewski at rnikolewski@watchdog.org and follow him on Twitter @robnikolewski