Medicare’s open enrollment season has arrived this year with a hint of desperation in the air.

While all of the nation’s 55 million enrollees will have until Dec. 7 to make changes to their coverage, nearly a third also face the distinct possibility of an unprecedented 52 percent premium hike next year. Even though the increase is likely to be short-lived and members of Congress are working to avert or lessen its effects, the potential price jump nonetheless complicates the annual open enrollment process for millions of seniors nationwide.

Higher premiums come alongside worries about spiraling prescription-drug costs and rising deductibles for many who are on fixed incomes. The federal government is already pursuing dozens of programs aimed at reducing the Medicare trust fund’s expenses, from targeting fraud and waste to rewarding doctors for avoiding unnecessary tests and procedures. But actuaries in Washington, D.C., said increasing premiums is also necessary to keep the program solvent.

Sitting at the Oceanside Senior Center on Friday, Bob Baker, 84, of Oceanside said while some people might see Medicare’s increases as insignificant compared to the premiums paid by those with private or employer-based coverage, they can be downright crippling for many like him, who regularly turn out for the center’s reduced-cost lunch program.

“If you don’t have a fat retirement account, you constantly have to adjust things, and increases make it painful,” Baker said, adding that he plans to stay away from Medicare and continue to rely as long as possible on his benefits through the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs.

He knows that enrolling in Medicare would give him access to a broader range of medical services. But the premiums, especially with the latest increase on the way, would gobble up the rest of his monthly budget. He uses that money to spoil his great granddaughter, Delaney, as much as he can.

“It’s a trade-off. As long as I’m feeling pretty good, I want to buy her and her mom as many presents as I can,” Baker said.

Fortunately, there are many in the region who make it their business to help Medicare recipients figure out which trade-offs are the right ones to make. Some health insurance brokers and the region’s Health Insurance Counseling and Advocacy Program provide free, one-on-one consultations that can help make a confusing set of options clearer.

Share Photo 





✉

Rate redux

The unevenness of next year’s possible premium increase is an indirect effect of a law that governs Social Security, not Medicare.

The U.S. Social Security Administration announced Thursday that low inflation numbers mean its 70 million beneficiaries will not receive cost-of-living increases in 2016. That decision triggers a “hold harmless” clause that prevents any increase to automatic deductions from monthly Social Security checks.

About 70 percent of Medicare recipients have their premiums deducted from their monthly Social Security checks, so they will continue to pay their existing premiums next year. The vast majority pay $104.90 per month for Medicare Part B, which covers outpatient services including doctor visits.

However, seniors who turn 65 next year and those who are on Medicare but are not yet receiving Social Security benefits will see their monthly premiums climb next year. The majority of these enrollees are projected to pay $159.30.

The increase also affects low-income seniors who qualify for both Medicare and Medicaid (called Medi-Cal in California), the government’s program for the poor and disadvantaged.

Also, deductibles for the Part B plan would increase from $146 to $205, though the bump would not necessarily apply to members of Medicare Advantage plans. Those plans, run by private insurance companies, have their own deductibles and copays.