Some like the sport of present-shopping, but I’m content to focus on giving.

Troubles after shopping (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto )

I went to the mall last weekend. I go at least once a year to remind myself why I don’t go more often. Given the choice between scrubbing the grout on the tile floor in my bathroom and going to the mall ... well, hand me some kneepads.

I don’t mind Sears, J.C. Penney or Target — any store I can get in and out of without entering the mall proper — but traipsing up and down the main thoroughfare, breathing recycled air and maneuvering in and out of scads of shoppers on a mission is simply not my idea of a good time.

I’m always a little resentful of the stereotype implying all women love to shop. I don’t. I never have. If I find a shirt or a pair of pants I like, I buy five in five different colors and call it a day.

And I’m baffled by Black Friday. Why anyone would willingly cast himself or herself into that sea of unfettered greed is absolutely beyond my comprehension. I’m told that some find it challenging, even fun, but I fail to see the attraction. And my little excursion last weekend did nothing to make mall trolling more appealing.

I don’t frequent the mall often enough to know whether it’s a holiday phenomenon or omnipresent but the main concourse is full of lots of little specialized kiosks, selling everything from cupcakes to cell phone covers. Such diversity, so many things to look at, yet each venue had one thing in common — totally disinterested sales clerks, most of whom had their faces firmly planted in their smartphones, typing and tweeting and Spotify-ing and whatever else electronics junkies do hour after hour, day after day.

I hovered around one booth that was selling some beautiful scarves for at least five minutes and received no acknowledgement. No “can I help you?” or “anything I can show you?” Not even a hello. It’s not like the young woman couldn’t see me. All she had to do was look up. She didn’t. Not once. I could have walked away with the whole kit and caboodle and she would have been oblivious.

And where did manners go? I was bumped, jostled, elbowed and, at one point, had my foot stepped on, all resulting in either a dirty look or a tacit implication that it was somehow my fault for having not moved my middle-aged tushie fast enough. What happened to “excuse me” or “please” and “thank you”?

And the language? At one point, I encountered a backward-baseball-cap-wearing teen verbally assaulting someone I assume was his girlfriend. He was peppering her with a most impressive array of vulgarity regarding her inadequacies as a female and, when I asked her if she was OK, the tirade was turned on me, along with a request to mind my own $#@*& business. Charming.

Either common courtesy has taken a hike or I have finally become an ornery old poop.

So I’ll continue to point and click my way through my holiday shopping and Hubby and I will walk the length of College Avenue on Small Business Saturday. We love the fresh air, the attentiveness of the shop owners and the thought that we’re supporting local businesses and keeping our dollars in the community we love.

In truth, gift giving is not at the center of the season in our household anymore. My children are grown and there’s nothing any of us really need. Others are not so fortunate.

It’s a fact I try to keep at the forefront of my giving. For me, the true heart of the holidays now lies in my family and friends.

So to all of you who crave the crowds and the noise and embrace the general chaos, I wish you well. You are braver beings than I am. Peace.

— Laurie Friedman Fannin is a Hortonville resident. She can be reached at pcletters@postcrescent.com.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1uVkTgc