New rail, not a trail, for Queens

Rockaway Park: Re your Dec. 2 editorial, “Working on a railroad”: Reusing the former LIRR Queens Rockaway Beach Line (RBL) for transportation is the best plan. It would reunite north and south Queens and decrease travel times for everyone. The QueensWay plan for a bikeway/walkway sounds good on the surface, but it would only benefit a few people and a small area. The reactivation of the RBL would expand the transit system, increase property values and tax revenues. The RBL would increase transit options, including faster travel times. Rail would decrease pollution and accidents while reducing overcrowding on unreliable buses, trains and roadways. That’s a great deal more than the QueensWay plan could ever offer for the people of the borough. Thanks very much to Assemblyman Phil Goldfeder and Queens College for organizing this reasonable and affordable study of how best to reuse this vital public asset. Philip McManus, Queens Public Transit Committee

Obamacare at work

Bronx: I had the pleasure of visiting family in North Carolina during Thanksgiving. I used the occasion to discuss with my two young adult nieces (both without health insurance) the importance of the Affordable Care Act, the process to sign up and the options available on Healthcare.gov. I walked one niece through the process, and she was pleased to discover there were plans available that she could afford. She plans to finalize her selection by the Dec. 23 deadline. The other niece plans to follow her sister’s lead. Victoria Wilson

Motives

Hamilton Square, N.J.: Voicer Robert Clorery, how dare you! What a small mind you must have to think that Republicans voted against Obamacare so that the poor and middle class and their children would die. Maybe they voted against it because it was — and still is — a lousy plan. Jeanette Nichols

Beware Mr. Carter

River Vale, N.J.: Robinson Cano must have been doing shots of designer vodka with Jay Z to put his career in Jay Z’s hands. Jay Z needs to either make up the difference or return to being a music mogul. He will just move on, and Cano will see his career go up in smoke. I love the Yankees, but Cano sure doesn’t put his head down and run when he gets a hit. Everyone should take that lesson, and nothing more, from A-Rod. Gina Susek

MetroCard math

Manhattan: Your Dec. 2 editorial “Bill’s fare treatment” declares (yet again) your support for many years of zero wage increases for transit workers and other public employees, including police, fire, sanitation and other city employees, thereby placing the full burden for balancing the city and MTA budgets on the shoulders of public workers. The big money interests in the city — banks, real estate, Wall Street houses — all seem to be raking in billions in the reshaped economy. Yet they would be spared any pain under your scenario. Like the city, the MTA has a huge budget surplus, so much so that it can afford to reduce the amount of future fare increases, yet it has not one cent for the workers who provide the service and protect riders. The MTA has a $1.9 billion surplus, certainly enough to do both. John Samuelsen, president, TWU Local 100

Handbag choices

Brooklyn: To Voicer Jean Novak: You questioned where Kayla Phillips got the money to purchase a purse for $2,500. Thankfully, in this country, a person has a right to make decisions for herself to be as happy as she sees fit — whether or not others may think those choices are extravagant or frivolous. You said you never purchased a handbag costing more than $20. That has been your choice, for whatever reason. How do you know Phillips has not sacrificed and provided for her children already? Bertha Dear

Straight facts only

Brooklyn: To Voicer Cecelia Kleinbart: What rock have you been living under? Those government workers did not walk off the job on their own. They were put out of work by the Republican-led Congress and that idiot senator from Texas, Ted Cruz. Why shouldn’t they get paid? Get your facts straight before you write a letter to the Voice of the People. Rhoda Melendez

Bring back Bratton

Malverne, L.I.: I strongly urge Mayor-elect Bill de Blasio to appoint Bill Bratton to be the next police commissioner. He has a wealth of experience in policing. Two years as the PC in New York was not enough. He should be given a chance to police this great city once again. Bratton has vast knowledge and will bring a lot to the table, especially in fostering healthy community relations. My thanks goes to outgoing Commissioner Ray Kelly, who has done a tremendous job in keeping our streets safe and crime stats low. The job is not easy and is always subject to criticism, but we must go forward with new vision and have the community actively involved in promoting and aiding our Police Department in a cooperative spirit. Ret. Det. Peggy Hopkins

The wrath of Khan

Brooklyn: Dear Mayor Bloomberg, you only have a few weeks left in office. Why are you letting Janette Sadik-Khan do what she has done to the traffic pattern on Flatbush Ave.? It’s a disaster. She wasn’t even qualified to do the stupid bike lanes. Thomas Ambery

Another DOT mess up

Kew Gardens: At 3 a.m., just hours before Thanksgiving, the DOT put up no-parking signs in my neighborhood without any warnings. Mind you, they have been put in spots where parking was always available since I moved here 12 years ago, and in an area where parking is scarce enough. No one knew these signs were up except for the ticket agents, who were told to patrol and issue tickets to an unaware public. How cold can this city be when it comes to punishing people during the holidays for having a car? Happy holidays? I think not. Hector Elvis Figueroa

Who was here first?

Manhattan: The turkeys of Staten Island have more of a right to live there than humans. They were there first. Just ask the pilgrims! Time for humans to stop exploiting innocent animals. We are here to share the earth with other living beings, not dominate them. Elaine Sloan

It wasn’t Eden

North Bellmore, L.I.: To Voicer Dawn Joseph: When you can prove to me that 17th century Native Americans did not steal each other’s food, raid each other’s villages, rape each other’s women and force each other off traditional tribal lands, then I too will feel the required politically correct guilt. Until then, happy Thanksgiving, indeed! Anthony DiMarco

Thank you

Staten Island: Thank you so much for the tickets to Barclays Center for the Coaches against Cancer Basketball Tourney. My wife and I enjoyed the two very exciting games and the beautiful Barclays Center. Thanks again, Daily News! Joe Gilman

Hitting hard

Staten Island: To a delusional old white man, Voicer Dan Freeman: So the knockout game, with blacks attacking whites only because of their race, is a harmless game? Ask the people who have had their jaws broken by these ruthless animals if it was a game. I hope you meet up with these wonderful young black men and play a nice knockout game. Anthony Liverano

Other side of the punch

Manchester, N.J.: Why is it that these black-on-white knockout punches are reported on page 6 or 9, in small articles, and not mentioned as hate crimes? If it were the other way around, it would be front-page news as a hate crime. When is this nonsense going to end? Vincent Herold

A bridge too far

Baldwin, L.I.: Councilman Peter Vallone wants to remove Ed Koch’s name from the 59th St. Bridge. I think a more egregious renaming was changing the TriBoro Bridge to the Robert F. Kennedy Bridge. Kennedy was an opportunist and a carpetbagger, as is Hillary Clinton, who would be a nothing without her husband, Bill. Robert Nielsen

Ditto

Brooklyn: The best reason not to name any NYC bridge after Ed Koch is that he balanced the city’s budget by not spending any money at all on bridge maintenance and repair! When he left office, the bridges literally started falling down and needed emergency care. We all have such short memories. Shelley Mitchell