Here are five takeaways from “A Tornado Town Hall: How to Hire the Best People to Put Your Life Back Together” in Garland, Texas.

Several hundred people attended the event — hosted by by DallasNews.com and The Dallas Morning News Watchdog desk — at the historic Plaza Theatre.

Watchdog Dave Lieber shares these five tips.

1. You’re on your own.

Roofers and general contractors are not licensed in Texas, unlike in neighboring Gulf states such as Mississippi and Louisiana. So consumers must act like their own private detectives. Watchdog Dave Lieber says you need to know everything about the contractor you hire — past record, business reliability and so much more.Very few are ever convicted of crimes in Texas. Prosecutors see it as a business conflict for civil court. Yes, you’re on your own.

DOWNLOAD A COPY OF THE WATCHDOG’s CHEAT SHEET TO HIRE GOOD PEOPLE HERE

2. Use search engines to play detective

Anyone who is a prospect should get a thorough search on Google and also a paid subscription website such as PublicData.com which costs $35 a year and allows you to find a person’s civil and criminal record. Watchdog Dave Lieber says it’s always better to know if the contractor dangling a contract in your face is a convicted thief before you sign on that dotted line.

3. Use your smart phone camera.

A smart phone is a great consumer protector, The Watchdog says. Use the video camera, still camera and audio recorder to capture important moments in transactions. Take photos of everyone you deal with, their car license plate, etc. Let them know you keep track. They are less likely to mess with you. Best idea from Watchdog colleague Marina Trahan Martinez is to take photos of their ID cards and even their driver’s license.

4. Roofers tells two lies. Here’s #1

Some — not all — roofers in Texas like to tell customers, “Hire me and I’ll pay your deductible.” Sounds great. What a deal. Only it’s illegal under Texas law. Some roofers, especially the out-of-state guys, don’t know. Others do know, and they do it anyway.

5. Roofer lie #2

Some roofers promise that they’ll get the best deal for a homeowner with an insurance company. They’ll handle the details. The only problem with that is it’s illegal in Texas. A roofing company can’t negotiate any details with an insurance company. That’s the job of the homeowner, a licensed public adjuster, a construction consultant or a lawyer. But not a roofer. Still, some brag that they do it. They either know about the law and don’t care or they don’t know.

Attendees receive a tip sheet showing best practices when hiring a contractor or a roofer. Want to read the tip sheet? It’s here: The Watchdog’s 2016 Hiring Cheat Sheet here.

Follow The Watchdog with the latest information in reports at The Dallas Morning News Watchdog Page, constantly updated.