Dr. Mohammad Q. Khan sees a patient at the Family Medical Clinic in Milwaukee. Roughly 60% of the patients at this clinic, including the woman Dr. Khan is examining, are covered by Medicaid. Credit: Kristyna Wentz-Graff

By of the

Mohammad Qasim Khan, a primary care physician who oversees a private practice in a low-income neighborhood, well knows the discrepancy between what private insurance pays for his services and what the state's Medicaid program pays.

Khan, who works with another physician and three nurse practitioners at the Family Medical Clinic, 5434 W. Capitol Drive, estimates that the program's payment rates are half — and in some cases, less than half — those of private insurance.

"If I was to go out and try to recruit a primary care physician," he said, "I doubt I would be able to find anyone who would be willing to practice in this area."

Medicaid's payment rates are one reason. If Khan spends 30 minutes each with two patients covered by the program, he can be paid less than $80 an hour for his services.

Wisconsin historically has had broader eligibility for its Medicaid program than most states. Hospitals and doctors have contended for years that the program has some of the lowest payment rates in the country relative to private insurance.

A report released last week by the federal Government Accountability Office now supports that contention — at least for physicians for certain services. The GAO found that Medicaid payments for physicians in Wisconsin on average were:

■ 71% lower for office visits than private insurance payment rates.

■ 76% to 78% lower for hospital care than private insurance rates.

■ 91% lower for emergency care than private insurance rates.

The report, based on an analysis of claims data for 2010, was released the same week that Wheaton Franciscan Healthcare disclosed its growing losses at Wheaton Franciscan-St. Joseph Campus, one of the two hospitals in Milwaukee that provide care to a large percentage of patients who are covered by Medicaid programs, such as BadgerCare Plus.

The hospital was projected to post a loss of more than $30 million for the fiscal year that ended June 30, up from a loss of $14.8 million for fiscal 2013. And the health system expects the hospital to lose $24 million in the current fiscal year.

Aurora Sinai Medical Center, the other hospital that provides care to a large percentage of patients covered by Medicaid in Milwaukee, has operated in the red almost consistently for a decade.

Wider coverage, lower pay

The GAO report looked at just physician services. Many physicians in Wisconsin work for health systems, but no one contends Medicaid payment rates for hospitals cover the overall cost of providing care.

"Medicaid reimbursement is among the worst in the country," said Eric Borgerding, executive vice president of the Wisconsin Hospital Association. "This report is another example of that."

In Wisconsin, Medicaid covers about 1.1 million people and has a budget of $8.4 billion. The federal government pays about 60% of Medicaid's cost in Wisconsin.

Before the Affordable Care Act, Wisconsin was among the few states with Medicaid programs that had relatively broad eligibility for adults with dependent children. They were eligible for coverage if their household income was less than twice the federal poverty threshold.

By contrast, residents of Mississippi, Louisiana, Missouri and Texas are eligible for coverage only if their income is one-fourth or less of the poverty threshold. In Louisiana, an adult with two children under 19 is eligible for coverage if the family has a household income of less than $4,749 a year.

Many of the states with much more limited eligibility, though, have payment rates that are much closer to private insurance rates, according to the GAO report.

Donna Friedsam, director of health policy programs for the Population Health Institute at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, noted that the GAO report compared Medicaid rates relative to private insurances rates, and that health insurance premiums in Wisconsin are higher than in many parts of the country.

"Medicaid as a federal safety net program is not designed to support the profits of the health systems," she said. "But it also should not be resulting in significant losses."

No one wants to see hospitals in low-income areas lose money, Friedsam added. But she said Medicaid covers people who otherwise would be uninsured.

"The question is, 'Would you rather have an uninsured person in your emergency department or a person covered by Medicaid in your emergency department?'" she said.

Friedsam agrees that payment rates need to be increased for certain services. But the place to start, she said, is targeted increases for those services for which access is a problem, such as primary care, dental care and behavioral health.

Obamacare rate boost

The Affordable Care Act allocated money to increase Medicaid payment rates for primary care physicians to the same level as Medicare rates.

"For us, it was a big, big relief," said Khan, of the Family Medical Clinic, who estimates that 60% of the practice's patients are covered by Medicaid.

For an office visit for a patient of moderate complexity, the practice's most common billing code, the payment increased to about $55 from about $37, Khan said.

The Family Medical Clinic used the additional money to buy new computers and office equipment, such as exam tables, and to pay for some renovations.

"The money was well spent," Khan said.

The increase in payment rates, though, will end this year.

"Then it again will be for us to figure out how to survive," he said.

The Wisconsin Medical Society estimates payment rates overall increased by about 70%. But Rick Abrams, its chief executive officer and executive vice president, is not optimistic the higher payments will be extended.

"It is going to be a tough road," he said.

Given the pressures on the state budget, no one expects significant increases in Medicaid reimbursement rates. Abrams, too, would support targeted increases in Medicaid payment rates, "as long as we don't rob Peter to pay Paul."

For example, Gov. Scott Walker's administration is increasing spending on behavioral health, he said.

Abrams, who previously worked in New York, said the disparity between Medicaid and private insurance rates exists throughout the country and adds to the complexity of the health care system.

It also results in costs being shifted to private health insurers, which in turn increases premiums, he said.

Borgerding, of the Wisconsin Hospital Association, said the same.

"This does affect the cost of health care for everyone else," he said.

Problems compounded

The losses at Wheaton Franciscan-St. Joseph and Aurora Sinai show what happens when a hospital provides care to a large percentage of patients covered by Medicaid.

One result of Medicaid's low payment rates for physicians is a shortage of primary care clinics in low-income neighborhoods in Milwaukee.

That contributes to many people seeking care in high-cost hospital emergency departments. Wheaton Franciscan-St. Joseph estimates that roughly half of the patients in its emergency department — the busiest in the state — could be treated elsewhere.

An immediate step would be to target additional payments for areas where a large number of people are covered by Medicaid, Borgerding said. But more work also needs to be done to help people get care in the appropriate setting, such as urgent care clinics.

Even then, Medicaid's payment rates are unlikely to cover their costs.

Abrams, of the state medical society, said new approaches also must be developed to address the underlying social and economic problems in areas with widespread poverty and therefore a high percentage of people covered by Medicaid.

Those problems only compound the economics of providing care to people covered by the program.

"This morning, every patient I saw had multiple problems," Khan said.

Many of his patients have diabetes, asthma and high blood pressure. Many also struggle with health literacy and other problems.

Khan knows he could make more money working for a health system or practicing elsewhere. But the practice keeps its overhead low and he values his independence.

"I like having my own practice," he said. "I like seeing my own patients."

But with each passing year, he said, being an independent physician in a practice with a large percentage of patients covered by Medicaid gets more difficult.