A man suspected of robbing a Papillion bank Saturday and leading law officers on a pursuit shot himself with a .22-caliber rifle before he was captured, authorities said.

Eric Dickerson, 33, a Sarpy County resident, was in critical condition Saturday night at Creighton University Medical Center, said Lt. Kevin Griger of the Sarpy County Sheriff's Office.

Before he was injured, Dickerson had fired one round from his weapon while fleeing across a field, Griger said.

No officers were hurt, and none returned fire, he said.

The robbery suspect had startled motorists by speeding through Sarpy County neighborhoods, business areas and apartment complexes in his attempt to elude officers. The winding chase and subsequent foot pursuit lasted about 30 minutes.

Dickerson's gray Chevrolet Impala went as far south as the Capehart area of Bellevue, as far north as Cornhusker Road and as far east as 36th Street, Griger said.

The incident began about 12:30 p.m. when an off-duty police officer saw a man leaving the First National Bank branch at Shadow Lake Towne Center in Papillion. He provided a description of the man as police were responding to a silent alarm during the holdup, Griger said.

The man fled in an Impala and was later spotted near 60th Street and Nebraska Highway 370. The pursuit began, involving law officers from multiple agencies, including the Nebraska State Patrol helicopter.

The man, later identified as Dickerson, abandoned the vehicle just north of Fall Creek and Cornhusker Roads about 12:50 p.m. and ran about 200 yards into the open field with a rifle, Griger said.

Minutes later, officers found him near a pile of brush, apparently seeking shelter, and suffering from a gunshot wound.

The field is northwest of 48th Street and Cornhusker Road and adjacent to the Keystone Trail.

Griger said officers tended to Dickerson while awaiting a medical helicopter.

Police officers from Bellevue, Papillion and La Vista assisted in the investigation.

UPDATE (11/3/13): A spokesman for the Creighton University Medical Center said Sunday that Eric Dickerson, 30, has died.

Sarpy County Attorney Lee Polikov said a grand jury will be convened, as required by law, to investigate the in-custody death.

***An earlier version contained an incorrect age provided by the Sarpy County Sheriff's Office for Eric Dickerson. He was 33.

World-Herald photographer Kent Sievers contributed to this report.