Covering Kids & Families of Central Indiana hosts its popular Back-to-School Family Day on Saturday, August 1 from 8 a.m.-12:30 p.m. on the on the grounds of the Marion County Public Health Department, 3838 N. Rural St.

This 15th annual event is one of the largest back-to-school events in the state.

Children in attendance receive a free backpack with school supplies. Back-to-school services include immunizations and sports physicals. For immunizations, parents or guardians should bring current shot records as well as an insurance or Medicaid card for any children seeking immunizations.

Health screenings and various types of health information will also be available. And, parents can get a copy of their child's birth certificate for a small fee with proper identification.

Not to be missed is the Indianapolis Fire Department, who provides entertainment as part of the Fire Safety Festival, offering games, food and interactive educational displays.

Those who need health insurance can get enrolled on-site for Hoosier Healthwise, Health Advantage, Healthy Indiana Plan (HIP) 2.0, or the Affordable Care Act. In order to enroll, the following documents are needed: income stubs from the last three months, Social Security Number, and proof of address in Marion County.

"What makes this event successful is the support we receive from all of the community agencies that support us," said Pamela Humes, program director of Covering Kids & Families of Central Indiana. "Our sponsors, our volunteers and the general public contribute to making this a very special day."

Covering Kids & Families is a statewide program run locally by the Health & Hospital Corporation of Marion County. For more information about Back-to-School Family Day, please call 317-221-3178.

Help Control the Mosquito Population This Summer

Enjoy summer evenings in the backyard this year by following some simple tips for reducing the mosquito population where you live.

Take five minutes to look for any container, big or small, capable of holding water. These are perfect areas for mosquito to breed. You should clean the container, cover it or put it away. Old tires are also popular breeding grounds for mosquitoes because they stay warm in the sun and collect rain water.

Getting rid of standing water reduces the likelihood of being bit and it helps control the mosquito population.

Mosquitoes generally do not venture too far away from where they hatch. So, if you get bit, there's a good chance the mosquitoes have a place to breed nearby.

For information, call Marion County Public Health Department's Mosquito Control program at 317-221-7440.

Free Diabetes Self-Management Classes in August

The ABCs of Diabetes program is a free, four-part series on diabetes self-management offered by the Marion County Public Health Department. Instruction will be given on medications, nutrition, exercise, monitoring, complications and available community resources.

Class members will participate in individual consultations with a registered dietitian, registered nurse and a health educator.

Classes in August will be held at the Southport Branch library, 2630 E. Stop 11 Rd., on Wednesdays, August 5, 12,19 and 26 from 5:30-7:30 P.M.

ABCs of Diabetes is open to anyone with diabetes, pre-diabetes, family members and friends. Participants are expected to attend all four classes of the session they choose.

Sessions are free but registration is required. Please call 317-221-2094 or visit MCHD.com/diabetes.