Sioux Falls, SD

Earlier this week, school districts across South Dakota received test results from the state. This is the first time the Sioux Falls School District is getting to see how students compare to others across the country, and it's all thanks to South Dakota adopting the Common Core standards.

It's a new school year and new opportunities for students and teachers. It's also a new year for Common Core standards.

The sometimes controversial method of teaching math and reading is in its second year for the Sioux Falls School District.

"The Common Core are the standards that guide curriculum development. They are not our curriculum. So each district writes its own curriculum, selects its own materials, and writes a curriculum guide so that the teachers and the districts are a part of that local decision making for the curriculum and instruction that happens in the classroom," middle school curriculum coordinator Sandra Henry said.

"Common Core has brought more rigor into the classroom. It has been very helpful because now we know across the United States, 4th grade you're going to have these concepts you have to learn. 5th grade, 6th grade, so that really does help when students move from school to school. Or they move from state to state," middle school math instruction coach Michelle Dykstra said.

Previous Story: School Leaders Say Curriculum Changes Helping Students

Common Core standards are used in 42 states right now. But these standards haven't been popular with everyone.

Some parents have expressed concern that subjects, like math, are being taught differently than the way they learned them.

"I think parents are used to the way they were taught. They were taught an algorithm. And they try then to show that maybe to their students and their students are saying, oh but that's maybe not what we're doing in school. So the kids have different strategies," said Dykstra.

"I just keep asking them questions. Well what do you know? How could you solve this? Maybe if you can't solve it this way, could you solve it another way? Not that their strategy is wrong, their parents' strategy. Because that's a way. But do the students understand that strategy? And does it make sense to them," Lindy Bell, an 8th grade math teacher at Patrick Henry Middle School, said.

District officials also believe there could be other, outside motives to the uproar of Common Core.

"We've studied and read the language of the standards. So there's a lot of comment out in the public, not about what the standards are when you read them. But what about the other political side of the standards, which we don't pay attention to," said Henry.

Teachers, like Lindy Bell at Patrick Henry Middle School, say these new standards are actually helping her students.

"It's very exciting in my experience. The kids are really being challenged. They are engaged. They're seeing how does this fit me? Is there another way I could solve that? If this isn't working, what other approach could I take," said Bell.

This new way of approaching math is also expected to trickle down into other areas of the child's life.

"When kids know why they're doing what they're doing, they're more apt to continue to work when things get hard," said Henry.

"They have to be able to work in a group. They have to be able to do analyze. They have to be able to communicate and argue with each other. So that gets them ready for real world," said Dykstra.

"Just being able to tackle a problem. If they're, if one way isn't working for them that they know that there's another way. They'll dig deeper. They'll be able to work in groups better, and understand maybe another strategy. Come up with one together collaboratively," said Bell.

Some life lessons that are common for anyone in the adult, working world.

District officials say, if you have concerns, feel free to contact them or your child's teacher.

For more information on the 2015 Report Card, visit the Department of Education website.

Eye on KELOLAND {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.