Topics: Barack Obama, Benghazi, Center for Public Integrity, Darrell Issa, Democratic Party, Editor's Picks, GOP, IRS, John Boehner, Michael Hiltzik, Paul Waldman, Republican Party, Ronald Reagan, submerged state, The Los Angeles Times, trey gowdy, News, Politics News

If you dig a little beyond the surface, you’ll find that within the world of liberals ridiculing conservative’s #Benghazi obsession, there is a sub-genre devoted to singling out Republican congressman and self-proclaimed “chief watchdog” Darrell Issa in particular. Besides the de rigueur mockery of a partisan foe, these barbs focus on Speaker Boehner’s decision earlier this year to effectively fire Issa as the lead investigator into the Benghazi affair and replace him with a “select committee,” led by Rep. Trey Gowdy, that will theoretically do a better job of finally unearthing proof that President Obama valued an election-year talking point about al Qaeda in retreat over the lives of four American citizens. Issa was reportedly unhappy about the committee’s formation and, with evident schadenfreude, progressives could see why.

Yet as tempting as it may be to deride Issa for his Benghazi blunders, an under-appreciated development from earlier this week shows that when it comes to the second of Issa’s dual obsessions, the supposed partisan bullying of conservatives by the Obama IRS, the House Oversight Committee Chairman has been a smashing success. Not in regard to uncovering evidence of a concerted plot to thwart right-wingers, of course — as is the case with Benghazi, there’s no “there” there for Issa to find — but in terms of the Republicans’ ultimate goal, weakening the besieged agency’s ability to regulate campaign finance to the point of near-nonexistence.

The story is told in a report released on Tuesday by the Center for Public Integrity, a left-leaning investigative journalism nonprofit. In brief, the CPI’s research finds that the IRS, never quite capable of keeping up with political activists and donors’ efforts to circumvent campaign finance laws through tax-exempt “social welfare” nonprofits, all but declared it wouldn’t even try after Republicans said the agency was making conservative groups jump through hoops while giving liberal ones the go-ahead. They were wrong on both counts — liberals and conservatives, both, were asked to provide further information (while also being allowed to continue their work as if they had already been approved) — but it hardly mattered. The coverage of the disproven allegations dwarfed that of their refutation and Democrats — already loath to defend most individual government agencies, much less the never-popular IRS — concluded it would be better to just move on than go to bat for the taxman.

Thinking in the short-term, as politicians are wont to do, letting what Paul Waldman cleverly called the IRS “scandalette” fade from the front-pages made sense. Democrats were already facing a tough election, and there was little reason to believe that talking about the IRS instead of jobs or wages or contraception would be the best way to inspire Democratic voters — who are notoriously uninterested in midterm contests — to hit the polls. But as the Los Angeles Times’ Michael Hiltzik noted in a recent Op-Ed, what makes sense for Democrats in 2014 is very different from what makes sense for progressive politics in the years to come.