After the attack, law enforcement was viewing it as a possible hate crime and the FBI was contacted to get involved.

This past week a Detroit man who is a Muslim stabbed two people at a bus stop after asking them if they were Muslim. The stabbing part came after they responded that they were not.

But it has just been reported that the man will not be charged with a hate crime. Now the story goes something like this, per a local news report at MLive:

Oakland County Prosecutor Jessica Cooper didn't charge a Detroit man with a hate crime after it's suspected he stabbed two people at a Southfield bus stop, possibly motivated by religious hate. Nick Loussia, Deputy Chief of Police for the Southfield Police Department, said the suspect, 39-year-old Terrence Lavaron Thomas, "is Muslim, and asked the victims what religion they were" before allegedly attacking them. He's charged with two counts of assault with intent to murder, carrying a dangerous weapon with unlawful intent and possession of marijuana. Oakland County Chief Assistant Prosecutor Paul Walton said the evidence doesn't support a 2-year felony charge of ethnic intimidation, although investigators are still interviewing witnesses. Walton said an argument started over "bad breath and bad teeth" before it "deescalated to a physical altercation." "At this point ... I'm not hearing anything that is going to monumentally change any of the charges," Walton said. The FBI is looking at the case also to see if any federal hate crimes were committed.

Say what?

Law enforcement continues to stand by the original report that the Muslim attacked the non-Muslims after they responded to his question regarding religious affiliation. Then suddenly the issue of “bad breath and bad teeth” pops up.

That certainly is a new defense argument for the record. Dental jihad?

In any case, it sounds as if the FBI is still investigating, but one can already see the direction this is going.

It is Detroit, after all. And this is Obama’s America.

Thomas Lifson adds: Don't forget that following the challenge of Turkey's President Erdogan, President Obama rushed to condemn the killing of three Muslims in Chapel Hill, where there is no evidence of a hate crime, although the alleged assailant is a militant atheist.

Hat tip: Weasel Zippers