DeMarcus Ware saw the ball fly through the hands of Bengals quarterback AJ McCarron and knew it was over.

“Oh yeah, I knew that I had the ball,” Ware said. “When I saw that on the ground, I was so close to it and I was like, ‘There is no way that somebody is going to take this ball from me.'”

Ware rushed around the outside of the line before pouncing on the football and cradling it, shielding it from harm as Bengals players hovered.

Ware continued to cradle it in his arms before hoisting it in the air to show off his prize to the fans at Sports Authority Field as he jogged back to the locker room. His overtime fumble recovery against Cincinnati ensured ” Wilson” was his, and that the Broncos would have a spot in the playoffs.

But it also reaffirmed Ware’s comeback from a back injury that sidelined him in separate stints this season for a total of five games and sapped the Broncos of one of their key defensive pieces.

The 11th-year veteran who last month was selected to his ninth Pro Bowl, played 42 of the Broncos’ 72 defensive snaps against Cincinnati. It was the next step in his slow, meticulous recovery that he has said may have ended too soon the first time around.

Ware initially injured his back during the Broncos’ Oct. 11 victory at Oakland. Two week’s rest proved not enough as he re-injured it two games into his return, on Nov. 8 on the turf at Lucas Oil Stadium.

The Broncos’ edge rusher who quickly racked up 6.5 sacks for a loss of 52.5 yards in his first seven games (both second-most on the team behind Von Miller’s 10 for a loss of 70 yards) has since taken a more cautious approach in his recovery.

“It was a difficult injury because it’s like you have to have time to heal,” he said. “You can work out all you want to, you can do all the exercises, but until (the) inflammation goes down, that’s when you can go out there and play. It’s harder when you’re thinking about — because I’m a workhorse, so I think I need to go out there and work. I’m like, ‘I’m going to work as hard as I can and it’s going to go away.’ No, you’re going to sit down. You’ve got to rest, you’ve got to ice, and this right here is what’s going to make it better.”

The slow approach is one that paid dividends Monday but may offer further benefits. Ware says he plays pain-free now, and his coaches say he’s ready to return to the field full-time, starting Sunday, when the Broncos host San Diego in a game that could land them a first-round playoff bye and, with help from New England, the No. 1 seed in the AFC.

“He looked like the DeMarcus Ware,” defensive coordinator Wade Phillips said after a practice this week. “The guy that was dominating early in the year. I’d be surprised if he doesn’t have a really good game this game.”

Despite missing nearly a third of the season because of the injury, Ware, at 33, established himself early on as a renewed force in Phillips’ 3-4. His 15 quarterback hits is tied with Malik Jackson for the second-most on a team that has 114 total. His seven tackles for loss are tied for the third-most among the Broncos’ 78 total.

His impact on the field has trumped his age on the roster. Bringing home “Wilson” last Monday was a celebrated triumph, but it was just another step in his return to form.

“I put Wilson up for a while,” he said, “but hopefully we can do something big this week and we can get another one.”

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or @NickiJhabvala