The cost of hiring a private company to manage Montana’s Medicaid expansion could be a few million dollars a year – or it could be a lot more.

Four health-insurance firms bid on the contract to manage the expansion of Medicaid, which will provide health coverage for thousands of poor Montanans. Every bid has proposed costs higher than originally estimated by the Bullock administration.

For example, if 25,000 people sign up for coverage under the program next year, Oregon-based PacificSource would charge the state as much as $12 million to manage the expansion – and perhaps a one-time technology fee of $632,000.

The Bullock administration had estimated that a private firm would charge about $6 million to manage the program next year, at that level of participation.

If thousands more sign up for the program, the costs get higher, because each company plans to charge a “per member per month” fee.

State officials may decide this week which company gets the contract. The federal government also must decide whether to approve Montana’s proposed expansion, including the private contractor.

The 2015 Legislature voted in April to expand Medicaid coverage in Montana, as part of the federal health-care overhaul under the 2010 Affordable Care Act.

Starting next year, the government-funded coverage will pay medical bills for Montanans earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level, or 16,400 for a single person and $27,700 for a family of three.

It’s been estimated that 70,000 poor Montanans are eligible for the coverage. The federal government pays for almost all the program’s costs, estimated at $430 million the next two years.

Montana would be the only state in the nation to use a private contractor to manage its entire Medicaid expansion. The contractor – a health-insurance firm – will collect premiums, process claims and handle other administrative duties of the program.

Bullock, a Democrat, proposed using a private contractor in his original Medicaid expansion plan this year. He said it’s a good idea to use a health insurer with an existing network of health-care providers to manage the program.

He also said he doesn’t think the feds will have a problem with Montana’s private-contractor arrangement.

Federal officials wouldn’t comment Monday, but have said in the past they plan to negotiate with the state on approving the overall proposal.

Bullock’s original proposal had a lesser estimated cost for the private contractor. But a compromise bill with Republicans asks the contractor to do much more, so the cost is higher.

If 25,000 people sign up next year for the program, the bidders and their proposed costs are:

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Montana -- $7.8 million for the first year. The per-member amount could drop the next year, if more than 25,000 are on the program. Blue Cross also may ask for reimbursement of up to $3.6 million in one-time technology costs.

PacificSource – $12.3 million for the first year. The per-member cost would decline the next year if enrollment increases.

Stanford Health Plan -- $13.2 million for the first year, with no decline the next year.

Allegiance Benefit Plan Management – Did not provide a cost estimate for the program’s first six months. For the next six months, $4.5 million. For 2017, $9 million.

All four companies said they’d increase the fee slightly in future years.

The initial cost would be lower, of course, if fewer people sign up – a strong possibility, since it’s a new program. But if enrollment comes in higher, or once it increases in future years, the money going to the private manager will increase.

For example, if 70,000 people sign up by 2017, Blue Cross would be collecting $21.6 million in management fees that year.

State officials began scoring the bids last week. So far, Blue Cross and Blue Shield has a slight lead over PacificSource in the scoring, with more evaluation to come this week.

The cost of the contract accounts for about one-third of the scoring. The company that scores the highest usually gets the contract.