A long-range Qadr ballistic missile is launched in the Alborz mountain range in northern Iran on March 9, 2016. Iran said its armed forces had fired two more ballistic missiles as it continued tests in defiance of U.S. warnings. (Photo: MAHMMOD HOUSSEINI, AFP/Getty Images)

Arizona's two Republican U.S. senators, both of whom opposed the White House-backed Iran nuclear deal, differ on the significance of recent revelations about how President Barack Obama's administration sold the agreement to Congress and the public.

Sens. John McCain and Jeff Flake reacted to a much-talked-about New York Times Magazine profile of Ben Rhodes, deputy national security adviser for strategic communications and speechwriting who is credited with masterminding what the piece calls "the successful Iran-deal messaging campaign."

Rhodes was portrayed in the article as a wannabe fiction writer without any military or diplomatic experience who nonetheless has become "the master shaper and retailer of Obama’s foreign-policy narratives." He specifically is said to have created the pro-deal storyline that suggested the timing was right for such an international agreement because supposed Iranian moderates who were open to the nuclear deliberations had politically outmaneuvered the country's "hard-liners." But the Times piece notes that the Iran negotiations actually started "many months" before those characterized as moderates came to power.

McCain, the Senate Armed Services Committee chairman, called the new insights "deeply disturbing and alarming," but Flake, who sits on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, downplayed them.

"They deceived the American people," McCain told The Arizona Republic. "They set up this straw man, that's there's this moderate group out there that will be in power, that the Iranians would change their behavior. If anything, the Iranians have stepped up their behavior, ranging from illegally, in violation of international law, capturing two American vessels, to stepping up their efforts in Syria and their support of the (rebel) Houthis in Yemen. Their aggressive behavior is not only unchecked, it has increased."

McCain added about Rhodes: "I think it's amazing when a young man with absolutely no background or experience — he was an aspiring fiction writer — could have that much influence over our national security."

But Flake, who supported the talks with Iran even though he ultimately came out against the final agreement, said he didn't find much new in the article other than the controversy over when the negotiations actually started.

"White Houses — they spin," Flake told The Republic. "That's what every administration does and, in this case, I'm sure if they had to do it again, they probably wouldn't have been so open about what they did to sell their deal. But it's not that far out of line with what administrations typically do."

Rhodes responded to the hubbub over the profile with his own post on the website Medium.com. He emphasized that Obama's support for reaching out to Iran was made clear in his 2008 presidential run and that, despite any earlier efforts, the White House had little hope of realizing a nuclear deal until Iranian President Hassan Rouhani was elected in 2013.

"The critical point that the deal’s opponents are missing in the current debate is that we believed deeply in the case that we were making: about the effectiveness of the deal, about the value of diplomacy, and about the stakes involved," Rhodes wrote. "It wasn’t 'spin,' it’s what we believed and continue to believe, and the hallmark of the entire campaign was to push out facts."

In other developments:

• McCain's U.S. Senate campaign is acknowledging the political impact of this year's unpredictable presidential race on his re-election prospects and is hoping to dampen any anxiety among supporters.

A Thursday memo from Ryan O’Daniel, McCain's campaign manager, ticks off the "major milestones" of McCain's campaign so far and seems written to rebut the recent national coverage of what McCain himself has characterized as the race of his life. Democrats believe that presumptive Republican nominee Donald Trump could hurt down-ticket Republicans with the crucial voting blocs of Hispanics and women and could put McCain's long-held seat in play.

"Our campaign infrastructure is unique in that it’s been built to combat potential headwinds from the 2016 Presidential election — real or perceived — with the goal of outpacing the national campaigns," O'Daniel wrote. "John McCain has a baseline advantage because of his long, deep ties to Arizona and unmatched name ID. Adding to his edge, the McCain campaign has a $4 million cash lead over our closest challenger."

And while U.S. Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, D-Ariz., McCain's likely Democratic opponent, has made it clear she intends to tether McCain to Trump, O'Daniel's memo expresses similar confidence that McCain can tether Kirkpatrick to her support for Obama's Affordable Care Act, or "Obamacare," and to the Iran nuclear deal.

Polls already indicate that a McCain vs. Kirkpatrick match-up is tight.

• McCain and Flake are continuing to take heat for their roles in blocking Obama's U.S. Supreme Court nominee, Merrick Garland. The liberal group People For The American Way is running a Spanish-language radio ad against them.

"So why are Senators McCain and Flake refusing to do their job and blocking President Obama's nominee?" the ad asks, according to its English translation. "Is it because they want to see Donald Trump — the man who called Mexican immigrants rapists and drug dealers — get to name our next Supreme Court Justice?

"By not doing their job, our senators are playing dirty Republican tricks."

McCain and Flake have joined other Republican senators in refusing to consider any nominee to replace Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia, who died Feb. 13, until after the presidential election.

• Matt Specht, Flake's state director and a longtime confidant, is departing to open his own political communications and public-affairs firm. Specht, who is based in Phoenix, has been with Flake since he first ran for the U.S. House of Representatives in 2000. Specht was Flake's deputy campaign manager in that first race.

After the 2000 election, Specht started in Flake's legislative office and subsequently served as his communications director from 2002 to 2009. Then, he became Flake's House chief of staff. He took the state director job after Flake won election to the U.S. Senate in 2012.

"I'm sick about it, obviously. He's been a very trusted adviser for a long time," Flake said. "Matt has been the calmest, most tranquil voice that I had. You could always go to him for very impassioned, unvarnished advice, and that's what I've appreciated."

Specht's last day with Flake is May 31.

Nowicki is The Republic's national political reporter. Follow him on Twitter at @dannowicki and on his official Facebook page.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1ThKFGh