There is a backlog of more than 700 doctors waiting for licenses to be approved by the Arizona Medical Board. The longer wait time stems from new board policies that require letter-of-the-law credential checks for doctors. (Photo: Jack Kurtz/The Republic) Story Highlights New policy leaves more than 700 applications pending

One year ago, the state's licensing board for medical doctors took an average of 11 days to process new applications. Now, the average time to review an application and issue a license has swelled to 61 days, even as the state faces a chronic doctor shortage.

That has led to a backlog of more than 700 doctors waiting for licenses to be approved by the Arizona Medical Board. The longer wait time stems from new board policies that require letter-of-the-law credential checks for doctors.

The board overhauled its licensing procedures in the wake of a critical state report in October that found license applications were not being fully vetted. The report also led to the dismissal of then-Executive Director Lisa Wynn.

Doctors groups say the longer wait time is frustrating out-of-state doctors who want to practice in Arizona, causing some to look elsewhere.

"It really is a problem that needs to be fixed quickly," said Jay Conyers, CEO and executive director of the Maricopa County Medical Society, a doctors group. "We have an obvious physician shortage. If physicians are looking at coming to Arizona versus another state, this may make us a second or third choice."

The Arizona Medical Board acknowledges the backlog but anticipates improvement now that the new policies are in place and two bills are before the Arizona Legislature that would clarify licensing requirements and bolster consumer protections.

"I think some people are frustrated with the length of time," said Patricia McSorley, the board's interim executive director. "We need to follow the law and do what's required. We're doing everything possible to move licensing along."

Board officials could not immediately say how many licenses have been approved since the guidelines were changed. Officials said the most recent count showed 713 pending applications.

With more people gaining health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, many predict the demand for doctors and other medical professionals such as physicians' assistants and nurse practitioners will be even greater.

A 2012 survey by the Association of American Medical Colleges ranked Arizona 32nd out of 50 states in the ratio of active doctors per population. Arizona had 231 medical and osteopathic doctors per 100,000 people, compared with a national average of 245 per 100,000. The report excluded naturopaths.

"This is very unfortunate timing," said Chic Older, executive vice president of the Arizona Medical Association, a physicians' group. "We have so many entities working independently to lure doctors here and keep them here."

Last October, the Arizona ombudsman-citizens' aide found that the Medical Board staff violated several state laws and rules in the review of new license applications. Wynn denied wrongdoing, saying both state officials and board members sanctioned her policies to speed up and modernize licensing practices while protecting public health.

The report said that Wynn and her deputy director pressured staff to quickly process applications, suggesting that more than 2,000 doctors were inadequately vetted. Those doctors are still practicing medicine, but the board must recheck their credentials. Senate Bill 1381 would fund $855,000 for a third-party agency to review all licenses issued from October 2011 through Feb. 5, 2014, which could speed up the process.

Medical Board representatives said the backlog occurred because they had to first review their own policies, then follow all the steps Arizona law requires.

State law requires doctors to provide "primary source" credentials such as medical-school transcripts, certifications from medical specialty boards and verification of work history. Doctors need to arrange for these documents to be sent directly from each source to the Medical Board. Wynn attempted to hasten licensing by allowing paperless applications and online database checks.

Doctors and medical groups are chafing because of the delays.

Conyers said one doctor from Washington state, whom he declined to name, has waited six months to get a license in Arizona. He said another doctor with 40 years' experience had little trouble securing medical licenses in Nevada and Alaska, but has waited more than three months for an answer from Arizona. Other doctors have complained that it takes weeks for a return call from Medical Board staffers, Conyers said.

The CORE Institute, an orthopedic practice in Phoenix, hired a surgeon who held a high-ranking university position, but so far has been unable to get an Arizona license.

"He has arrived. We are paying him," said David Jacofsky, chairman and CEO of the CORE Institute. "He still doesn't have his license, so he is unable to work."

State Sen. Nancy Barto, who chairs the Senate Health and Human Services Committee, said she doesn't believe the state's longer wait times are a problem.

"It takes a little longer to make sure the licensing processes are followed," said Barto, who sponsored Senate Bill 1380, which calls for new Medical Board standards, including criminal background checks of doctors seeking a new license or renewing an existing license, which is required every two years.

Barto added that she expects Arizona's application-review time will improve with the new policies and when the board's new director takes over. C. Lloyd Vest, previously general counsel at the Kentucky Board of Medical Licensure, will take the helm Monday.

"What we're really concentrating on is making sure we prevent the same thing from happening," Barto said. "We are codifying a lot of the licensing practices that were ignored."

The Federation of State Medical Boards does not track average processing times for new licenses among different states. Some states have adopted laws requiring timely reviews.

California's medical board requires examiners to review an applicant's file within 60 days, but it takes the licensing agency an average of 40, said Chris Valine, the agency's public-information analyst. She added that it can take longer to process an application, particularly if a doctor hasn't provided all necessary documents.

In Arizona, the Naturopathic Physicians Medical Board issues a new license within 12 days of receiving a complete application, according to Gail Anthony, the board's executive director.

Interim Director McSorley said the board has changed its procedures to make sure it complies with Arizona's requirement that applications have "primary source" documentation of professional credentials such as medical-school transcripts or hospital verification. The Medical Board also must have the Arizona Auditor General's Office review its new policies and procedures.

"There is no perfect system," McSorley said. "We're responsible for ascertaining what primary source is a primary source."

Conyers said that some doctors who attend medical school abroad may have trouble meeting the requirements of Arizona's current law.

About one in four U.S. doctors attended a medical school abroad, and more than 900 doctors who applied for Arizona licenses in 2011 and 2012 studied at a foreign medical school.

The Philadelphia-based Educational Commission for Foreign Medical Graduates offers a service that verifies credentials. The vendor can use the databases of foreign medical schools where mailing documents may not be possible due to war conditions, spokesman Bill Kelly said.

But Arizona law requires both certification from the Philadelphia-based commission and transcripts from the medical school. While other states such as Nevada make exceptions for doctors who have trouble securing documents from abroad because of war or political turmoil, Arizona's law does not. A doctor's application won't be accepted unless he or she arranged for transcripts to be sent from the medical school.

Barto's bill would require that doctors ensure that verification is sent directly from their medical school, but the legislation also would permit verification from a board-approved service. It also would allow the board to evaluate an application if a doctor was unable to secure required documents through no fault of his own.

Dr. William Thrift, a Prescott family physician and former Medical Board member, believes Arizona's troubled licensing system is the result of outdated laws and rules. Thrift's tenure on the board ended last year when Barto refused to schedule his confirmation in front of her legislative committee.

"We're working with a new century, and they were still working for laws that were devised more than 20 years ago, before we had e-mail and ways of electronically checking doctors," Thrift said.

License approvals

Average number of days for the Arizona Medical Board to approve physician licenses:

February 2013: 11

March: 17

April: 18

May: 17

June: 15

July: 25

August: 26

September: 25

October: 38

November: 38

December: 44

January 2014: 61

Source: Arizona Medical Board

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1iHVbaB