More than half of New Jerseyans aged 40 and older say they’ve looked after sick or elderly relatives who have been discharged from the hospital by making sure their loved ones get their medication, keep their follow-up appointments and other nursing tasks, according to a new poll the AARP released today.

It can be an overwhelming responsibility, and they wish they had someone showing them how to do it right, they survey found.

Leaders at the AARP — the influential lobbying group for baby boomers and senior citizens — say they have a solution that’s making its way through the state legislature, and their goal is to get it passed before summer recess begins in July.

The Caregiver Advise, Record and Enable (CARE) Act would create a standardized way for all hospitals to prepare unpaid family caregivers for their post-discharge responsibilities.

The legislation has the support of 85 percent of the 1,000 state residents 40 and older in the poll, 53 percent of whom are taking care of sick or elderly people now or have in the past. The Assembly passed it 74-0 with three abstentions last month; the Senate has not yet taken a vote.

“There is overwhelming public support for improving the way our healthcare system recognizes, works with and assists unpaid family caregivers,” Douglas Johnston said, AARP’s lobbyist.

The results confirm what AARP members have been saying for years -- sometimes all caretakers get is a bag of prescription bottles and a handout with directions, Johnston said.

"We're not suggesting there is a plague of poor health care in New Jersey, but there is inconsistency among health care facilities and how they work with family caregivers," Johnston said. "There needs to be a basic standard."

The bill (A2955) would let patients admitted to the hospital identify a caregiver who will be providing assistance when the patient returns home. The hospital must include that person's name, address and telephone number in the patient's medical record.

Within 24 hours after a decision to discharge a patient is made, the hospital would have to explain what the patient needs, answer questions and offer training, which could include a live or recorded demonstration, according to the bill.

The AARP is also seeking support on a related bill (A1855) that would provide a tax credit to help pay for expenses including respite care and home improvements to accommodate the sick relative. With a maximum credit of $675 a year for couples whose income do not exceed $100,000 or $50,000 for single people, the N.J. Caregiver Assistance Act would cost the state $75 million to $150 million, according to the Office of Legislative Services.

Passing the CARE Act is timely for hospitals, which are now penalized under the Affordable Care Act if readmissions rates within 30 days after discharge are deemed too high for Medicare patients.

New Jersey has the second highest rate of readmissions in the country, with 59 of 64 hospitals forfeiting as much as .66 percent of their Medicare payments, according to Kaiser Health News, an independent, nonpartisan research organization.

“New Jersey’s dismal rankings in hospital readmission rates speak for themselves,” said Evelyn Liebman, AARP’s associate state director. “These are the kinds of changes we need to be seriously embracing.”

The New Jersey Hospital Association supports “the goals of the CARE Act – to work with patients’ loved ones and ensure they have the support they need to keep their recoveries on track once they’re discharged from the hospital.,” said Randy Minniear, the hospital association’s senior vice president.



"Some of the current language is inconsistent with existing federal and state regulations, and some could create operational issues within the hospital that could actually delay discharges for patients that are ready to go home,” Minniear said. “We’ve had good constructive conversations so far, and we’re pretty confident we can work through those concerns."

The AARP-commissioned the telephone poll from April 11 and April 24, and has a margin of error of 3.2 percent.

RELATED COVERAGE

• N.J. elderly more likely to be readmitted to hospitals

• Nearly every N.J. hospital to be penalized by Medicare for high readmissions





More Politics