Billy Long

Rep. Billy Long was not a very effective legislator in the last Congress, according to a new analysis examining lawmakers’ legislative success.

Among Missouri’s nine House members, Long, R-Springfield, earned the lowest score from the Legislative Effectiveness Project, a new website developed by two political scientists at Vanderbilt University and University of Virginia.

Long scored “well below expectations,” said Craig Volden, one of the website’s creators and a professor at the University of Virginia.

Long strongly defended his record in Congress, noting that he sits on one of the most powerful committees in the House — the Energy and Commerce Committee — which has held a bevy of hearings and cranked out substantive legislation.

“I am an active member of the influential House Energy and Commerce Committee,” Long said in a statement to the News-Leader.

There’s no question that the data from Legislative Effectiveness Project does not capture every aspect of a House members’ job. For example, it doesn’t take into account lawmakers’ efforts to help their constituents with Social Security benefits or Veterans Affairs’ claims. It also doesn’t include lawmakers’ efforts to hold federal agencies accountable for how they spend taxpayer dollars and how they implement government regulations.

“Members of Congress serve lots of different roles,” said Volden. “What we’re focused on is the lawmaking role.”

And at a time when Congress is divided and deadlocked, it is particularly difficult to be effective.

“An average bill, once sponsored, has about a 4 percent chance of becoming law,” said Volden. “It’s tough to be an effective member.”

Only one Missouri lawmaker — Rep. Blaine Luetkemeyer, R-St. Elizabeth — landed in the website’s highest category of “above expectations.” Rep. Vicky Hartzler, R-Harrisonville, and others were in the middle — earning a “meets expectations” label.

The website, unveiled at a news conference last week, uses 15 factors to calculate how successful lawmakers are in pushing their legislative priorities. Among other things, the yardsticks include: the number of bills each lawmaker has introduced, how substantive those proposals are, and how far in the legislative process each measure has gone.

Volden and his partner on the effectiveness project, Alan Wiseman, an associate professor of political science at Vanderbilt University, also took into account how much seniority and power each lawmaker has. For example, they set a lower expectations “benchmark” for someone like Long, who was in his first term in the 112th Congress and did not chair any committees or subcommittees.

Volden and Wiseman did not examine senators’ effectiveness, saying the rules of that chamber made it more difficult to track bills at different stages of the legislative process.

In the new analysis, Long received a “legislative effectiveness score” of .162. His benchmark — where the two political scientists said Long should score given his seniority and other factors — was set at .829.

Hartlzer had the same benchmark, and she earned a score of .580. There is no data available yet on Rep. Jason Smith, R-Salem, who won a seat in the House in June 2013, after GOP Rep. Jo Ann Emerson retired.

The data shows that Long introduced four bills in the 112th Congress, but only one of those received any committee action, such as a hearing or a vote. Hartzler introduced five bills and one passed the House, although it did not become law.

Steve Walsh, a spokesman for Hartzler, said his boss is effective in many ways that this analysis doesn’t measure — from hosting job fairs and youth leadership summits to listening to voters at roundtables and other forums. He said another accomplishment not reflected in the data was pushing the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to change a management plan for a hydroelectric plant at the Lake of the Ozarks, which could have led to the destruction of 1,200 homes.

“The effectiveness of a lawmaker entails more than bills a legislator has sponsored and passed,” Walsh said. “It means making a difference for the people she serves by fighting for the people of her district — taking their views and values to DC, plus helping them in tangible ways to make government work for them; not against them.”

Long said he has “provided active oversight” of the Obama administration’s implementation of the Affordable Care Act and worked diligently to advance bills sponsored by other lawmakers on the Energy and Commerce Committee.

Long’s spokesman also noted that the congressman is among a handful who have not missed any House votes in this Congress.

“When legislation is debated and voted on in the House it is imperative that the 7th district is heard, and their voice is heard through my votes,” Long said.

Volden said that lawmakers who are the most effective in pushing their legislative priorities showed perseverance, media savvy, and the ability to build coalitions, among other traits.

Although the Legislative Effectiveness Project leaves out many elements of how lawmakers exercise power and shape policy, it offers one of the most comprehensive ways to measure effectiveness. Other organizations and advocacy groups rate lawmakers on certain votes, but those often have a partisan slant and relate to a single issues or narrow agendas, such as gun rights or abortion.

Reporter Deirdre Shesgreen writes for The News-Leader from Gannett’s offices in Washington, D.C.

BY THE NUMBERS

Rep. Billy Long, R-Springfield

Effectiveness score: 0.162, below expectation

Effectiveness rank: 212th out of 245 Republicans

Legislation sponsored: Four bills

Bills receiving committee action: One

Bills that passed House: None

Bills that became law: None

Rep. Vicky Hartzler

Effectiveness score: 0.580, meets expectation

Effectiveness rank: 146th out of 245 Republicans

Legislation sponsored: Five bills

Bills receiving committee action: Two

Bills that passed House: One

Bills that became law: None

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/1welvfW