Can’t make it to tonight’s congressional debate in Bay Minette? We’ve got you covered.

I’ll be with the candidates in the room at the Bay Minette Civic Center and will post updates here as soon as the debate kicks off at 6 p.m.

Tonight’s event is sponsored by the Common Sense Campaign, a prominent Tea Party group in south Alabama.

The entire field of candidates – including 9 Republicans, 2 Democrats and one Independent – was invited to participate.

The candidates are vying for the seat vacated Aug. 2 by former U.S. Rep. Jo Bonner, R-Mobile, who left to take a job as a chancellor at the University of Alabama System in Tuscaloosa.

It’s the first of three debates in the next three days, as the campaigns roll into the Sept. 24 primary election. Tomorrow’s event at St. Paul’s Episcopal School in Mobile will be live-streamed over AL.com.

Tonight’s event is not televised, but sit back and enjoy the fireworks from the comfort of your computer keyboard as we update the action in real time. Join the conversation and jump in the comment stream below.

8:30 p.m. And that's a wrap from Bay Minette. Look for a full report on tonight's event coming from my colleague John Sharp.

8:20 p.m. Closing statements.

Hillyer: I've been fighting for conservative principles for 34 years. 2 million words in print. Consistent advocate for conservative values. Just Google it.

James: We all know our country's in trouble. I'll fight for you and get us back on track.

LeFlore: I feel passionate about you - the people of this district. What's going on in D.C. is a travesty. It's a travesty because we have a Republican supermajority that is doing nothing.

Powe: Our country is in trouble. This district is in trouble. We need people working and our seniors secure.

Thornton: I know how to balance a budget and handle my own checkbook. We've got a long ways toward progress there.

Young: This is it. We've got a week. It's real clear. You know where I stand. I'm different. We're losing our country. You know it. The media knows it. Washington knows it.

Byrne: I am standing on principles I've held my entire life. I will not back down to any special interest group.

Dyas: I believe the foundation of our nation is sound. The problem is the federal government is being built outside the foundation. Send a statesman to Washington - not a politician.

Hall: I won't be on the ballot Sept. 24. But if your guy doesn't win, I invite you to support me in the general election.

8:15 p.m. Dr. Lou asks candidates to name the most important foreign policy issue facing America.

Hall: Syria. Says he opposes intervention.

Hillyer: We have cut defense to the bone. Spread our troops too thinly. A strong defense would solve a lot of our foreign policy problems because nobody would want to mess with us.

James: We have to stop being the world referee. We should take care of ourselves first.

LeFlore: We need to focus on the home front. I'm very disappointed to hear President Obama talking about sending troops to Syria.

Powe: We protect our country by sealing our borders.

Thornton: The problem is to the south of us. We need to work with that country.

Young: What foreign policy? The whole world is laughing at our foreign policy. We need a foreign policy the world will respect.

Byrne: I actually agree with Dean about this. We've farmed out our foreign policy on Syria to Putin. Our policy must be based foremost on the safety of U.S. citizens.

Dyas: Roosevelt said speak softly and carry a big stick. That's the policy we should adhere to.

8:08 p.m. All candidates say they would oppose a carbon tax. Hall says global warming "is the biggest fraud perpetrated on humanity." James says global warming is "a ruse concocted by the Democrats." LeFlore says there is evidence that global warming is real (A smattering of boos).

7:57 p.m. All candidates express support for the 2nd Amendment. LeFlore says guns are dangerous and should be regulated. Powe says ladies need to know more about guns.

7:52 p.m. Dr. Lou says it's time for the lighting round.

7:52 p.m. Question: What steps will you take to make Biblical marriage the only form of marriage in the U.S.?

Thornton: I am for marriage between a man and a woman. That's it.

Young: We need to bring DOMA back up. Two guys? That's not marriage. We need to impeach judges who believe that.

Byrne: I supported a constitutional amendment that defines marriage between a man and a woman. That is the law in Alabama. I will support the right of each state to define marriage.

Dyas: Marriage is covenant between a man, a woman and God.

Hall: I believe in traditional marriage like the Bible tells us. Where does it lead? Three women? Four men? No.

Hillyer: Congress should pass a law excluding marriage from the jurisdiction of the courts. That way DOMA could stand.

James: I believe in traditional marriage.

LeFlore:I am not a proponent of gay marriage. We have to accept there are gay people in the world. If they want to live together, so be it. But I don't understand why they need to get married.

Powe: The first institution God made was marriage. If all the gays got together and Democrats killed all their babies, we'd be sure of one thing, the Democrats would be extinct.

7:45 p.m. Question: What will you do to de-fund Obamacare?

Powe: It must be de-funded. But there are people that actually need affordable health care. Obamacare is not working for anyone.

Thornton: It's unwieldy, unmanageable and impossible to implement.

Young: It's a train wreck. It's not going to work. We all know it. Free enterprise can work this out. Not the government.

Byrne: Why should we wreck the health care of 80 percent to take care of 20 percent? I'm for de-funding it. But we need to take power away from IRS to implement it.

Dyas: We were lied to. We were told we could keep our coverage. It was wrong to ram it through the way they did.

Hall: Correct me if I'm wrong, but did I just hear "Bradley-care"? You're going to come up with a solution to replace Obamacare? That's kinda scary.

Hillyer: True story: It was Sarah Palin who named 'death panels.' She got the topic from Rush Limbaugh. He got it from editorials I wrote for the Washington Times.

James: Health care is not a right. It's a privilege. We need to deregulate health care.

LeFlore: We've got to have health care. Every one in this room needs it. There are aspects of Affordable Care Act already in place and they are working.

7:35 p.m. Question: How will you protect religious freedom in this country?

LeFlore: I am a Christian but not a proponent of religious fanaticism. I'm not aware of any movement to supress religious freedom. Audience murmurs.

Powe: This country was built on Christian principles, and until we return back to them, we'll have many, many more problems.

Thornton: We need to get Christian values back in our schools. I'm not sure how.

Young: Quotes Patrick Henry. Says Christianity is under attack in America. "I mean, we can't even say Merry Christmas in Wal-Mart."

Byrne: Quotes 1st Amendment. "As a member of Congress, I will stand up for the free exercise clause."

Dyas: I will fight to repeal Obamacare because it is the greatest threat to our Christian religion today.

Hall: Mr. Young hit it on the head. Christians are under attack. Being a Christian is who we are as a country.

Hillyer: As a theology major, there is nobody with a record like mine fighting for religious liberty. Google me.

James: Last time I checked, we are one nation under God. I want prayer back in our schools.

7:30 p.m. Audience member asks candidates if they're pro-life. All the Rs says yes. So does Hall. LeFlore says he's a proponent of Roe v. Wade and a woman's right to choose. Audience = stunned silence.

7:25 p.m. Candidates asked if they'd take contributions from gambling interests. All say no, including Burton LeFlore - who then adds that he thinks Alabama should approve a lottery. Audience = confused.

7:20 p.m. Question: Do you take PAC money?

Dyas: No. And we need to shun those who take it.

Hall: Agrees with Dyas. "But there's folks up here who've raised $250k and it's hard for regular folks like me to compete with that. I would take PAC money for something I believe in, like the 2nd Amendment."

Hillyer: Issue-based PACs are just citizens getting together. I'm proud to have support of Citizens United PAC, for example. That's a good PAC.

James: I have not received nor am I looking to receive.

LeFlore: No. It's been difficult to raise money. Democrats are struggling just like you. I will not sell my soul just for a little money to run my campaign.

Powe: No. This is a grassroots campaign.

Thornton: Every penny of my campaign came out of my own pocket. (Dons a Murphy High School cap). Says he tells supporters to give money to their favorite school and not a politician.

Young: I have not taken PAC money. But if Tea Party Express wants to support me, I will gladly take it.

Byrne: 90% of my contributions came from individuals.

7:15 p.m.: Question: Do you support term limits?

Byrne: Yes. I would limit House members to 5 two-year terms and senators to 2 six-year terms.

Dyas: Yes. I won't serve more than two full terms after completing the rest of Bonner's term.

Hall: Yes. Career politicians are the problem.

Hillyer: Yes. I pledge to a five-term (10-year) limit.

James: Yes. No more than 5 terms.

LeFlore. No. The people impose term limits at the ballot box.

Powe: Yes. To give others the opportunity to run.

Thornton: Yes.

Young: Yes. BUT...it's got to be for everybody. The bad guys - Pelosi, Barney Frank - they'll stay up there forever. The good guys don't need to leave - that's us.

7 p.m. Time for audience questions. First up: Are you a Tea Party, McCain or Rand Paul conservative?

Young: Tea Party.

Byrne: I'm a south Alabama conservative.

Dyas: I'm a south Alabama Tea Party conservative. "We're going to put the Republican Party back in line." (applause)

Hall: I'm not into labels. I am a conservative who believes the GOP left me. I'm frustrated with politics, with trying to move to the center. Call me whatever you want but I am an independent.

Hillyer: I'm a Ronald Reagan conservative.

James: I am a Tea Party conservative.

LeFlore: I am a conservative Democrat.

Powe: I am a strong conservative Republican.

Thornton: I've voted for more Republicans than anybody on this panel.

6:45 p.m. Quin Hillyer strikes a professorial tone. Warns the audience to expect a lot of quotations from the Founding Fathers tonight. "It's important to get the prose right in addition to the poetry."

Jessica James relates her experience of living in New York on 9/11. "It was a life changing moment for me." Says she dedicated her life to public service.

Burton LeFlore says he just found out about the forum this afternoon. LeFlore says one his biggest pet peeves is "politicians who tell you what they think you want to hear." Says he won't tell people what they want to hear tonight. As the lone Democrat at a Tea Party event, reckon that's a safe bet.

Sharon Powe says voters should elect someone "who is going to ignite Congressional District 1." Ignite it with jobs and Christianity.

6:30 p.m. Dr. Lou says the candidates will get 3 minutes each for opening statements.

First up is David G. "Thunder" Thornton, a former Shell engineering worker who looks a bit nervous.

Next up is Dean Young, who's wearing an NRA cap and looks the opposite of nervous. Young: "I see a nation that's disintegrating...we've lost our moral compass."

Bradley Byrne touts his work reforming Alabama's two-year college system. Says that distinguishes him from field: "The difference is I have a proven track record."

Daniel Dyas, in jeans and shirtsleeves, says America's biggest problem is Barack Obama. Also politicians and lobbyists. And PACs. "We've got to get back to statesmanship in this country."

Independent James Hall, in coat and tie, reads from notes. Hall says his grandfather taught him: "Never trust a man who says 'trust me.'"

6:25 p.m. Not present tonight: Republicans Chad Fincher and Wells Griffith, Democrat Lula Albert-Kaigler and somebody named Curtis Railey (!). Moderator Lou Campomenosi chides them for their absence, and organizers helpfully label their empty chairs:













6:20 p.m. Your candidate lineup, starting with Rs: Bradley Byrne, Daniel Dyas, Quin Hillyer, Jessica James, Sharon Powe, David "Thunder" Thornton and Dean Young.

Democrat Burton LeFlore is here, along with Independent candidate James Hall.

6:15 p.m. ...and we're live from Bay Minette. Big crowd in the Civic Center for tonight's debate. George Washington is in the house! (Or is that Martha?)