The pilot was Jeffrey Pino, 61, of Chandler, pictured on the left. The passenger was Nickolas Tramontano. (Source; KPHO/KTVK)

Family, friends and the aviation community is in mourning after a deadly plane crash Friday killed two people, including a popular Chandler pilot.

Jeff Pino, 61, and his passenger, Nick Tramontano, 72, took off from Stellar Air Park Friday for a scenic tour of the Valley. They were in the air for only a matter of minutes when something went terribly wrong.

[Read more: Names released of passenger, pilot killed in AZ plane crash]

"He would have been the last person I would think that would happen to," said fellow aviator Scott Urschel, who described the loss as tremendous.

Pino was killed when his P-51 mustang war-bird crashed near Maricopa and burst into flames on the ground.

[Raw video: 1 person killed fiery plane crash]

Urschel says it was eerie, as he and our very own chopper pilot Bruce Haffner snapped a selfie just minutes before they learned of the tragedy and headed to the scene.

"It was crushing to fly over and identify some of the paint scheme on the airplane so it was very, very emotional," Urschel said. He knew immediately the outcome would be grim for a man so well respected in the aviation community.

Pino was an army master aviator test pilot, test pilot and former president for Bell Helicopter and had recently retired as president from Sikorsky Helicopter Company.

Investigators say Pino's friend and fellow pilot Nick Tramontano was a passenger on the aircraft. He was also killed. The two were flying above Pinal County in Pino's World War II aircraft known as "Big Beautiful Doll."



Urschel says as much as Pino loved to fly, he says he loved his family even more. "He always spent time with his family. He was always going to Tucson for the football games to spend time with his parents and his sisters and constantly spoke of his family, and he was so polite to everybody that he met."

The FAA is handling the investigation.

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.