BENJAMIN NORMAN FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

Valeant Pharmaceuticals International sought and failed to buy Botox-maker Allergan, but it looks like it’s doing everything it can to give itself a facelift.

On its third-quarter earnings call, Valeant’s management tried to distance itself from some of the most controversial elements of the company’s business model. Among them: acquiring companies and then raising prices on the company’s drugs and investing little in research and development.

The company’s investors didn’t like this new face. Valeant’s stock was down 6% Monday by early afternoon. That drop came even though the company lifted its full-year outlook and beat earnings expectations in the latest quarter.

Yet the focus of investors and Wall Street analysts once again turned to the more controversial elements of Valeant’s business model, and on most of them, Valeant made an about face.

Last week, the company’s stock came under scrutiny after Valeant revealed that it had received subpoenas from federal prosecutors seeking information related to how it prices drugs, distributes them and helps patients afford the medicines.

On an analyst call Monday, Valeant Chief Executive J. Michael Pearson said that the company is “likely to pursue fewer, if any acquisitions focused on mispriced products,” going forward. He added that M&A will be less of a focus as the company plans to pay down debt.

Share buybacks should generate better returns for investors now than most acquisitions, Mr. Pearson said. Shares of Valeant, which had been one of the best-performing stocks of the last decade, have dropped precipitously in recent weeks. Shares are down 30% this month, yet remain up 18% for the year.

He added that Valeant is unlikely to raise prices for any drugs in its existing portfolio more than 10% per year.

In a sharp divergence from the company’s previous statement, Mr. Pearson also said that the company plans to make research and development “more of a focus.”

Just last week, Mr. Pearson sent a letter to Sen. Claire McCaskill (D., Mo.) this week defending the Canadian company’s price increases on two drugs, by 525% and 212%, after acquiring the medicines in February, moves detailed in an April article in The Wall Street Journal.

In that letter, Mr. Pearson wrote that spending money building “large, fixed-cost research infrastructure” is inefficient and not necessarily the most productive model for the drug business. On the call, he did say that Valeant has no plans to be like other drug companies with its R&D spending, but it plans to spend more.

The company also said it is planning a sale, spinoff or take-private transaction for its “Neuro” segment, which the company said has seen the largest price increases. “Given the current environment, that probably doesn’t make sense for us to hold onto it, especially given sort of what’s happened to our multiple, with everything we got there in the press,” Mr. Pearson said on the call.

He admitted that a buyer could potentially be interested in the division, despite the negative attention directed at it, because of its potential to allow a buyer to move its headquarters to a lower tax regime. Valeant, headquartered in Canada, has been known for its aggressive acquisition strategy and its ability to lower taxes on companies it acquires, particularly those in the U.S.