It was unanimous in the Broncos’ locker room at Dove Valley this week that the play of their special teams Monday at Cincinnati wasn’t acceptable. But coach John Fox led the opinion that there wasn’t any reason to panic.

After all, the Broncos struggled in all three phases of the game while losing 37-28.

The Bengals had 206 return yards — 134 on three kickoff returns and 72 on three punt returns. Fox said better special-teams play is required in Denver’s regular-season finale against Oakland on Sunday, and he believes he has the personnel to make the necessary improvements.

“We haven’t been awful all season,” Fox said. “It was a little bit problematic with our coverage teams both on punts and kickoffs, but I think the more concerning one was the kickoff coverage. The (special teams) have been pretty consistent all season long, but it wasn’t one of our best efforts.”

Fox noted that he has some young players on special teams who weren’t maintaining their assignments.

In addition to the Broncos having poor kick coverage, Connor Barth missed a 49-yard field goal at a critical time. That snapped his string of 11 consecutive makes.

Britton Colquitt noted that it wasn’t only about a coverage problem, and that he could have done a better job by having better hang time on his punts.

“There’s a lot that goes into it other than the coverage,” said Colquitt, who discounted any problems resulting from the rain. “I could have done more to help. (The Bengals) don’t like to fair catch. They took their chances and got a couple of good returns.”

David Bruton has been a key special-teams contributor all season. He preferred to look at the performance against the Bengals as “a bad day” and not as a trend.

“All three of our units didn’t play up to the level needed to win the game. But the sky isn’t falling. We have some issues to address, but we definitely have the personnel to get the job done,” said Bruton, a veteran safety.

Jacob Tamme, who plays on the kickoff-coverage team, expects the Broncos’ special teams to rebound Sunday against the Raiders with a good performance at Sports Authority Field at Mile High.

“We have a lot of players who take pride in playing on special teams,” said Tamme, a veteran tight end. “I don’t think any of us were really pleased with the performance Monday night. None of our units played as well as what was needed. But we’ve done a lot of solid things. There are a couple of plays along the way that we’d like to have back. But that’s not just with the special teams.”

The Broncos’ highlights on special teams this season include recovering four fumbles and blocking two kicks.

Irv Moss: 303-954-1296, imoss@denverpost.com or twitter.com/irvmoss