The Office of Minority Health invites you to join us and the Health Resources and Services Administration, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, and Asian Counseling and Referral Service for a webinar, “A Workforce for the Future: Advancing Diversity and Cultural Competency in Health Professions.”

Strengthening the nation’s health and human services infrastructure involves addressing the critical shortage of primary care physicians, psychiatrists, nurses, behavioral health providers, long-term care workers and community health workers in the U.S. As the nation grows more diverse, the disparity between the racial and ethnic composition of the health care workforce and that of the U.S. population widens as well.

This webinar will provide a look at successful efforts to address these gaps and reduce racial and ethnic health disparities by 1) increasing racial and ethnic diversity of the health care workforce, 2) improving the quality of patient-provider interactions in clinical settings and 3) enhancing cultural competency education and training for health care professionals.

This is the second in a special Minority Health Month webinar series that will be held each Monday throughout April.

Presenters:

Introduction by J. Nadine Gracia, MD, MSCE, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Minority Health and Director, Office of Minority Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

Michelle Allender-Smith, RN, BSN, MS, Director, Office of Health Equity, Health Resources and Services Administration

Roslyn Holliday Moore, Public Health Analyst, Office of Behavioral Health Equity, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Yoon Joo Han, MSW, Behavioral Health Program Director, Asian Counseling and Referral Service

Webinar: A Workforce for the Future: Advancing Diversity and Cultural Competency in Health Professions

Who Should Attend: Health care professionals and administrators, students and community based organizations

When: April 14, 2-3 p.m. ET

To join the event (no pre-registration needed):

Join here.

Conference number: RW2029726

Passcode: 5780103

Dial-in: 1-877-669-4124