PUEBLO — Pueblo East High School won’t have to chase history anymore.

The Eagles scored 16 unanswered points in the fourth quarter to defeat Rifle 30-14 on Saturday to win the Class 3A state championship at Dutch Clark Stadium. It was the inaugural state football title for the school, which opened in 1959.

“These boys, their heart, they just played like champions and that’s why they are champions,” East coach David Ramirez said. “It’s better than I could ever imagine (to win state). To know where we started from, and we won this thing. It is a great feeling.”

Pueblo East (11-3) made an improbable run to the state championship after starting the season 3-3. Rifle (12-2) was trying to win its fourth state title.

The game was in limbo at the start of the fourth quarter. In a 14-14 game, Rifle’s defense stopped Pueblo East quarterback Danny Martin just short of the end zone on fourth-and-goal.

On the next play, Pueblo East linebacker Damon Sabbagh hit left-handed Rifle quarterback Layton Stutsman as he was attempting to pass out of his own end zone. Stutsman’s pass was caught by offensive lineman Gage Johnston, who was tackled by a mob of Pueblo East defenders for a safety. That gave the Eagles a 16-14 advantage with 10:25 left.

“I was trying to get the ball out, and it got knocked out as I was throwing,” Stutsman said. “That was my fault. I should have gotten the ball out sooner, knowing I was in the end zone.”

Pueblo East defensive end Josh Tellez said the safety was just the jolt the Eagles needed.

“At that moment, we thought we needed to get a safety to turn things around,” Tellez said. “I hit him (Stutsman) at the legs, and Damon got him up top. It was a big play and got us going.”

On East’s ensuing possession, Bryson Torres broke free on the first play for an 80-yard touchdown run over the right side.

“It was exciting,” Torres said. “We knew we just had to keep pounding and win the game.”

The Eagles put the game all but out of reach when Martin scored on a 22-yard run for a 30-14 lead with 8:33 remaining.

“This is incredible to win state,” Martin said.

Martin paced East with 192 yards rushing and two touchdowns, and he tossed an 8-yard scoring pass to Bruno DeRose.

Torres added 156 yards rushing, and East’s defense held Rifle to 196 yards of total offense, 79 in the second half.

Rifle7070—14Pueblo East07716—30

R — Leyba 37 pass from Stutsman (Sandoval kick). E — Martin 5 run (Benavidez kick). R — Clark 39 run (Sandoval kick). E — DeRose 5 pass from Martin (Benavidez kick). E — Safety, Johnston tackled in end zone. E — Torres 80 run (Benavidez kick). E — Martin 22 run (Benavidez kick).

Mvp

Pueblo East junior quarterback Danny Martin accounted for 279 yards of total offense and had two rushing touchdowns and one passing to lead the Eagles to their first football championship.