An American company has produced a wristband that aims to instill good habits in people – by giving them an electric shock when they stray.

The Pavlok is worn like a FitBit bracelet, and can be activated manually or automatically through an app. Inspired by Pavlov's theory – who trained his dogs to expect food every time a bell was rang – the app wearer is supposed to learn to avoid certain behaviour, or else an electric shock will be sent out from the band.

"The idea is everybody has these things they know they shouldn't do," said Maneesh Sethi, who created Pavlok . "If you start to add a small amount of shock when you do stupid things, you can mostly just increase the awareness of your activity in your daily routine. I like to say that for the last 1,000 years, we've tamed environment, but we haven't tamed ourselves."

Mr Sethi explained that, for instance, those looking to lose weight could shock themselves when their plate was half finished, to encourage themselves to stop eating. Or if you knew that you wasted too much time on social media, you could shock yourself to snap your attention away from the device.

He told The Daily Dot website that while activating the Pavlok manually might sound counterproductive to the aim of the device, his team's research showed that self-applied shock is as – or more – effective than automated shock. Having the Pavlok on your wrist "opens up the awareness of your habits," he claimed.

"It makes you ask yourself, wait, why am I hungry again?"

The shock is delivered at two milliamperes, which the manufacturers claim is neither dangerous nor excessively painful. The device goes on sale next year for $244 (£155).

And on their website, the company state: "If there was one thing you could do, every day for a year, who would you become? Change is hard. We're held back by distractions, other people, and often ourselves.

"But change isn't impossible. Choose your daily action, and Pavlok will hold you accountable, ensuring lasting success."

An American journalist, EJ Dickinson, tested the bracelet last week for her family's Thanksgiving meal – activating the shock when she was tempted to have second helpings.

"Is a shock therapy wearable necessarily the healthiest way of preventing overeating, or even obsessive-compulsiveness? Probably not," she concluded.

"That said I'd be lying if I said it wasn't at least a little effective: Today, I was more than able to button each button of my trousers."