Here is what President Obama said on Friday at the end of the NATO summit in Wales, at the end of a week when ISIS conducted another public execution of an American journalist, this time Steven Sotloff:

“We are going to degrade and ultimately defeat (ISIS).”

If he manages that, if he can assemble a modern League of Nations for a dangerous, terrorist world with our allies in Europe who don’t choose to sit out a fight like this and independent Arab states, it will give him the chance to be something he has not been in his first six years in office.

ISIS has provided President Obama a chance to lead, which is something he was elected to do.

That means a great President.

ISIS is not the greatest threat to America, not after everything we have seen since George W. Bush committed as stupid and terrible and lasting a crime as any an American President has committed, which means invading Iraq in the shadow of 9/11 even though Iraq had nothing to do with Al Qaeda invading us. Obama has been trying to clean up that mess since he took office and the next President will have to do the same, because of everything Bush and Dick Cheney did to turn that part of the world into even more of a dumpster fire than it already was.

Mark Green, a Democrat who nearly got elected mayor of New York City in 2001, said Obama 'can’t just stay calm as ISIS beheads an American or Westerner every 10 days.' (Craig Warga/New York Daily News)

ISIS isn’t the worst threat, just the latest. But because of what these people have done, the way they have killed people for show and almost for sport, they have provided Obama a chance to do something he was elected to do:

Lead.

He has not been the failure the bullhorn media says he is. If you are grading him against an epic failure like Bush the Son, there is nothing to discuss. But he has not been the transformative figure we hoped he would be when elected this country’s first African-American President. More than anything, he has been a disappointment.

University of Central Florida (UCF) students hold lit candles during a candlelight vigil in memory of American freelance journalist Steven Sotloff. (ALEX MENENDEZ/EPA)

Only now comes this new enemy, and what can be a defining moment for him, in front of our own country and in front of the world. Finally, with the meter running on his presidency, he can walk his own talk.

This will be no easy thing, despite the fact that idiots on the right seem to think it is. Mark Green, a Democrat who nearly got elected mayor of New York City in 2001, who seemed to be on his way to getting elected before the planes hit the buildings, was talking about Obama’s challenge the other day.

“He’s refused to take the bait of the (John) McCains and just be a Bush-like gunslinger,” Green, an Obama loyalist, said. “But he also can’t just stay calm as ISIS beheads an American or Westerner every 10 days. But the problem for him, and for all of us, is this: The public wants ISIS destroyed, but wants that done without a new war or troops.”

Fighters from the Al-Qaida linked Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) march in Raqqa, Syria. (AP)

Green then added this: “If we despise ISIS more than Iran and (Syrian President) Assad, do we go ahead and try to destroy ISIS even if it collaterally helps Assad and Iran? It won’t be pretty, but it wasn’t pretty when Roosevelt and Churchill allied with Stalin to defeat the greater evil of Hitler?”

No President will ever eliminate jihadists this determined, this hell-bent in all ways, to kidnap and kill innocent Westerners. The President admitted as much in Wales when he said, “You can’t contain an organization that is running roughshod through that much territory, causing that much havoc, displacing that many people, killing that many innocents, enslaving that many women. The goal has to be to dismantle them.”

It is his job now, in what can be the defining moment of his presidency, to find a way to do that, to somehow form a coalition that very well might include Assad and Iran, to back it up with special forces and intelligence and air strikes and — his word — to “dismantle” ISIS once and for all, at least before the next ISIS comes along.

A Muslim woman releases a dove as a symbol of peace during a rally against the Islamic State group, in Jakarta, Indonesia, Sept. 5, 2014. (Tatan Syuflana/AP)

“It will be harder after Bush’s dumb war,” Green said, “but not impossible.”

He thought his legacy would be health care, as if Obamacare would somehow be remembered like the Voting Rights Act. He was wrong about that. He has been wrong about a lot of things. But he has a chance to make a lot right as he goes after ISIS, not with speeches and rhetoric, he needed none of that before we took out Osama Bin Laden. Just by walking his own big talk, once and for all.

He was always a terrific candidate. He will almost certainly be a terrific ex-President someday. But if Barack Obama is ever going to be a great President, he has to be one now.