Lone Star College System credit hour policy clarified

A clarification within the Lone Star College System regarding limitations on credit hours led to confusion among some faculty members.

Citing issues with the Affordable Care Act and the Teachers Retirement System, the board of trustees voted at a December meeting to clarify the LSCS policy regarding adjunct instructors and the number of credit hours they are allowed to teach.

"This issue is bubbling up all over the United States," said LSCS chancellor Richard Carpenter. "There have been unanswered questions, and if you are an adjunct faculty member in our system that would be frustrating to you because you look to us for answers.

"We are so dependent on our adjunct faculty."

According to the policy, an adjunct instructor, or adjunct employee, is one who receives a limited per semester appointment to teach no more than nine credit hours per semester not to exceed 15 credit hours in any given academic year.

Ronda Rotelli, LSCS chief human resources officer, said she believes adjunct faculty were misinterpreting the meaning of an academic year, and that many were working well past the 15 credit hours they signed up to teach.

"There was a lot of assumption that academic year meant Sept. 1 through the end of August," she said.

"Academic year for us is Sept. 1 through May, so there was a misunderstanding on that."

Under the Affordable Care Act, employees who work a minimum of 30 hours per week are now considered full time.

Under those requirements, LSCS would then be required to classify some adjuncts as full-time employees which would increase costs for the college system.

In fact, Rand Key, LSCS vice chancellor and chief operations officer, said the policy wasn't one that was strictly followed because there were no consequences to the college system.

"What the ACA did for us here, is that it made us sharpen our pencils and really look at the teaching loads of adjuncts, because in the past there was not really any fiscal implication to us if they taught an extra class or two," Key said.

As a result, Key said the policy not only needed to be clarified to everyone, but needs to be followed.

Adjunct faculty members are individuals who usually have a minimum of a master's degree, in most educational classifications, and are considered part-time employees at the college level.

These employees are eligible under the state Teacher's Retirement System if they have worked for 12 credit hours during the previous academic year, and have worked each of the semesters.

"We have been admonished (recently) to follow our own policy … some of our policies are hard to interpret (and) contradictory," said David Holsey, DDS, who chairs the board of trustees.

The system uses about 2,000 adjunct instructors, and recently hosted hiring fairs for adjunct instructors at several of the LSCS campuses.