With three weeks until the primary in New Hampshire, the Associated Press reported last week that Ohio Gov. John Kasich is campaigning with a “sense of calm” in a very small state where he’ll “live or die.”

Gov. Kasich’s “sense of calm” may sound Zen-like, but once results of the latest CNN/WMUR are considered, it’s more like he’s whistling past his own graveyard. In the poll, John Kasich falls to sixth place with just two percent of poll participants. Not good for the crusty CEO who’s pinned his hopes for a second run for the White House exclusively on the Granite State.

Kasich Takes Big Hit In Pew Research

More bad news comes to Gov. Kasich in a look at the candidates by the Pew Research group. “A year before the next president takes office, voters are skeptical that any of the leading 2016 candidates would make a good president,” the report said. “Moreover, of nine candidates included in the survey, far more voters say each would make a ‘terrible’ than ‘great’ president.”

Looking at four GOP candidates, John Kasich, along with Ben Carson, Chris Christie and Jeb Bush, are more negative than positive, on balance, Pew notes. “While 17% say Kasich would make a good or great president, 25% say he would be poor or terrible, and 31% think he would be average; 27% of Republican voters express no opinion about Kasich possibly becoming president, the highest percentage among GOP candidates.”

Kasich Misleads NH Legislature On Medicaid Expansion

One of a couple GOP candidates who accepted an offer to briefly address New Hampshire’s legislature, the largest in the nation at 400, Gov. Kasich made his off-beat claim that by accepting Medicaid expansion as part of President Obama’s Affordable Care Act he’s bringing Ohio money back home.

“I took $14 billion dollars over the next two years back to Ohio from Washington to meet our challenges, and you did it here,” he told Granite State legislators who earn the paltry sum of $100 per year. “I want to compliment you for it. Lives have been saved; people have some hope.”

His one-time good buddy, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has gone a little sour on the Wizard of Westerville. “I’ve heard John called a lot of things — the Prince of Light and Hope has never been one of them,” he told Fox News, reports said. Gov. Christie added that John Kasich “sounds a heck of a lot more like Satan than the Prince of Light and Hope when he is attacking other candidates.”

The governor’s campaign touts it’s many endorsements from former or current state-level politicos and its bulked-up ground game, including five offices with 15 full-time staff members working front doors and phones, as “Captains For Kasich” do their Granite State best to keep the petulant plutocrat from bowing out early if he doesn’t finish at least second or third once real primary voting starts on Feb. 9.

Palin Out Rogues Kasich

While Gov. Kasich crisscrosses the “Live Free or Die” state in his big, shiny bus with a ticking debt clock on it, Donald John Trump got another passenger on his big shiny jet Tuesday when Sarah Palin rose from GOP shadows to endorse him. Palin, who gained fame from being John McCain’s 2008 pick for vice president and won fortune with reality TV shows and being a Fox News commentator, was at her rhetorically confounding best when she touted The Donald in Iowa.

Singing his praises with rhetorical flourishes that even the New York Times had problems translating into real English people could understand, the “you betcha” former governor of Alaska showed she hasn’t lost a step when it comes to speechifying that defies gravity with fabulous floating phrases that make playing bullshit bingo as easy as child’s play.

“Sarah Palin’s meandering, fiery, sarcastic, patriotic and blustery speech endorsing Donald J. Trump for president on Tuesday in Ames, Iowa, does not easily submit to categorization,” the NYT said, describing Mrs. Palin’s talk as “performance art, a filibuster, even slam poetry.”

Not to be outdone by Sarah Palin, whose political and personal persona may be as divisive as his own, John Kasich is legend for his unique style of performance art. A record of Kasich favorites would have to include the always cloudy refrain that the Republican Party is “my vehicle, not my master,” or how about “tripping over ant hills on the way to the pyramids” or solid standards like “link arms to climb a mountain” and the every popular “I’m an unorthodox politician because I’m normal.” Over his four decades as a performance politico, Ohio’s term-limited governor has uttered oracle gems that leave his listeners, especially the Greek Chorus of Ohio and New Hampshire reporters who just report what he says, never asking him to explain what he say, scratching their heads in bewilderment.

John Kasich likes to say, “I’m not a scripted person.” This enables him to say babble that makes headlines but remains mostly murky. He expressed wonderment that such a trait could be considered a drawback. “That’s bizarre to me, because what do we want, robots?”

“I try to drive (voters) to the light, not the dark,” said the Catholic raised Mr. Kasich, the AP reported. The term-limited governor’s new analogy, one that reporters who follow him know is ripe for ridicule, is about, what else, driving a bus.

“You know, if I were the bus driver, I wouldn’t be doing what some of our people in our race are doing, and that’s looking in the rear view mirror,” he said, adding, “If you really want to be a great bus driver, you’re looking way at the car up front. If you want to be a great leader, you look way out there, not in the rear view mirror.”

In 2010, when he became Ohio’s 69th governor by just two percentage points, then Governor-elect John Kasich warned his enemies and detractors that he would run the bus over them if they didn’t heave-to for him. He bloated state spending to the highest levels in state history while short-changing local governments and schools by billions. He then redistributed those confiscated revenues in the form of income tax cuts that disproportionately benefited Ohio’s wealthiest over common tax filers who actually ended up paying more.

Gov. Kasich had held steady in making his resume his central selling point as being the best qualified among the crowded field of GOP candidates vying for the presidency. That’s an exercise in rear-view mirrorism if ever there was one, but that doesn’t trouble him or reporters who will be trailing him.

Inscrutability is a valued commodity to Kasich’s performance art and political salesmanship, as he’s shown from his early days in Congress through his last five years as Ohio’s governor.

But with Sarah Palin back in the ballgame, speaking for and campaigning with Donald Trump, she will continue to befuddle. John Kasich, a black-belt befuddler himself, has likely met his match when it comes to speaking English that makes little sense .