Hatch calls for answers as more health co-ops close down

WASHINGTON--35,000 Utahns will be left without health insurance as a result of the closure of Utah's Obamacare CO-OP, Arches Health Plan, announced last week. Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch, R-Utah is seeking answers. Nearly 870,000 individuals have enrolled in 23 CO-OPs nationwide, and yesterday Arizona's co-op, Meritus Health Partners, became the 11th to shut its doors.The co-op covers about one in three Arizonans that have an Affordable Care Act marketplace plan, and won't be allowed to sell health plans due to government suspension.Twenty-two of the total 23 CO-OPs are reportedly losing money and many are headed by political activists with no business experience. Sen. Hatch, along with Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee Chairman Lamar Alexander, R-Tenn., sent a letter today to Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Acting Administrator Andrew M. Slavitt, pressing the administration on the financial viability and management of the CO-OP program. ​"These non-profit, consumer-run health plans were intended to improve coverage, increase competition, and provide more affordable options," the Senators wrote. "The CO-OPs are not living up to these expectations. To date, eleven ACA CO-OPs—in Arizona, Colorado, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, New York, Nevada, Tennessee, Oregon, South Carolina and Utah—have collapsed. As a result, hundreds of thousands of Americans will lose their health insurance plans and will have to scramble to find new plans, most likely with higher premiums and deductibles."Last week when Arches announced it would close, leaving 35,000 Utahns without health insurance plans, Senator Hatch said, "The failure of Utah's CO-OP is a direct consequence of Obamacare's inability to put Utah patients first. Because of Obamacare's broken promises, patients in Utah will be forced out of their health plans and federal taxpayers will be left footing the bill for this botched experiment. Today's latest failure underscores the need to repeal this disastrous law in its entirety and replace it with patient-centered reforms."