The Hospital Authority of Washington County signed a five-year management deal with University to start Jan. 1. University will provide some new leadership and business advice but the hospital retains its name and its 300 employees, according to a news release. The hospital in Sandersville is the county’s largest employer, according to the release.

The hospital will get a new CEO, a new chief nursing officer and possibly a new chief operating officer or other administrator that Washington Regional will pay but will actually be part of University’s team, said University CEO Jim Davis.

“It’s hard to keep people up to date today with all of the changes that are going on if you’re not part of a big system,” he said. “We’ll help them with strategic planning, business office functions, things like that.”

For instance, the Sanders­ville hospital is due for an inspection by The Joint Commission; University will help them prepare for that, Davis said.

“It’s hard for people at that size of an organization to keep up with all of those rules,” he said. “So we’ll be sending a whole team of people down there to make sure they are ready and doing everything appropriately.”

Equally important, Washington Regional will have access to University’s purchasing agreements.

“They’ve done well but to take the next step they really need to leverage the assets of a big system, things like with the supply chain, better buying power,” Davis said. For instance, checking to see whether a self-pay patient could actually qualify for coverage through the Medicaid program or others, which University routinely does, he said.

Washington Regional will pay a $10,000 a month fee as part of the arrangement but “they will recoup that very quickly,” he said.

University was chosen from among five organizations responding to a request for proposals earlier this year, and as far as Davis knows this is its first management contract. But it is part of a broader strategy the health care system is pursuing of reaching out regionally.

University had sought to build a hospital in Columbia County, and its board may decide later this month to appeal that denial, and last week University announced it would seek a 50-bed hospital in Aiken. Two years ago, McDuffie Regional Medical Center became University Hospital McDuffie and University is building a 25-bed replacement hospital there. It is part of a strategy for survival in the face of shrinking reimbursements, Davis said.

“This is part of that strategy to reach out, to have access points to our system in as many locations as we can get so people can get care closer to home and get quality care and hopefully build our market share as we try to overcome some of the revenue losses that are sure to come with the Affordable Care Act,” he said.

While University already gets a lot of referrals from the area, it is really more about helping Washington Regional, Davis said.

“Unless they can leverage our scale, reduce their costs and increase their expertise, they’re going to have a tough time making a go of it going forward,” he said. “This is more about them than us.”