A new seafood takeout restaurant is opening in North Charleston this fall. Shipwreck Seafood will serve made-to-order Lowcountry dishes such as shrimp and grits, fried okra and fried shellfish. The restaurant will open at 5117 Dorchester Road near West Montague Avenue at the beginning of November, owner Orrin Mallard said.

Mallard has worked in the local food and beverage industry for the past 15 years, and the new venture is his first independent project. He plans to use locally sourced seafood.

"I don't ever want to do anything frozen or from out-of-town," he said. "I'm going to try to build a relationship with shrimp boat captains in Shem Creek to get (shrimp) straight off the boat and keep it as fresh as possible."

Now open

Family Dollar recently opened its new store in North Charleston at 6660 Dorchester Road, one of a handful of locations the N.C.-based discount chain plans to open soon in the area.

Cliff Cermak, spokesman, said another store is expected to open by the end of the month in West Ashley at Dogwood and Ashley River roads. Family Dollar sites also are planned in North Charleston and St. George.

As it expands locally, Family Dollar continues to be pursued nationally by Dollar General and Dollar Tree. On Friday, it shunned the former's latest $9.1 billion buyout offer, saying it would sell to the latter suitor for $8.5 billion. Dollar Tree said it would shed stores to win antitrust clearance and close the sale.

Coming soon

The former Larry's Giant Subs that went dark in Mount Pleasant nearly a year ago will soon be replaced by Subway, say other owners in the shopping center at 1039 Johnnie Dodds Blvd., next to Anna Knapp Boulevard.

Farther north, the Target-anchored Seaside Farms center off Rifle Range Road near the connector is getting two new businesses. Planet Ballroom, a national chain of dance studios, is opening its first local franchise at 1952 Long Grove Drive.

And a few doors down, locally owned Sweetgrass Pharmacy & Compounding is moving in. Owner Cynthia Reich said the business is expected to open by the beginning of November.

Job fair

Bi-Lo is looking for managers. The supermarket is holding a job fair noon to 6 p.m. Monday at the Bi-Lo at 1000 Tanner Ford Blvd. in Hanahan.The company is looking for full-time salaried store managers and assistant managers in Charleston, Mount Pleasant and Summerville. Apply at www.bi-lo.com/careers or visit the customer service desk.