Bill Manns is president at Mercy Health Saint Mary's. David Baumgartner is executive medical director of specialty medicine at Mercy Health Physician Partners.

By Bill Manns and David Baumgartner

One of the many benefits of living in West Michigan is the access we all have to outstanding physicians who are dedicated to keeping our community healthy. Unfortunately, our region's largest hospital system has recently taken steps to dramatically change the way physicians are taught, mentored and even scheduled across Grand Rapids.

The result will reduce patient access to doctors, while limiting critical experiences for up-and-coming physicians.

Medical resident physicians represent a critical resource for any community – a resident is typically a doctor who has completed medical school and one or more internships. During residency, these doctors serve patients in a wide range of care environments and consider their career options, including how and where they want to practice medicine.

For more than 15 years, Grand Rapids Medical Education Partners (GRMEP) has provided a truly collaborative learning environment for medical residents, giving them time at multiple hospitals across multiple specialties. GRMEP, composed of Mercy Health Saint Mary's, Spectrum Health, Michigan State University and Grand Valley State University, has sponsored programs to give medical residents a diverse range of clinical experiences and the ability to advance the community's health care services while lowering costs.

With GRMEP, any notion of competition among hospitals was set aside for the greater good. That is now changing.

Over the past few months, Spectrum Health has been driving "negotiations" in an attempt to essentially take control of GRMEP and secure a competitive advantage in assigning medical residents and developing relationships with these doctors. These conversations have not been "negotiations," but simply Spectrum telling the consortium what they wanted to do, and are going to do. Within the past several weeks, Spectrum has filed an application to create Spectrum-only residency programs.

Related: Saint Mary's, Spectrum square off over control of medical residency program

They have stated they are doing so for greater brand recognition. And because they're not the same health system they were when the consortium was formed.

Our community has also changed – Grand Rapids has grown as a well-known space for life sciences, medical research and health care opportunities. The region has become a recognized attractive place for residents and long-term medical professionals. There has been significant development in important specialized areas, such as pediatrics, mental health care and rehabilitation.

We are concerned that the work that's been done over the last two decades – to create a national reputation of Grand Rapids as an up-and-coming hub of innovative health care and medical research – will be diminished by any one organization's decision to focus on their own brand building at the expense of the rest of the community.

In addition, the Affordable Care Act has changed how we deliver care and how consumers and patients interact with their providers. Consumer engagement and knowledge about health care is on the upswing, and patients are increasingly voicing their opinions and concerns about the cost and value of their care.

In our view, these changes mean our community needs MORE collaboration across hospitals, not less. That's why Mercy Health Saint Mary's supports a collaborative, community-wide approach to physician residency – and we will continue to do so with other health care provider partners in the community.

Mercy Health Saint Mary's is committed to providing the best patient access to expertise, and the best medical training opportunities for our community in the most cost-effective way. To date, our collaborative approach has effectively reduced the total cost of education and health care for the West Michigan region and – given the pace of unpredictable change in the industry – Mercy Health Saint Mary's believes this value-driven approach is now more important than ever.

We also believe that graduate medical education is more important than any single hospital, any single brand – period.

To submit a guest opinion to The Grand Rapids Press, email Zane McMillin at zmcmilli@mlive.com