The broad-shouldered, broad-smiling young professional is settled on corner stool at the bar of a local restaurant, and he chats up a fellow patron on whatever topics strike them as interesting. Tajh Boyd is well within in his element, no stranger to friendliness, more chummy than celebrity.

Moving to a booth for a wide-ranging half-hour interview on a Wednesday afternoon, Boyd does relive a few memories, but only out of old habit. Clemson’s former All-American quarterback sounds much more interested in discussing what’s next.

That’s probably because the 2012 ACC Player of the Year has crafted a future equitable with off-the-field endeavors along with fading yet breathing football dreams.

App-lying himself

After setting an ACC record with 107 career touchdown throws and leaving Clemson as the league’s No. 2 all-time passer (11,904 yards), Boyd was drafted 213th overall by the New York Jets in the 2014 NFL Draft. He did not survive fall cuts.

Later, he dabbled in the Fall Experimental Football League with two separate clubs, failed to make cuts in his second NFL venture (with the Pittsburgh Steelers) and bounced around the Canadian Football League as property of three separate teams in a span of two months. He is now one of eight quarterbacks whose rights belong to the Montreal Alouettes, to whom he’ll report for the 2016 season in May.

Until then, Boyd keeps busy. He’s working out, preparing to conduct a youth camp in Greenville next Sunday, staying involved with his foundation, networking with officials connected to Clemson University and the athletic department, pursuing several broadcast opportunities, and even producing the early stages of a mobile applications that would serve as something like a combination of Yelp and Google Maps for tattoo parlors.

“Man, I’m just doing a little bit of everything at this point,” Boyd says. “(Ex-South Carolina running back) Marcus Lattimore and I are going to do a camp donating whatever we make to one of the areas affected by (this year’s) flood. Got a lot of different things moving.”

Boyd majored in sociology and criminal justice, but he laments “nothing I ever really wanted to do deals with that.” When he left the Hampton Roads in Virginia to begin his college career, choosing Clemson over offers from Ohio State and Oregon, Boyd had designs on studying veterinary medicine, but couldn’t follow through when those afternoon classes conflicted with football practice. He has considered going back to school for a Masters in business administration, musing the possibility of being Clemson’s athletic director someday.

But once the summer rolls around and Boyd returns to Canada, his third and perhaps last shot at the NFL will command his full attention.

“Knowing I can play, knowing I am good enough, I don’t want to be one of these guys looking back saying I wish I would have stuck with it a little bit longer,” Boyd says. “I’m going to do my due diligence. I’m going to go up there and ball, do what I need to do, and see if I can make my way back.”

But ...

“But I’m not going to let football solely control my emotions. Because that’s happened before,” he continues. “Sometimes when you put your eggs in one basket and it doesn’t work out, you kind of get lost, and you have to find yourself again.”

Tajh the broadcaster?

In 2014, TeamTajh.com was launched, allowing Boyd to express himself in blogform. Later that year, Boyd hooked up with ESPN Upstate, providing commentary on postgame and midweek radio programs.

“It’s cool. It broadens you mentally. It broadens your vocabulary. It broadens your thoughts,” Boyd says. “Writing became an outlet as something I really enjoy doing, whether it’s writing about real life or writing poetry.

“I had some experiences with the ACC Network this year. Sturg (Mark Sturgis, a weekday afternoon radio show host in Greenville) has been a great outlet for me to get out there and learn how to articulate my words, say what I need to say, so I give that guy a lot of praise for letting me do that.”

Boyd has sought advice from Clemson Tigers Sports Network play-by-play announcer Don Munson, along with other former Tigers and radio voices Patrick Sapp and Rodney Williams.

“The thing for me is figuring out what I’d like to do and make the most of that,” Boyd says. “Being a fan of Kirk Herbstreit, Desmond Howard, Lee Corso, at some point, they’re going to get old. Hopefully I can jump right in there.”

No regrets

That a man in his 20s with a revolving door of full-time employment isn’t certain what he wants to do with the rest of his life is not breaking news. That this 25-year-old was once in line to become a millionaire before his 23rd birthday makes Tajh Boyd’s journey a little more fascinating.

Fans, media and friends questioned Boyd’s decision to stay at Clemson for his senior year, both derisively and sympathetically. Sitting here three years later with a Canadian contract still waiting to fire his first NFL pass, well, Boyd does not care for your derision or sympathy.

“I made a decision, and I don’t regret a damn thing about it, to be honest,” Boyd said, without a bitter tone. “Would I have come out and been drafted higher after my junior year? Absolutely. It would’ve happened. I came back. You get critiqued for whatever. That’s just the nature of the business.”

It’s times like these Boyd feels for old teammates like running back Wayne Gallman or tight end Jordan Leggett, agonizing over their NFL futures. One of Boyd’s old buds, wide receiver Martavis Bryant, has caught on with the Steelers after a somewhat surprising decision to turn pro early. But these days, a third of all underclassmen who declare don’t even get drafted, and many end up in limbo without an NFL contract or college degree.

“It’s easy for the Sammys and DeAndres, because they know right now,” Boyd says, referring to Watkins and Hopkins, two first-round picks who rose to stardom catching passes from Boyd. “When you’re still undecided, that’s tough. It’s tough because,” — he takes a long pause — “there’s a lot of dilemmas that go on internally. A lot of agents contacting you, a lot of people you’re going to call to figure out what the right process is.”

No regrets? None at all?

“No regrets,” Boyd says. “I was the first person in my family to graduate from college. We won our first BCS game. All these things matter to me. I remember people being like, ‘you may not see it right now, but you’ll always be remembered for that reason (not going pro early).’ My whole thing was never to be remembered. I just wanted to put my best product out there.

“I appreciate people. I appreciate the support. Appreciate the Clemson family. I think they know I genuinely, truly care about them as well. ... At some point, “everybody moves out the house. I just decided to stay in the house a little longer.”