The Eklund Opera Program's "Cosi fan tutte" was inspired by Rock Hudson and Doris Day's roles in the 1959 film "Pillow Talk." ( Glenn J. Asakawa / University of Colorado )

If you go What: The University of Colorado Eklund Opera Program presents Mozart's "Così fan tutte." When: 7:30 p.m. Friday, March 13, and Saturday, March 14; 2 p.m. Sunday, March 15 Where: Macky Auditorium, 285 University Ave., University of Colorado campus, Boulder Tickets: $14-$38 Info: 303-492-8008 or cupresents.org

When Nicholas Carthy became music director at the University of Colorado opera program in 2004, the first production he conducted was Mozart's "Così fan tutte."

It has taken 11 years for the opera to return to the Macky Auditorium stage, but next weekend, the comic romp with surprisingly disturbing elements arrives in a reimagined staging by director Leigh Holman.

The third and last of Italian opera series Mozart wrote to texts by his greatest librettist, Lorenzo Da Ponte, "Così" typically stands in the shadows of its sisters "The Marriage of Figaro" and "Don Giovanni" (both of which have been staged at CU in recent years).

But according to Carthy, the work is at once the most complex and polished of the three. And although there are only six named characters, three male and three female, the conductor calls it "the ultimate ensemble opera."

"Everybody sings with everybody else, and there are no outlying characters," he said. "Everyone has a central role to play."

The plot, in which two officers, Guglielmo and Ferrando, are persuaded by the scheming Don Alfonso to test the fidelity of their girlfriends, sisters Fiordiligi and Dorabella, in a complex identity switch, was shocking in 1790 and still raises a few eyebrows today, although Holman has concocted an intriguing concept that brings the story at least into the 20th century, if not the 21st.

"Performers and opera buffs love the piece, but it seems that audiences always have a mixed reaction," said Holman, now in her sixth year as program director. "I thought about what I could do to make it more relevant.

"I've always loved the romantic comedies in television and film from the 1950s and '60s, "and I came up with a scenario inspired by Rock Hudson and Doris Day in (1959's) 'Pillow Talk.' "

The costumes and staging will evoke that era. The opening scene, which Da Ponte sets in a café/tavern, is placed in a pool hall. The mock swordfight is staged with cue sticks.

Holman said that while she wanted to emphasize the comedy, her concept also brought out the story's serious elements.

"Any good comedy has seriousness," she said. "There is a sincerity and realism to the relationship of Lucy and Ricky on 'I Love Lucy,' for example. The comedy emerges from that sincerity."

Most of the "serious" moments come from Fiordiligi, the more "constant" of the sisters (although she also eventually yields to her lover's friend). Carthy said that her two arias, among the most elaborate and difficult Mozart wrote, had a profound effect on the immediate future of the art form, particularly the grand arias of the central character Leonore in Beethoven's "Fidelio."

"It's really a summation of everything that has happened in opera through the end of the 18th century," Carthy said. "That includes elements from serious opera and even the introduction of musical motifs representing characters and concepts," such as the series of chords from the overture that returns at the end to mark the clinching statement of the opera's title.

Even the maid Despina, who becomes Alfonso's accomplice, continues a comic archetype perfected by Mozart.

Carthy said that the characterization of the six principals is even reflected in the orchestra. The clarinet belongs to Dorabella, the more cheerful sister, while horns and trumpets reflect the conflict being stirred in Fiordiligi's soul.

Unlike "Figaro" and "Giovanni," the ending of "Così" remains ambiguous and unresolved, more in Mozart's music than Da Ponte's words.

"That's why audiences were so baffled in 1790," Carthy said. "Nobody knows for sure who is really back together and who isn't."

He said there was no real moral, no big apotheosis, simply the assertion in the title that "all (women) are like that."

But, he said, it is still "incredibly relevant" for today's audiences.

"It shows that just because you fall in love, it doesn't mean you can never fall in love with anybody else," Carthy said. "Life isn't guaranteed, and the love of your life may not remain the love of your life."

He said that while the characters are chastened and changed by what happens, the message rings true.

Both Holman and Carthy said this is an opera that can only be staged with the right singers, and there are enough in the CU program now to make it possible.

Like most CU productions, "Così" is double cast, with only Don Alfonso sung by the same actor (baritone Luke Williams) on all three performances.

This is the second production under CU Opera's new name, the Eklund Opera Program, and its associated endowment, which Holman said has had a huge positive impact on the students, their performances and their education.