CHICAGO, Sept. 29, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Health Care Service Corporation (HCSC), the nation's largest customer-owned health insurer, today announced that Robert Imes will join the company as vice president for health care policy in Washington D.C. Imes joined HCSC on September 29, 2014 reporting to Theresa Doyle, divisional senior vice president and chief government relations officer, HCSC. In his new role, Imes is responsible for supporting HCSC's public policy, legislative affairs and compliance activities.

"Rob is an outstanding addition to our government relations and policy team," said Doyle. "He has the right combination of market, regulatory and legal experience to advance the policy agenda and business interests of our members. I am confident that Rob's broad industry knowledge and skills will be a tremendous asset to the company and its members."

Imes joins HCSC from the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight (CCIIO), Washington, D.C. where he was CCIIO's acting associate deputy director for policy and regulations, as well as acting director of the agency's oversight group. Prior to that position, he worked in the Washington, D.C., office of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association (BCBSA) as a policy director where he worked on projects related to the Affordable Care Act (ACA), the Health Insurance Portability and Affordability Act (HIPAA), and the Employee Retiree Income and Security Act (ERISA). He held previous positions as an associate at Groom Law Group, Chartered in Washington, D.C., and as a policy analyst at Georgetown University's Health Policy Institute.

Imes holds a B.A. from Ohio State and a J.D. from Georgetown University School of Law.

About Health Care Service Corporation

Health Care Service Corporation is the country's largest customer-owned health insurer and fourth largest health insurer overall, with more than 14.5 million members in its Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans in Illinois, Montana, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas. A Mutual Legal Reserve Company, HCSC is an independent licensee of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. HCSC has a rating of AA- (Very Strong) from Standard and Poor's, A1 (Good) from Moody's and A+ (Superior) from A.M. Best Company. For more information, please visit www.HCSC.com, visit our Facebook page or follow us at www.twitter.com/HCSC.

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130401/AQ85974LOGO

SOURCE Health Care Service Corporation