Wisconsin's Nigel Hayes shoots between Eastern Kentucky's Corey Walden, left, and Jeff Johnson. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Madison — Bo Ryan's players can exhale, prepare for final exams, savor Wisconsin's first 12-0 start in the modern era and know that, with their next game nearly two weeks off, they have time to ample time to fine-tune their overall game.

After a somewhat skittish start, fourth-ranked UW dominated every facet of the game against an Eastern Kentucky team that had played well at North Carolina State and at Virginia Commonwealth before losing both games.

UW moved the ball well, spent much of the game at the free-throw line, put four players in double figures and led by double figures for the final 29-plus minutes en route to an 86-61 victory Saturday at the Kohl Center.

"I think Wisconsin showed why they are the fourth-ranked team in the country," Eastern Kentucky coach Jeff Neubauer said. "They are incredibly efficient on the offensive end, and their defense is as disciplined a defense as I've ever seen."

The 12th consecutive victory to open the season set a program record for the modern era (since 1946). That bettered the 11-0 start of the 1993-'94 team. UW's all-time record is a 15-0 start, set by the 1911-'12 team and matched by the 1913-'14 team. UW is off until Dec. 28, when it hosts Prairie View A&M.

"I think it is good to get time off, stay healthy, get your body right," said senior guard Ben Brust, who hit 5 of 7 three-pointers and 7 of 11 shots overall to lead UW with 20 points. "We've got a couple injuries. Take care of them. But we've also got to stay sharp."

Brust and his teammates were sharp for most of the game Saturday.

Freshman forward Nigel Hayes, shooting just 47.6% from the free-throw line (10 of 21) and averaging 4.0 points per game, hit 13 of 17 free-throw attempts (76.5%) and finished with 17 points in 14 minutes.

Hayes, who made 2 of 3 shots, credited assistant Lamont Paris for constantly reminding him to duck hard into the lane for the ball.

"And when Bronson (Koenig), Ben and everyone else was driving around trying to beat the pressure," Hayes said, "I was able to slip in underneath the defense,"

Sophomore forward Sam Dekker added 16 points on 6-of-8 shooting. Dekker hit 6 of 6 shots in the first half, when he scored 15 points.

Junior Frank Kaminsky, who missed practice Thursday and was limited Friday because of a right-foot injury, finished with 13 points, six rebounds and four assists in 24 minutes. Guards Traevon Jackson and Koenig combined for 11 points, six assists and eight rebounds.

Ryan praised the ball-handling and passing of Koenig against Eastern Kentucky's tenacious half-court pressure.

The Colonels (7-4) entered the week ranked fourth nationally in steals per game (11.1) and had forced opponents into an average of 18.2 turnovers. UW had two turnovers on its first three possessions but finished with only 11, still above its average of 8.9.

"He got us out of a lot of jams," Ryan said of Koenig, who played 24 minutes. "He found open people....There aren't too many people who can break down what they do defensively the way he did today."

The Badgers spread the court to open driving lanes and moved the ball well against the Colonels' aggressive man-to-man defense and finished with 17 assists on 26 field goals and a season-high 60.5% shooting (26 of 43).

UW entered the day with more free throws made (171) than its opponents had attempted (157). Those numbers didn't suffer a bit, particularly in the decisive first half.

"We've taken our group into very hostile settings through the last several years," Neubauer said. "Our team has really competed in this type of venue.

"But we've never run across a team like that."