A carnivorous, winged creature is terrorizing the people of the Dutch city of Purmerend: a European Eagle Owl has attacked dozens of people in the city, sending several to the hospital with wounds requiring stitches, The Guardian is reporting.

Liselotte de Bruijn, spokesperson for the Prinsenstichting home for the disabled, said that the nighttime owl attacks have left its residents and workers terrified – at least 15 people who either live or work at the home have been attacked by the owl.

“During the day there’s no problem, but at night we now only venture outside armed with umbrellas, helmets and hats, anything really, to protect ourselves The problem is that you don’t hear the owl before it strikes. Its claws are razor-sharp. We hope the city will soon catch this rogue bird.”

The most recent owl assault took place Tuesday night: two members of a local athletic club, out for an evening jog, were attacked by the owl. One runner required stitches. The club has suspended all nighttime activities until further notice.

The Washington Post reports that the European Eagle Owl is one of the largest owl species in the world, with a wingspan of up to six feet. In its natural habitat, the bird-of-prey eats rabbits, rats, and sometimes, small deer.

Owl expert Gejo Wassink, who admits that they owl’s habit of attacking humans is unusual for the species, has a couple of theories as to why it’s doing it.

“Either the owl was reared in captivity and released into the wild and now associates humans with food – meaning it’s not really ‘attacking’ people. Or it may have heightened hormone levels as the breeding season starts, which influences its behaviour and makes it defend its territory.”

Regardless of his or her reasons (Wassink think it’s a female), the town of Purmerend is up to here with the crazed bird and wants it gone. Unfortunately, that’s going to be a problem: European Eagle Owl (Bubo bubo)is a protected species in The Netherlands, even though its conservation status, according to Wikipedia, is “least concern.”

Purmerend’s town government will seek an exemption to allow them to rid themselves of the bird. In the meantime, they’re warning the residents to be patient and diligent.

“We want to catch the owl as our city’s residents are in danger. These procedures can still take some time. Meanwhile, we are advising people to stay away from the owl.”

[Image courtesy of: U.S. News and World Report]