President Barack Obama won’t let protections for babies in the womb get past his desk, but he is on board with new protections for endangered lions in Africa.

This week, the Obama administration is moving to increase protections for lions in Africa after the killing of a well-known lion named Cecil in Zimbabwe earlier this year drew international outrage, according to the Associated Press. President Obama’s administration plans to extend the Endangered Species Act protections for two breeds of lions whose numbers have been declining in Africa, the AP reports.

The outrage about the lion’s death came soon after the Center for Medical Progress released its first three videos exposing a top Planned Parenthood official negotiating the sale of aborted babies’ body parts. At the time, Obama ignored the public outrage about Planned Parenthood’s treatment of human life; but he spoke up quickly after the lion’s death and called for an investigation.

SIGN THE NEW PLEDGE: I Pledge to Vote for a Pro-Life Candidate for President

While Obama’s efforts to protect wildlife are commendable, his record on protecting human life is shameful. Obama has been labeled the most pro-abortion president in U.S. history. Through his policies and close connections to abortion advocates, Obama has tried to expand the millions abortions that happen every year across the world.

Earlier this month, Obama also threatened to veto legislation to de-fund the abortion giant Planned Parenthood, which is under investigation for selling aborted babies’ body parts. The U.S. Senate passed the bill on Dec. 3. The House of Representatives is expected to approve the de-funding bill in January and send it to Obama’s desk.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

Before he became president, Obama voted against the Born Alive Infant Protection Act, which would have ensured that babies who who survive abortions are protected. He vowed to veto a similar bill this fall that would have held abortion facilities criminally liable for harvesting body parts from aborted babies who technically are still alive.

During Obama’s first week in office, he wasted no time in overturning the Mexico City Policy. The Mexico City Policy requires the more than 600 groups that receive State Department taxpayer funding to pledge not to promote or perform abortions with it. Abortion advocates objected to the measure for years during the Bush administration because they want to use the funds to do abortions overseas or lobby pro-life nations to reverse their laws against unlimited abortions.

As LifeNews previously reported, in 2009, Obama also gave China, one of the worst countries in the world for sex-trafficking, millions of dollar to fund their brutal one-child policy.

Then he promised the American people that his health care policy, Obamacare, would not fund abortion. However, four years later, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a report that showed that Obamacare plans cover abortion and receive taxpayer subsides.

In 2012, Obama even opposed a federal ban on sex-selection abortions, which had wide public support. Obama said he opposed the bill because it would “intrude in medical decisions.”

Obama has shown his loyalty to abortion advocates throughout his presidency. Cecile Richards, the president of Planned Parenthood, which aborts about 330,000 babies every year, visited the White House dozens of times during Obama’s presidency.