The American Journal of Managed Care and Joslin Diabetes Center will present Patient-Centered Diabetes Care April 7-8, 2016, in Teaneck, N.J. We are in a dynamic time in healthcare and in many ways, diabetes is leading the way for new care models, improving quality and achieving the Triple Aim, said Dr. Robert Gabbay Past News Releases RSS AJMC’s February Tweetchat to...

AJMC’s Evidence-Based Oncology...

Cost, Value of Cancer Drugs Take...

The increasing prevalence of diabetes continues to place a burden on the healthcare system, which is not well-equipped to meet the needs of chronic diseases. As such, an improved focus on disease management and health outcomes is needed.

On Tuesday, March 22, 1-2 pm ET, The American Journal of Managed Care (AJMC) will host a tweetchat with Joslin Diabetes Center to discuss diabetes management and the current status of diabetes performance measures.

Joslin’s Robert A. Gabbay, MD, PhD, FACP, chief medical officer and senior vice president, will answer questions through the Joslin Twitter handle (@JoslinDiabetes) on topics that include optimal disease management, opportunities for performance measures, and the upcoming Patient-Centered Diabetes Care meeting.

“We are in a dynamic time in healthcare and in many ways, diabetes is leading the way for new care models, improving quality and achieving the Triple Aim,” said Dr Gabbay. “The upcoming meeting will bring leaders from across the country to share their innovations and approaches.”

AJMC and Joslin encourage Twitter users to submit questions and participate in the chat on Tuesday, March 22, by using #AJMCchat. And don’t forget to follow @AJMC_Journal and @JoslinDiabetes.

Dr Gabbay is the conference chair for Patient-Centered Diabetes Care, which is being held April 7-8 in Teaneck, NJ. To see the agenda and register, visit the conference page here.

About the Journals

The American Journal of Managed Care is the leading peer-reviewed journal dedicated to issues in managed care. AJMC.com distributes healthcare news to leading stakeholders across a variety of platforms. Other titles in the franchise include The American Journal of Accountable Care, which publishes research and commentary on innovative healthcare delivery models facilitated by the 2010 Affordable Care Act. AJMC’s Evidence-Based series brings together stakeholder views from payers, providers, policymakers and pharmaceutical leaders in oncology and diabetes management. To order reprints of articles appearing in AJMC publications, please call (609) 716-7777, x 131.

About Joslin Diabetes Center

Joslin Diabetes Center is world-renowned for its deep expertise in diabetes treatment and research. Joslin is dedicated to finding a cure for diabetes and ensuring that people with diabetes live long, healthy lives. We develop and disseminate innovative patient therapies and scientific discoveries throughout the world. Joslin is an independent, non-profit institution affiliated with Harvard Medical School, and one of only 11 NIH-designated Diabetes Research Centers in the US.

CONTACT: Nicole Beagin (609) 716-7777 x 131

nbeagin(at)ajmc(dot)com

http://www.ajmc.com