Topics: Books, Gumption, Jeff Tweedy, Music, nick offerman, Uncle Tupelo, Wilco, Yankee Hotel Foxtrot, Entertainment News

If you look him up on the Wikipedia website, the entry begins like this: “Jeffrey Scot ‘Jeff’ Tweedy (born August 25, 1967) is an American songwriter, musician, record producer best known as the leader of the band Wilco.” I don’t recommend you do look there, as there are two perfectly good books about Jeff and Wilco, and I would always encourage you to eschew the computer in general, not to mention—that website is weak and yields inconsistent information.

First of all, the grammar is for shit. Somebody who can tolerate monkeying with computers, please go in there and put an and in front of record producer. Number two, they are burying the lede by a country mile. Jeff Tweedy is really nice. Jeff Tweedy is really smart. And Jeff Tweedy is really, really cute. He’s what the young ladies of a bygone era would refer to as a “dreamboat.” For my money, he’s also the preeminent American singer-songwriter of my generation. Finally, I would add that I am in love with him. We are getting married. The end.

Just kidding, guys. Just joshin’ around. But not really.

He is already married to a champion named Sue, and I am also already married, to a champion named Megan. Plus, Jeff and I are heterosexuals. Strike two. If it weren’t for these formidable obstacles, then we would probably be together already and be very happy, but I guess since that’s not in the cards, I will have to be satisfied with writing this chapter about him and also being his pal.

Like most humans, I am very moved by music. It can rile me up or make me incredibly happy, or it can move me to tears, all with a commensurate amount of relish. Music shared among friends and family, I have found, is one of the most powerful bonding methods we have as monkeys who can wear jean shorts and press “play” on our music devices with our handily opposable thumbs and fingers. So when Pat, Pat, and Paul brought me Wilco, in the form of their first two records, “A.M.” and “Being There,” I was born anew. Jeff Tweedy’s music spoke to us, and much of the eared world, with a compelling relevance. It was clearly our music. How did he do it? How could he see inside me? Little did I realize that I was enjoying the song stylings of my future husband.

As I had recently moved to L.A. from Chicago, the town that Jeff Tweedy has called home for twenty-five years or so, his lyrics inspired in me a strong tendency toward nostalgia for my recent years in the Windy City, which had been immensely satisfying on an artistic level. At the time, I was still very good at smoking, so the lines “When you’re back in your old neighborhood / The cigarettes taste so good / But you’re so misunderstood / You’re so misunderstood” really pushed my fond-memory button. With good reason, it turns out, as Mr. Tweedy grew up in a geographical circumstance quite similar to my own. His hometown of Belleville, Illinois, was proximate to St. Louis in the same way that my village of Minooka, Illinois, was close to Chicago. We both felt out of place, or “Misunderstood,” in our conservative communities, and so we turned to the arts as an escape route to the world at large.

In the late eighties, Jeff met his future wife, Sue Miller (just the sort of charismatic lady you want to be in charge of things), when she was booking bands at the Cubby Bear in Chicago. Sue subsequently operated the legendary rock club Lounge Ax in Chicago’s Lincoln Park, which quickly became the premiere venue for taking in the most enervating new indie rock acts, including Tweedy’s band from Belleville, Uncle Tupelo. My pals and I enjoyed the bar for the killer music (like Adelstein’s band, Doris) and the cheap, cold longnecks, so there’s a good chance that Jeff and I spilled beer on each other at Lounge Ax in the early nineties, although Cupid was clearly not ready for our two hearts to beat as one just yet.