Since he was a kid growing up in the Bronx, Dr. Raul Vasquez wanted to practice medicine. For this young man growing up in a tough neighborhood with no role models and little money, his success in fulfilling his dream defied the odds. Armed with a photographic memory, Vasquez managed to balance his studies with the odd jobs he found to survive as a minority at Fordham University and the University at Buffalo School of Medicine and Biomedical Studies.

At age 52, Vasquez has been a family doctor in private practice for 18 years. Working out of Urban Family Practice at 564 Niagara St., Vasquez oversees a medical staff of one physician, two physician assistants and a nurse practitioner. He estimated 18,000 patients have come through his doors since he started.

He and his wife, Toni, have four children and live in Williamsville.

People Talk: Where did you grow up?

Raul Vasquez: I grew up in the South Bronx, and went to South Bronx High School, an alternative school. I was raised by a single mom, had two siblings, not all doing well. My youngest brother is serving life in jail over drug charges. I’m a little disappointed because he had me as an example of what he should be doing.

PT: How did you achieve your goal?

RV: The hospital placement program at Mount Sinai allowed me to apply to Fordham University’s Higher Education Opportunity Program originally started by Arthur O. Eve. From there I ended up studying at Cornell University’s summer health studies program. When I graduated from Fordham, I applied to 13 medical schools. I got into 12, and I picked UB. The first week of medical school, I get called into the financial office at UB. I told him I didn’t have any money so he passed me an envelope. I opened it up and there was a check for $37,000 to cover all my schooling. They never had a student as poor as me.

PT: You must have been an excellent student.

RV: What helped me succeed was my photographic memory. I could remember a lot of things and I thought everybody was the same. When we were in college I didn’t find myself working as hard. I wasn’t a 4.0 student, but I was pretty good considering the amount of time I dedicated to my studies because I was a cab driver in the Bronx. I did a lot of odd jobs. My Uncle Joe, who passed away three years ago, had cab drivers. He was the driver of my courtesy van. His grandson is my driver now.

PT: What is your courtesy van used for?

RV: There’s a big barrier in health care that people – a lot of time older people – can’t get to their medical appointments. So we have a list of people within a five-mile radius who we will pick up. It cuts down on no-shows.

PT: How has the Affordable Care Act changed your job?

RV: I’m at a time in my life that I’m really enjoying what I do because of the changes in health care. The Affordable Care Act is reshifting the control of health care from one sector to another. We’ve had in health care a division between hospitals and private practitioners. More of the specialists are building big systems in hospitals. Private practitioners have always been kept out of the loop; we’ve never been part of the solution. Now as part of the Affordable Care Act, you are forcing these two systems to work together.

PT: How is your health?

RV: I’m a diabetic. Diabetes is killing our country. Early on in my life my diet wasn’t good. A lot of the products that Latinos eat have a lot of fat and sugar. They taste good but they’ll kill you.

PT: Do you still see patients?

RV: I have a staff of four helping see patients now. I couldn’t fix everything seeing one patient at a time, so I sit on top and manage and analyze data. I’m a population management guy now. They see the day-to-day sinuses.

PT: What medicine do you prescribe most?

RV: Antidepressants. Major depression.

PT: Are you part counselor?

RV: I’m a rabbi. I’m a priest, a social worker. I’m a doctor, a lawyer. I’m a family physician. At one point I delivered babies. I was doing upper and lower GI at the hospital. I’ve done it all.

PT: What distinguishes urban patients from others?

RV: We have a lot of people with pain. We have people with back injuries who come in, a lot of neck injuries. Pain tends to bring people into the office. At the same time there is a plague of diabetes, and they’re coming in with complications. At least 35 to 40 percent of our market has hypertension.

PT: Do you see many gunshot wounds?

RV: When I worked at Columbus Hospital I saw some. Drugs are killing our markets. But we manage pain, and because there are so many restrictions, some of the patients who are put on narcotics get hooked. When they can’t get off the pills, they turn to heroin. It’s cheaper, and it destroys people’s lives.

email: jkwiatkowski@buffnews.com