Photo

Readers discuss work-family balance for women in today’s corporate culture.

To the Editor: I want to thank Anne-Marie Slaughter for the critical conversation she started with her now famous 2012 Atlantic article “Why Women Still Can’t Have It All.” In “A Toxic Work World” (Sunday Review, Sept. 20), she furthers the conversation by taking to task an American corporate culture that privileges long work hours over a life more balanced between work and the personal.

I fully support Ms. Slaughter’s argument. But I’ve been deeply troubled by her equation of “having it all” and having children. Women have multifaceted interests, priorities and pursuits — one of which may or may not be motherhood. More important, I’m troubled by blaming women’s paucity in the senior ranks on a competitive environment marked by long hours, which (naturally) privileges those without children.

As a 27-year veteran of the diversity and inclusion field, I have done research showing that the barriers women face as they work their way up the corporate ladder are far more pervasive and insidious than a culture of long hours. Stereotypes about what women can and want to do continue to abound — and work to surreptitiously hold women back. Disparate access to the informal networks that are so critical to moving up the ladder are another enormous barrier. Mentoring and sponsorship of women also play a critical role; there is still a gender imbalance here.

While I applaud Ms. Slaughter for her focus on the systemic roots of women’s workplace inequality, she’s doing a disservice by not taking up the case in its entirety. Without rigorous attention to the many and varied mechanisms, systems and cultural mores that combine to affect women’s careers, we can expect to see little progress in this area.

PAULETTE R. GERKOVICH

Brooklyn

To the Editor: I did a double take of recognition at these sentences: “But many women who started out with all the ambition in the world find themselves in a place they never expected to be. They do not choose to leave their jobs; they are shut out by the refusal of their bosses to make it possible for them to fit their family life and their work life together.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

While struggling to balance working full time as a physician with caring for my dying father, my special-needs daughter and my 90-year-old aunt who had fallen and broken her hip, I requested that my boss allow me to go part time or telework. He denied these requests and explained to me how many other physicians were successfully making it all work. (Really?) I loved my work passionately, but I took an unpaid leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act. In his world, where his wife was primarily caring for his children, my boss (a caring and thoughtful person) could not understand my struggle.

There remains a profound misunderstanding in the workplace of the toxic level of expectations and stress under which women are working. Does anyone really wonder why there are so few women “at the top”?