The children, ages 2, 4, 5 and 6, were hungry. They stunk of putrid, stale cigarette smoke, urine and feces — their own, along with cat and rodent urine and excrement. They could not speak. They made noises. Like animals.

When horrific child-abusing couple Wayne Sperling and Lorinda Bailey were mercifully relieved of their parental rights and hauled out of their stunningly filthy apartment in Denver more than a year ago, Sperling looked like Saddam Hussein when he was pulled from that hole in Iraq by U.S. troops in 2003. Frankly, Sperling’s wife did, too. The arrest mug shots were unsettling.

Flash forward through the train wreck of our judicial and human services systems to this month, when Sperling and Bailey appeared in court again.

He had a really nice haircut. A neatly trimmed beard. A spiffy suit. Bailey, too, had a different hairstyle and hair color. She wore makeup. They looked like lawyers. Which shouldn’t be a surprise. Their lawyers groomed them and dressed them up for their sentencing appearance.

Tried to make them look human.

Denver prosecutors, apparently not confident they could convict the two, first struck a sweet deal with Bailey. They dropped six original charges against her, including four counts of felony child abuse, and allowed her to plead guilty to two lesser child abuse charges.

Denver District Court Judge Eric Elliff thought that was a terrific idea. He not only accepted the lovely plea deal but also capped it off Nov. 7 by sentencing Bailey — who could have received seven years in prison — to 90 days in jail.

Ninety days.

Then, on Nov. 13, it was Sperling’s turn to play “Let’s Make a Deal” with our tough prosecutors. The original six charges were dropped. In return, he pleaded guilty to one charge of child abuse.

Even though there were four horribly neglected children living with feces and thousands of dead and dying flies, according to police.

Sperling will be sentenced Dec. 30. He, too, could get up to seven years in prison. He will not. Same judge. Ninety days in jail would be a good bet.

Oh, and both Sperling and Bailey have duped the system previously. The Sperling-Bailey baby machines each pleaded guilty to child abuse in 2006 and 2009. Bailey lost three older children in 2009 when her parental rights were terminated.

From the 2013 arrest report in the current cases:

“(The officer) noted a strong odor of a decomposing animal when Sperling opened the door. The officer reported the ‘smell became unbearable’ as they entered the apartment. The room from which the smell emanated was full of flies … covering every surface.”

A detective said last week that after the four boys were taken away from the parents from hell, they were each given a sandwich and an apple.

“The boys, who communicated through grunts and physical contact,” the story said, “patted the sandwiches and rolled the apples on the floor like toys.”

And, somehow, we still find a way to sleep at night.

Contact Rich Tosches at richtosches@gmail.com.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.