Buy Photo Editorial (Photo: The Jackson Sun)Buy Photo

We offer selected comments from a Facebook post by The Jackson Sun about UT Martin being place on academic probation. Some comments may have been edited.

Post: The University of Tennessee at Martin was given notice this week that it is now under a 12-month academic probation by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools. Interim Chancellor Robert Smith notified faculty of the probation in a campus-wide email Thursday. “We have not received the official letter (from SACS) with specifics, but you can be assured this will receive 100 percent of our attention over the next several months,” Smith said in the letter. “We know we are not where we need to be but, given the progress we’ve made in the last four months, I am confident we will be successful thanks to the commitment of our faculty and staff.”

Cheri Johnson Spencer: #UTMProud. Not sure of any details but I support UT Martin and their work to improve. As a native of Martin, an alum of UTM, the daughter and granddaughter of UTM retirees, the sister, aunt and parent of UTM students and graduates, I hope the best for the university and the students they continue to serve.

Jesse Smith: Wish I could say I was surprised about my alma mater. Maybe they spend too much time asking for money from kids that just graduated instead of actually working to make sure this doesn’t happen.

Spencer Bowers: I wasn’t surprised either. Some of the programs are so mismanaged.

Amanda MissKitty Pugh: What exactly does this mean?

Powell Franklin: Won’t be the first time at least one of their programs has lost accreditation. They’ll muddle through with a slap on the wrist.

April Lynn Rice Richey: Wow. I was shocked to see this. I assumed they had good programs based on their college algebra class. That is the only class I have tutored for, but it is tough, not watered down like so many universities are doing.

Jonathan Shell: It’s meaningless at this point. The first 12-month probation is the one where they have time to correct the deficiencies found in the SACS initial audit.

TENNCARE MISERY METER

Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey’s, House Speaker Beth Harwell’s and the Tennessee General Assembly’s lack of leadership and urgency and failure to expand TennCare under the Affordable Care Act are bringing misery to an estimated 280,000 Tennesseans who could have received health insurance, including an estimated 30,000 veterans. Meanwhile, the financial stability of hospitals is at risk, and workers could lose their jobs. It is costing Tennesseans an estimated $2.5 million per day. The loss to date is:

$2,292,500,000

Read or Share this story: http://www.jacksonsun.com/story/opinion/editorials/2015/12/13/readers-post-ut-martin-academic-probation/77235340/