Dean Jones made us all laugh with his honest-guy face and his Disney-designed dilemmas, in comedies like The Love Bug and That Darn Cat! But he also drank heavily and cheated on his wife -- until he came to Jesus and experienced a spiritual rebirth.

His life as a believer lasted the last half of his 84 years. But when Jones died this week, what did many obits fixate on? With few examples, the answer was the same: the showbiz angle.

The Associated Press -- in an obit used by several news media -- trots out the list of snickery titles in which Dean Jones acted: not only the above two, but Million Dollar Duck, Monkeys Go Home and Under the Yum Yum Tree.

In pedestrian AP style, the obit says Jones appeared in five Broadway shows and 46 films, including 10 for Disney. It drops the names of those he worked with, including Elvis Presley in Jailhouse Rock and Jane Fonda in the play There Was a Little Girl.

What of his faith? Nada.

USA Today is little different. Its obit lists some of his pro-Christian work ...

A committed Christian, Jones later founded the Christian Rescue Committee (now Christian Rescue Fund), which helped rescue Jews, Christians and others persecuted for their faith. Jones’ other charitable activities included international child-care and world hunger.

... as if it were a natural outgrowth of his showbiz stuff. (At least the story mentioned the Christian Rescue Fund, now part of the Jubilee Campaign. Sounds like a worthwhile cause.)

And as you’ve seen from the video atop this article, Entertainment Tonight likewise has not a hint of the life change that marked Jones since the early 1970s.

But what of the Los Angeles Times, the biggest paper in Tinseltown? It's only marginally better.

The Times reports how Jones rubbed elbows with the likes of James Cagney and Elizabeth Taylor. Also how he continued to work in later years in films like Clear and Present Danger and Other People's Money. Then it tosses in this:

Despite his success, however, Jones' personal life was a shambles. He left "Company" shortly after the opening and was drawn to self-destructive behavior.

Later, he had a religious conversion -- he became a born-again Christian -- that altered the course not only of his life but also his career choices.

"I won't blaspheme God," he told Christianity Today in 2009. "That immediately eliminates most scripts."

Having thus tantalized us, what does the paper add?