I miss George Carlin. He was the truth.

The comedic genius, who died six years ago this month, understood the hidden duplicity of language and politicians better than any American satirist of the modern era.

He once blasphemously said the following about the Ten Commandments and courthouses.

“The reason why you can’t post thou shall not steal, commit adultery, or lie in a building full of lawyers, judges and politicians is simple.

“It would create a hostile work environment.”

I think he was right, especially, with the part about the lie. Our nation’s political system has always been rife with lies: “All men are created equal,” easily being offered as exhibit No. 1.

What would Carlin say now, however, about a decision handed down Monday by the United States Supreme Court involving a free speech case from Ohio? The case is all about abortion, lies and the freedom to lie about politicians.

The court ruled unanimously that an anti-abortion group can challenge an Ohio law that bars advocacy groups from lying about politicians – and possibly facing criminal penalties - during an election.

It’s a solid, highly-defensible ruling. Would you really expect a journalist to feel any differently? I loathe liars. But I love free political speech more.

The decision comes too late for former Cincinnati-area Congressman Steve Driehaus, a Democrat, who lost an election in 2011 after the Susan B. Anthony List, an advocacy group, attempted to sponsor an advertisement that accused Driehaus of supporting “taxpayer-funded abortion.”

It was a lie.

Driehaus was anti-abortion. He threatened legal action. As a result the inflammatory billboard never went up.

But that didn’t stop the group from effectively linking Driehaus to a pro-abortion platform because he had voted in favor of the Affordable Care Act. The subsequent negative publicity the brouhaha generated affected what should have been a competitive political race.

After Driehaus lost the election, he withdrew his fraud complaint with the state. But the camel’s nose was already under the speech tent. The Susan B. Anthony List saw a golden opportunity to challenge the law on the grounds of protected discourse and it prevailed on Monday.

So now what?

We can expect our politics to become even more coarse, crude, perhaps even vulgar. I can live with that. A strong case can be made that we've become too politically correct for our own national interest. Politicians have never been above distorting their records, their accomplishments or even outright lying.

The American electorate has always countenanced the elected with a healthy grain of political salt. But now that special interest and advocacy groups have been given a green light to advance their own myopic versions of what is true, let the buyer beware that each individual is ultimately responsible for his or her own voter education.

Voters must constantly educate themselves on the veracity of candidates, issues and the forces that attempt to influence political outcomes. America needs a more vigorous debate about the issues that define our domestic and global agendas. Lies, half-lies and the truth all have a place at the table and can be a part of a healthy and evolved national discourse.

“The truth or falsity of political speech should be judged by voters, not government bureaucrats,” said a spokesperson with the Susan B. Anthony List, the group that labeled Driehaus an abortion-rights supporter.

Those are fighting words that will likely echo loudly in an expanded and amplified political arena.

Or, as Carlin once said: “By and large, language is a tool for concealing the truth.”

Which only goes to suggest that the freer and more robust political speech remains, the greater the ability to ferret out those who would use language to deceive.

Ultimately, truth will prevail and liars will be exposed and hoisted with their own petards.