Both “two minutes” and 25 years were celebrated this month at Center Place, where the Brandon Outreach Clinic marked its quarter-century of service in the community with a fundraiser tied to the 140th running of the Kentucky Derby.

“We are excited to have you here tonight as we celebrate not only ‘the most exciting two minutes in sports history’ but also the 25th anniversary of the Brandon Outreach Clinic,” said Dr. Stephen Parks, Deborah “Debbie” Meegan and Jerry Ball, in the printed program for the Kentucky Derby Party fundraiser. Parks is the clinic’s co-founder and medical director; Meegan, its executive director; and Ball, the board’s president.

The trio thanked attendees for their support, noting that the night’s proceeds would help to ensure that the Brandon Outreach Clinic, at 517 N. Parsons Ave., would continue to serve as a “health care safety net for those vulnerable individuals who fall through the cracks of our fragmented health care system.”

Clinic services include diagnostic screenings, lab tests and medications necessary to treat chronic conditions and diseases, including diabetes and high blood pressure. According to Meegan, the demand for clinic services has remained critically high for eligible patients, even with the national health insurance reforms signed into law with the Affordable Care Act of 2010. The Brandon Outreach Clinic serves people who have incomes but whose paychecks are not enough to cover their medical expenses.

“We keep our patients healthy so they can go to work to keep their jobs to support their families and to keep their homes,” Meegan said, in an interview May 3, at the Center Place Fine Arts & Civic Association, at the start of the Kentucky Derby Party.

“We’re seeing as many uninsured people as we always did,” she added. “A lot of people are being forced to work part time, the economy still isn’t as strong as it should be and many people are working two jobs. People don’t realize how fragile things are in society, that people like the ones we see will always need our help.”

Doctors, nurses and other medical professionals donate their time and services to provide care through the not-for-profit clinic. To be seen, a patient must be between 100 and 200 percent of the federal poverty level, depending on household size, Meegan said.

“The Brandon Outreach Clinic isn’t going anywhere,” she added. “There’s always going to be people needing help to save their lives.”

She noted one woman in particular, who came in for a Pap smear and got a mammogram as well. “It turned out she had breast cancer and who knows for how long,” Meegan said. “She couldn’t feel a lump. We got her in time and treated her and she is alive today.”

The annual Kentucky Derby fundraiser traces its roots to attorney Eileen Griffin, who had a similar party in her home for years. Griffin provides pro bono legal counsel for the clinic. When Griffin stopped throwing the party, Meegan suggested they adapt the theme for a Brandon Outreach Clinic fundraiser.

This year marked the third such event. Attendees showed up in big, colorful, creative and theme-related hats. As for the race itself, the so-called “Run for the Roses” was streamed in live from Churchill Downs thoroughbred racetrack in Kentucky. Attendees bet on horses for cash prizes and awards were given, too, including for “Best Hat” and most “Dapper Man.”

Placing winning bets for California Chrome were Terry Fink, Rachel Griffin, Maggie Tagliarini, Tim Watts and Melissa Weeks. Best Hat went to Juliet Wilks, whose hat sported a small plastic horse and trophy cup and a miniature bottle of Maker’s Mark bourbon, commonly referred to as “a Kentucky gentleman.”

“It’s the gentleman’s drink,” Wilks said. “Everybody was wearing a funky hat so I thought, ‘Let’s make it really funky,’” she added, on her decision to go for the gold in Best Hat honors.

As for winning Dapper Man, Al Morris, who owns his own landscaping business, said he drew inspiration from his previous job. “I was in banking for 13 years, so I dressed like a banking officer,” he said.

As the night got underway, Meegan gave a posthumous shout out to William W. “Bill” Wolfe, the clinic board member who brought her on board and served as her mentor. The civic-minded Wolfe, who died in 2009, was affiliated with many organizations and served on many boards, she said.

“He had no agenda. He just knew people would support us if they knew about us, so he put people together, he connected the dots,” Meegan said. “I miss that man. He was the loyal, steady heartbeat of the clinic.”