Topics: aol_on, Chris Christie, comedy central, daily show, The Daily Show, the daily show with trevor noah, Trevor Noah, TV, Entertainment News, News

Trevor Noah’s third try as host of “The Daily Show” turned out to be the charm. Last night’s episode was by far the most confident “Daily Show” episode in this debut week, despite tackling objectively harder material—bias training for police and Governor Chris Christie, respectively, are not easy targets. It seemed to me like Noah was simply on his game—settling into the rhythm of hosting, with its back-and-forth between monologuing, listening, and interviewing, all within the bounds of one bounded persona. I laughed out loud at the black-and-white cookie gag, and that was after I’d already paused to call my cat a “baby lion” that poops in a “tiny sandbox,” per Noah’s description. And the opening pre-recorded segment with Jordan Klepper and Roy Wood, Jr. was purely excellent—a long sketch on what is essentially just one joke, which is that black people and white people see police very differently, that found a lot of different ways of illustrating the absurdity of contemporary race relations. (“Empire,” which had just aired on Fox, found its way into the discussion, as did Bo Dietl of Fox News, “nerdy Suge Knight,” and Wood taking a moment to call, on his phone, the assembled masses of #blacktwitter, to inform them that Wisconsin had a bunch of biased cops. It was absolutely brilliant.)

What I appreciated about this was both that the segment really played to Noah’s strengths—the dialogue on race relations—while also letting him take a backseat to the correspondents’ shenanigans; it reminded me a bit of the earlier days of “The Daily Show,” when scene-stealers like Steve Carrell and John Oliver took some of the burden of attention off of Jon Stewart.

It left Noah free to focus on his interview with Christie, and lo and behold, the little piece of advice I threw at Noah yesterday turned out to be prescient. His interview with Christie was breezy and fun, and that may well be because Noah apparently met first Chris Christie at a party (!) on Long Island (!!) while at least one of them was wearing shorts (!!!). Whatever that initial meeting was (and it sounds like a doozy), it clearly softened Noah up enough to question Christie, and in turn made the governor a lot more affable than his rather rigid debate persona.

Was Christie dismantled? Definitely not. The mood was more of mutually assured benefit than interrogation. Noah did get in one good jab at Christie, observing that Christie’s reviled “the government” would logically include the governor as well. But the rest of it was Chris Christie getting a chance to talk about his platform on the national level; when Noah asked him how he was going to get his poll numbers up, Christie responded, “coming on the first week of ‘The Daily Show With Trevor Noah.’” The men then affably shook hands.