UPDATE 2:35 pm: Wendy Davis had a private meeting with President Obama after his speech at the summit.

The meeting was outside the reach of media cameras and was announced by the White House, not the Davis campaign.

The Greg Abbott campaign, immediately pounced.

“Sen. Davis stated last month that she would not shy away from President Obama’s visit to Texas, yet in another flip-flop, she instead decided to meet with him in secret – away from the public and refusing to mention what they discussed,” said spokesman Matt Hirsch.

“We can only assume President Obama and Sen. Davis bonded over their shared support of Obamacare and limiting Second Amendment rights. Texans want a governor who shares there values, not someone who wants to bring Obama’s big government agenda and failed liberal values to our great state,” Hirsch said.

Bo Delp, spokesman for the Davis campaign, said the president and Democratic nominee briefly discussed the importance of the Voting Rights Act and its legacy in Texas.

On limiting gun rights, both Obama and Davis have supported expanded background checks, a position favored by a majority of Americans and Texans, according to recent polls.

Davis is supportive of the Affordable Care Act.

ORIGINAL POST 11:40 am: Democratic candidate for governor Wendy Davis has arrived to listen to Barack Obama at the LBJ Library.

Obama is politically unpopular in deeply red Texas and GOP opponent Greg Abbott already has worked to link her politics to those of the president.



While Davis did not go to Houston, where Obama attended two high-dollar Democratic fundraisers last night, her campaign made no secret that she would appear at the civil rights summit.

Some Democratic candidates running in conservative states have avoided association with Obama. On a previous presidential trip to Dallas, Davis was in South Texas and made no effort to meet with Obama.

The summit is reflecting on the 50th anniversary of Lyndon Johnson’s signing of the Civil Rights Act.

In addition to Obama, former Presidents Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton and George W. Bush are speaking at the conference.

Davis also attended the speech Clinton gave Wednesday night and the dinner that followed.