Construction slated to end Aug. 15

Construction on Arapahoe Avenue from Folsom Street west to 15th Street is expected to wrap up on Aug. 15. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

In six weeks, traffic is expected to again be flowing in both directions along a portion of Arapahoe Avenue near downtown Boulder.

Aug. 15 can't come soon enough for some businesses along that stretch.

That date marks the scheduled completion of a $5 million reconstruction of Arapahoe from Folsom Street west to 15th Street.

The project — which involves replacing the rutted and crowning asphalt with concrete, improving underground utilities, reconstructing damaged sidewalks and performing minor landscaping — is the first major road reconstruction to occur there in 20 years and was funded by the $49 million Capital Improvement Bond approved by Boulder voters in 2011.

The concrete is less-susceptible to failures, pot holes and rutting, requires less maintenance and should last 25 to 30 years, said Noreen Walsh, a transportation planner for the city.

The project also will allow for better utilities and the installation of storm sewer lines — something the street lacked in the past, she said.

"Arapahoe Avenue is a major east-west corridor ... it was just an area that needed to be addressed," she said.

All lanes are expected to be open by Friday, Aug. 15, she said, noting that some landscaping work will continue through parts of the fall.

Because of the project's nature and the artery's proximity and necessity to the University of Colorado and Boulder High School, the construction was sliced into three phases, with the major overhauls of the road occurring in the summers of 2013 and 2014.

But for a seasonal business like Rocky Mountain Anglers, the timing is problematic.

"Could you imagine how gridlocked it would be if there was construction (during the school year)? I understand that," said Randy Hicks, owner of the fly shop at 1904 Arapahoe Ave. "It's just a bummer for us to have it fall two years in a row when I'm supposed to be my busiest."

Hicks estimates that his store has taken a sales hit upward of 20 percent.

Brian Harris, right, helps customer Jason Lynch pick out flies at Rocky Mountain Anglers in Boulder. Like other merchants on Arapahoe Avenue near downtown Boulder, the shop's owner says business is hurting thanks to the second straight summer of road construction on Arapahoe. (Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera)

It's an easy situation to complain about, Hicks said, but he noted he's taken the approach that he would rather "make lemonade from the lemons."

He extended the store's hours to 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. — an hour on both ends — and has told his crew to put an even greater emphasis on customer service.

Hicks also launched an Intro to Fly Fishing course on Sundays for beginners, started doing a little grilling on Saturdays and also decided to cater to past requests and begin selling inner tubes.

"If these three to four little things can help keep me viable and put a little turn in the register, then I think the overall sting in the whole situation isn't that bad," he said. "But don't get me wrong, I'm looking forward to Aug. 15. I'm looking forward to Aug. 15 for sure."

'Out of business'

Other neighboring businesses are biding their time as well.

Business at the SnarfBurger shack at 2000 Arapahoe Ave. has been "killed" during the past two summers, said Jim Seidel, the Snarf's Sandwich Shop chief executive officer who opened the burger-based concept in April 2013.

"A lot of our customers come from all over; they just don't come when the road's closed or under construction like that," he said, noting the street's current state that includes eastward-only traffic between 17th and Folsom streets. "I imagine if I was a small business owner, I would be out of business."

To endure the slower times, Seidel has not raised any prices to account for pricier ingredients. As the margins get lower, SnarfBurger has to eat the cost.

'Nothing for us'

Randy Leever, who has run the Boulder Stained Glass Studios at 1920 Arapahoe Ave. since 1976, said this two-summer stretch has been the most difficult time his operation has faced in its 38 years.

The stained glass business has seen a 50 percent drop in business, Leever said, noting the walk-in traffic has been essentially non-existent.

"People aren't out walking up and down the street," he said, noting the typical traffic of guests from the neighboring Quality Inn & Suites, visitors to the bed and breakfast and Saturday morning Farmers' Market traffic.

Leever said he wishes that the city would install a large sign at 17th Street indicating the businesses just east to Folsom.

He said that while he understands the city has put attention and dollars to help businesses in the construction-riddled West End of Pearl Street, he was disappointed to not receive much attention.

"They get one-half and full-page ads for them, but nothing for us," he said.

Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com.