On Fox News’ “Cavuto” Thursday, talk-radio host Mark Levin ripped into the television network for employing establishment Republican strategist Karl Rove.

Host Neil Cavuto asked Levin for his thoughts on Republican candidates across the nation.

“You look at North Carolina, you look at Arkansas, you look at a number of these states,” Levin said. “Here’s the big lie that’s going on for election cycle after election cycle, advanced by, among others, Fox favorite Karl Rove.”

He continued, “The fact of the matter is we’ve [the GOP] lost the Senate over and over again not because of [former Senate candidate] Todd Akin, not because of two or three or four tea-party candidates. The vast majority of the candidates running are your Republican establishment candidates who’ve never had to fight in a Republican primary.”

Cavuto – visibly irritated by Levin’s comments – promptly interrupted his guest.

“All right, listen I’ll arrange the next dinner party for you and Karl Rove,” Cavuto said. “In the meantime, I’ve got to run upstairs and talk to my bosses.”

Levin has repeatedly expressed his dislike of Rove.

On his show in September 2013, he blasted Rove for rejecting Republicans who advocated defunding Obamacare.

“I say this with all due respect, because Fox is my favorite cable network, Karl Rove and Dana Perino, it’s like they’re endlessly on all the programs there, hawking the establishment Republican position,” he said. “Where are all the Reaganites?!”

Levin added, “Your record sucks, Karl Rove! Why are we going to listen to you?!”

As WND has reported, Rove joked in 2012 that then-Missouri Senate candidate Rep. Todd Akin should be killed for making a controversial comment on rape.

“We should sink Todd Akin,” Rove is quoted as saying in Bloomberg Businessweek. “If he’s found mysteriously murdered, don’t look for my whereabouts.”

Rove reportedly apologized, but not in public.

WND also reported that Rove saw donations to his three Crossroads groups plummet by 98 percent after “declaring war” on the tea party and spending nearly $325 million on the 2012 elections with little to show for it.