Photo

“We are up and running,” said one health insurance company official on Tuesday, even as the Web sites for many of the state marketplaces, and for www.healthcare.gov, the source of information about the health plans being run by the federal government, seemed plagued by technical problems. Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina reported that it was experiencing higher volumes of calls and online queries regarding coverage than usual, as well as more visits to its retail stores.

Florida Blue, another insurer, estimated volume across the board on Tuesday was about 20 percent higher than usual. While its chairman and chief executive, Patrick J. Geraghty, acknowledged that enrolling through the federal Web site was still slow going by midday, he emphasized that people would have six months to enroll. The deadline is mid-December to have coverage begin on Jan. 1, but people can continue to enroll through March. “It’s very hard to judge it through half a day,” he said.

In Philadelphia, Independence Blue Cross said it signed up its first customer under the federal health care law earlier in the day. “We don’t feel as if this has started today,” said Daniel J. Hilferty, the insurer’s president and chief executive, which said his company had been educating people at church events, football games and the like for weeks.

Many people are calling to find out more about the new law, said Mr. Hilferty. The most common question in the last 24 hours, he said, was whether it was possible to get a policy even if a person had a pre-existing medical condition, which is one of the fundamental requirements of the law’s sweeping overhaul of health insurance.

Other insurers were less sanguine. “It’s got off to a kind of rocky start,” Greg Gieseman, the president and chief executive of a small nonprofit plan, Community First Health Plans in San Antonio, said Tuesday morning. People had been trying for more than three hours to use the federal Web site to enroll and to look at information about plans in his state.

While some people might know to go directly to the better-known insurers, Mr. Gieseman was not certain they would know to go to the Web sites of some of the smaller plans. “It may very well be that a lot of folks don’t know who the carriers are,” he said.

In Maryland, the chief executive of one of the state’s new offerings, Evergreen Health, said he thought people would wait to sign up and would probably need the help of navigators to steer them through the wide array of offerings. Dr. Peter Beilenson, Evergreen’s president and chief executive, likened the start of the state marketplaces to a political campaign but without a single election day.

“You’re really not going to be able to tell the success of the program for six months,” Dr. Beilenson said. “Folks will come to it when they’re ready.”