New flood maps could lower property values in Topeka neighborhoods near water, triggering a vicious cycle of deferred maintenance and still-lower values, according to city officials.

Bill Fiander, director of the city planning department, said new maps drawn by the Federal Emergency Management Agency showed areas of Topeka thought to be safe from most floods in the past are now considered at-risk in a 100-year event. The neighborhoods near the Shunganunga Creek are one area at risk, he said.

Homeowners living in a flood plain are required to buy flood insurance if they have a mortgage backed by federal agencies. That raises the cost of living there and may lower property values, discouraging people to buy there or to improve their homes, Fiander said. When that happens, social problems tend to increase in an area, so the city would spend more to provide services but receive less in tax dollars, he said.

“Once your property value starts to go down, that’s a trigger for disinvestment and decay,” he said. “It affects neighborhood vitality. It affects property values. It affects people’s lives.”

The last time the area saw major flooding was May 7, 2007, when six inches of rain fell in 24 hours, according to The Topeka Capital-Journal archives. More than 500 people living near the Shunganunga Creek and the Wakarusa River had to evacuate, and areas near Lake Sherwood, the Kansas River and Cross Creek also experienced flooding. The flood was severe enough that authorities asked people who owned boats to help those living in the flood zone to evacuate.

Part of the reason FEMA now considers the area a flood plain is that more water is feeding into the Shunganunga Creek, Fiander said. Developments on the west side of town increased run-off into Lake Sherwood, because paved areas can’t soak up water like fields or open ground does. The run-off then feeds into the creek, making it more prone to flood in heavy rains, he said.

New developments are required to include features like ponds or systems to slow down stormwater that will limit run-off, Fiander said, but adding those features to an existing development is difficult or impossible. That means the city will have to deal with water downstream, either by building levees, buying up land that is prone to flooding or deciding to let it continue to flood while allowing people to live there, he said.

Doug Whitacre, director of public works for the city, said they will have to compare the value of the property and the cost of protecting it. Any work along the Shunga Creek, such as building levees, would have to be approved by the Army Corps of Engineers if the city decided it made sense, he said.

Another option would be to buy the land and use the area as a park, Whitacre said. It wouldn’t have to be protected from flooding but it would still be useful to the public most of the time because the area doesn’t flood on a regular basis, he said.

“People can use it when it’s not flooded,” he said. “So what if a picnic table goes underwater?”

The area along the Kansas River near downtown also is facing flood-related challenges. The Army Corps of Engineers determined levees along the Kansas River aren’t up to modern standards, which means the riverfront area’s flood insurance premiums will reflect the increased risk the levees could fail in a 300-year flood.

Whitacre said he wasn’t certain what would constitute a 300-year flood, but it likely would involve massive rainfall upstream. Normal rainfall or even an unusually large storm aren’t enough to breach the levees, he said.

“We are not in danger of one of the levees collapsing,” he said.

Whitacre said the Corps of Engineers is doing engineering and design work, but funding for improvements depends on Congress passing the Water Resources Development Act. The project would cost $24 million, with the city responsible for about $8 million, he said.

The Topeka project was included in versions passed by both the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate, Whitacre said, but the two have to come up with one bill to send to the White House. Even if they do so this year, money probably wouldn’t be appropriated until 2015, he said.

Doug Kinsinger, president and CEO of the Greater Topeka Chamber of Commerce, said fixing the levees is a concern before riverfront redevelopment can proceed. Companies haven’t said the cost of insurance in a flood zone to be a deciding factor when they look at moving near the Kansas River, he said, but Hallmark did indicate it was one of multiple issues they took into account when they decided to close the Topeka plant.

The federal government has subsidized flood insurance premiums in high-risk areas for decades, meaning people who build or buy property there don’t pay the full cost of protecting it. High levels of claims from recent stormy years have threatened to drain the program’s funds, however, and premium increases were pitched as a way to stabilize them.

Under the 2012 changes, subsidies would phase out by 2017 for owners of second homes, frequently flooded properties and businesses. Those owners would pay 25 percent more a year until they reach a rate in proportion to the cost of covering them, according to The Associated Press. Others get to keep their subsidies but can’t pass them on when selling their homes.

Rapidly increasing costs sparked outcries from coastal property owners, however, and the Senate voted to delay the increases until FEMA completed an affordability study. Both Kansas senators voted against a delay. It isn’t clear if the House or President Barack Obama would support the bill.

Michael Cappanari, spokesman for FEMA’s office in Kansas City, Mo., said if the delay became law, FEMA would have to look at whether the insurance increases are affordable. It isn’t clear what method they would use to do that, he said.

“Essentially what that bill would do is put a halt on the increases we’ve been seeing,” he said.

An affordability study could take up to four years, Cappanari said, but it isn’t known if existing increases would remain in force or if they could be rolled back pending the study’s outcome.

“We’re kind of in limbo,” he said.