Buy Photo Iowa businessman and humanitarian John Pappajohn, left, and Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad were among the hundreds in attendance during the 2014 Prometheus Award ceremony in Des Moines on Wednesday, April 9, 2014. Pappajohn received a Lifetime Achievement in Venture Capital award from Branstad. (Photo: Bryon Houlgrave/The Register )Buy Photo

During a night that paid tribute to some young up-and-coming entrepreneurs, the Technology Association of Iowa honored a very familiar face.

John Pappajohn, a venture capitalist and philanthropist whose name adorns entrepreneurial centers at five Iowa colleges, received a Lifetime Achievement in Venture Capital award from Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad.

“The Prometheus Awards ceremony was the perfect venue to celebrate Mr. Pappajohn,” said Leann Jacobson, Technology Association of Iowa chief executive. “This is our annual opportunity to showcase Iowa’s best innovators and entrepreneurs. Many of these folks have benefited from Pappajohn’s support.”

The winners represented a cross section of small startups and larger technology companies that have been on stage before.

WebFilings, a financial reporting software firm, was the lone multiple winner this year, taking home awards for Technology Company of the Year and Software Company of the Year.

The company, led by CEO Matthew Rizai, has won both awards three years in a row.

The company announced plans to expand in Ames and add 700 jobs.

The following is a list of winners:

Igniter Award (for advancing technology in Iowa): John Deere Intelligent Systems Group, Urbandale. Ambassador for the world with its leading-edge technology.

Best Mobile Application: NCLEX Mastery by Higher Learning Technologies, Coralville. Helps nursing students prepare for licensing tests.

Software Company of the Year: WebFilings, Ames. Its SEC filing software serves more than 60 percent of Fortune 500 companies.

IT Service Provider of the Year: Circle Computer Resources, Cedar Rapids. IT services for clients.

Top Growth Company of the Year: MediRevv, Coralville. Revenue cycle management software for healthcare industry.

Best User of Technology: Rockwell Collins, Cedar Rapids. Aviation giant.

CIO/CTO/CSO of the Year: Tim Peterson, executive vice president, Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield, Des Moines. Only company in Iowa with an Affordable Care Act-ready website on Oct. 1.

Chief Executive Officer of the Year: Wade Arnold, Banno, Cedar Falls. Company recently sold to Missouri-based financial technology firm.

No Boundaries Spotlight: Caleris, West Des Moines. Call center provider based in central Iowa that was purchased by Iowa Network Services.

Investing in Iowa Award: Ben Milne, Dwolla, Des Moines. Announced investment in ClusterFlunk in a blog post last year.

Student Innovation of the Year: ClusterFlunk, Iowa City. A digital meeting place for university students to connect with classmates.

Breakout Company of the Year: Phantom EFX, Cedar Falls. Revenue grew in 2013 by 1,411 percent for its slot and casino games.

Outstanding Startup of the Year: TelePharm, Iowa City. Remote pharmacists inspect and verify prescriptions at telepharmacies.

Life Sciences Company of the Year: Trans Ova Genetics, Sioux City. Second straight win in this category for Trans Ova.

Technology Company of the Year ($1 million to $10 million revenues): GlobalVetLINK, Ames. National leader in electronic animal health records.

Technology Company of the Year (more than $10 million revenues): WebFilings, Ames.

Read or Share this story: http://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/tech/2014/04/09/prometheus-awards/7531849/