It’s been 20 years since Denver landed the Colorado Avalanche, which led to the city’s first professional sports national championship with a Stanley Cup.

Like most Coloradans, I didn’t grow up with hockey, and was a rookie learning the game with other new fans in 1995. I grew up playing basketball and following the NBA, and bled orange and blue like other Broncos fans.

As the city’s mayor at the time, I was thrilled when the Avalanche moved into the former McNichols Sports Arena. I knew it would bring more people to the Central Platte Valley and help the revitalization of the area and downtown Denver.

The Avalanche’s season began in the fall of 1995, months after the city finally opened Denver International Airport. I won re-election that June following a grueling runoff in which every unfounded accusation was thrown my way. So I could relate when Patrick Roy demanded a trade following a humiliating game in which he should have been pulled.

I felt the excitement build as the team worked its way through the playoffs in the spring of 1996 and to the finals against the Florida Panthers.

I don’t think it is exaggerating to say Denver had a chip on its shoulder after the Broncos four Super Bowl defeats.

I knew how important the Avs’ victory in the Stanley Cup finals would be for the city’s psyche. With the Avs up 3-0 in the playoffs and game four in Florida, I wanted to make sure I was there if they clinched the championship. I flew down to Miami with a couple of my staff and nervously watched from the stands. And when they won 1-0, I made my way down to the ice for the victory celebration.

At the time, not too many 6-foot-4 black men have stepped onto a professional hockey rink. I suspect many thought, “Who is that tall black guy wearing a suit and wing-tip shoes on the ice?”

On our way back to Denver, my staff and I began planning the team’s victory parade through the streets of downtown Denver. City workers didn’t care if they had to work overtime to get the route in place and the mess they would be cleaning up afterwards. Police gladly helped with security. As a city, that 100-pound gorilla on our back — that we would never be national champions — was gone.

How thrilling it was to see thousands of workers pour out of office buildings with white pom-poms to cheer our Stanley Cup winners. Thousands of others played hooky from work or school and jammed into Civic Center.

When Captain Joe Sakic walked out on the Denver City and County Building steps and hoisted the Stanley Cup, the cheers could be heard from Limon to Durango. That victory wasn’t just for the Avs players and their fans, but for the entire state.

How fortunate we were that just a few years later, the Denver Broncos had a victory parade for its first Super Bowl win, then another in 1999. And in 2001, I was in my third term as mayor when Sakic and Roy once again hoisted the Stanley Cup.

I’m a strong believer that sports bring people together. Men and women of all different backgrounds, religions, political affiliations and economic means will high-five and banter following one of our teams’ victories or defeats.

Congratulations to the organization and its fans for 20 years in the Mile High City. I will never forget the thrill of Denver’s first national championship and what it meant to our city and state.

Wellington E. Webb was mayor of Denver from 1991 to 2003.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.