Paul Williamson holds a model of a solar-hydrogen energy source that would power the proposed SkyTran magnetic levitation system. ( LEWIS GEYER )

If you go SkyTran What: Informational meeting about proposed SkyTran monorail between Boulder, Longmont and Firestone. When: 7 p.m. Thursday Where: Longmont Public Library, 409 Fourth Ave.

LONGMONT -- SkyTran Colorado is still trying to drum up the $5 million it needs to get on track.

The project's head, Paul Williamson, will visit the Longmont Public Library on Thursday to share information about the project, a proposed monorail between Boulder, Longmont and Firestone using the median of Colo. Highway 119. Use of the median would require approval from the Colorado Department of Transportation.

The monorail's backers estimate it would cost $250 million for the initial Boulder-to-Longmont connection if SkyTran gets the green light. That price goes to $350 million if the route includes Firestone.

"We've talked about it being a Phase 2," Williamson said of the Firestone extension. "As we've had meetings all over the place, there has been no lack of people who want us to expand it before we even put it in. That's gratifying, but we realize we've got to work with what we have."

What SkyTran has so far is a starting line and a long road ahead. The plan is to use private money to build the monorail, anticipating that most government sources would be strapped for cash. Its first hurdle is to raise $5 million, the amount it would need to build a test track.

Advertisement

As envisioned, the train would use a maglev system, using magnets instead of wheels to guide small commuter "pods" over a track 20 feet overhead. The system would need two to six feet of right of way for the supporting poles, spaced every 60 to 100 feet.

Williamson said he's been talking with potential partners, but doesn't have any commitments yet. Those talks have included at least one company from the solar industry, important since the plan is to use solar-hydrogen power to run the system.

In a recent letter, the Longmont City Council asked CDOT to study SkyTran's proposal, but stopped short of an endorsement, saving its support for the overall idea of alternative transportation. One member, Councilman Brian Bagley, said he thought even the letter was going too far until he could see a more detailed business plan.

That will solidify, Williamson said, when partners start falling into place and the tests can be made.

"You don't start a new transportation system that's never been done here and expect it to be done overnight," he said.

He said he hopes to be able to start building the one- to two-acre test site by the beginning of 2014.

"I think that's doable," Williamson said. "Whether that's reality or not, we'll have to wait and see."

The Longmont information meeting begins at 7 p.m. A second meeting will be held in Gunbarrel starting at 7 p.m. Sept. 19 in the Boulder Rural Fire Protection District station, 6230 Lookout Road.

Scott Rochat can be reached at 303-684-5220 or srochat@times-call.com.