Man killed in shark attack at Lefthanders Beach near Gracetown

Video

Image Man killed by shark near Margaret River A man has died after reportedly being attacked by a shark near Margaret River in Western Australia.

A MALE surfer, aged 35, has been killed in a shark attack near Gracetown, 270km south of Perth.

The attack happened at a popular break called Umbies, next to Lefthanders, about 9am.

The shark bounced off the board of another surfer before fatally attacking the victim, police say.

Acting-Sergeant Norm Giocas of Margaret River police said they believe the victim's family are overseas.

"We haven't be able to get in touch with the immediate family, but we have notified close friends," he said.

The girlfriend of the victim arrived at the Lefthanders carpark at noon.

There were emotional scenes when police broke the news to the young woman, who arrived at the beach with a friend.

Police and St John Ambulance were called to Lefthanders Beach, south of Gracetown, shortly after 9am following reports of a shark attack.

Surfer Ryan Scanlon was about to paddle out when the tragedy occurred.

"I ran up the beach and called police," he said.

"There was a guy with me. He's an anesthetist and he pronounced the guy dead at 9.05am.

"I saw him wash up. He was missing his left arm and flesh off the right leg.

"The shark bit him and held him for about a minute. He was dead before the shark let go."

The man's body was removed from the beach by helicopter, because of difficult terrain.

Search for the shark

The Department of Fisheries has issued an "imminent threat order" for the shark.

Fisheries and Marine Officers are in the water with capture gear.

A green and yellow surfboard has been recovered.

The Shire of Augusta-Margaret River and Department of Fisheries have closed a number of local beaches, from Umbies, to South Point and Huzzas. North Point and the main Gracetown beach have also been closed. The initial beach closures will be in place for 24 hours.

History of attacks

Today's death is the first fatal shark attack in WA in 2013.

The attack comes six weeks after abalone fisherman Greg Pickering survived a shark attack, 180 kms east of Esperance, on the state's southern coast.

Gracetown is the site of three fatal shark attacks in the past 10 years.

Surfer Bradley Smith was taken by a great white at a beach near the town in 2004, and another surfer, Nicholas Edwards, was killed by a shark at nearby South Point in 2010.

Tom Jones, a Margaret River surfer, was surfing a nearby spot called Big Rock at the time of the attack

"I heard the sirens. You know if you hear a siren around here it's probably a shark," he said.

"I hope Fisheries start killing them. It's time. There is too many of them."

Another surfer, Marc Baldan said he kept surfing for two hours after the attack and saw the helicopter collect the body.

"It's such a clear day you can see through the water," he said.

He said the attack wouldn't put him off surfing, and he would return to the water tomorrow.

"It's a release. I don't know what I would do without it. It's not until you see one (a shark) that you think twice."

A spokesman for WA Police said officers arrived at the beach, to find a man deceased.

He said inquiries were continuing into the circumstances surrounding his death and the report of a shark attack.

The Department of Fisheries has been advised and will also investigate the incident.

The attack came as some of the world's finest chefs, including Heston Blumenthal, gather in WA's southwest for the Gourmet Escape festival.

It's understood Blumenthal was surfing in waters near the site of the attack on Friday.

Many school leavers are also holidaying in the area.