“I would love to meet this person,” Virginia Victoria said, “and tell her God bless her for being so brave and so giving"

The moment seemed so simple for a gift many consider so great.

“It was really my pleasure,” said Jodi Friend, nodding her head with a smile while looking up at Joe Turner, the stranger she donated a kidney to so he could enjoy his retirement without dialysis.

Turner and his wife stood together, with Jodi sandwiched between them, taking turns with their “thank yous.” What else could they say?

Friend’s response was always the same — “It was my pleasure.”

Around the conference room at St. Barnabas Medical Center the same scene played out as donors and recipients met for the first time.

This year marks the 10th anniversary of the St. Barnabas Living Donor Paired Exchange Program, where approximately 150 living-donor exchanges take place each year.

The program allows patients who have a willing but incompatible donor the option of joining an exchange registry to be matched with either an altruistic donor or a donor/recipient pair in the same situation.

This week, the program brought together recent transplant recipients and donors for a first meeting.

“Really a significant portion of what we do now is with paired donation,” said Stuart Geffner, director of renal and pancreas surgery at St. Barnabas Health.

“If patient A needs a kidney and their intended donor is not compatible and patient B needs a kidney and their intended donor is not compatible, perhaps patient A’s donor is compatible to patient B, and patient B’s donor is compatible to patient A,” Geffner said.

Just a few tables from Friend and Turner, donor Reinaldo Victoria and receiver Francesco Concepcion were introduced. They first shook hands, then after a quick pause, grabbed each other for a hug.

Victoria, Concepcion, and their wives were part of a nine way chain involving 18 people last September, one of the largest single-center kidney paired donation chains in the United States.

When Victoria found out he wasn’t a match for his wife Virginia, he donated a kidney to the chain, unlocking the possibility for his wife to be matched with someone else. The alternative was more dialysis, which left her too weak to care for their son.

“It was scary at first,” Victoria said, “But either way you look at it you’re doing something good for someone.”

As Victoria got to know the man whose life he saved, his wife scanned the room, anxiously awaiting the arrival of her donor.

“I would love to meet this person,” Virginia Victoria said, “and tell her God bless her for being so brave and so giving. . . She means the world to me and I am never going to forget this.”

Related Links

• Kidney donations connect strangers in 'Chain of Life'