Image via Facebook.

LifePoint Health has wrapped up its acquisition of Providence Hospitals, the company announced Tuesday in a joint statement with the Sisters of Charity System, which originally founded Providence.

Providence Hospitals includes two hospitals, thirteen physician practices, a network of rehabilitation centers, two sleep centers, a school of cardiac diagnostics and is an accredited chest pain center. The system employs more than 2,000 staff.

"In joining LifePoint, Providence will have access to new resources that will further enhance quality care and strengthen its ability to expand the services it provides. It also will continue to operate in a manner consistent with the identity of a Catholic hospital, as it has since its founding," the companies said.

LifePoint and Providence plan to invest in expanding the available services at its Northeast Campus. LifePoint will support Providence's mission of providing charity care to those who can't afford healthcare services, with Providence continuing to operate a full-fledged member of the Catholic Diocese of Charleston, abiding by the provision of Catholic Healthcare throughout its daily operations, the companies said.

Like Healthcare Finance on Facebook

The completed acquisition of Providence Hospitals makes them a local taxpayer for Richland County. The company will also create a hospital board of both community representatives and physicians who will involve the community in hospital governance, the companies explained.

Finally, the official deal brings with it a new CEO for the Providence team. Scott Campbell, who had been serving as lead administrator and transition executive for Providence Hospitals during the acquisition process has been named the organization's market CEO.

"In the last several months, I have seen the tremendous dedication everyone at Providence has to serving their communities and caring for those who live here. We have great opportunities ahead of us to partner with LifePoint to honor Providence's Catholic heritage, expand upon the team's dedication, and enhance the many ways we foster the wellbeing of people of all ages throughout this region," Campbell said.

Twitter: @BethJSanborn