It’s no secret that kids love snow days.

They even have rituals they hope will bring one that vary from wearing their pajamas inside out and backward to flushing ice cubes down the toilet.

But soon, snow days might become a thing of the past.

Lynn Grewing, principal of St. Cloud Cathedral High School in Minnesota, told Weather.com that her private school had a “successful test run” of a policy that students must work from home when school is closed due to inclement weather.

“This is what we will be doing every single snow day going forward,” she said. “I’ll be honest. There has been some grumbling.”

Michael Mullin, president of Cathedral, told TODAY.com the plan has been in the making for about four years, and that “all of the school’s 655 students and 45 teachers have a MacBook Air laptop at their disposal.”

“Our students are used to conducting many of their learning experiences on their laptop machines, whether school happens to be in session or not,” Mullin told TODAY.com. “It’s been very methodical. … It was just a very logical next step for us.”

Cathedral senior Tommy Auger told Weather.com that working from home “didn’t feel much different than a day in class” and that he’d rather save his days off for summer.

“It’s hard to think ahead, but it’s definitely better,” said Auger.

Brittany Corona, a research assistant for The Heritage Foundation’s Institute for Family, Community, and Opportunity, said:

“Digital learning is on the rise, allowing students access to quality education anytime, anywhere. Whether through blended learning, virtual education, or course choice, over 1.5 million students participate in online classes.

“According to Evergreen Education Group, in the 2013 school year there were 310,000 students in multi-district fully online schools, 740,000 course enrollments in state virtual schools, and 29 states with multi-district fully online schools,” Corona added. “Online learning provides an innovative alternative to traditional brick and mortar education, further opening the doors of opportunity for students by meeting their needs despite their location.”