Believe it or not, folks, it’s been five years since President Barack Obama signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, the 2009 stimulus measure spent $831 billion on infrastructure, tax credits, and other policies that largely served as taxpayer-funded giveaways to core leftist constituencies

Passed in the aftermath of the Great Recession, the stimulus bill was based on the Keynesian notion that the government, through spending on “shovel-ready” infrastructure projects and other purported economic multipliers, could drive aggregate demand and create jobs.

Christina Romer and Jared Bernstein, the economic advisors who developed the stimulus plan, argued that these policies would help bring the United States back from the brink of economic depression. In their January 2009 policy paper, the two economists claimed that the unemployment rate would not exceed 7.9% with the stimulus bill, while it would reach 8.8% without it. Because, you know, counterfactual.

They were wrong.

Even with the $831 billion stimulus bill, the unemployment rate rose from 7.8% in January 2009 to 10% in October of that same year, at which point Romer declared that the measure had already had its greatest impact. In fact, unemployment didn’t fall below 9% until October 2011.

The infamous Romer-Bernstein chart shows the unemployment rate falling to 5% in December 2013. In reality, the December 2013 unemployment rate was 6.7%, nearly 2 points higher.

Hardcore Keynesian economists, including Paul Krugman, insist the stimulus bill didn’t work because it wasn’t large enough. Then again, Krugman has written fondly of death and destruction because he believes it will drive economic output.

Sen. Marco Rubio (R-FL) marked the anniversary of the stimulus bill by declaring it to be a complete failure and urged Washington tackle pro-growth economic policies.

“If you recall five years ago, the notion was that if the government spent all this money — that, by the way, was borrowed — that somehow the economy would begin to grow and create jobs,” Rubio said in a YouTube video. “Well, of course, it clearly failed.”

“Five years later,” he continued, “underemployment is still too high, the number of people that have dropped out of the workforce is astounding, unemployment remains stubbornly high and our economy isn’t growing fast enough — proof that massive government spending, particularly debt spending, is not the solution to our economic growth problems.”

Rubio says that a “vibrant free enterprise economy and a people with the skills and the education needed to take up those jobs that a vibrant free enterprise economy would create” is what the White House and Congress should promote.

If there is anything that the stimulus bill has taught us it’s that the behavior of people cannot be so easily determined by economic models and forecasts. This isn’t necessarily a new lesson. Friedrich Hayek wrote in his 1988 book, The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism, ”The curious task of economics is to demonstrate to men how little they really know about what they imagine they can design.”

Unfortunately, President Obama and congressional Democrats continue to push an agenda — including Obamacare, billions in tax hikes, and new regulations — that has hampered the economic recovery.

After five years of doing the same thing over and over again, one would think that a new course would be mapped out. But rather than trying something different, President Obama and his cohorts in Congress have become the very definition of insanity.