CLEVELAND, Ohio - The beginning of fall, increasing numbers of people with health insurance in Ohio, and the state's ranking for median income are part of this week's recap of Numbers in the News.

1. This is the last full day of summer. Fall begins at 5:05 a.m. Wednesday. The changing season is tied to the fall equinox, one of two times during the year when days and nights are each about 12 hours throughout the world. (Read more)

2. The number of Ohioans without health insurance has been trimmed by 450,000 since the Affordable Care Act was signed into law in 2010, new census estimates say. This has caused a drop in the uninsured rate in Ohio from 12.3 in 2010 percent to 8.4 percent last year. It's even lower, at 7.6 percent, in the Cleveland and Akron metro areas. (Read more)

3. Ohio has slipped to 35th place nationally for median household income, though income was up a little bit last year to $49,308, the U.S. Census Bureau estimates. A year ago, Ohio ranked 32nd. (Read more)

4. From the sports side, check out a numbers breakdown of Ohio State quarterbacks Cardale Jones and J.T. Barrett, as compiled by Bill Landis of the Northeast Ohio Media Group. (Read more)

5. Find demographics, population history and other information for Greater Cleveland communities with our series of data profiles. So far, you can find information for these cities and villages at these links: Avon, Avon Lake, Bay Village, Beachwood, Bentleyville, Berea, Brecksville, Broadview Heights, Brooklyn, Brunswick, Chagrin Falls, Cleveland Heights, Cuyahoga Falls, Fairview Park, Gates Mills, Highland Heights, Hudson, Independence, Lakewood, Lyndhurst, Macedonia Mayfield, Mayfield Heights, Medina, Middleburg Heights, Moreland Hills, Olmsted Falls, Orange, North Olmsted, North Royalton, Parma, Parma Heights, Pepper Pike, Richmond Heights, Rocky River, Seven Hills, Shaker Heights, Solon, South Euclid, South Russell, Stow, Strongsville, Twinsburg, University Heights and Westlake. Those added later can be located at this link.