Editor’s note: Jason Andringa, president and chief operating officer of Vermeer Corp., Pella, Iowa, will take over as CEO of the company in November of this year, replacing Mary Andringa, current CEO and chair of the board. He recently spoke with Rental Management about his background and how he came back to be in a leadership role at the company started by his family. An edited version of that conversation follows.

RM: Vermeer has developed its own successful succession plan that has led to your new position. How did you prepare for this and did you always plan on leading the company someday?

Jason Andringa: I have had a lot of pride in Vermeer my whole life. I’ve had a really close relationship with my grandfather and with my mom. I really always hoped to and anticipated that I would come to work at Vermeer. We also have a family employment policy which indicates that we will work outside the business first. Even without a family employment policy, I think I would have wanted to work outside the business first. I decided to major in engineering the summer before my freshman year in college, in part, because I helped my grandfather build a cabin in Canada at that time, and just seeing a naturally brilliant engineer at work, inspired me to want to major in engineering. I also thought that it would be terrific preparation to eventually come to work at Vermeer. As an undergrad, I co-oped at Johnson Space Center in Houston and loved that, and was driven by the desire to pursue being an astronaut. I went to graduate school at MIT in aerospace engineering and was exposed to a number of very smart people, all of whom wanted to be astronauts. So then I started thinking, “I’m ready to get back to the plan of coming back to work for Vermeer,” and my wife, said, “You have to work outside the company first.” I said, “Well, I have. I’ve co-oped for a year and I’ve been a research assistant for a year and a half.” And, she said, “That doesn’t count.” My wife is a really straightforward, direct person and I’m really glad that she gave me that advice. I ended up going to work for the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, [JPL] which is NASA’s lead center for robotics exploration, with the idea being that if I’m going to put the astronaut dream on the back burner, then I would want to design the robots that go explore other planets and space. I worked at JPL for four years and thoroughly enjoyed it. I worked off and on for those four years on the Curiosity Rover, which has now been on Mars for a while. When I left JPL for Vermeer, I left a job and organization I really liked for an organization I like even better. When I was at JPL, I went to night school for an MBA, which caused me to recognize how much I wanted to get into a competitive business setting where we’re driven by our competitors and our customers to constantly get better and that’s a bit missing at NASA. There’s just not much competition. I am very happy that I chose to come to work for Vermeer. Vermeer has definitely exceeded all my expectations as a place to work. It’s a huge honor to have the opportunity to succeed my mom as CEO and I’m looking forward to a bright future for the company.

RM: How do you think Vermeer will change under your leadership?

Andringa: The most important thing to tell employees when there has been a succession from one generation to the next is, “What’s not going to change.” There’s a lot that’s not going to change because things are going well at Vermeer. We have what we call the “Four P Philosophy,” which shows Principles at the center, surrounded by People, Product and Profit. That’s not going to change.

RM: There have been times when Vermeer seems more focused on the equipment rental industry and times when it is not. How does equipment rental fit into the company’s sales strategy today?

Andringa: We consider equipment rental to be very important and about three years ago we dedicated a team specifically to develop and launch products that appeal to the rental market. I would say equipment rental is going to continue to be an increasing phenomenon for contractors who want to keep their financial risk lower, by renting as opposed to purchasing equipment. We design stump cutters and pedestrian trenchers and skid-steers for rental houses that will rent to the weekend warrior, but we also are very conscientious about designing our equipment so that it can be rented to contractors and for professional users.

RM: Has the percentage of products sold into the rental channel changed over the past few years? Why?

Andringa: We’ve specifically designed some brand-new products for the rental market. We’re also finding that even with the machines that we have historically designed for the contractor market, a higher percentage of those are being accepted into rental company business plans and also by our customers, who are asking our dealers to rent them to them if they aren’t available via rental businesses.

RM: When developing products, what’s the difference between machines that will be sold to end users versus those sold into the

rental channel?

Andringa: The Vermeer brand is known for high quality and being robustly built and rental customers can be very hard on the equipment,

so we feel like our brand does play well to the rental market. An additional factor that we take into account more when it comes to rental equipment is being simple to use.

RM: Here’s a chance to give the sales pitch. If I am a rental store owner, why should I buy Vermeer equipment instead of machines from your competitors?

Andringa: Vermeer definitely has a long-term focus. We’re a family-owned company and we have successfully succeeded into the third generation and have every intention to continue to run Vermeer as a family-run business with family values. We’re not worried about the next quarter. We’re worried about what we look like 10 and 20 years from now.

RM: How would you describe Vermeer?

Andringa: We’re a company that has a global footprint, but at the same time we want to go local globally. We want our local customers to know they’re well taken care of, that they’re important to Vermeer. Our dealer network is definitely there to support our customers and that’s a big chunk of going local, globally.

RM: As you look to future, what are your chief concerns? Now that you are in a leadership position with the company, what keeps you up at night?

Andringa: I think the biggest concern I have is just the rate of change and the fact that customer expectation, volatility in the market and opportunity internationally seem to change more quickly now than ever before. At the same time I feel that Vermeer is the type of company that is going to be able to be resilient and flexible and adapt as quick or quicker than anybody else, so I take it as an opportunity.