AS BOYS playing cricket, Mark Greig and his mates loved to bowl a ''sandshoe crusher'', without knowing its significance. ''I had no idea that the ball originated with the one Jeff Thomson bowled to dad,'' Greig says, referring to the yorker at Tony Greig's Nike Astro Grabbers at Brisbane in 1974.

Too young to see his father's career, Mark was a child when Tony helped Kerry Packer lead the World Series Cricket revolution in 1977. Tony told his eldest son he would have liked to have written an autobiography, but when he died while suffering from lung cancer last December, the task fell to Mark, who has reconstructed his father's past in a book written jointly with Tony's 94-year-old mother, Joycie.

''Joycie couldn't fly from South Africa for dad's funeral,'' Mark says. ''And [she] was finding it hard to come to terms with his death. We heard that she wasn't turning the television on, wasn't playing canasta with her friends, wasn't seeing people. My sister Samantha and I flew there to comfort her and give her family support. After a couple of days, Joycie began telling stories - dad got his gift as a storyteller from her - and we wanted to preserve 90 years of the family's history. When we saw the groundswell of respect from the cricket world when dad died, which took me completely by surprise, it felt important to write things down.''

There was also the matter of correcting the record, as Tony Greig saw it, built around Packer and WSC. ''Dad was never happy with how Kerry was portrayed as a wealthy bully in the television series Howzat!,'' Mark says. ''That wasn't the person dad became friends with.''

Advertisement

The book has many eye-opening scenes in that friendship, which began at the opening of a John Cornell-Paul Hogan nightclub in Woolloomooloo in February 1976. ''They hit it off immediately,'' Mark says. ''They were both big presences who turned heads by walking into a room.''

Tony was won over by Packer's vision for cricket almost a year before Dennis Lillee, his manager Austin Robertson and Cornell approached the Channel Nine owner at the end of 1976 and the leading Australian cricketers were signed up for WSC. Greig's negotiations with Packer are rendered verbatim. Packer offered the then England captain $30,000 a season, but Greig wanted more. Packer said he would not pay him a bigger base salary than his teammates, but added a $10,000 captain's bonus. This still wasn't enough for Greig, who, at 31, knew he might be sacked at any moment as England captain. Packer threw in a job for life, starting at $25,000 a year, followed it up with a housing loan and, later, paid the private school fees for Greig's children and bailed him out of a business debt.

''I'm so disappointed in myself that I never took the chance to thank Mr Packer for that,'' Mark says. ''I'd thought thanking him was dad's job, but I wish I'd said something to him before he died.''

Mark got to hear the stories, and witness the friendship between his father and the media mogul, during holidays at the Packers' house at Palm Beach and their farm, Ellerston, in the upper Hunter Valley. ''My perception might be different from those who did business with Kerry,'' Mark says. ''But deep down he and dad were both big kids, looking for fun and adventure.''

Packer and Greig raced go-karts, went on hunting and fishing trips, played golf against each other, and ''took ridiculous risks'', such as when Packer challenged Greig to fly an ultralight out of Ellerston when he had never piloted an aircraft. Greig was lost for 20 minutes - later he said he had reconciled himself to his death - before crash-landing into a fence.

Mark had his own scrapes, crashing a quad bike crash racing James Packer at Ellerston, and getting a hiding from his father when, as a little boy, he blew a raspberry down the phone line while Tony was speaking with Packer: the episode that awoke him to how seriously his father took that relationship.

''Kerry was a hard man to say no to,'' Mark says. It led indirectly to the breakdown of Tony's marriage to Mark's mother, Donna. The job for life came with strings. On Saturday and Sunday mornings, Packer would call, and Greig would leave his family. ''It was hard for all of us, particularly for mum, having to fight for dad's attention,'' Mark says. ''But dad wouldn't have been who he was without that commitment, and we got a lot in return.''

The Packer-Greig friendship, which would change the course of cricket history, was built on a mutual respect and fearlessness that went back to the week of the sandshoe crusher in November 1974. It was there Packer saw Greig, before helmets or arm guards, flaying Lillee and Thomson in one of the most daring counter-attacking centuries ever played. ''He saw his role as an entertainer,'' Mark says. ''But he was so courageous, too. If I had the opportunity to shake his hand for one act, it would have been for that innings in Brisbane.''

For more information, visit www.tonygreig.com.au.