Denver District Attorney Mitch Morrissey should walk away from the case against Clarence Moses-EL, who was recently released from prison after serving 28 years on a 48-year sentence for a rape and assault conviction that now seems dubious.

Moses-EL, 60, always has maintained his innocence and has been fighting what seemed like an impossible struggle to earn his freedom.

The plight of Moses-EL was detailed in the excellent 2007 Denver Post investigative series by reporters Susan Greene and Miles Moffeit, who are no longer with the paper. The reporters found 141 prisoners whose bids for freedom were stalled because of lost or destroyed DNA evidence.

Moses-EL’s case was among the most infuriating.

Immediately after the 1987 attack in Denver’s Five Points Neighborhood, the victim gave police three possible names: “L.C., Earl and Darnell.”

A couple of days later she told police the identity of Moses-EL came to her in a dream. Moses-EL was convicted for the crimes by a jury in 1988.

While in prison, Moses-EL persuaded fellow inmates to pitch in $1,000 for lab work he believed would show he did not commit the crime. A judge approved the request. But police destroyed the evidence from the crime scene in 1995.

The case seemed stalled until 2006 when the name “L.C.” reappeared. L.C. Jackson was a neighbor of Moses-EL. In 2006, authorities matched Jackson’s DNA to a sexual assault that occurred in 1992, not far from where the 1987 rape occurred.

But police reportedly never investigated Jackson. Even after The Post told Moses-EL’s story in 2007, revealing these facts, it took eight years for a judge to finally step in.

In 2013, Jackson told authorities he had consensual sex with the victim of the 1987 rape and then beat her. He repeated that account in a summer court hearing.

With Jackson’s confession on record and blood tests indicating the attacker likely had a different blood type than Moses-EL, Denver District Judge Kandace Gerdes vacated Moses-EL’s conviction and granted a new trial.

The Denver’s DA’s office asked for a new trial date, which was set for May 16. But the office has not decided whether it will retry the case. It should not.

Moses-EL already has served more than half his sentence. He was up for parole in 2017.

Let him enjoy the freedom that was taken from him decades ago. The case is weak with little more evidence than a dream.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.