An advocate for Canberra's over 60s has backed a national report that indicated older people were in no rush to downsize.

Council on the Ageing ACT executive director Jenny Mobbs said she had heard few demands from older Canberrans seeking to move into a smaller private home, but acknowledged downsizing was not easy and more financial advice should be available.

Canberra could do with more independent living places, such as those at Goodwin's Monash Green in Tuggeranong, even though downsizing is not a priority for many elderly. Photo: Ben Wrigley photohub.com.au

"People would prefer to modify their own house instead of going to a situation that they don't know," she said.

"If the family home is not enormous and can be rejigged to cope with mobility or care needs, for a government [also] that works out to be cost effective."

The Productivity Commission report on seniors housing released this week found about three-quarters of Australians aged over 75 lived in detached houses and had three or more bedrooms.

"Surveys show that the majority of older people are satisfied with their dwellings and often find other uses for spare rooms, such as to accommodate guests or for hobbies," the report said.

Advertisement

The report called for reform to make it easier to seniors to free-up equity in their home, but acknowledged they had a broad reluctance to tap into this wealth and strong aversion to debt.

It said state planning systems were the most significant barrier to innovative and affordable housing options, which were needed to encourage downsizing.

Ms Mobbs said there was a need for financial advisers with the depth of knowledge to advise on retirement village investments, which could cost anywhere between $350,000 to $500,000 or more.

Canberra was also failing to meet demands for retirement village places, she said.

"That's why the big operators like Goodwin are building on hugely, IRT have come into town, Hindmarsh, BUPA, the building is ongoing."

The Property Council of Australia called for a change to the age pension means test to exempt up to $200,000 of home sale proceeds for full-rate pensioners, aged over 75, who purchased a cheaper home within 12 months.

The ACT government has supported moves to "more suitable accommodation" by providing over 60s with a concessional rate of stamp duty, allowing a duty of just $20 if a purchased home is worth no more than $625,000.

Chief Minister Andrew Barr said the current land release program includes six sites suitable for aged care and retirement villages, which were scheduled to be released between this year and 2018-19. Demographic data was used in modelling to decide how much land was needed for retirement purposes.

The Property Council ACT has previously called for more retirement-living developments in established suburbs.

About one in 10 Canberrans is 65 and older, with that figure expected to double by 2025.