The airline industry is hitting pause on a proposal to shrink the allowed size of passengers' carry-on bags after intense pushback from lawmakers.

The International Air Transport Association called last week for airlines to limit the size of bags that are carried onto flights to a size of 21.5 inches by 13.5 inches by 7.5 inches. Most U.S. airlines currently allow bags that are up to 22 inches by 14 inches by 9 inches.

Lawmakers responded to the proposal by introducing legislation to block airlines that charge passengers for checked luggage from shrinking the size of carry-on bags.

ADVERTISEMENT

The IATA said Wednesday that it is putting the proposal on hold to conduct a "comprehensive reassessment" of the merits of shrinking the size of carry-on luggage.

"While many welcomed the Cabin OK initiative, significant concerns were expressed in North America," Tom Windmuller, IATA's senior vice president for airport, passenger, cargo and security, said in a statement.

"Cabin OK is a voluntary program for airlines and for consumers," he continued. "This is clearly an issue that is close to the heart of travelers. We need to get it right. Today we are pausing the rollout and launching a comprehensive reassessment of the Cabin OK program with plans to further engage program participants, the rest of our members, and other key stakeholders."

Sen. John Thune (R-S.D.), chairman of the Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, welcomed the decision to delay any changes.

“If adopted by airlines, this standard would have prevented Americans from using many carry-on bags currently in use," Thune said in a statement. "This ill-conceived proposal created understandable frustration among the traveling public.

"The Senate Commerce Committee immediately indicated our intention to scrutinize any such change by U.S. carriers. Given the public outcry and concern from lawmakers, IATA’s decision to pause and reassess is appropriate,” he added.

Supporters of requiring smaller carry-on luggage had argued the restriction would speed up the boarding process for flights.

Critics accused airlines of trying to force passengers to pay more checked bag fees by shrinking the carry-on luggage allowance.

“Consumers are tired of being squeezed — physically and fiscally — by airlines and this proposal is a step too far,” Rep. Steve Cohen (D-Tenn.) said in a statement after he introduced the legislation this week to stop the proposal.

“It is a transparent attempt to squeeze even more money out of passengers by forcing them to pay baggage fees to check luggage they purchased specifically to avoid those fees," Cohen continued. "The new proposed carry-on size limits should not be allowed to go into effect, especially at a time when the airlines are already making huge profits.”

The group that lobbies for U.S. airlines in Washington, Airlines For America (A4A), moved Wednesday to distance itself from the proposal to shrink the size of passengers' carry-on luggage.

“A4A and its members reject the recent carry-on size initiative put forth by IATA because it is unnecessary and flies in the face of the actions the U.S. carriers are taking to invest in the customer experience — roughly $1.2 billion a month — including larger overhead bins,” A4A President Nicholas Calio said in a statement on Wednesday.

“Our members already have guidelines in place on what size bags they can accommodate, making this action unnecessary," Calio continued. "We agree with IATA’s action to reassess this initiative and take into account stakeholders’ views and recognize work already underway to improve baggage facilitation.”

Customer groups have attributed the increase in the amount of carry-on luggage to fees for checked baggage implemented by almost every U.S. airline in recent years.

They say passengers are carrying on bags that they would have previously checked to their destinations to avoid the fees.

Airlines have defended the bag fees, saying it allows passengers to choose how much luggage they want to bring on flights.

The Department of Transportation's Bureau of Transportation Statistics state that airlines collected $3.5 billion from baggage fees in 2014.

This story was updated at 4:24 p.m.