WASHINGTON — U.S. Rep. Leonard Lance wants to permanently repeal a section of the Affordable Care Act even if he can't get rid of the entire law.

Lance (R-7th Dist.) and U.S. Sen. Bill Cassidy (R-La.) are sponsoring legislation to permanently prevent taxpayers from covering any losses insurance companies suffer under the health-care law. The spending bill funding most U.S. government operations for the current fiscal year contains such a ban, but the legislation expires Sept. 30.

"I am concerned that taxpayers not bail out insurance companies," Lance said as he joined Cassidy, his former colleague on the House Energy and Commerce Committee, at a meeting with reporters. Lance still sits on the committee, one of two panels with jurisdiction over health issues, while Cassidy was elected to the Senate last year.

They announced their bill on Wednesday, a day after House Republicans voted for the 56th time to repeal all or part of the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare. None of those efforts have been successful as Senate Democrats have blocked consideration of repeal in their chamber and President Obama has threatened to veto the measure if it reaches his desk.

With this year's Feb. 15 deadline for getting insurance approaching, the Department of Health and Human Services reported that 7.5 million Americans have signed up for coverage under the law, including 216,425 in New Jersey. HHS said 83 percent of the state's residents who signed up qualify for government subsidies that will lower their premiums.

The Lance-Cassidy measure would target so-called risk corridors. They were added to the health-care law to protect insurance companies if they wound up attracting a disproportionate amount of customers with high medical expenses and whose premiums were not set high enough to cover the costs. Those companies would receive financial help through fees paid by insurers with higher profits due to lower medical expenses. Under the original bill, taxpayer funds could be used to help money-losing companies if the government did not collect enough in fees from the profitable insurers.

Cassidy, a physician, said he was concerned that insurers would set their premiums too low so they could attract more business, knowing that they could be bailed out by the government.

"Clearly, if you're a company looking for market share or an administration looking to put the best face on Obamacare, you would deliberately underprice your premium," Cassidy said.

The two lawmakers said that their provision already has received bipartisan support as it was in the spending bill that President Obama signed into law. But coming a day after the repeal vote, Lance's legislation drew a wary look from a Democratic supporter of the Affordable Care Act.

U.S. Rep. Bill Pascrell Jr. (D-9th Dist.), a member of the House Ways and Means Committee that also oversees the health industry, said he was concerned that the Republicans were trying to kill piecemeal what they couldn't repeal outright.

"They've decided not to kill the beast but to starve the dog," Pascrell said. "I'm open to all kinds of ideas as long as the basic part of the Affordable Care Act is not reduced. We'll look at things but we're not going to starve the dog.''

The insurance industry also opposed the provision.

"American budgets are already strained by health care costs, and this change will lead to higher premiums for consumers and make it more difficult to achieve affordability," said Clare Krusing, a spokeswoman for the industry's trade group, America's Health Insurance Plans. "Our focus should be on changes to the law that will lower costs - like repealing the health insurance tax - not those that drive premiums higher."

Lance said the latest bill to eliminate the law also instructed the House committees with jurisdiction over health care to develop an alternative to the Affordable Care Act. "Repeal is not enough," he said.

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.