Two new reports help give Colorado consumers insight into what mobile service company here has the best voice, data and text quality. Perennial leader Verizon took the top spot on both reports.

J.D. Power’s 2015 Wireless Network Quality Study, released Thursday, ranked Verizon at the top with the fewest number of problems — or 10 per 100 connections. That’s better than the average score of the West Region, which includes almost the entire western half of the nation.

Tied for second are AT&T and T-Mobile, at 13 problems each. Sprint came in at the bottom, with 14.

But Sprint saw the greatest improvement. In the last report, Sprint had 17 problems per 100.

“In general, we did see improvements for both Sprint and T-Mobile overall in most regions,” said Kirk Parsons, practice lead for J.D. Power’s telecom practice. “For Sprint, they pretty much (improved) across the board in call quality, latency, voice mails. … T-Mobile had slight improvements in text messaging and call quality. We all know both Sprint and T-Mobile have been working extra hard to not only improve the quality. T-Mobile’s going to 700 MHz will help.”

On Thursday, T-Mobile announced its 700 MHz network was now available in Denver and the front range. The wireless frequency helps mobile signals better penetrate concrete walls and propagate further. In other words, 700 improves indoor calls and coverage in rural areas.

More specific to Colorado mobile service, RootMetrics recently released its First half 2015 report for the state. The research firm, which sends out drivers to make calls nationwide, also put Verizon at the top by a significant lead. (The Denver-specific report published in April. See “Best mobile service in metro Denver? Verizon takes the lead”

Verizon had the most reliable network in Colorado, with a rating of 94.3. AT&T came in second at 90, while Sprint and T-Mobile were at 87.9 and 87.1 respectively. This rating included results of calls, data connections and texting, plus the speed of data transfers, downloading e-mail and web or app tasks.

While T-Mobile did well for data speeds and was second to Verizon, the company had the lowest score in voice quality and texting.

Rich Garwood, T-Mobile’s area vice president who was just in Denver to help launch its 700 MHz service, said that he hopes the company’s upgrades will show up in RootMetrics next report.

For readers who want to zoom in on their neighborhood to see how the mobile services compare, RootMetrics posts a map indicating quality of service from good to bad at webcoveragemap.rootmetrics.com/us.

Other good sites to check on local mobile-service quality:

• DeadCellZones.com (Denver)

• Speedtest.net

• RootMetrics app to report mobile service quality

• Sensorly, a crowdsourced wireless network coverage app