Buy Photo People shop at local food, clothing and art booths during the Kentucky Farm Festival Saturuday in Crestwood, Ky. (Photo: Matt Herp, Special to T--he C-J)Buy Photo

Farm life was brought back to light Saturday afternoon during the Kentucky Farm Festival at The Maples farm in Crestwood, Ky. The family-friendly educational event provided kids and adults with an assortment of educational and fun activities, teaching them many of the lost farm life ways.

Homesteading, personal brewing, organic gardening, and cooking workshops were in place along with an assortment of food trucks, clothing, and art booths. As well, sheep and cows were joyfully greeted by younger crowds in attendance.

"I like kids seeing what the farm representation is," said Warren Adcock, of the Kentucky Sheep and Wool Producers Association.

Adcock who stood along side his wool sheep named Bailey, educated families about the intricacies of sheep wool and sheep shearing. Adcock said the he enjoyed the event and that most of all, it's about the kids seeing the sheep and knowing what the farm life is like.

Nicole Martin who attended the event with her husband and two kids thought the event was great for families.

"A lot of the booths are set up with kid friendly activities whether it's just spinning a wheel for a game or the farm animals and feeling the different wool," Martin said.

Along with the kid friendly booths, Martin thought the educational workshop booths were also very impressive.

Emily Diamond, of Diamond Family Farm, taught an educational class on homesteading to a packed house Saturday afternoon. Diamond who desires to be self reliant and said she wanted to teach others to do the same.

"My goal was to help them understand what goes into it," said Diamond. "I hope they have a better knowledge base to start off from because homesteading can be very misleading, what's out there as far thinking that you just go into homesteading that you are self sustained. A lot of people get into it and they get out of it because they don't understand what goes into it."

Angela Caporelli, of the Kentucky Dept. of Agriculture, and Rocky Allen, of Crystal Bridge Fish, LLC, also educated a large group of event goers as they filleted fish and talked aquaculture during a cooking demonstration. As Caporelli cooked she wanted to teach the public about buying from local fisheries.

"90% of the fish consumed in the U.S. is imported and of 70% of that is farm raises," said Caporelli. "When you have farm raised fish in other countries you really don't know how they treat those animals, what they are fed. When here in the U.S. we are very, very strict."

"When its farm raised in the U.S you know it's healthy."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1MnMfBG