Schuylkill County Coroner Dr. David J. Moylan III wants to represent the 17th Congressional District in order to make it and the United States better places to live.

“We need to alter the trajectory our country is on,” Moylan, 62, of Lake Wynonah, said during an interview Monday with The Republican-Herald Editorial Board.

Moylan, a Republican, is challenging first-term Democratic incumbent Matt Cartwright for the 17th District seat in Tuesday’s General Election.

The Democratic-leaning 17th District, which was significantly altered after the 2010 Census, includes all of Schuylkill and parts of Carbon, Lackawanna, Luzerne, Monroe and Northampton counties. Although Schuylkill is the only county fully within the 17th, much of the district’s population is in Lackawanna and Luzerne counties.

Moylan said the sanctity of human life is his major issue, noting that Cartwright has a ranking of 0 from pro-life groups and claiming his views are “not in line” with the people of the 17th District.

“That’s something I feel passionately about,” Moylan, who also is director of the Simon Kramer Cancer Institute in New Philadelphia, said.

His pro-life stance extends to many fields, including the war against the terrorist group ISIS, Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, which seeks to impose a dictatorship in that region and has beheaded three Western captives: two Americans and one Briton.

“Unless we control them in the Middle East, we’ll be fighting them in Manhattan. Our way of life is being threatened,” he said.

Moylan said he believes we need to take stronger action against ISIS — which he also calls ISIL, Islamic State in the Levant — a general term for much of the Near East. He said that name reflects the area the group wants to control.

“The war has been politicized. We’re not letting our generals run the show,” Moylan said. “This war won’t be over until the last jihadist is killed.”

The battle against Ebola is another one where American lives are on the line, he said.

“This is a deadly virus,” Moylan said. “I think it’s being politicized. Turn it over to the doctors.”

A ban on travel from Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, the African countries where the disease is raging, should be considered, although the Obama administration is opposed to it, he said.

“I would rather err on the side of caution here,” said Moylan, who labeled the Centers for Disease Control the “Center for Disease Confusion” for its handling of the Ebola crisis.

Concerning illegal immigration, Moylan said he opposes amnesty and believes the top priority should be securing the borders and ports.

“It’s a great burden to the taxpayers,” he said of illegal immigration.

He also said the military and/or the National Guard should be used to stop illegal immigration.

Concerning the economy, Moylan said the 17th District is not doing as well as other regions and that it should base its future on energy, including its plentiful deposits of coal and natural gas.

“Bring back coal,” he said, adding that the Obama administration is fighting a war on coal. “We need relief from these onerous (Environmental Protection Agency) regulations. There are still a lot of miners in Pennsylvania.”

Moylan also said the unemployment figures are deceptively low, since large numbers of people who are not working are not counted because they have stopped looking for a job.

“The labor participation rate has changed,” dropping from 66 percent of adults to 62 percent, he said.

Moylan also said the national debt of more than $17 trillion is a huge concern.

“This is a major problem that’s going to destroy this nation,” and more legislative votes should be based on whether the country can afford what is being proposed, he said. “We’re addicted to this runaway spending.”

He said that if the national debt were converted into a stack of dollar bills, it would reach 70,000 miles into space.

“This is the president’s new space program,” Moylan said.

He said a Republican-controlled Senate, which many political pundits believe will occur as a result of Tuesday’s election, would not be a bad thing.

“It might be a good thing” for the Senate to stand against Obama, Moylan said. He said many bills that the Republican-controlled House of Representatives has passed are languishing in the Senate.

The Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare, must be repealed, he said.

“I don’t think we should be turning over our health ... to the government,” Moylan said. “The best medical system in the world could be destroyed.”

Failing that, he said, it should be modified significantly, and Moylan has proposed 12 ways to do that, including health savings accounts, the ability to shop across state lines and limitations on lawsuits.

Another clear difference between him and Cartwright, Moylan said, is the right to bear arms embodied in the Second Amendment.

“The Constitution says we can’t infringe on that,” Moylan said. “It’s keeping us safe from tyrannical government. I’m in favor of keeping our citizens safe. I’m passionate about the Second Amendment.”

He calls Cartwright “an enemy of gun owners’ rights.”

The election offers voters in Schuylkill County and the rest of the 17th District a chance to choose someone who will stand with them, Moylan said.

“The people in the 17th District have a clear choice,” he said.

Candidate: Dr. David J. Moylan III

Age: 62

Residence: Lake Wynonah, South Manheim Township

Party: Republican

Office sought: U.S. representative, 17th District

Education: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, bachelor of science degree; Georgetown University, doctor of medicine degree

Experience: Director, Simon Kramer Institute, New Philadelphia; Schuylkill County coroner, 2011-present