Henry Krinkle and Emma Quangel have uncovered what appears to be the website of Dylann Roof, the man who murdered nine people in a Charleston church earlier this week. (The site was registered in February of this year, and Quangel reports that she confirmed Roof's responsibility with a reverse whois search.) The site, called The Last Rhodesian, contains a zip file full of photos of Roof in various poses, often armed, sometimes with a Confederate flag, sometimes trampling or burning an American flag. And it contains a manifesto, which doesn't leave any room for doubt—in case anyone still had any—about the author's worldview. Here is a sample:

I think it is is fitting to start off with the group I have the most real life experience with, and the group that is the biggest problem for Americans.



Niggers are stupid and violent. At the same time they have the capacity to be very slick. Black people view everything through a racial lense. Thats what racial awareness is, its viewing everything that happens through a racial lense. They are always thinking about the fact that they are black. This is part of the reason they get offended so easily, and think that some thing are intended to be racist towards them, even when a White person wouldnt be thinking about race. The other reason is the Jewish agitation of the black race.

If you have the stomach for it, you can read the rest here, including his thoughts on East Asians ("They are by nature very racist and could be great allies of the White race") and Jews. ("Unlike many White naitonalists, I am of the opinion that the majority of American and European jews are White. In my opinion the issues with jews is not their blood, but their identity.") But the most chilling comment comes at the end:

I have no choice. I am not in the position to, alone, go into the ghetto and fight. I chose Charleston because it is most historic city in my state, and at one time had the highest ratio of blacks to Whites in the country. We have no skinheads, no real KKK, no one doing anything but talking on the internet. Well someone has to have the bravery to take it to the real world, and I guess that has to be me.