You may have noticed the name Fritts Farm along that shopping area. Well, it's been a major part of businesses coming to town.

By Joleen Chaney

There's been a lot talk lately about several big businesses going up in the city of Moore, and that's in addition to millions of grant dollars the city has gotten.

As you drive through Moore near 19th and Telephone Road, there's a Chick-fil-a and a Home Depot. You may have noticed the name Fritts Farm along that shopping area. Well, it's been a major part of businesses coming to town. Couple that with millions of grant dollars and it's a sight city officials say is a miracle.

"We had barbed wire fence all the way and down," Jason Fritts of Fritts Farm said.

Now, that fencing has turned to businesses.

"We all learned how to drive, my dad too, going down the fence lines and just driving the pasture in our old truck," Fritts said.

Now hundreds of vehicles have taken the place of that old truck, but that's not all that's changed on the Fritts Farm land. Telephone Road used to be an old two-laner, and Fritts said buildings have replaced a barn.

Construction crews are now clearing out dirt, making the way for the newest addition, Computer RX, a software developer that will provide about two hundred high paying jobs to the area.

"The year we've had, I consider this to be pretty miraculous," said Deidr Ebry with the City of Moore.

And just down the road at Broadway and 19th, a Sam's Club is going up. In addition to all of this private sector development is millions of dollars in grant money.

"A lot of that is going to be put into infrastructure," said Ebry. "It will go to fortifying and putting back the infrastructure that we lost during the storm."

From red farm dirt to bustling city life, something just one year ago city officials weren't sure would be happening for a while.

"It completes the circle for us," Ebry said.

There are many more large corporations looking to come to Moore, but until they get a permit from the city to build, nothing can be confirmed.