Although welcomed warmly by both retailers and Wall Street, Black Friday stands for much more than a singular annual opportunity to make money and improve the overall economy. Ironically, it also represents a tangible expression of what is very deeply wrong with this country; in essence, it is an embarrassingly recurring symptom of America's most widely overlooked pathology. This underlying "disease," moreover, while essentially unhidden, and cheerfully conspicuous, remains substantially unacknowledged.

What, exactly, is this neglected disease? More than anything else, it is a ritually cultivated deformation of the national spirit, a continually manufactured delusion that pleasure derives from "stuff," and, as corollary, that every holiday-based accumulation of shiny gadgets offers a path to personal happiness.

On Black Friday, with its additional benefit of bargain prices, all Americans are feverishly reminded of something else. This is their country's most thoroughly revealing Thanksgiving mantra; "You are what you buy."



Every year, this enduring and ecumenical message, however blatantly vulgar, remains both reassuring and simple. Ritualistically, and almost as if it were actually some sort of religious incantation, the familiar mantra reminds each American that anything that is authentically pleasing and important must eventually emerge from wrapping paper and a box, and that herculean personal efforts must sometimes be exerted to properly collect these purchases – preferably, on the cheap. Ultimately, of course, almost each and every American discovers the depressing futility of such concocted messages, but not before our economy and society have become unavoidably dependent upon their recognizably general acceptance.

[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

Basically, these commercial messages are a form of addiction, and, by definition, all addiction is more or less pathological. Whatever their officially veneered interpretations on Wall Street and Main Street, they are ultimately a true expression of disease.

For the most part, the Black Friday addiction is not really hard to figure out. It stipulates, plainly, that American economic growth and prosperity now require the endlessly contrived consumption of mostly useless goods. Stated differently, it identifies the problem of meeting our core national economic requirements without simultaneously transforming the citizenry into more of a "crowd."

For economic, social, and even psychiatric reasons, we will soon need to move more deliberately and self-consciously toward a thoroughly contrary wisdom. In this indispensable effort, we must finally learn to understand that every society is the sum of its disparate human wants or preferences. To Americans, the traditionally favored path to any such society has been selected not according to what Ralph Waldo Emerson had once called "high thinking," but, instead, by the commonly desperate citizen search for higher net worth.

At its heart, moreover, this search is animated not so much by the promise of greater personal wealth per se, but rather by presumptively vital expectations of enhanced personal status, or "respect." This thoughtful conclusion had already been reached by Adam Smith, whose 1776 classic "Wealth of Nations is still cited breathlessly by every vocal American champion of "free markets" and correspondingly unbridled holiday shopping.

[READ: Don't Go Shopping on Thanksgiving]

Normally, as citizens, our inter-penetrating considerations of personal wealth, status, and self-worth are intimately interwoven with politics and society. From the start, therefore, each and every American is made to understand that conformance and fitting in are the reciprocally core components of individual success. Significantly, the grievously distressing results of such a crudely instrumental understanding are decidedly far-reaching, and also easy for all to see.

As a visible symptom of our social and economic pathology, Black Friday has readily discernible "disease correlates." These can be found in America's willful abandonment of an interiorized or intellectual life in favor of merchandise, and in its steadily open preference for gaudy ornamentation and glitz over substance and quality. Just as things were already back in the 1830s and 1840s, the search for what Emerson had presciently called "vulgar prosperity" is still corrupting the country's vital spirit, and, paradoxically, still undermining its potentially more durable pillars of economic strength.

Every day in America, but especially on Black Friday, the libraries are empty, but the stores are overflowing.

Americans now live shamelessly at the lowest common intellectual denominator. In this generally ignored societal arithmetic, higher education warrants some special notice. Our proliferating universities have already become expensive training schools, promising jobs, but less and less of a real education. "Branding" themselves in the distinctly unappetizing manner of fast food companies and underarm deodorants, these vaunted institutions of higher education carefully instruct each student that learning is essentially just one more commodity. Commodities, each student learns in turn, exist solely for suitably profitable exchange, somewhere in the wider marketplace.

Ultimately, our students exist in universities in order to prepare themselves to be bought and sold. Memorize, regurgitate, and fit in the existing mold, instructs the college. Then, everyone be praised, all will make money, and all will be well.

But all is not well. Today, faced with potentially existential threats from Iran, North Korea and several other undeniably volatile places, perhaps even Russia or China, we prefer to distract ourselves from myriad inconvenient truths using the immense clamor of mass society. To be sure, America now imposes upon its already-breathless people the grotesque cadence of a vast and over-burdened machine. Predictably, the most likely outcome of this rhythmically calculated delirium will be an utterly exhausted country, one that is devoid of Emersonian "high thinking," and one that is only selectively able to help bestow upon its citizens a high net worth.

[READ: Black Friday Has Become Black Thursday for Workers]

Ironically, we Americans inhabit the one society that could have been different. Once, it seems, we still had a unique opportunity to nudge each other to become more than a crowd. Emerson, the quintessential American philosopher, had even described us as a unique people, one motivated by industry and self-reliance, and not by anxiety, fear, and a conspicuously relentless trembling.

America, Emerson had urged, needed to favor not just "high thinking," but also "plain living." Black Friday, and the underlying disease of which it is merely a prominent expression, represent a grotesquely stark refutation of such sound advice.

Indeed, in all the years following American Transcendentalism, no philosophical urging could possibly have been more consciously disregarded.

In spite of our heroic claim to be a nation of “rugged individuals,” it is still the delirious mass or crowd that typically shapes us, as a people, as Americans. Look about. Our consumer-driven society bristles with demeaning hucksterism, humiliating allusions, choreographed violence and endless political equivocations. Surely, we ought finally to assert, there must be something more to this country than its fundamentally meaningless elections, its stupefying music, its demeaning entertainments, its growing tastelessness and its all-too willing surrender to Thanksgiving holidays squandered at the mall.