By Eric Mandel

Approximately 50 community members picketed the decline in charity care and medical debt forgiveness outside of Swedish Medical Center (747 Broadway) on Thursday, July 23.

This was the latest of about a half-dozen protests organized over the last year by the Washington Community Action Network (CAN!) outside of Swedish. A member of Seattle City Councilmember Kshama Sawant’s staff was among the attendees.

Washington CAN! communications director Rosalind Brazel said the Providence-Swedish Health Alliance is coming off one of its most profitable years, yet charity care given to low-income patients declined by 39 percent at the Cherry Hill campus (1600 E. Jefferson St.).

Brazel called Swedish the “most stubborn” negotiators of all the medical health debt systems the grassroots lobbying organization has taken on.

“Swedish has been the slowest to respond,” she said. “They just do not want to make changes or acknowledge that there’s a problem.”

Swedish spokesperson Mary Beth Lowell confirmed that the hospital’s charity care spending went down year-over-year, but she said that’s actually a positive because it was a result of the Affordable Care Act and an indication that many previously uninsured individuals now have access to health care through Medicaid expansion and the insurance exchanges.

“In the future, this coverage means people can [get] better access to preventive care and address medical conditions before they are serious enough to need treatment in an emergency department,” she said.

Lowell added that Swedish’s commitment to charity care has impacted thousands of lives, with more than 9,300 community members granted financial assistance from Swedish in 2014. For more than half of those patients, free care was covered at 100 percent, she said.

“We have historically provided more community benefit than any other non-taxpayer-supported hospital in Seattle,” she said. “Over the last three years, Swedish has spent almost a half of billion dollars in community benefit. Our community benefit includes community education programs, research, charity care and uncompensated care.”

Protestors on July 23 wound a string of envelopes — meant to signify medical bills — to represent the estimated 23,000-plus patients with medical debt who could have been aided by Swedish.

Washington CAN!’s demands include Swedish creating a charity care policy that will provide “more benefit to their community,” which includes simplifying the application process and altering their “really short” application deadline by extending it or getting rid of it altogether.

Brazel said no more pickets are currently planned, but that “I believe there will be more.”

To comment on this story, write to editor@capitolhilltimes.com.