President Obama has a Brian Williams Problem on Deficits

Despite the recent illogical musings of some liberal economists, including Paul Krugman, deficits and increasing debt are bad things. Not only do they jack up the borrowing costs and necessary amounts of taxation and/or inflation needed to cover the difference, deficits also drain investment capital that could be put to efficient use (and sustainably grow our economy) out of the market and into the hands of notoriously wasteful government bureaucrats.

Deficits are bad. There is no argument. Prior deficit spending by other presidents doesn’t make even bigger deficit spending OK. I wasn’t old enough to vote for George W. Bush either time and, as much as I admire many of the attributes of Ronald Reagan, The Gipper made fiscal mistakes too. I agreed with candidate Obama: trillions of dollars in national debt is unpatriotic. To some degree the president still seems to understand that deficits are a bad thing, even if just politically. At the Democrats’ Winter Meeting this past week, the president (again) took credit for falling deficits, claiming that deficits only seem to go down when Democrats are president. He claimed that our deficits are falling at the fastest rate in 60 years. This is technically true, but that’s the purpose of doublespeak isn’t it?

President Obama needs to learn a lesson from the Brian Williams suspension and stop taking credit for things in which he played absolutely no part. Deficits have fallen, but President Obama has done almost nothing to account for this, except for hiking taxes on people’s health care under Obamacare.

First of all, deficits have fallen from the massive highs resulting from stimulus spending that he himself orchestrated. To credit Obama with falling deficits is like patting a drunk driver on the back for only blowing twice the legal limit when he blew three times the limit before. Bravo! But the car is still wrapped around a tree.

Most of the deficit reduction has come from spending freezes put into place under sequestration. Remember the sequester? President Obama lampooned conservatives at the Democrats’ Winter Meeting for doom and gloom predictions about his economic policies. Yet here’s the president on the sequester:

The pain, though, will be real…many middle-class families will have their lives disrupted in significant ways… hundreds of thousands of Americans who serve their country — Border Patrol agents, FBI agents, civilians who work at the Pentagon — all will suffer significant pay cuts and furloughs…All of this will cause a ripple effect throughout our economy. Layoffs and pay cuts means that people have less money in their pockets, and that means that they have less money to spend at local businesses. That means lower profits. That means fewer hires. The longer these cuts remain in place, the greater the damage to our economy — a slow grind that will intensify with each passing day.

Well, the sequester happened — and two years later the president is bragging about how great the economy appears to be. Underlying data suggests otherwise, but that’s an entirely different topic.

President Obama and Democrats fought tooth and nail against every cent of the sequestration budget cuts, which were technically just reductions in planned future spending. Yet now they want credit for falling deficits?

Finally, the president keeps referring to our deficit problem as if it is a thing of the past. While his presidency may be coming to a close, our fiscal nightmare is far from over. By the president’s own predictions, via the White House Office of Management and Budget, the budget never balances. Deficits never go lower than $460 billion (2017) under current projections. We resume trillion dollar deficits within 10 years. Under the president’s plan, the United States government will continue to spend trillions of dollars it does not have in perpetuity, pushing our national debt towards $30 trillion and possibly beyond.

These are the facts: The president was responsible for the massive deficits from which we’ve since come down. The president fought the very policies that have shrunk them. Last, but not least, the president’s own budget projections predict a deteriorating budget situation, with deficits exploding to dangerous levels within 10 years. This is the truth. President Obama is being deceitful. It’s just too bad the country won’t get the same Brian Williams-style six-month suspension from Obama’s reckless fiscal policies.