I was hoping we could have gone through November but that wasn't going to work out. -- Pat Eldean



HOLLAND, MI -- Within hours of the announcement that The Piper restaurant was closing its doors, owner Pat Eldean began receiving emails from former employees.

They expressed appreciation for the lessons gained and lifelong friends made during their time on staff.

By Eldean's estimates, more than 3,000 people have worked under her roof since the Holland area waterfront restaurant opened over three decades ago. It closed on Aug. 29.

"One of the highlights of Pat's workday was working the hostess desk on a busy night while greeting and helping each guest," wrote her son, Wade Eldean, who now oversees Eldean Shipyard, in an email this week announcing the restaurant's closure.

For many of her employees, the family-owned restaurant was a first job. It was where they learned the importance of being on time and customer service.

Eldean expected her waitstaff to remember customer orders without writing them down. They also had to learn the difference between a Pinot Grigio, an Italian white wine, and a Pinot Noir, a red wine that originated in France.

The longtime restaurateur began to hear similar memories from longtime customers since word got out the family had put the business up for sale in the spring 2014.

"People would tell me how much the place meant to them all summer," said Eldean, whose gets momentarily teary-eyed remembering those heartfelt conversations.

For many people, the restaurant was the setting of life's big celebrations from weddings, to reunions, birthdays to anniversaries.

One customer shared with Eldean that a last photo of her family was taken at the restaurant before her husband died.

"It was very meaningful to her," Eldean said.

Nearly every seat in the restaurant let customers dine as their eyes feasted on Lake Macatawa, where the waters head through the Holland Channel into Lake Michigan's expanse.

"It's beautiful year-round," Eldean said Wednesday, sitting at a table in the restaurant which has already been stripped of most of its dishes, edibles and decorations.

The Piper is part of the Eldean Shipyard, one of the oldest active marinas and boatyard facilities in the country. It was started in 1901 as Jesiek Brothers Shipyard.

Eldean had hoped her decision to retire wasn't going to mean closing the restaurant, but the family couldn't find someone willing to accept its terms -- including a long-term lease instead of ownership of the building.

Some "very good restaurateurs" did a walk through but no deals were reached, added Eldean.

In its sales pitch, the family said the restaurant, which had revenues of nearly $1.3 million in 2013, had growth potential for a new owner who would be willing to expand hours beyond dinner, adding off-site catering and delivery, maximize outdoor seating areas and better utilize its banquet facility.

The Piper's chef for 17 years, Keaton Stearns, also passed on taking over the restaurant.

The owner of a horse farm, Stearns has the skill set but not the time required for the enterprise. For now, he is taking some time off and contemplating his next move, Eldean said.

What's next for the three-story structure at at 2225 South Shore Drive remains unclear.

"We really don't know how the property will be re-purposed," said Eldean. "We are really opened to ideas."

One option is to convert the second and third floors into vacation condos and leave the lower level available for some kind of casual eatery and bar to serve the marina's customers and others, Wade Eldean said.

The dining facilities at Macatawa Yacht Club next door are only available for members, he added.

The closest restaurant on South Shore Drive, Black Sheep, is more than a mile away.

The marina has always housed a restaurant-- although in a more humble cinder block state when Herb Eldean bought the waterfront business in 1973. He leased the space out until he decided the family should take over operations.

He convinced his wife, Pat, a "home ec" teacher who taught cooking classes in her home for six years, she could run a restaurant. Even with a passion for food and a comfort level working with youth who would make up much of her staff, it was a steep learning curve.

"I have a master's (degree) in counseling and thought that was something I could use every day," Eldean said.

She credits Herb, who has a strong accounting background, for helping with the books.

The restaurant began as the Sandpiper, an upscale fine dining restaurant, garnering several awards, including Best Restaurant in West Michigan.

In 1997, it underwent a major overhaul and the name was shortened to reflect a more casual setting designed to make guests feel more comfortable.

Despite being "well-past retirement age," Eldean wasn't ready to step down until last year.

She blames a growing labor shortage and increasing government regulations -- particularly tied to the Affordable Care Act -- for making her workload heavier in recent years.

Even staying open a few days longer for the always-busy Labor Day weekend wasn't possible because too many of her seasonal employees began to leave in August to head back to college.

"I was hoping we could have gone through November but that wasn't going to work out," Eldean said.

As for herself, Eldean doesn't know what retirement holds for her. But she is looking forward to having more time to putter around in her own kitchen.

"I really want to cook more at home because I haven't cooked a lot," said Eldean, a trim woman who looks younger than her age -- which she declined to share for this story.

Beyond spending time with her four grandchildren, traveling and volunteering, the lifelong planner is taking a wait-and-see approach.

"I don't have a plan but it will resolve itself. Doors will open, I know."

Shandra Martinez covers business for MLive/The Grand Rapids Press. Email her or follow her on Twitter @shandramartinez.