It is surprising how many Medicare Advantage plan members know little about their health insurance coverage and benefits. Taking time to explore what your plan includes or doesn't include can help you prepare ahead of time for unforeseen events.

Prescription deductibles

Have you looked at your prescription drug plan closely? If not, you may be under the false impression that your medications are higher cost than normal, especially if you had chosen a new Medicare supplement this year.

Many plans do not start paying for prescriptions until a deductible is met, but surprisingly a significant portion of health insurance plan enrollees don't know their drug plan details.

If you do have a deductible, also known as stage 1 of your prescription plan, your medications will revert to a lower cost co-payment after the deductible is met.

Where to go when you need help with medication cost

What you need to know if you are on high cost medications is when to ask for help. Diabetics, for instance, can obtain assistance for some types of insulin once they reach the Medicare coverage gap, also known as the “donut hole”.

Some medications are available if you are in the Medicare coverage gap and others can be obtained even if you have Medicare drug coverage. A resource for finding where to get help with medications is needymeds.org.

Many insurance plans offer a medication review annually that is a consult with a pharmacist. Asking for your annual review can help guide you to lower cost medication option that you can discuss with your doctor.

You should read your summary from your insurance company that tracks total drug spending throughout the year so you’re not taken off guard at the pharmacy.

If you know you’re approaching the donut hole you can remain proactive to avoid missing taking needed medications. You can call customer service on the back of your insurance ID card and ask to speak with a nurse case manager or pharmacy benefit manager to get started. Your doctor can also help with applications for medication assistance that often have generous income allowances for getting medications either free or for low cost.

This year Medicare recipients reach the coverage gap when spending on medications, including your deductible, reaches $2,960 on covered drugs. It’s important to understand that the donut hole occurs based on total amount spent on medications, between you and your insurer; not just what you pay out of pocket.