Despite signs of strength in the manufacturing sector, concerns loom about work force development and the rising cost of raw materials, health care and energy.







Wire-Net, a manufacturing economic development group in Cleveland, released a survey earlier this month in which 50% of 89 respondents predicted improved profitability in the next year. Another 31% expected profits to remain the same.







All respondents had fewer than 250 employees. About 12% were in the automotive space, and another 35% were in miscellaneous manufacturing, including metal stampers and fabricators.







But the survey also highlighted some constraints to growth, and the consensus on those factors was pretty strong.







Material costs were the most commonly cited constraint at close to 63%.







About half (47%) pointed to electricity costs and the cost of the Affordable Care Act (55%). And challenges related to talent remained near the top of the list with about 62% of respondents citing it as a concern.







John Colm, president and executive director of Wire-Net, said it was significant to see raw materials costs at the top of the list of concerns. Though Wire-Net hasn't recently conducted this survey, it used to do so at least twice per year. From about 2008 until 2011, sales were the top concern for manufacturers, he said. Talent-related issues started to gain prominence after that.







And rising costs aren't just a worry in Cleveland.







The Federal Reserve Beige Book released Sept. 3 boasted relatively widespread growth in manufacturing, including in the Cleveland region, which covers Ohio, western Pennsylvania, eastern Kentucky and part of West Virginia.







The report noted that the demand was strongest in the food, motor vehicle and oil and gas industries.









Raw deals

But it also said a “growing number of manufacturers reported rising prices for raw materials, especially metals and agricultural products.” And while prices for higher materials were passed through to customers with “little pushback,” some manufacturers said the increases were starting to affect profitability.

A study released by the National Association of Manufacturers and IndustryWeek Sept. 8 cited rising health care and insurance costs as major business challenges.







About 41% expressed concerns about energy or raw material costs.







To combat increased spending, local companies have been improving efficiencies and raising prices, Colm said.







The Cleveland area has the type of manufacturing sensitive to shifts in raw materials prices, said Randy Solganik, owner and president of City Plating in Cleveland. But coming out of the financial crisis, manufacturers have primarily been able to absorb rising materials costs through lean techniques and other efficiencies. City Plating has turned to methods like automation to avoid price increases.







“People have been loath to raise prices,” Solganik said.







But he thinks that will soon have to change. In the past year, two of the materials City Plating uses have seen steep increases in prices: about 40% for nickel and about 20% for zinc, Solganik said. And he's watching for increases in the cost of electricity.







Bill Adler, president of metal stamper Stripmatic Products Inc. in Cuyahoga Heights, said materials make up about half of the cost for the company to produce a part, and, in the past year, he's seen more competition from low-cost imports.







A recent trade case puts tariffs on certain tubes and pipes, but the same products that have been minimally processed aren't included, he said. The tariffs protect the primary suppliers, but not the secondary processors, he said.







“That is so much harder for us to compete against,” Adler said.







Adler said he expects 2014 sales to be close to those in 2013. He has higher expectations for the future as the company moves into new applications and markets.





Labor pains

It's not just companies working with metal that are feeling the squeeze.Earlier this summer, Omnova Solutions Inc. in Fairlawn announced price increases on vinyl acetate and vinyl acrylic-based emulsion polymers because of a “global supply shortage of key raw materials.”

Jeff Walters, president of Master Products Co. in Cleveland, said raw materials prices have been creeping up, but he hasn't had to take those cost increases to the customer — yet. While materials are the company's largest cost, the one that concerns Walters the most is health care.







If Master Products, which produces flat washers and metal stampings, is dealing with cost increases of a product like steel, it can be justified to customers. But those customers don't want to hear about health care increases, he said. That's for the company to handle.







Business is booming at metal stamper Talan Products Inc., but one of the issues that concerns CEO and founder Steve Peplin is labor. He said in the past year or two, the Cleveland company has been doing more training than it used to, hiring someone who is technically minded and helping him or her gain the necessary skills, rather than expecting the skills on day one.







Labor isn't just a concern in terms of finding people with the skills to fit the job openings.







Stripmatic, which has fewer than 50 employees, has raised wages in recent years, and Adler said he's seen increased pressure on wages in recent years.







Solganik said starting wages at his shop still were the same, but current employees did receive a pay increase this year. The company needs to stay competitive, he said. Though City Plating doesn't share overall sales, Solganik said sales were up 7% year to date. And he expects to see steady growth into the next year.

Something's got to give

Solganik said he thinks many of the materials cost increases are related to geopolitical or regulatory issues, like nickel from conflict-ridden Russia or the coal-related mandates facing the electricity industry, rather than just demand.







The market is still competitive, but he thinks the rising costs are something manufacturers will have to confront at the end of 2014 and into 2015.







“Nobody wants to raise prices, but at some point, you have to think about it,” Solganik said.