The charges against Jesse D. Namotka of North Carolina include attempted murder and threatening to commit murder.

. (Photo: ~File) Story Highlights Jessica Namotka of Allentown, Pennsylvania, told police her cousin took her against her will.

Jessica jumped from her Jeep, which her cousin was driving on Route 1.

A chase by police ensued and Jesse Namotka was arrested.

Two handguns were discovered in the Jeep.

EDISON - Multiple criminal charges have been filed against a North Carolina man in connection with an alleged attempt to kidnap his cousin and a police chase during which he tried to fire a handgun at pursuing patrol cars but ended up shooting his own backseat, according to a statement from police.

Jesse D. Namotka, 20, of Sylva, North Carolina, has been charged with attempted murder; threatening to commit murder, carjacking, criminal restraint, four firearms possession charges, theft, possession and intent to distribute heroin and cocaine, leaving an accident scene and eluding police, the statement said.

At 12:45 p.m. Saturday, Namotka's cousin, Jessica Namotka, 37, of Allentown, Pennsylvania, leaped from the passenger-side door of a gray Jeep Cherokee while the vehicle slowed in traffic on Route 1 near Wooding Avenue.

Jessica Namotka later told police she was trying to flee from Namotka after he allegedly commandeered her Jeep and took her with him against her will.

Startled by her sudden escape, police said, Jesse Namotka collided with another vehicle that was stopped in Route 1 traffic and then sped away from the accident scene.

Moments later, Officer Nicholas Bayne saw the damaged Jeep — with a flat rear tire — heading north on Route 1 and tried to stop it, touching off a chase that ended when Jesse Namotka lost control of the Jeep along Amboy Avenue near Franklin Avenue.

Once the Jeep stopped, Jesse Namotka surrendered to Officers Nicholas Bayne and Brian Castles, and several other patrolmen who had joined the pursuit. During the arrest, police said, they found a dozen packets of heroin, small bags of rock cocaine and a packet of cocaine powder in his trouser pockets, police said.

Meanwhile, Officer Erwin Enriquez found two handguns — a revolver and a .45-caliber semiautomatic handgun — inside the damaged Jeep.

Officers also found several bullet holes and slugs from the revolver in the vehicle's backseat indicating that Jesse Namotka apparently tried to shoot — without success — at pursuing patrol cars during the chase, police said.

In addition to Edison's charges, police said, Jesse Namotka was wanted for a parole violation in connection with a robbery in another jurisdiction. Other charges may be filed against him pending the outcome of Edison's investigation into Saturday's incident.

His cousin, Jessica, was treated at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick for minor injuries suffered when she jumped from the Jeep and fell onto the pavement along Route 1, police said.

Jesse Namotka is being held at the Middlesex County Adult Corrections Center in North Brunswick on $250,000 bail.

Staff Writer Susan Loyer: 732-565-7243; sloyer@gannettnj.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1jgU579