Just say no to more casinos

Manhattan: I am writing as a lifelong citizen of New York to express my dismay about a constitutional amendment that would permit more casinos in the state, and which comes to a public referendum in November.

The enabling language of this bill is so vague and cynical that it creates a Catch-22 for voters, decreeing a huge expansion of video lottery terminals if the amendment loses.

Casinos are a lose-lose proposition, economically and socially. They derive 50% of their profits from the 4% of the adult population who are problem or addicted gamblers. The average casino may temporarily bring increased economic activity, but this is just money transferred from one party to another; it is not true economic development.

Casinos cause social disruption, such as the lost trust of children in their gambling-addicted parents, divorce and suicide. I urge my fellow New Yorkers to vote no in November. Elizabeth Shafer

Doing their job

Manhattan: Juan Gonzalez accuses a charter school of ignoring a student’s special needs (“Success at what price? Aug. 28), but the facts show just the opposite. Recognizing a severe need that it was not equipped to meet, the school followed its legal duty to ask the city for a more appropriate placement for the child. Such conversations happen at district schools every day, which is why the city has an entire district devoted to students with the most intensive needs — and pays for thousands of students to attend specialized private schools. Charter schools have a responsibility to serve a wide range of students, but no public school can offer every service. It serves no one to suggest otherwise. James Merriman, CEO, N.Y.C. Charter School Center

Freedom is ringing

Brooklyn: My black co-workers don’t worry about reparations. They struggle to provide for their families, pay bills and put their kids through school. They are equal and fully immersed in the American dream of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, accomplished through hard work and perseverance. Those who seek excuses about decades-old injustices might wonder why many have succeeded and they have not. Remembering that the fault sometimes “lies not in our stars but in ourselves” might help. Heaven, this ain’t. But if we wish to say that Martin Luther King’s dream has come true, then we have reached the mountaintop for some time now. David DiBello

The march before the march

Scarsdale, N.Y.: Although the 1963 March on Washington is heralded today, little is said about its predecessor, the Youth March for Integrated Schools (on Oct. 25, 1958, and April 18, 1959). To see the nation’s capital for the first time was quite an awesome experience. However, after speeches by Harry Bellafonte and others, and a long march across Constitution Ave., I was very disappointed that President Dwight Eisenhower did not come out to greet us. Phyllis C. Murray

Out of step

Brooklyn: Why is it that for 40 years, the March for Life has never gotten one-tenth the publicity of the March on Washington? We know that Martin Luther King Jr. would have led the March for Life, because he believed every life is worth respecting. Frances Ruocco

Sorry situation

Staten Island: I would love to know who hired Al Sharpton to run anything. What’s on his resume — race baiting, Tawana Brawley, tax evasion? Still, he gets away with it because of his skin color. And Paula Deen is still apologizing. Anthony Liverano

Go with Joe

Staten Island: In my opinion, all the Democratic candidates for mayor are career politicians seeking to advance themselves. New York City has pretty much thrived under Republican administrations. Joe Lhota is the most qualified to be mayor. Let’s not go back to pre-Giuliani days. Frances Baldassarre

The better half

Ozone Park: With the plethora of scandals occurring in our government, it’s time for women to take over. Ladies, get a chastity belt for your husbands and restore some dignity to our country. Josephine Ambrosio

How to bear the loss

Elmont, L.I.: Re “It’s eternal hibernation for Gus” (Aug. 29): How do you bid farewell to a guy you’ve known in passing for 20-plus years? A friend who brought a smile to your face every time you encountered him, never asking for anything in return? A buddy that simply made your day. You say, “Gus, thanks for the fond memories — and may you rest in peace.” I’ll miss you. Derek K. Evans

Scan-dal

Brooklyn: I am a three-year cancer survivor. Since the onset of the disease, my doctors have sent me for PET scans every three months. Because of these scans, new concerns were discovered in the early stages, and again my life was saved. In August, the imaging facility informed me that Medicare will now only pay for three scans in a lifetime for one disease. This ruling, I believe, is due to Obamacare. I sincerely hope no one in our President’s family needs a PET scan to save his or her life. Sandy Seidenberg

The pay is too darn low

College Point: All we need is for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce to get corporations who are sitting on piles of cash to increase wages for all Americans. This will end the recession by stimulating consumption — and begin the long road to income balance. Frank N. Sforza

Better luck next time

Manhattan: I want to thank you for sending me four tickets to the Staten Island Yankees. I gave them to a young friend’s mother so they could go that night. I’ve gotten so many thanks and kisses. Next time you have a contest, I hope I win what I would like — a ride on the Ferris wheel. (I’m 781/2). Gloria W. Geddie

The rule of law

Flushing: My sincere congratulations to Federal Judge Shira Scheindlin for ruling that stop-and-frisk is unconstitutional. In her judicial wisdom, she has upheld the inviolability if the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States. Hyman Auslander

Color blindness

Whitestone: Voicers Joyce Blondo and Paul McGuiness argue that stop-and-frisk actually helps prevent crime, and that the judge who ruled on it was way off the mark. Study after study has indicated that most of those stopped and frisked have no weapon on them, and those who do are a minuscule minority. I don’t understand how anyone in this city does not see — unless, of course, they are white or racist or have never been the victim of an unnecessary stop-and-frisk — that this program has been targeted at young black and Latino males. I’m taking an educated guess that almost no one has been stopped and frisked in Whitestone. Why not? There is plenty of drug use and drug dealing in lily-white Whitestone. Jan Finney

Doctoring the Rockaways

Albany: News that the Rockaway Peninsula may lose its last hospital (“A very grim prognosis,” Aug. 14) echoes the financial troubles faced by hospitals across the state. One factor common in many closures is the substantial cost of medical liability insurance, largely driven by lawsuits. New York providers pay the most in the nation for insurance premiums, despite their excellent safety records. Reasonable reforms, such as limits for noneconomic damages and higher standards for medical experts, could reduce lawsuits and prevent future hospital closures. Phoebe E. Stonbely, Lawsuit Reform Alliance of New York

Capice?

Hicksville, L.I.: In a recent replay on TV of a movie I still enjoy, “The Godfather,” Marlon Brando is talking to his son Al Pacino, saying he had hopes of him becoming a senator or governor. Al Pacino casually says in Italian, “Another pezzonovante.” Are there any old-time Italians still alive who can tell me what that phrase means? Dominick Battaglia

Quixotic politics

South Ozone Park: To Voicer Patricia Maggiulli: What a beautiful thought! I can’t help reminiscing about the song from “Man of La Mancha,” “The Impossible Dream.” As long as we have a less-than-informed, partisan electorate who continually elect the dregs from the political pool, of the ilk of Mark Sanford and Charles Rangel, we will never realize our quest. Kenneth Kucinskas