Gov. Chris Christie signed a bill to loosen state regulations for multiple-employer welfare arrangements, a self-funded insurance option for small businesses, and allow larger employers the opportunity to seek an insurance alternative.

Both the Employers Association of New Jersey and the New Jersey Business & Industry Association previously supported the passing of the bill in order to expand coverage options for small business employers.

The MEWAs use pooled contributions from employers to purchase health insurance plans for their employees and help support the cost of claims.

“MEWAs give employers greater flexibility in designing health plans that are right for their workforce,” said NJBIA Vice President Mary Beaumont. “For some businesses, they are essential for providing affordable health benefits to their workers. With the cost of health insurance as high as it is, New Jersey needs this legislation.”

The law governing MEWAs has not been updated since 2002, she said.

“Employers are committed to providing health benefits to their employees, but they are struggling against the rising cost of benefits,” Beaumont said.

The pooled insurance option is rather complex in its arrangement, but is effective in lowering costs while increasing risks for the employer, according to EANJ President John Sarno. “It is not for the faint of heart.”

“Large employers are already getting a good deal with (insurance) carriers,” he said, explaining that their size allows better negotiating options, as well as removes the risk on the employer.

Currently, EANJ and the Medical Society of New Jersey have sponsored a MEWA administered by QualCare, the Affiliated Physicians & Employers Health Plan, which launched in 2004. There are currently 2,000 members across a number of industries, including restaurants, physicians, landscapers, small tech firms, mental and behavioral health centers, and manufacturers.

In order for a larger employer, with up to 500 employees, to seek a pooled contribution option, they would have to be willing to accept the increased risk, a move Sarno said he doesn’t see many making.

“It remains to be seen if there is a market for a large group MEWA,” he said. “It’s all about the market.”

Last year, Meadowlands Hospital Medical Center in Secaucus shut down the MEWA it sponsored.

On the other hand, another MEWA said it is thriving.

"The Affiliated Physicians & Employers Health Plan, administered by QualCare, has seen significant growth over the past few years in the large group market because many large employers see the MEWA as an alternative to the traditional insured market," said QualCare spokeswoman Bridget Gielis. "We have seen a significant spike in large 'virgin' groups who have never offered benefits before and have chosen the MEWA plan because of its ability to offer alternative options to its employees.”

William Megna, an attorney with Genova Burns in Newark, represents two New Jersey MEWAs, including the EANJ-sponsored one.

“There is definitely an uptick in interest from large employers,” Megna said.

The reason, he explained, is because “these plans very financially sound. They have a proven track record,” he said.

One thing is for certain: Members of NJBIA have said that the cost of the plans through the Affordable Care Act has negatively impacted business, Beaumont said. “That’s why this is helpful.”