Republican Evelyn L. Rogers has announced her candidacy for the District 1 House of Representatives seat. District 1 represents all of Tulsa County, Washington County, Wagoner County, and parts of Rogers County and Creek County.

Rogers holds an associate’s degree in nursing and psychology, a bachelor’s degree in healthcare management, a master’s degree in practical theology and another master’s degree in library and information studies.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

She attended Victory Christian Center in Tulsa for 23 years and Life Church more recently. Rogers currently works as a librarian at Tulsa Community College, where she has worked for 13 years.

“I am running to be available as a public servant for the people of Oklahoma who need excellence in representation in that office, which I can do,” she said in a prepared release.

“I am a librarian who has years of research and educational background to bring with me into this position,” she added. “I chose to run because now is the time for me to make a positive difference.”

Rogers wants people to know that she is a pro-life candidate, and if elected, she would like to repeal or replace Obamacare, lower taxes and balance the federal budget.

“Honor and respect for veterans and military is important to me,” she said.

Rogers’ family background includes a father who served in the Army air Corps and a mother who was a teacher and nurse who also ran for public offices. She also said her brother was excellent in car mechanics and counseling.

For more information on Evelyn Rogers, visit her online at h.mobiapp/evelynrogers.