A prospective Kentucky lawyer has won her first case before she even took the bar exam.

The Kentucky Office of Bar Admissions, which initially denied Jacquelyn Bryant-Hayes' request for extra time to pump breast milk during the upcoming July bar exam, has granted her appeal.

She said in a text that she was pleased with the outcome, which she called "a great advancement for working mothers' rights."

Bryant-Hayes was represented by the ACLU of Kentucky and the ACLU's Women's Rights Project, which is fighting for accommodations for breast-feeding mothers.

In a statement, the local chapter said the ruling for Hayes "is a victory we celebrate," but that there is still work to do because while the the bar admissions office granted her appeal, it has not announced a policy change in regards to the needs of nursing moms.

"A woman shouldn't have to hire a lawyer to be allowed to pump milk," Bryant-Hayes said.

"Nursing Kentucky mothers should not have to obtain attorneys to secure these kinds of accommodations," the ACLU says.

Refusing to grant her additional time, the agency last month initially told her that the single half-hour break given all applicants during the exam would give her "ample" time to express her breast milk.

But her lawyers said the statement "ignores the fact that requiring our client to dedicate that break to the expression of breast milk will deprive her of equal time to conduct any of the other activities to which the break period is typically dedicated-such as eating, going to the restroom, resting, walking, or stretching."

Bryant-Hayes, a third-year student at the University of Louisville's Brandeis School of Law, is expecting June 21, and her baby will be four weeks old at the time of the July 28-29 bar exam, which she must pass to practice in Kentucky.

She requested two additional 30-minute stop-the-clock breaks during the 8-hour examination, as well as a private location other than a restroom, to allow her an opportunity to express breast milk during the exam, and submitted a letter from her doctor supporting the request.

But Office of Bar Examiners granted her the request for private space, but denied her the extra time in an April 14 letter.

After the appeal to Elizabeth Feamster, director and general counsel of the office, its board reversed its decision and said she will be given a 20-minute break in each testing session on both days of the exam.

In a letter, the office cited additional support she had provided for her position.

The ACLU says as it stands now, nursing mothers around the country have to appeal, one by one, for accommodations and that "many who are told 'no' probably give in without a fight."

The organization claims denying accommodations to pump breast milk during the bar exam is sex discrimination, disadvantages new mothers who need accommodations for nursing, and sends the message that they should put their careers on hold just because they're breastfeeding.

Bryant-Hayes' lawyers, William Sharp, legal director of the Kentucky chapter, and Galen Sherwin, of the women's rights group, said in their appeal letter that the "refusal to acknowledge that a woman who is nursing has additional physical demands that require additional break time flies in the face of the medical facts of lactation and puts her at a significant disadvantage compared to other examinees.

"Should she be forced to take the test without the additional break time she has requested, her chances of success will be hindered by pain and distraction, and her health potentially placed at risk," they said in the appeal.

Women have won accommodations after similar disputes in in Texas and Illinois, according to press accounts.

The Kentucky Office of Bar Admissions is known for its strict interpretation of the rules.

In a 2013 decision upheld by the Kentucky Supreme Court, its character and fitness committee refused to let an applicant apply for the bar exam because he was listed on the sex-offender registry for a conviction for possession of child pornography.

In 1991, it refused to let a Swiss lawyer sit for the bar exam in part because it said his required service in the Swiss army might place him in conflict with the oath that Kentucky lawyers must take to uphold the constitutions of Kentucky and the United States.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1H9cUUa