R. Conner McAllister is an attorney in Jackson. (Photo: Submitted photo)

So Gov. Phil Bryant is too busy being the best governor he can be (to debate his Democratic opponent). My question is, when did he start?

He clearly does not have the best interests of the vast majority of Mississippians on his mind when he says things like he does not trust the federal government to fully pay for the Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act. This in light of the fact almost half of the governors across the country, many of them Republicans, have expanded Medicaid for the middle class, working poor and those who are just suffering and poor. He is not too concerned about the other hundreds of million dollars the U.S.Treasury sends to Mississippi each year along with the money received by cities, counties and the state itself. I am sure should we be hit by a natural disaster he would be the first one on the phone with President Obama asking for disaster relief aid. Neither he nor the Legislature wants to fund the adequate education program, but even if he did, he cannot control the Legislature.

Our portion of any funds due under the ACA and MAEP could probably be covered by cleaning out the jails and prisons across this state and allowing first-time nonviolent offenders to work their way back into a more civilized society. This does not include elected officials who have failed the public’s trust by stealing money from the taxpayers. They can stay in prison along with the murderers, rapists, drug lords and anyone who used a gun in the commission of their crime.

With education and decent health care the children of Mississippi can grow up to be an informed electorate, but that is never going to happen when we have governors like Phil Bryant and the lieutenant governor and Speaker of the House we have now.

Whatever organization or entity is sponsoring the debate in Mississippi should give Mr. (Robert) Gray a free 30 minutes of air time in front of a podium with an empty one for Phil Bryant next to him so he can tell the voters exactly what he would do as governor.

So in answer to my initial question, Phil Bryant has never been governor for the vast majority of the people in Mississippi but he always has time to spend at the million-dollar deer and duck camps and on fishing trips along with his rich Republican friends and take junkets all over the world at the taxpayer’s expense. If he is going to be the best governor he can be, he needs to stop doing things for people that are already going to vote for him and do something for the people who might vote for him if he had their trust and their best interest at heart.

R. Conner McAllister is an attorney in Jackson

Read or Share this story: http://on.thec-l.com/1LPRY5A