Hall, pictured in 2009, was chief economist of George W. Bush’s Council of Economic Advisers. POLITICO Pro CBO pick Hall a Bush vet, government skeptic

Republicans on Friday named Keith Hall head of the Congressional Budget Office, installing a conservative Bush administration economist atop an agency charged with determining how much lawmakers’ bills would cost.

Hall, who served on George W. Bush’s Council of Economic Advisers, is a critic of the Affordable Care Act who shares Republican skepticism of government spending and regulation.

Story Continued Below

He has criticized proposals to raise the minimum wage, expand regulation and boost anti-poverty programs.

Hall will replace Doug Elmendorf, a Democratic appointee who has run the office since 2009.

The pick is the latest bid by Republicans to revamp Congress’ budgeting process since they took control of the Senate. Last month, House Republicans formally adopted controversial budgeting rules known as “dynamic scoring” that aim to account for the macroeconomic effects of legislation. Democrats call it fuzzy math.

Though many Republicans hope the combination of a new CBO director and the dynamic scoring rules, will make it much easier to cut taxes, revenue estimates are actually the job of a different office: The Joint Committee on Taxation.

The twin budget offices divvy up the scorekeeping responsibilities, with JCT focused on taxes and CBO handling spending, deficits and economic forecasts.

Hall will handle proposals to rewrite President Barack Obama’s signature health care law, as well as those to revamp the nation’s immigration laws, among other issues. Many Republicans were unhappy with the agency’s analyses of Obamacare under Elmendorf and are eager for a new director to declare a repeal of the law would boost the economy.

“Keith Hall will bring an impressive level of economic expertise and experience to the Congressional Budget Office,” said House Budget Committee Chairman Tom Price, in a statement. “His vast understanding of economic and labor market policy will be invaluable to the work of CBO.”

Democrats gave Hall a chilly welcome.

Sen. Bernie Sanders, an independent who caucuses with Democrats, and the ranking member on the Budget Committee, called him outside the mainstream.

“His opposition to increasing the minimum wage and his resistance to sound strategies for eliminating poverty place him outside the mainstream,” Sanders said in a statement. “That said, I look forward to continuing the important, 40-year tradition of independent and objective budget analysis at the CBO.”

His counterpart in the House, Rep. Chris Van Hollen, offered little more than congratulations.

“On a daily basis, Congress relies on CBO for nonpartisan, unbiased economic and budgetary analysis,” said the Maryland Democrat. “I hope that Director Hall will continue that tradition.”

Democrats pointed to a 2013 op-ed Hall wrote for the Hill in which he criticized Obamacare as well as proposals to raise the minimum wage.

The health care law would depress labor participation, while increasing the minimum age would result in fewer people being hired, Hall wrote — findings CBO actually made under Elmendorf to the disappointment of Democrats.

“Policies that either raise the cost of hiring or reduce the incentive for work are counterproductive to fostering employment,” Hall wrote. “Going forward, our economic policies must focus on avoiding and correcting such counterproductive policies.”

He also criticized efforts to combat joblessness through increased government spending, more generally.

“Throwing more government dollars at this problem won’t solve it,” he said.

He told the Senate Budget Committee in 2014 that “while new regulation may be important, they raise the cost of production and therefore the cost of hiring.”

It’s hardly uncommon for CBO chiefs to come into the job with a record of opinions on various public policy issues, said Alice Rivlin, the agency’s first and longest-serving director.

“That was true of me, and it was certainly true of, I think, almost everybody who’s served in the job,” she said. “It’s a very demanding job because you have to put your own opinions aside and do solid analysis that isn’t biased, and I hope he can do that.”

Hall, who will be just the ninth CBO director in its 40-year history, was also previously head of the Bureau of Labor Statistics and chief economist at the Commerce Department. and a fellow at George Mason University’s Mercatus Center. His GMU biography lists labor markets and labor market policy as well as economic data as his primary interests.

He has a Ph.D. in economics from Purdue University.

Hall will begin work on April 1, Price said, with Elmendorf remaining in office until then. Hall’s four-year term runs through 2018.

Republicans had been split over whether to reappoint Elmendorf, who was named to the job by Democrats. Some prominent Republicans economists such as Greg Mankiw and Alan Viard had urged their colleagues to retain him, calling him a fair broker. Others led by Grover Norquist’s Americans for Tax Reform argued that Republicans ought to install their own person in the office.

Republicans also interviewed Harvard University health care economist Katherine Baicker and former FCC Commissioner Harold Furchtgott-Roth, an economist, for the job.

CBO directors are chosen jointly by the heads of the House and Senate Budget Committees, with the Speaker and Senate’s president pro tempore — its longest serving member of the majority party, who is Sen. Orrin Hatch — formally making the appointment. No vote is required.