Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share More than a dozen states that opted to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act have seen enrollments surge way beyond projections.

Gov. Doug Ducey has unveiled a plan to step up efforts to reduce the Arizona's Medicaid enrollment numbers. (Photo: Emmanuel Lozano/The Republic) Story Highlights Gov. Doug Ducey’s plan to modernize Medicaid would impose new cost-sharing requirements and eligibility limits for 350,000 able-bodied adults.

The federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services must approve any Medicaid waiver request.

The Ducey administration will hold six community forums to discuss the proposal.

Arizona’s 1.6 million residents who get health insurance through Medicaid will hear more details this week on Gov. Doug Ducey’s plan to overhaul the public program for the poor and disabled.

The Ducey administration is holding six community forums to answer questions about the governor’s plan to modernize the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, known as AHCCCS. They begin Tuesday in Phoenix and then move to Yuma, Flagstaff and Tucson.

The Republican governor earlier this month described his plan as a path off government assistance for about 350,000 low-income, able-bodied adults. They would be required to pay a larger share of their health-care costs, establish health-savings accounts, search for employment and face a five-year Medicaid eligibility limit.

The Ducey administration has not said whether the changes would save Arizona taxpayers money. The reform plan does not affect children or disabled adults, nor does it apply to adults with children under the age of 6.

But Ducey’s Medicaid plan, outlined in a two-page fact sheet, raised as many questions among Medicaid recipients, health advocates and medical providers as it answered. AHCCCS will offer a more detailed, written plan that outlines the governor’s ideas during the community forums. Officials will also answer questions and gather feedback as the state further refines the reform plan.

The federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which oversees state programs, will decide whether to allow Ducey’s changes after the state submits a waiver request, due Oct. 1.

Critics cast doubt on whether such sweeping changes — particularly the lifetime eligibility limits, which no other state has enacted — could gain federal approval. Other states, however, have received approval for cost-sharing requirements such as copayments and premiums.

And while the government has approved certain Medicaid reforms, states are not allowed to cut off those who earn less than the federal poverty level and don’t pay their monthly premiums, according to analysis by the nonpartisan Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.

RELATED: Ducey’s Medicaid plan calls for lifetime limits, copays

OPINION:Nothing wrong with health-care incentives for poor

“The concerning thing about what Arizona is proposing is it goes all the way down to people with no income,” said Jesse Cross-Call, a health policy analyst with the center. “These are people in deep poverty ... with incomes so low that they have to make really tough choices about transportation, child care, rent and food.”

The plan would require able-bodied adults on Medicaid to:

• Pay a premium equal to 2 percent of their household income, which would be deposited in a health-savings account that could pay for services Medicaid doesn’t cover, such as dental or vision care. Those who failed to pay their premium would be cut off from coverage for a minimum of six months and would have to repay their debt if they earn between 100 and 138 percent of the federal poverty level. For those who earn less than 100 percent of the federal poverty level, any unpaid premium would remain a debt to the state. (The poverty level is $11,700 for an individual and $24,250 for a family of four, while 138 percent of the poverty level is $16,243 for an individual and $33,465 for a family of four.)

• Make copayments of up to 3 percent of household income to deter cost-wasting measures, such as missing an appointment, visiting a specialist before going to a less expensive primary-care doctor or visiting a hospital emergency room when a doctor is available.

• Meet preventive-health goals like getting a flu shot, a wellness exam or a glucose screening.

Adults who wanted to access their health-savings account would have to either have a job or be looking for one, or be enrolled in school or a job-training program.

AHCCCS would oversee the program, so doctors, hospitals and other providers would not be required to collect copayments.

“The purpose is to modernize our Medicaid program to fit the needs of today,” said Daniel Scarpinato, Ducey’s spokesman. “The governor feels strongly about transitioning able-bodied adults while protecting our most vulnerable adults and children.”

The Governor’s Office has not released details on the administrative costs of proposals such as mandating health-savings accounts, twice-a-year eligibility checks, and collecting premiums and copayments. AHCCCS would likely hire a third-party contractor to handle those administrative functions, officials said.

“The focus is not on saving money, necessarily,” Scarpinato said. “It is creating a better plan for people who are using it and transitioning them to work.”

While many Arizona health-care leaders agreed that AHCCCS should be modernized and recipients should be encouraged to adopt healthy behaviors, they said they worry Ducey’s plan may reduce hard-earned gains in health-insurance coverage in Arizona.

More than a half million Arizona residents have gained health coverage through the state’s Medicaid expansion and the Affordable Care Act’s marketplace since the beginning of 2014.

That has helped drop the state’s uninsured rate to 14.5 percent, down from 20.4 percent, over the past 18 months, according to a midyear survey by Gallup.

While the plan does not affect young children, some adults with children older than 6 would have to meet new requirements. And that provision worries some advocates who fear parents who lose coverage may not enroll their children, too.

“We are concerned that this does matter to kids,” said Dana Naimark, president and CEO of Children’s Action Alliance. “There is research that shows if you make access to health care harder, kids are less likely to be covered.”

Other health leaders agree that it’s time to update Medicaid, but they say they will be eager to read the fine print as the plan develops.

“Both the devils and angels are in the details,” said Greg Vigdor, chief executive of the Arizona Hospital and Healthcare Association. “We’re interested in the whole enchilada.”

Community Forums

The Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System will hold six community forums in Phoenix, Flagstaff, Tucson and Yuma beginning this week.

AHCCCS recipients, medical providers and other stakeholders are invited to attend and learn more about Gov. Ducey’s proposals.

The Phoenix meetings will be Tuesday from 12:30 to 2:30 p.m. and 3 to 5 p.m. at the Disability Empowerment Center, 5025 E. Washington St., Suite 200. Space will be limited, and interested parties are asked to RSVP at publicinput@azahcccs.gov.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1TMIEVK