Sioux Falls, SD

It's been a little over a month since the first round of hail damage hit central Sioux Falls. But, the process of assessing and fixing people's cars is far from over.

This State Farm Catastrophe Center has been set up in the parking lot of Lowes since the first round of hail damage came on June fifth, and they're still processing claims.



"We've been busy from the very beginning. Seven days a week, seven in the morning until seven in the evening, and it's finally starting to slow down a bit," State Farm Catastrophe Center Manager Brenda Martin said.

But even though things are less hectic than before, the catastrophe center is still processing about 250 claims per day.

"We've got appointments right now that are still probably another week or 10 days out. And of course, new claims are reported every day, so, those folks too, we work them in as well," Martin said.

More than a month since large hail damaged thousands of vehicles in central Sioux Falls; customers continue spending an hour waiting for estimates. But people we spoke to don't seem to mind.

"I think it's been very good and very efficient. I've been very happy, you know, I was able to pick the time that I wanted to come, and they've made nice accommodations for us, and so I'm not having any problems at all, it's good," hail damaged car owner John Bockenstedt said.



But once people receive an estimate, it's time to wait again for an appointment at an auto body shop. John Winge owns Pro Dent Hail Repair, and he says business has been going non-stop.

"My phone's been going crazy, probably 15, 20 calls a day at least, and then people stopping in for estimates and booking them in. I've got a bunch of little shops that we're doing, around town as well, and probably booked out six weeks at least right now," Pro Dent Owner John Winge said.

Other auto body shops say they'll continue making hail repairs through Christmas.

Although there are a lot of hail damaged cars in the area, Winge says most of the repairs he's done have been minor.