Of the current tally, most of the enrollments, 7.2 million people, came from the federally run Obamacare exchange HealthCare.gov, which serves 37 states. The remaining 2.7 million enrolled through state-run exchanges.

About 84 percent of all Obamacare customers—8.3 million people—received received a subsidy, or tax credit, to reduce the cost of their monthly premium. Officials said that the average subsidy was $270 per month. Subsidies are available to people who have incomes between one and four times the federal poverty level, or $11,670 and $46,680 for a single person.

HHS noted Tuesday that 9 out of the 10 states with the highest rates of consumers getting Obamacare subsidies were states that as of June 30 had not expanded their Medicaid programs to allow most poor adults who earn below $15,654 annually for an individual to enroll in that government-run health coverage program. Mississippi, the leader among those states, had more than 94 percent of its Obamacare customers receive subsidies.

More than half of customers nationally, or 5.6 million people, also received federal assistance paying for medical costs that are not covered by their insurance plans. That cost-sharing help is available to people with low incomes who enroll in so-called silver Obamacare plans, which tend to be the second-least expensive types of plans on the exchanges.

Obamacare's next open enrollment season for 2016 plans begins Nov. 1, and will run through Jan. 31. Experts have predicted that getting additional people to sign up for health plans on the government-run marketplaces could prove more difficult this year and in the future, because many people who were eager to get coverage have already signed up, while the remaining uninsured may be disinclined to enroll or feel the plans are not affordable.

However, the minimum penalty for failing to have some form of health coverage will rise considerably in 2016, and could motivate some bystanders to sign up.

That penalty, which this year is the higher of 2 percent of adjustable gross household income or $325 per adult, rises next year to the higher of 2.5 percent of household income or $695 per adult.