A view of Physical Culture City. (Photo: Courtesy of WeirdNJ.com )

Though its official nickname is the Garden State, there have been a number of people throughout New Jersey's history who have envisioned it as more of a Garden of Eden –– a paradise for the body, mind and spirit.

They have sought to establish new and different social orders outside the confines of mainstream culture and in some cases have succeeded, albeit only for a brief time. Some have claimed to discover the Fountain of Youth here, others have advocated enlightenment through physical fitness or sexual magnetism. They have invented new languages and even new religions to suit their own unique world order.

Though they all had their own individual philosophies, some weirder than others, as to how to attain the perfect lifestyle, all of these charismatic leaders believed that our state was the place where their personal Utopia could take root and flourish.

Today, only scant vestiges of the communities they once dreamed into reality still can be found, and for the most part, their ideologies have either been forgotten or seem laughable to us now. But in their time they convinced thousands of willing supplicants that their way to health and happiness was the way and that true bliss only could be attained in a paradise known as New Jersey.

Lost City of Physical Culture

A friend recently asked me if I ever heard of there being a nudist colony in Spotswood, something I vaguely remembered hearing tales of. After doing some research, I discovered a place called Physical Culture City that was built in 1905 in Monroe, in a section known as Outcalt. According to its founder, Bernarr Macfadden, it was to be a community where "Physical Culturists could live the kind of life they could not find out in the rest of the world," where natural foods, diet and outdoor exercise were the norm –– a community where there were "no sickly prudes, no saloons, drug stores, tobacco shops or places in which one may purchase things that make for the moral undoing of man or woman!"

Macfadden (1868-1955), was a bodybuilder, lifelong physical-fitness advocate and millionaire magazine publisher who published Physical Culture magazine and such magazines as Photoplay, True Story, True Detective and Ghost Stories.

In 1905, he attempted to create a physical fitness resort on 2,000 acres of land he purchased around a lake he called Lake Marguerite, which was formed by a dam on the South River once owned by J.D. Outcalt. There, his "culturists" built the Macfadden Institute, along with a health home, a restaurant and other buildings. They lived on the property in tents, helping to build Macfadden's health resort and laying out streets for this small city. They also worked at the Physical Culture Publishing Co., which also was built on the land.

Many left because of the reported meddling of his wife, Marguerite Macfadden, but mostly because they thought they were being overworked.

A major problem was that some residents in the area complained when his culturists left the grounds in their bathing attire, complaining of seeing too much skin. Passengers on passing trains often leered out windows, hoping for an eyeful of skin when they passed this section of town. Rumor had it that Macfadden was running a nudist colony, accusations made because of the sight of shirtless male workers and women wearing shorts, which was rare in 1905.

Photographs in the Physical Culture magazine of topless women also fueled belief that he was trying to create something more than a health resort. The Physical Culture City would last only a couple of years, never to be fully realized as Macfadden had envisioned it.

Several lawsuits were filed against Macfadden, accusing him of sending obscene material through the mail. He also was known for giving sex seminars, which was unheard of at the time. He was convicted for publishing a sexually explicit story in his Physical Culture magazine. This, along with other legal battles, caused the demise of his city and he soon moved his publishing company to New York City.

Macfadden also attempted to create a religion called "Cosmotarianism," which also failed. Besides being a magazine publisher, he wrote more than 100 health-related books and published several newspapers, which helped him become a multimillionaire. He also popularized the practice of fasting as a way to rejuvenate the body and was known to take long daily walks in his bare feet. Macfadden became known as somewhat of a screwball and kook by many people over the years; this could be partly because of his habit of burying money in steel cartridge boxes on property he owned. There was a rumor that much of his fortune still was buried out there after someone found $89,000 on land he once owned on Long Island.

The area where the Physical Culture City once stood would be pretty much unrecognizable to Macfadden if he still was around to see it today. The lake is long gone and all that remains as reminders that the city ever existed are some streets that were part of the city's original layout, including a street named after Macfadden himself — though his name is spelled wrong on the street sign. The dam that created the large lake broke shortly after Macfadden and his culturists left, turning it back into the South River waterways. After searching for the dam's exact location, I learned that it was located just off Daniel Road, next to a Veterans of Foreign Wars post. After searching old aerial maps and photographs of the time, I believe the location was near Old Forge Road and was called Old Forge Dam and said to have been part of an ancient dam known as Weequehalaw's Saw-mill Dam. The once-beautiful Lake Marguerite has reverted back to a heavily wooded area. It makes me wonder if residents of Outcalt and surrounding areas today even know of the section's history.

For stories of all the other Utopian societies once founded in our state, pick up Weird NJ magazine, "Your Travel Guide to New Jersey's Local Legends and Best Kept Secrets,"on newsstands throughout the state or read it on the Web at www.WeirdNJ.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1mAaeil