The annual Ask An Expert Hotline drew about 200 people seeking advice about investments, retirement planning and other money matters. The free event is sponsored each year by the Orlando Sentinel and the Central Florida chapter of the Financial Planning Association.

Q: I'm currently invested in a fund that allocates 30 percent to equities and 70 percent to bonds. Is that a good retirement allocation? — T.S., Orlando

A: That is a conservative allocation. As long as you don't need to take more risk to achieve a higher expected rate of return, that allocation will keep 70 percent of your portfolio stable and 30 percent subject to stock market fluctuations. — Paula Taylor

Q: My husband and I have a mortgage on our home of $100,000, a mortgage on our rental property of $80,000 and $400,000 in mutual fund assets. We are living off Social Security income but would like more income for a better life. Any suggestions? — J.W., Dr Phillips

A: Take $80,000 and pay off the mortgage on the rental. Then take about $1,000 monthly income from your remaining $300,000 in mutual funds. That should create about $1,700 a month of additional income, which should help tremendously. — Matt Chancey

Q: How can I establish a credit rating? — D.L., Orlando

A: If you have a job, go to a department store and apply for one of their credit cards. After you have used it and made the payments on time, you can use it as a reference for one of the major national credit cards. The only way to maintain your credit rating is to make all payments on time. — Richard Almeida

Q: My husband is in hospice. We have IRAs and 401(k) s. What should I be looking at regarding his estate? — M.A., Longwood

A: I am sorry about your husband. Please check your 401(k) and IRA beneficiaries to make sure your primary and contingent beneficiaries are listed according to both of your wishes. Also consider adding a "payable on death" or "transfer on death" designation and beneficiaries to your taxable bank and brokerage accounts. — Dennis Nolte

Q: I am retired and have an old 401(k) and an IRA at a local bank. Can I transfer the 401(k) to the IRA? I am very conservative with my investments. Will an IRA provide me with higher returns? — S.L., Orlando

A: If you share the same investment goals for both accounts, you should consider consolidating both accounts into one IRA. This may expand the number of conservative investment options available to you. Returns are dependent on what your money is invested in, not the type of account you own. Many 401(k) plans limit your investment choices. You could have unlimited investment options in an IRA. — David Blount

Q. Should I put all my savings in my 401(k), which I believe has high fees, or diversify into other investments? I am debt free. — E.H., Orlando

A. Take advantage of your 401(k) especially for any employer matches. With the additional funds you have available for investing you can open a Roth IRA (if you meet the income and contribution limitations) and use inexpensive index funds to help diversify your savings and cut down on your expenses. — Jerry Thompson

Q: We have individual trusts and a family trust. Now that the estate tax ceiling has been lifted to $5 million per person and $10 million per couple, can we eliminate some of these trusts as we are safely below those levels? — J.K., Winter Park

A: You should be able to consolidate the three trusts into one trust. Consult with your CPA to ensure there are not any tax nuances that apply to your particular situation. Consult with your financial planner as to the specific requirements that need to be met to consolidate or to re-title the existing trusts into one. — Beth Fleming-Brown

Q: I have an IRA and my daughter is the beneficiary. I was told that upon my death my daughter would have to withdraw the funds and pay taxes on the whole amount. Is this true? — B.L., Maitland

A: That is an option, but not the only one. Instead, she could open a beneficiary IRA, transfer the funds to it and begin taking mandatory distributions. — Denise Kovach

Q. Can I withdraw $6,500 from my traditional IRA and contribute $6,500 to my Roth IRA? — J.W.L., Orlando

A: No, you must have earned income to contribute to a Roth IRA. IRA distributions are not considered earned income, so they do not meet the requirement for a Roth contribution. — Derrick Chandler

Q: I left my company in September. It has a profit-sharing plan. The company told me I had to wait until after the first of the year to get my money from it, even though I am 100 percent vested. How can they do that? I want my money! — D.M.G., Viera

A; Sorry, but they can do that. Realize that this is benefit to employees (of which you were one) and the company has to wait until the end of their tax year to determine how much profit they can or will share. — Gregg Collier

Q: My parents just retired; both are 64. They made too much in income to qualify for the Affordable Care Act subsidy. If my father lowers what he is withdrawing from his IRA, can they qualify for the subsidy? — B.D., Orlando

A: Because your father is below the age of required minimum distributions, yes, that would be a good way to lower their income to possibly qualify for the subsidy. — Nancy Hecht

Q: I retired two years ago with two pensions and deferred compensation. I had to pay a lot in taxes when my return was filed. How do I make sure this doesn't happen again? — E.D., Orlando

A: It sounds like you're not withholding enough in taxes from your income sources. Contact your accountant and ask what they project your estimated taxes due. From there, you'll be able to adjust your tax withholding. — Karl Furno

Q. Are we still allowed to donate up to $100,000 from our IRA to charity without tax consequences? — E.R., Orlando

A: Congress has not yet extended this provision for 2014. At this point, this won't be addressed until after the November election but will possibly be finalized after the election. — Randy Harrison

Q: My husband's company no longer provides a deferred compensation plan. What can we do to avoid paying taxes on the funds that weren't taxable under the deferred compensation plan? He's already maxing out his 401(k) account. — L.A., Winter Park