Bai Tong and Cafe de Bangkok expand from Fort Collins, offering Loveland diners new choices

Bai Tong head chef Tim Kaeppel, left, poses Wednesday with restaurant owners Ekawat Sunti and Chinn Sunti, who is holding their 20-month-old daughter, Miray. The Thai restaurant at 1120 N. Lincoln Ave. in Loveland opened April 29. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

A month ago, Loveland had no Thai restaurants. Now, it has two.

Two Fort Collins restaurants owned by natives of Thailand have expanded into the Sweetheart City and are doing their best to introduce their country's cuisine to diners here.

Bai Tong

Ekawat Sunti, who opened Simply Thai about five years ago at 2531 S. Shields St. in Fort Collins, launched Bai Tong on April 29 in the Victorian house at 1120 N. Lincoln Ave. that, for many years, was the home of Sofia's Bistro.

Sunti, whose English nickname is Eddie, bought the building last October and has been working to give it a new flavor.

P'Korn cooks vegetables Wednesday at the Thai restaurant Bai Tong at 1120 N. Lincoln Ave. in Loveland. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

He said he and his wife, Chinn Leelachat Sunti, spent two months in Thailand, ordering and shopping for decor for their new restaurant — much of it from the northern village of Baan Tawai, which specializes in handicrafts.

The restaurant is filled with elephants, Buddhas, elaborately carved wooden scenes, Thai-silk hangings and portraits of Thailand's king and queen.

"I tried to make it like a museum," Ekawat Sunti said. "People come in and appreciate the Thai music, decorations, food and drinks."

Sunti, who came to the United States in 1989, learned about the restaurant business from his father, who opened his first establishment in Seattle in 1984. Sunti took over the family's two restaurants in Washington and then sold them to an uncle and moved to Colorado, opening a restaurant in Windsor first.

Advertisement

The Loveland restaurant has more of a fine-dining approach than Simply Thai,l he said, with more variety on its menu and a full bar that will open soon.

The menu features 60 separate dishes, not counting desserts and drinks, including seven curries, from red, green and yellow to extra-spicy jungle curry.

Sunti said the pad Thai — stir-fried rice noodles with bean sprouts and green onions — is his best seller so far, and the appetizers are popular, too.

Arunee "Joy" Davis cuts potatoes for curry Thursday in the kitchen of the new Cafe de Bangkok II at 1360 E. Eisenhower Blvd. in Loveland. (Craig Young / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

The arrival of a second Thai restaurant just weeks after Bai Tong's debut doesn't bother him, he said.

"I don't mind because I think in the end, it brings more people to know Thai food faster," Sunti said. "A lot of people are still fairly new to Thai food. This will be a good experience for them to come in and learn about us and Thailand in general."

The restaurant is open 11 a.m. to 9 p.m. every day except Tuesday, when it is closed. Phone: 970-685-4757.

Cafe de Bangkok

When Wichayanee Chayangkura was earning her MBA at Southern New Hampshire University, she often wondered why Thai restaurants in the United States didn't make the dishes she loved at home.

Wichayanee Brown, co-owner and head chef of Cafe de Bangkok, sits Thursday in a booth in her new Loveland location at 1360 E. Eisenhower Blvd. The Thai restaurant opened May 19. (Craig Young / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"One day, when I have my restaurant, I will have that food," she told herself.

An only child, she said she learned to cook from her nanny, the daughter of a woman who worked in the royal family's kitchen. "I peeled cucumbers, cut long beans — that was my toys because I had no friends."

While working in marketing in Thailand, she met and married an American, David Brown, and they eventually moved to Colorado.

Wichayanee Brown, who goes by Yanee or Pu, has taught cooking classes for years; almost four years ago she opened a Thai restaurant, Cafe de Bangkok, at 1232 W. Elizabeth St. in Fort Collins.

On May 19, she and her business partner, Suthin Charoensap, opened a second Cafe de Bangkok, at 1360 E. Eisenhower Blvd. in Loveland, in the former Pho Lan location.

True to her dream, Brown said she serves authentic Thai food, some of it not found in many restaurants in this country, including khao soi, a northern-style curry with two kinds of noodles.

Brown's menu features a wide variety of dishes, from soups and salads, appetizers and noodle dishes to 10 kinds of curry.

During a break from her kitchen duties Thursday, Brown talked about the ingredients she uses, some of which are hard to find here.

"We test every dish that comes out," she said, smiling as she pulled a spoon from her apron as proof.

Brown said there's room for two Thai restaurants in Loveland, offering an analogy of two hair salons opening next door to each other.

"You like one hairstylist better than the other, for whatever reason," she said, and in the same way, Loveland customers will settle on their favorite Thai restaurant.

Cafe de Bangkok II is open 11 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. and 4:30-9 p.m. every day except Monday, when it is closed. Phone: 970-800-3429.

Craig Young: 970-635-3634, cyoung@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.