LITTLE ROCK — Gov. Asa Hutchinson said Monday that three of the 10 Republican state senators who oppose funding his Medicaid expansion plan have said they are willing to go along with a strategy that would allow the funding to pass without their direct support.

But Democrats who support Medicaid expansion also would have to go along for the strategy to work, and it was unclear Monday whether they would.

A bill to fund the state Medicaid program stalled in the Senate last week when 10 senators voted against it because it contains funding for Arkansas Works, the governor’s plan to continue and modify the program now known as the private option.

The program has provided government-subsidized private health insurance to more than 267,000 low-income Arkansans since it was created in 2013 as an alternative to the Medicaid expansion envisioned in the federal Affordable Care Act. It is support by Democratic legislators but has divided Republicans from day one.

Like most appropriation bills, the Medicaid funding bill requires a three-fourths majority vote to pass in each chamber. Hutchinson and House leaders have said the bill has enough support to pass in the House, but the opposition of nine or more senators is enough to block the bill in the 35-member Senate.

A group of supporters of Arkansas Works has proposed amending the bill to remove funding for the governor’s plan, then sending it to Hutchinson’s desk and allowing him to use a line-item veto to strike the amendment and restore the funding. Hutchinson has endorsed that strategy, saying last week it would allow opponents of Arkansas Works to vote according to their consciences.

A motion to amend the bill to remove funding for Arkansas Works failed in the Joint Budget Committee last week when most Democrats on the committee voted against it, however.

Hutchinson spokesman J.R. Davis said the governor told the Legislative Black Caucus on Monday that three of the 10 senators blocking the bill have told him they would vote for it if funding for Arkansas Works were removed, despite Hutchinson’s intention to use his veto power to restore the funding.

Asked what the current level of support for the strategy is among Democrats, Davis said, “He’s continuing talks with all involved.”

Meanwhile, six of the 10 senators who oppose Arkansas Works said they will hold a news conference Tuesday to discuss an alternative proposal.

Sen. Alan Clark, R-Lonsdale, Bart Hester, R-Cave Springs, Terry Rice, R-Waldron, Gary Stubblefield, R-Branch, Scott Flippo, R-Bull Shoals, and Blake Johnson, R-Corning, said in a joint news release they would provide details of a “proposed compromise” at the news conference.

Stubblefield said the group will propose changes to Arkansas Works, such as an asset test, that would make the program acceptable to them. He acknowledged that the changes likely would not be acceptable to the governor, however.

Hutchinson has said he is not open to making policy changes to Arkansas Works, which the Legislature debated and approved during a special session earlier this month. He also has said the current federal administration will not allow the state to make an asset test part of the program.

The Joint Budget Committee is scheduled to meet Tuesday. Co-chairman Sen. Larry Teague, D-Nashville, said Monday he planned to talk with other Democrats on Monday night and Tuesday morning to gauge their positions on the veto strategy.

“I’m confident that we’re going to do the right thing, which is to get Arkansas Works funded,” he said. “I don’t know if we’ll do it tomorrow.”

House Speaker Jeremy Gillam, R-Judsonia, said Monday that a second attempt to move forward with the veto strategy likely will happen this week, but not necessarily on Tuesday.

“We’re going to make sure everybody has reached a good comfort level before we go back into (Joint) Budget with an amendment,” he said. “We’re going to be patient.”

Sen. Bobby Pierce, D-Sheridan, who voted against the amendment last week in the Joint Budget Committee, said Monday he is “holding firm” in his opposition to the veto strategy. He questioned why a majority of legislators should accommodate 10 senators.

“Here we are letting 10 people kind of tell us what to do,” he said.