From humble beginnings, Diane von Furstenberg became a fashion icon. Here, in her remarkable new book, she recounts the emotional story of her mother's survival in the death camps - and the bird of a clothing empire that became the envy of the world.

Here is a large frame on the bookshelf in my bedroom in New York. In it is a page torn from a German magazine of 1952. It is a photo of an elegant woman and her small daughter in the train station at Basel, Switzerland, waiting for the Orient Express. The little girl is nestled in her mother’s tented coat and is eating a brioche.

That was the first time, at the age of five, that I had my photo in a magazine. It is a sweet picture. My mother’s older sister, Juliette, gave it to me when I was first married, but it was only recently that I realised its true importance.

On the surface, it is a photograph of a glamorous woman en route to a holiday with her curly-haired little girl. Nothing indicates that only a few years before, she had been on another railway, coming back from the Nazi death camps where she had been a prisoner for 13 months, a bundle of bones, close to death from starvation and exhaustion.

Scroll down for video

From humble beginnings, Diane von Furstenberg became a fashion - she is pictured in New York last week

Diane Von Furstenberg pictured in 1973 - the next year an 'easy, sexy, elegant and affordable' wrap dress catapulted her into fashion history

My mother Lily Nahmias was 20 and engaged to my father when, on May 17, 1944, the SS arrested her for working in the Belgian Resistance. Her job was to go around Brussels on her bicycle to deliver documents and fake papers to those who needed them. She was thrown into a crowded truck, which took her to a prison in Malines, Flanders. She told her interrogator she was Jewish and was sent to Auschwitz, where she was given prisoner number 5199.

On that inhuman train ride there was no food. No water. No air. No toilet. Four days jammed in a cattle car. A woman in her forties comforted my mother. My mother made sure not to leave her side, especially when they arrived.

Women with children were immediately separated from the rest and sent toward long, low buildings, while the others were forced into a line. When it was her turn, the older woman was directed to the group being formed on the left and my mother quickly followed her. A white-coated officer stopped her. Striding down the ramp, he walked directly up to my mother, yanked her away from her friend, and threw her into the group on the right.

That man was Dr Josef Mengele, the notorious Angel of Death, who killed or mutilated many, many prisoners in experiments, especially on children and twins. However evil or otherwise his intentions were, he saved her life. The group the older woman was in went directly to the gas chamber. The group my mother was thrust into did not.

After that, she was determined to survive, no matter the horror. Even when the unmistakable smell of the smoke coming from the camp crematorium seemed unbearable and her fellow prisoners would say ‘We’re all going to die,’ my mother would insist: ‘No, we’re not. We’re going to live.’ She was put to work on the 12-hour night shift in the nearby weapons factory; so long as she worked she was useful and was kept alive.

A general view of Auschwitz Concentration Camp - Diane's mother was sent to the camp after being arrested in May 1944 for working in the Belgian Resistance - Diane was born on New Year's Eve 1946

She was tiny, barely five feet tall, and naturally slender. She had never eaten much and could subsist, albeit barely, on the minuscule rations of bread and watery soup she and the other prisoners were given.

If ever I feel too lazy to do a chore, if I hesitate to go out because of the cold, I remember my mother. I envision her being marched out of Auschwitz with 60,000 others in the winter of 1945, just nine days before Soviet troops reached the camp.

The SS hastily executed thousands of inmates and marched the others 30 miles through the snow to a train depot from where they were sent to new camps, in my mother’s case to Neustadt-Glewe in Germany.

Some 15,000 prisoners died on that march, of exposure, exhaustion, illness, or being shot for falling or lagging behind. In what can only be described as a miracle, my tiny mother survived it all. She was one of 1,244 survivors from 25,631 Belgian Jews sent to the camps. Her will and spirit to live were her defiance of the evil she had endured.

When Neustadt-Glewe was liberated a few months later, my mother’s weight was barely the weight of her bones. She was hospitalised at an American base and wasn’t expected to live. She defied the odds again. When she was stable enough to return home to Belgium, she had to fill out a form. I have found that form. It had her name and date of birth and a question: ‘in what condition’ she was returning from her 13 months in captivity. Her astonishing answer, in impeccable handwriting, was: ‘en très bonne santé’ (in very good health).

I didn’t know, as a very little girl in Brussels, why my mother had two lines of blue tattooed numbers on her left arm. I remember thinking they were some sort of decoration and wished I had them, too, so my arms wouldn’t look so plain.

She was very strict. Independence, freedom, self-reliance – those were the values she drummed into me. As much as I loved and respected her, I was a little frightened of her, and never wanted to displease her.

Now, I often repeat a few of her lessons, which have served me well. ‘Fear is not an option.’ ‘Don’t dwell on the dark side of things, but look for the light and build around it. If one door closes, look for another one to open.’

She lived those lessons.

Nazi Josef Mengele, the notorious Angel of Death, who killed or mutilated many - however evil or otherwise his intentions were, he saved Diane's mother's life

I used to feel great admiration watching my mother get dressed to go out. She took great care in what she wore: her hair, her make-up, her perfume... she looked at herself in the mirror with a smile of confidence. She had a great figure and wore very tight skirts and dresses.

‘How does she know how to put herself together so well and always look so chic?’ I would wonder. I couldn’t get enough of it, watching all the shine, the allure, the glamour that was my mother. She was the woman I hoped to be.

But I came into fashion almost by accident. I never dreamed that the simple dress I launched in 1974, a dress that was easy, sexy, elegant, and affordable, would catapult me into fashion history. I didn’t think much of the wrap dress when I created it, but I now appreciate its value and uniqueness.

The story of its creation began when I met the man who would become my first husband, Prince Eduard Egon von und zu Furstenberg, at a birthday party in Lausanne when we were both 19. He had just enrolled at the University of Geneva, where I was also taking courses.

Egon was the perfect eligible bachelor, an Austrian/German prince by his father, and a rich heir from his mother, Clara Agnelli, the eldest child of the Fiat motorcar family.

He took me to the south of France to meet his glamorous uncle Gianni Agnelli on his yacht and to watch the Monaco Grand Prix. He took me to the film festival in Venice and the Volpi Ball on the Grand Canal. I met everyone who was anyone anywhere.

My son Alexander was the unexpected result of a weekend I spent with Egon in Rome in May 1969. I couldn’t believe my ears when the doctor told me I was pregnant. Here I was, barely 22, and what I wanted most was to be independent. I went home to Geneva to see a doctor who told me he could help me end the pregnancy. I was torn.

Reluctantly, I drafted a telegram to Egon, who was in Hong Kong, offering him the choice. I have kept the telegram of his wonderful reply in my scrapbook. ‘Only one option. Organise marriage in Paris July 15. I rejoice. Thinking of you. Love and kisses, Eduard Egon.’

Diane and her mother Lily Nahmias in the German magazine waiting for the Orient Express in 1952 - this was the first time she had her photo in a magazine

Clara, Egon’s mother, was very supportive, but on Egon’s father’s side, the patriarch of the Furstenberg family was evidently not. Jewish blood in the family was unheard of and there was opposition. I felt belittled and hurt and remember caressing my pregnant stomach. ‘We’ll show them,’ I said out loud to my unborn child. ‘We’ll show them who we are!’

Egon and I married in July 1969 on a beautiful, sunny day in the countryside outside Paris. Egon’s father, Tassilo, was so pressured by the family’s patriarch that he came to the ceremony but boycotted the reception, though it barely diminished the celebration or our joy.

Nor did it stop me from attempting to pursue my professional dreams when, shortly afterwards, we moved to America. I arrived in New York heavily pregnant with a suitcase full of sexy, colourfully printed, jersey dresses I’d created in the hope that I could sell them and make myself financially independent. Every morning, I’d struggle to make the rounds of department stores. The people I met were amused and intrigued by the unorthodox presentation of little jersey dresses pulled out of a Vuitton suitcase by a young, pregnant European princess.

THE WRAP DRESS SENSATION THAT 'TOOK OFF LIKE A STAMPEDE' Diane von Furstenberg’s jersey wrap dress has been hugely popular since its arrival in 1974. The stretchy fabric can accommodate women of all shapes, sizes and ages, and the style fits a variety of social settings. There are no zips or buttons: it slips on – and off. Today it is worn by fashion icons such as model Cara Delevingne and American Vogue editor-in-chief, Anna Wintour. The Von Furstenberg wrap worn by model Cara Delevinge at the New York fashion show in 2013 After the Duchess of Cambridge stepped out in one during the Royal couple’s visit to Australia in April, the style sold out from the Von Furstenberg website in just eight minutes. Despite costing upwards of £250, the wrap remains a staple in the wardrobe of the fashion-conscious.

And the door that opened two months later, in March 1970, was the most critical one in New York: that of Diana Vreeland, the intimidating, all-powerful dragon lady editor-in-chief of Vogue. They may have looked like nothing on hangers, but the dresses looked sexy and feminine when she put them on two of her in-house models. Orders from department stores really began to gain traction after my dresses appeared in the magazine.

The ultimate breakthrough came when I saw Julie Nixon Eisenhower wearing the wrap top and skirt on TV speaking in defence of her father, President Richard Nixon, during the Watergate scandal.

‘Why not combine the top and the skirt into a dress?’ I mused. And the concept for the wrap dress was born. I then spent many hours at a factory outside Florence, standing around the cutting table playing with paper patterns, figuring out the puzzle. I used to spend half my time naked, wrapping and unwrapping myself in dresses to check whether they fitted. Finally, one did. The wrap dress made its debut in 1974 at a fashion show at the Pierre Hotel in New York. The models I hired for the show all became stars. The legends were born on an April afternoon, their names a future Who’s Who of superstar models – Jerry Hall, Pat Cleveland, Apollonia. They also became my friends. Jerry was only 17, always accompanied by one of her many sisters.

The wrap dresses took off like a stampede, and soon could be seen on the streets of cities all over America. By the end of 1975, production had escalated to more than 15,000 dresses per week. By 1978, I’d sold millions. At the age of 29, I’d even made the cover of Newsweek. Everything I touched turned to gold.

But my marriage to Egon had ended in 1974. Life in New York was lots of fun in the early 1970s. Prince and Princess von Furstenberg (we had dropped the ‘und zu’) were the ‘it’ couple in town. Our youth, our looks and our means put us in social columns and on every invitation list. We lived on Park Avenue and everyone came to our parties – Andy Warhol and his entourage, Yves Saint Laurent, Bernardo Bertolucci. Life was fast, to say the least, too fast, finally, for me.

I realised I didn’t want to be a European Park Avenue princess with a pretend decadent life. Egon moved out soon after, but our friendship lasted for ever.

After that, I had a little fling with Richard Gere, who had just finished making American Gigolo. Hard to resist. I also had a mini fling with the movie star Ryan O’Neal.

The nightclub Studio 54 had opened, and was the final stop for any evening in New York. Sometimes, when Barry Diller, my future second husband, was away in L.A., I would put on my cowboy boots late at night, walk into 54, meet my friends, have a drink, and dance. It was fun. We all felt very free as we did not yet know about Aids.

But there was, of course, a price for my early success. By 1990 I was quite lost. My business, what was left of it, was in tatters. The licences to use my name had been sold and resold, and my designs had lost their uniqueness. My line of cosmetics had vanished in mergers and acquisitions. At 40, I was a has-been.

The wrap returned in 1997, when I reintroduced my brand in the high-end department store Saks. It was the start of my comeback and, by 2002, we were in virtually every quality department store. Over the next few years, we opened 50 of our own shops around the world. Now, my goal is to create a legacy for the brand so it will last long beyond me.

For all the wealth and glamour that have at times surrounded me, it is my mother who remains the most important person in shaping my life, in making me the woman I wanted to be. My voice catches when I speak publicly about her and her fortitude, and I do so in every speech I make. Sometimes it feels odd that I always bring up her story, but somehow I am compelled to. It explains the child I was, the woman I became.