Ladies night out centers around friendship, food, fun and bowling for this Kenner group. Every Tuesday night the ladies gather at the AMC All Star Lanes to have a good time and to sharpen their bowling skills as part of the Carter's Lassies ladies bowling league. Some are newcomers and some have belonged for years but all cherish the good times shared each week.

"We come here for the camaraderie, bowling is the excuse," said Judy Townsend, who has been bowling in the league since 1998. Her team, Little Bit O' Luck, has members ranging in age from 29 to 83-year's old with various skill levels.

Sisters Martha Tedesco and Maria Martinez have been bowling on Townsend's team for four years. Tedesco encouraged Martinez to join.

"She wanted me to let loose and have fun. I love to come out and have fun with the girls," Martinez said.

The sisters had little bowling experience before joining the league.

"All the teammates give you pointers. The more I come, the more I pick up. You don't have to be a pro bowler," Martinez said.

The league uses a handicapped scoring system which allows the games to be more competitive since the handicaps level out the scores. All agree that the bonding is more important than the score.

The ladies have become a family over the years celebrating birthdays, engagements and weddings, holding baby showers and sharing in personal successes at the weekly gatherings. The relationships built through the league have resulted in traveling groups and they often go out to eat together.

There have been tough times also, when a loved one or member has passed away. They offered support for each other when several members were battling breast cancer.

"It's more than just bowling to us, its friendship," Tedesco said.

Joyce Woodruff travels in from Hahnville every week to be a part of the group. For her bowling nights are stress relievers from her demanding job.

"On Tuesdays I leave at 4:30 and my co-workers know not to ask me a question after 4. This is my release, my party night," Woodruff said.

The league was originally formed at the Kenner Triangle Lanes in the early 1970s with a move to the present location in 1983. They are a member of the United States Bowling Congress.

Each league team has five members and plays three games each week. Subs fill in when a member has to miss which isn't often since they have a 95 percent weekly participation rate. There are two seasons with a 16-week summer league and a 30-week winter league.

New bowlers are invited to join the league and individuals or teams are welcome. The cost is $18 a week which includes the cost of bowling and a prize fund. For information or to join contact Janet Molere at 504.888.4174 or jmolere@att.net.

Garden awards

The Palm Vista Garden Club recently met at the home of Maria Melendreras with members donning western wear. Co-hostesses for the meeting were Wendy Trocquet, Angie Green, Jan Vincent, Yvette Roman, Anna Lehman and Tina Payton.

The Garden of the Month awards for February were presented to: Edel Paddock, first place; Sandy Lacour, second place; and Debbie McShane, third place.

The March Garden of the Month winners were: McShan, first place; Karen Vocke, second place; Yvonne Dietz, third place; and Suzanne Muhleisen, honorable mentioned.

St. Elizabeth Ann news

St. Elizabeth Ann Seton Catholic School students are competing at the state level in social studies and geography.

Ben Erdozain has qualified to compete in the state National Geographic Geography Bee to be held in Baton Rouge on Apr. 1. Erdozain won the geography bee at SEAS and then tested in the top 100 students in the state to earn the privilege of competing for the state title. The winner of the state title will advance to the national championships to be held in Washington, D.C. in May.

Ashley Hebert placed first in the SEAS social studies fair in anthropology with her project on Alcatraz then placed second in state level competition.

Other winners in the SEAS social studies fair are: Anthropology, Ashley Hebert, first place; Donny Allen, second place; Ben Hunn, third place; economics, Camille Vincent, first place; Rachelle Burdine, second place; Jose' Selva, third place; geography, Cody Fruge' first place; Emily Adams, second place; Diego Palomo, third place; history, Hailey Savoie, first place; Dominic Bondio, second place; Micha Pittman, third place; Louisiana history, Alexis Fuentes, first place; Ian Baldwin, second place; Christian Dreis, third place; political science, Drew Gardner, first place; sociology, Alexandra Johnson, first place; Tyler Johnson, second place; and Genesis Argenal, third place.

There is still time to register for "33 Days to Morning Glory" which begins on April 7 at Divine Mercy Catholic Church, 4337 Sal Lentini Parkway, Kenner. The program, designed to foster a relationship with the Mother Mary, will feature weekly meetings at 10 a.m. or 7 p.m. through May 12.

The cost is $25 for individuals and $40 for married couples until the current supply of course material is depleted.

For information, call Ray Barrilleaux or Anne-Marie d'Abadie at 504.443.2204 or email amdabadie@att.net.

Tax return help

The American Association of Retired Persons is offering tax return assistance to taxpayers of low and moderate income, with special attention to senior citizens. AARP volunteers are preparing 2015 income tax returns through April 15 at various locations in the New Orleans area.

Tax assistance in Kenner will be available on Mondays through Thursdays from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. at the Pavilion at Kenner City Park, 3800 Loyola Drive, Kenner.

In Metairie, assistance will be available at the Metairie Senior Center, 265 N. Causeway Blvd., on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 9 a.m. to noon and at the Jefferson Parish East Bank Regional Library, 4747 W. Napoleon Ave., on Mondays through Fridays from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.

AARP will host an assistance site in Harahan at the Harahan Senior Center, 100 Elodie St., Harahan on Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m.

There are additional tax assistance sites in New Orleans and the surrounding areas. Visit the AARP website at http://www.aarp.org/taxaide and enter your zip code or call 888.687.2277 for these locations.

Taxpayers must bring their Social Security card, picture ID, W2 and 1099 forms, 2015 tax forms and records including the new Affordable Care Act Marketplace form 1095 and any Marketplace exemption documents. They should also bring their homeowner's insurance declaration page and their 2014 income tax return.

Rosalyn Eason can be reached at northkennertp@cox.net or 504.455.5766.