An insidious form of discrimination is hiding in the open: Washington's refusal to make medical research a national priority. Every American has experienced a serious disease as a patient, family member or friend. Each one deserves better.

Consider, for example, that cancer will soon overtake heart disease as the primary killer of Americans. One of two males and one of three females will be diagnosed with a type of cancer during their lives. In 2015, that will translate into 1,658,370 new cases and 589,430 deaths.

Yet funding for the National Institutes of Health has remained relatively stagnant since its budget was doubled in 1998-2003 from $13.5 billion to $27 billion. The last budget passed by Congress includes slightly more than $30 billion for NIH, the eleventh year in a row that it has remained relatively stagnant.

Taken together, this neglect actually has translated into significant cuts after factoring in inflation and has had devastating consequences. Less NIH research activity is taking place today than in 2003.

NIH is the fuel that runs the engines of research in many medical institutions throughout the nation.

It is important to understand that the paradigm for medical research is very different from other categories of federal funding. The drug development process from basic research to patient delivery can typically take a decade or longer.

When funding is limited, vacuums are created that will only be seen many years later when the number of approved innovative drugs declines.

Medical research is also maddeningly inefficient. It is not at all uncommon for 99 out of 100 research ideas to ultimately lead nowhere. But the process of elimination is essential to realize progress.

To find that one great idea, the other 99 ideas must be researched and tested. Having the resources to fail creates the knowledge and experience that lead to success.

Moreover, despite the fact that oncologists and cancer researchers are among the most educated people on earth, they know more about what they don't know than what they do know. If, for example, engineers had a similar universe of understanding about their field, bridge collapses and falling buildings would likely be daily occurrences.

Talented and committed researchers and clinicians are needed to drive change. Instead, they are choosing not to enter or are leaving the field of medical research. As education reforms are promoting more STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) schools to nurture new scientists, Washington's neglect of NIH is closing the door to many who would want to choose medical research.

Additionally, increasing the NIH budget would provide hope to families facing Alzheimer's disease, which affects 5.1 million Americans and is projected to reach 13.8 million by 2050. It would provide hope to the estimated 29.1 million Americans who have diabetes, 21 million of whom are undiagnosed. It would provide hope to the estimated 30 million Americans who suffer from approximately 7,000 different rare diseases.

The lesson of doubling NIH funding must be relearned. If Congress and the Obama administration commit to provide leadership, they could achieve a budget of $60 billion within the next five years.

It could be done for the price of building one aircraft carrier. And the commitment to double NIH funding should be done every five years.

Congress should also resurrect an idea that Sen. Tom Harkin and the late Sen. Mark Hatfield proposed more than 20 years ago, especially with the windfall that insurers are reaping because of new business created under the Affordable Care Act. A two percent tax on their profits should be designated to NIH only if it receives annual 10 percent budget increases.

No one questions support for increased military costs in times of war. Neither should anyone question fighting diseases with all the resources we can muster.

It's long past time for Congress and the administration to act decisively. Every American should remind them to do so — constantly.

NIH is one of the crown jewels of American government; it is being tarnished. Not prioritizing its work as one of our most important national interests is a subtle but real form of discrimination that touches every American. If this continues, the fault, as Shakespeare observed, is not in our stars, but in ourselves.

Greg Brozeit is an independent consultant based in Fairlawn, Ohio, who works with cancer advocacy organizations and medical institutions.