Buy Photo Jackson Township Municipal Building. Wednesday, March 19, 2014, Berkeley. (Photo: Robert Ward / Asbury Park Press)Buy Photo

JACKSON – Changes to the township’s “no-knock” ordinance, measures aimed at reining in over-aggressive solicitors, will likely be enacted into law by month’s end.

The Jackson council on Tuesday unanimously voted to introduce the ordinance, encouraged and supported by about 25 members of the public who looked on.

“The problem is not only are they knocking at your doors, they’re pulling in the driveways and stopping in front of your house, blocking traffic and waving oncoming cars by,” Green Valley Drive resident Brandy Jarmolowich said. “My children go to check the mailbox and play in the street. It’s a real safety concern.”

The council will hold a public hearing on the ordinance at its Aug. 25 meeting. If adopted there, it will become law.

Changes to the ordinance were inspired by a rash of persistent, door-to-door real estate canvassers. Multiple residents have filed complaints with the township over such visitors who would not let up after asking a homeowner if they’d consider selling their property. In extreme cases, residents reported the solicitors peering over fences and into windows.

Under the ordinance, any for-profit company — from plumbers to real estate agents — interested in door-to-door solicitation must receive a permit from the township. The permit will only be issued after submitting a list of all canvassers, specific streets and a date range of up to 30 days.

“The concerns are about the intrusion of the privacy of the residents,” Council President Barry Calogero said. “Everywhere I go, residents come over very concerned about people knocking on the door and very rudely and obnoxiously trying to buy their house.”

Some residents have singled out members of the Orthodox Jewish community in Lakewood as the solicitors behind the perceived harassment. As the Lakewood community has boomed, Orthodox Jewish people from New York have sought property on the outskirts, particularly on the Jackson and Toms River borders.

The ordinance also reiterates sections of the federal Fair Housing Act, which prohibit real estate solicitors from implying that a neighborhood could under go an “adverse” change if a homeowner declines to sell their home.

“It’s left to linger in people’s minds that if they don’t agree to sell, something bad will happen in the neighborhood,” Councilman Rob Nixon said

Violators would be subject of fines up to $1,250 and 90 days in county jail, an addition that Nixon said would discourage anyone willing to ignore the rules, including visiting a home on the township’s no-knock registry.

“It’s very clear that if you’re on the no-knock list, it’s the responsibility of the solicitor or vendor to respect that list,” Nixon said.

The ordinance specifically calls out for-profit endeavors: Activities protected under free speech laws, such as religious and political canvassing, are not affected by the ordinance.

“The state has laws on the books about the sale of homes, including prohibitions on discrimination for race, religion and other reasons,” ACLU of New Jersey legal director Ed Barocas said in an email.

Mike Davis: 732-643-4223 mdavis@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1Nt7kLI