Red Robin wants to mainstream the Ramen Burger.

The Greenwood Village-based casual dining chain on Tuesday unveiled plans to launch the Red Ramen Burger, a beef patty served between two crispy ramen noodle buns with toppings such as teriyaki, Chiu Chow aioli, chili-infused seasoned cabbage, basil, carrots and onions.

“We closely follow emerging trends, and when the ramen burger first debuted, our culinary team worked to develop Red Robin’s take on the foodie favorite, enabling us to be the first to offer it nationally,” Red Robin’s senior vice president and chief marketing officer Jonathan Muhtar said in a statement.

Red Robin officials compared the ramen burger’s release to that of the chain’s introduction of the beer milkshake and ghost peppers to its menu.

The Red Ramen Burger is expected to be on the menu April 4 through June 5, with April 19 set as a special promotional day catering to ramen’s most-loyal followers: the starving college student.

On that day, Red Robin is offering up the new creation for 22 cents (roughly the cost of a package of instant of ramen soup) for the first 22 college students at each of its restaurants.

The latest promotional effort comes after a year of growth for Red Robin Gourmet Burgers Inc.

In 2015, the company remodeled 157 of its 538 restaurants as part of a continuation of the “brand transformation initiative” started three years earlier, Red Robin reported last month.

Between new restaurants opened — Red Robin added 21 last year — and the performance at existing stores, the company pulled in net income of $47.7 million on nearly $1.3 billion in revenue. The results were up from the $32.6 million of net income and $1.1 billion in revenue reported for 2014.

In its fourth-quarter and full-year earnings report released in February, Red Robin said that in addition to adding new restaurants and remodeling others, the initiatives for 2016 include the promotion of new items and value menus.

Shares of Red Robin (Nasdaq: RRGB) were trading up $1.64, or 2.7 percent, to $61.41 on Tuesday.

Alicia Wallace: 303-954-1939, awallace@denverpost.com or @aliciawallace