Donald Trump

Donald Trump has unveiled his healthcare proposals, and pharma rates a bullet point. The Republican presidential candidate says he'd push for reimportation of prescription drugs as a way to bring down rising pharma prices.

It's not pharma's favorite idea. Industry lobbyists have fought against previous proposals to allow drugs to flow into the U.S.--a higher-priced market--from countries where they're less expensive. Bills including the provision have been defeated several times in Congress.

But this time, the proposal comes amid a presidential campaign that's put pharma pricing front and center. Amid the controversy over a huge price increase from Turing Pharmaceuticals' then-CEO Martin Shkreli, Hillary Clinton made big waves in the biotech market with a tweet promising action. Valeant Pharmaceuticals ($VRX) and its price-hike strategy was roped into the scandal, and lawmakers have made the point that Big Pharma uses price increases--albeit much smaller ones--to boost revenue.

Trump isn't the first Republican candidate to put forth the idea, either: Sen. John McCain proposed the same thing during his 2008 run for president, and more recently teamed up with Sen. Amy Klobuchar to introduce a bill allowing reimportation from Canada in 2014. He revived the idea late last year

But reimportation has also figured into drug-pricing proposals from Sen. Bernie Sanders, who's running for the Democratic nomination, and his rival, Hillary Clinton. Last year, Sanders and fellow Democratic Congressman Elijah Cummings introduced a drug-pricing bill that included reimportation provisions.

One suggestion Trump didn't include in his healthcare plan: granting Medicare power to negotiate drug prices directly. Though it, too, has come up repeatedly, the idea has typically been floated by Democrats, including President Obama, who included it in his most recent budget proposal. Trump had backed the idea in public statements earlier this month.

"Congress will need the courage to step away from the special interests and do what is right for America," the blueprint read.

Easier said than done. Lawmakers in Maine pushed through a law to allow the state's residents to buy their meds from pharmacies outside the country. The law was the state's version of a federal proposal that has failed several times in Congress. But last year, a federal judge in Maine struck down the law.

Drugmakers lobbied hard against the Maine Pharmacy Act, not because of its potential effects in Maine--which would be small--but because the idea might have spread to other states as a way to control healthcare costs. Allowing foreign drugs to be sold in the U.S.--at the generally lower prices charged in other countries--could seriously undermine pharma's U.S. pricing power.

"The pharmaceutical industry wins these things 10 out of 10 times, so I'm not surprised," the state senator who introduced the bill told the Portland Press Herald at the time.

Trump also proposed a variety of broader healthcare provisions, including repealing Obamacare, allowing insurance to be sold across state lines, and making health insurance premiums fully tax-deductible.

- see Trump's healthcare plan