Buy Photo A now-settled law suit brought by two female officers casts light on culture of Neptune PD (Photo: File photo)Buy Photo

“Get used to it. This is the culture here.”

Elena Gonzalez, a police officer in the Neptune Township Police Department, was told that by superiors after she complained about sexually explicit behavior and discrimination in the force, according to a lawsuit filed in December 2013 and settled last year.

Gonzalez and co-plaintiff Christine Savage, also an officer with the township police force, received $330,000 apiece in that settlement and were promoted to sergeant.

The killing of Tamara Wilson-Seidle by her husband, Neptune police Sgt. Philip Seidle, has cast a harsh light on the department and its handling of domestic violence calls involving the Seidles.

The question of whether Seidle was vetted to see if he could possess firearms — as a state attorney general’s directive outlines — has yet to be revealed despite Open Public Records Act requests from the Asbury Park Press. A domestic violence allegation would have triggered such an investigation.

The township denied the female officers’ allegations in its answer to the lawsuit.

Named in it were Robert H. Adams, the then-chief of the department, who retired on a $126,643 pension before the lawsuit was filed; current Chief James Hunt; and Michael Emmons, then a captain and now retired with a $94,904 pension, according to public records.

The lawsuit said the two female officers were subjected to sexual harassment and a hostile work environment that included being exposed to sexually explicit gestures and language by Emmons, who denied the allegations in his answer.

And they were passed over for promotions, they alleged.

Among the allegations were:

•Emmons was accused by both women of sending pornographic material to male officers and goading them into responding in the presence of women.

•Both women witnessed Emmons gesturing sexually with his crotch.

•Emmons, a sergeant at the time, mentioned in front of Gonzalez that he engaged in rough sex with another officer’s wife the night before.

•The suit claimed that a car magnet indicating a love for the male sex organ was placed in the patrol car that Gonzalez used to drive to her assignment as a school resource officer at Neptune High School.

The attorney for both women did not respond to requests to interview the two.

Philip Seidle is mentioned in the suit. The complaint alleges that Gonzalez complained of the wrongful conduct to the sergeant. Seidle told Gonzalez he would record the alleged wrongful conduct as harassment and note that abdominal pains she complained about were related to it, according to the complaint.

The women allege in the suit that the department did not have a “well-publicized and enforced anti-harassment and anti-retaliation policy.”

Police Director Michael Bascom, responding by email Tuesday, said the department had a policy in place and has since revised it.

As for the culture of the department as alleged in the complaint, Bascom said confidentiality agreements prevent him from responding.

Ken Serrano: 732-643-4029; kserrano@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1RRw0Uo