Topics: Barack Obama, Editor's Picks, George W. Bush, IMF, Jeffrey Sachs, kiev, Media Criticism, New York Times, Putin, Thomas Friedman, Ukraine, News, Politics News

Months of discontent in Kiev and the western portion of Ukraine combust into an explosion of provocation and response, unwarranted violence, political crisis and now what amounts to a coup, even as Washington prefers any other name for the past two weeks’ events.

We are invited to see in this some kind of Ukrainian Spring, a nation cleansed by its own will of its many dysfunctions. There is a post-revolutionary glow. There are daunting tasks, our media tell us, but 46 million Ukrainians now can turn toward the liberal democracies of Western Europe, so escaping the burdensome influence Russia, its neighbor to the north, has exerted for centuries.

The ultimate came last Sunday in the person of Tom Friedman. One can always rely on the supremely toady New York Times columnist to come forth with comment that remolds the world such that the most misshapen, ambiguous events fit neatly into the Washington orthodoxy and the neoliberal version of humanity’s way forward.

“The good news is the fact that this happened from the bottom up,” Friedman said on ABC’s “This Week with George Stephanopoulos.” “The West didn’t do this. The United States didn’t do this. The EU didn’t do this. The Ukrainian people did this.”

Every one of the above sentences reflects what we are supposed to think we have just witnessed in Ukraine. And every one is false. The “revolution” in Ukraine was orchestrated, not bottom up; the West by way of the Europeans and Americans did the orchestrating, and the Ukrainian people — that portion who favor a Westward tilt — were the instruments, not the composers.

The true tragedy in Ukraine as we have it for the moment is that the tragedies of the past couple of weeks are not the true tragedy. As I see it, this is yet to come. Seduction and betrayal are the plot lines — the former now accomplished, the latter the inevitable denouement.

The American media made very little of the recently leaked YouTube tape wherein Victoria Nuland, the assistant secretary of state, plots to manipulate “regime change” — when did this odious euphemism gain legitimacy? — with Geoffrey Pyatt, Washington’s ambassador in Kiev. We were supposed to take Nuland’s vulgar language as no more than a curious bit of naughtiness, end of story.

Shame on the Times and all other media for this chicanery. In hindsight the Nuland tape is the Rosetta Stone of the Ukrainian riddle. It was an early advisory that we were about to watch Washington at work corrupting the affairs of another nation, exactly as it has for the past 60–odd years elsewhere. Nothing new under the American sun, even as the afternoon light starts to fade.

Proof of this pudding: The three opposition politicians Nuland and Pyatt were subverting — Vitali Klitschko, Arseniy Yatseniuk, and Oleh Tyahnybok — were the three who signed a late-hour compromise, instantly drowned by events, just before Viktor Yanukovych fled the presidential palace last week. Watch for these names as events unfold.

This read of Ukraine brings grave realities to the fore, especially for Americans.

Their nation’s foreign policy cliques remain wholly committed to the spread of the neoliberal order on a global scale, admitting of no exceptions. This is American policy in the 21st century. No one can entertain any illusion (as this columnist confesses to have done) that America’s conduct abroad stands any chance of changing of its own in response to an intelligent reading of the emerging post–Cold War order.

Imposing “democracy,” the American kind, was the American story from the start, of course, and has been the mission since Wilson codified it even before he entered the White House. When the Cold War ended we began a decade of triumphalist bullying — economic warfare waged as “the Washington Consensus” — which came to the same thing.

One thought this might end with the sobering humiliations of September 11. But then came Bush II and the “nation-building” set. Then one thought Obama would end it. My new conclusion: Americans are too intimately dependent on this narrative to escape it. As nothing lasts forever, we must now wait to see the magnitude of the calamity that will force the U.S. to accept some workable form of global citizenship.

I do not think this is an over-interpretation of the Ukraine question. Consider this from Tuesday’s New York Times, front page, above the fold:

Turned off by what he saw as Mr. Bush’s crusading streak … Mr. Obama, aides said, was wary of being proactive in trying to change other societies, convinced that being too public would make the United States the issue and risk provoking a backlash. The difference, aides said, was not the goal but the methods of achieving it.

There you have it. Our leadership is trapped in mythologies, incapable of breaking free, even if these lead recklessly up to Russia’s borders and must be realized by way of open secrets.

This clinging to mythical “missions” induces a form of blindness, unhelpful when running the relations of the world’s most powerful nation. You get a lapse of vision and a tendency to see the world as if it were a John Wayne movie, all black hats and white.