A Harrisburg-based federal judge disagreed with the arguments of an employer which claimed, among other things, that the Affordable Care Act makes it impossible to provide health benefits that don't violate its employees' objections to birth control.

Judge John E. Jones III of the United States District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania sided with the federal government in dismissing the suit brought by Real Alternatives Inc.

Real Alternatives is a non-profit which operates in Pennsylvania and several other states, providing alternatives to abortion, pregnancy support programs and abstinence education.

It has three full-time employees, all of whom are lawyers. Each receives health insurance through Real Alternatives that also covers their families.

The ACA requires employer-provided health plans to cover services including all government-approved contraceptive methods, including things such as birth control pills and the "morning after" pill.

The government views those services as "preventive care," and contends they are "shown to improve well-being" while preventing or delaying other medical conditions.

Real Alternatives argued the contraception mandate is, among other things, unconstitutional, and in violation of religious freedom.

Real Alternatives had excluded contraceptive care from its health insurance plan since 2008, and was able to continue doing so until 2014 because its plan was "grandfathered" against requirements of the ACA. But the insurer eventually opted to discontinue the plan, and after 2014 Real Alternatives was unable to buy coverage that didn't include contraceptives.

One of the goals of the the Real Alternatives suit was to obtain a court order to allow it to obtain coverage that doesn't include contraceptives.

One of the Real Alternatives arguments dismissed by Jones was that the government has no legitimate purpose in mandating people to have benefits they don't want or won't use.

Jones wrote, "Time and again, courts have found a government interest to be compelling even when it does not achieve a benefit for each and every member of the population. Not every person who pays into social security receives or desires its benefits. Not every person who pays taxes receives unemployment benefits, welfare, or a myriad of other services offered by the government through citizens' tax money."

Jones also addressed what he called an "issue of great sensitivity" — that an employee's health plan covers a whole family, and there might be disagreement within the family over contraception.

He wrote that if families with religious objections to contraceptive coverage are allowed opt out of such coverage, "the collective decision could create untold tension and family strife should disagreement over contraceptive coverage arise, which is more likely now that children up to the age of twenty-six may be covered by their parents' plans."