During Noah Lagos’ first year as its director in 2004, St. Petersburg-Clearwater International Airport had the strongest year in its history with more than 1.3 million passengers.

That number dropped by more half by the end of the following year after its two biggest airlines abruptly ended service, hollowing out 70 percent of the small airport’s passenger traffic in a matter of months.

As Lagos approaches retirement, though, he has the mid-Pinellas County airport in its best shape ever. Passenger numbers are on target to break that former record, largely driven by the dramatic growth of budget carrier Allegiant Airline during his tenure.

Local officials and business leaders credit him with helping bring a wave of leisure travel to the area with more than 50 cities in the United States and Canada having direct flights to Pinellas and its beaches on Allegiant and a handful of other low-cost carriers.

The airport known as PIE also has undergone a thorough overhaul of its dated, 1970s-style terminal that will continue after Lagos is gone.

He has overseen tens of millions of dollars in improvements done incrementally with grant money and a modest budget that has helped the facility maintain its reputation for having the lowest carrier fees in the state.

“The industry has realized that PIE is a viable commercial service airport serving the Tampa Bay community,” says Lagos, 64.

“There is a place in the market for international, low-cost carriers to continue to grow this airport. That’s a longer term vision.”

Long-time deputy director Tom Jewsbury will take over for Lagos, who retires May 15. Jewsbury is poised to guide the airport into a future where county officials may contemplate building new runways to keep up with growth in service rather than struggle to fill gaps left by bankrupted airlines.

The 20-year airport employee formerly in charge of operations ranging from security to information technology will lead an upcoming public discussion about the county-owned facility’s future in a master plan process scheduled to begin in 2017.

❖ ❖ ❖

The current airfield takes up about half of the 2,000 acres controlled by the airport along Old Tampa Bay. Local leaders will take a serious look at PIE’s potential to expand, possibly starting with a 120-acre former golf course at the south side of the property.

“If we want to continue in this direction and provide Allegiant the opportunity to grow as it wants to and also provide the opportunity for other airlines to come to the airport, there’s going to have to be a significant expansion of the airport,” said Jewsbury, 47, who came to the airport in 1994.

In the meantime, a series of upgrades are underway that include new flight display systems, concessions, more concourse seating and the upcoming construction of 500 additional remote parking spaces, a multimillion-dollar undertaking made possible by several years of substantial passenger growth.

“Years ago, we would not have been able to afford to do that,” Lagos said.

“Our philosophy is pay as you go.”

When Lagos arrived in 2004, he quickly learned he had inherited a “handyman special” badly in need of an updating in both infrastructure and aesthetics — especially its dreary battleship-grey color scheme, he said.

“The facility hadn’t been updated except for new baggage claim since 2000,” he said.

A precipitous drop in air service no one saw coming initially put such improvements out of reach financially, but Lagos quickly began looking for outside sources to fill the gap.

The airport has taken on a $22 million terminal renovation with expanded gates, new jet bridges and replacement of the facility’s air chiller system — using only 10 percent of its own budget while relying on state and federal grants for the remainder.

“We keep proactively growing, but we have to do it in phases because we don’t have the money to do it all at once,” Lagos said.

“It helps keep our costs low to the airlines to move forward in a phased approach.”

❖ ❖ ❖

The airport never will reach the scale of its much larger neighbor across the bay, Tampa International Airport, but Jewsbury hopes to continue driving growth by sustaining PIE’s low-cost carriers.

During the past year, Allegiant has brought new flights to Clearwater every couple of months — in February, the carrier announced service to Akron, Ohio, and Raleigh, North Carolina, bringing its total flights to 43 — and currently it provides more than 90 percent of the airport’s passenger traffic.

Largely thanks to Allegiant, the airport in July is set to handle 125 to 130 flights per week throughout the month — more than its historically busiest time of year, the December holiday season — and should top 1.6 million passengers for the entire year.

Jewsbury is keenly aware that a big part of his job going forward will be to build on this success by luring new carriers.

“We’re very fortunate that Allegiant is a very financially sound airline and continuing to grow, but it makes us very vulnerable should something happen to Allegiant,” he said.

“So that is a priority; to go out there to look at new airlines that have an interest in coming to this airport,” noting the new Silver Airways flights to Key West and Fort Lauderdale scheduled to start in May.

In retirement, Lagos plans to head down to the Florida Keys himself this summer, in a motor home, and also expects to spend more time boating and bicycling, with an occasional vacation flight.

He said he is proud of being a “catalyst for change” at the airport but gives much of the credit to staffers such as Jewsbury and others who have helped establish a foundation for its future.

“I feel a great sense of accomplishment in leaving the legacy that will set the stage for the future growth of this airport,” he said.

jboatwright@tampatrib.com

(727) 215-1277

Twitter: @JBoatwrightTBO