The two anonymous media watchdogs responsible for outing BuzzFeed’s Benny Johnson for plagiarism last month have brought new allegations against CNN host Fareed Zakaria.

Mr. Zakaria was caught plagiarizing a New York piece by Jill Lepore in August 2012. Time magazine, CNN and The Washington Post assured readers at the time that an exhaustive review of Mr. Zakaria’s work revealed that it was an isolated mistake.

However, Twitter users @blippoblappo & @crushingbort of Our Bad Media have published 12 instances where Mr. Zakaria appears to have copied passages from other writers — and all of the instances would have fallen under the Time, CNN, and Post investigations, Breitbart News reported.

Our Bad Media accused Mr. Zakeeria of lifting passages from the New York Times, Bloomberg, Vanity Fair, Forbes, The Nation, The Telegraph, Time magazine and Wikipedia.

“Fareed Zakaria is a news editor and a New York Times bestselling author who holds a B.A. from Yale and a Ph.D. from Harvard,” @blippoblappo & @crushingbort write. “In other words, someone who should be more than familiar with proper citation by now. The above examples are from a span of less than two years and do not include his work since, his columns at Newsweek from 2001-2010, or the books he wrote before 2012.”

“These examples raise far more serious questions about the integrity of Zakaria’s editors at CNN, TIME, and the Washington Post, all of whom claimed to have conducted similar reviews and found nothing,” they write. “In the light of our findings, we have to call [expletive]. It took less than an hour and a few Google searches for us at Our Bad Media to find an example of lifting in Zakaria’s columns written before the 2012 plagiarism scandal. So we’re left to wonder: did TIME, CNN, or the Washington Post actually conduct good faith reviews of Zakaria’s work? Have they since?”

Time magazine said in a statement to Politico: “While Fareed Zakaria is no longer employed by Time Inc., TIME takes these charges very seriously. In 2012, we conducted a review of Zakaria’s work for TIME and were satisfied with the results of that investigation. We will be reviewing these new allegations carefully.”