Food, beer and wine all there to enjoy at 1stBank Center Thursday

Go Fish Sushi chef Danny Lin prepares a sushi roll Wednesday at the restaurant's Broomfield location. Go Fish is one of 18 food providers set to take part Thursday in Taste It Broomfield!. ( Doug Pike / For the Enterprise )

If you go What: Taste It Broomfield! When: 5 to 8 p.m. Thursday Where: 1stBank Center, 11450 Broomfield Lane Cost: $20; purchase in advance at broomfieldchamber.com or at the door More info: Open to ages 21 and older. Donations for Broomfield FISH will be accepted and those who donate will be entered into a drawing for tickets to a 1stBank Center event of their choosing.

As a first-year event last year, Taste It Broomfield! attracted about 150 people and 17 vendors to the Broomfield Chamber of Commerce's inaugural showcase of local restaurants, catering services, breweries and wineries.

The event evolved out of a longstanding business after-hours event, Broomfield Chamber of Commerce president Jennifer Kerr said, but in its first year it faced competition for attendance from several August back-to-school nights.

This year's event, set for Thursday, arrives two months earlier on the calendar and promises to tickle a few more taste buds.

Ten days before this year's event, chamber organizers had 25 vendors signed on and more than 350 people pre-registered to attend. Kerr said she encourages participants to preregister on the chamber website, broomfieldchamber.com, to avoid the wait at the door.

Advertisement

"It's at the beginning of the festival season this year," Kerr said. "I think that helps. We can already see that it's going to be much bigger this time."

For the $20 price of admission, participants are treated to unlimited samples from participating food and drink vendors. Participants must be 21 or older.

Despite taking place on the arena floor at the 1stBank Center, Kerr said the chamber has attempted to create a street scene ambiance.

Nikki Rasmussen, co-owner and graphic designer at Nighthawk Brewery, tilts the tap at the brewery's tasting room on Industrial Lane. Nighthawk is one of six local breweries taking part Thursday in Taste It Broomfield!. (Doug Pike / For the Enterprise)

"We have special lighting and vendors are setting up tents at their individual booths, so it feels like an outdoor festival," she said.

Ethan Hall, who opened Nighthawk Brewery in Broomfield, said he is looking forward to joining Taste It Broomfield! in its formative years and hopes the exposure helps shine a light on his young business.

"It was really a no-brainer for us to take part," Hall said. "People said last year's event was busy and this year's is going to be even bigger."

Hall said Nighthawk has been involved in a handful of beer festivals in the Denver-metro area, but Taste It Broomfield! will be its first hometown event.

"Brew fests are a lot of fun, but (Taste It Broomfield!) is going to be a lot more fun than doing a remote event," Hall said. "We get a much better quality interaction with the people who live right here in our backyard."

Hall said he hopes the evening will put his fledgling brewery in touch with local beer enthusiasts who have yet to make their way to Nighthawk's tasting room on Industrial Lane.

Food and drink Restaurants participating in Taste It Bromfield!: Asti d' Italia Babajoon's Kabobs & More Blue Mountain Kitchen Broomfield Farmers Market at Holy Comforter CB & Potts Emilio's Almost Famous Fox & Hound Freddy's Frozen Custard & Steakburgers Go Fish Jim 'N Nick's Bar-B-Q Jules Gourmet Catering Sam's Club Ted's Montana Grill The Meritage The Gourmet Kitchen Catering The Modern Edge Catering Tiller's Kitchen & Bar Zaika Indian Cuisine Breweries and winery: 4 Noses Brewing Company Big Choice Brewing CB & Potts Kokopelli Beer Co Nighthawk Brewery Turquoise Mesa Winery Wonderland Brewing Co.

"Hopefully we'll get an opportunity to meet people who have never been here before," Hall said. "We hope people will say, 'You have great beer ... and you're right here.'"

Nighthawk joins 4 Noses Brewing Company, Big Choice Brewing, CB & Potts, Kokopelli Beer Co. and Wonderland Brewing Co. as beer providers for the event. Broomfield's Turquoise Mesa Winery also will be on hand.

Drinks are unlimited and participants will be given a sampler mug to use throughout the evening.

Like Hall, Lee Hong, one of the owners of Go Fish Sushi restaurant said he hopes Taste It Broomfield! helps put his business on the local map.

"We're new to the area," said Hong, who opened his restaurant at 2055 W. 136th Ave. in December. "This is our first event in Broomfield, and I just want people to be able to sample our food and get to know us. We're getting good traffic already, but I want people to know we're here."

With 18 food providers, participants can sample everything from sushi to Italian or Indian cuisine to barbecue.

For the first time Taste It Broomfield! participants will be asked to vote for their favorite food and drink vendor at the event, Kerr said.

A Broomfield FISH truck will accept food donations throughout the evening. Those who donate will be eligible for a prize drawing for tickets to a 1stBank Center event of their choosing.

Musical entertainment will be provided by Patrick Keating.