1 Flares Filament.io 1 Flares ×

December 12, 2013 – Austin, Texas – This week the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME Local 1624) endorsed Brigid Shea for Travis County Commissioner, Precinct 2. AFSCME Local 1624 is the Labor Union representing City of Austin and Travis County Employees since 1969.

“AFSCME is proud to support Brigid Shea,” said Union Representative Carol Guthrie. “We had an opportunity to work with Brigid when she was a city council member. She was always very open and receptive to working with us. We think the breadth of knowledge and experience she brings to Travis County will make her a solid asset for the county as a whole and for our organization as well.”

Disclaimer: The author is paid to work on Brigid Shea's campaign.Shea's father was a small-town doctor and her mother was a social worker who cared for the mentally ill. Shea's upbringing instilled in her a deep and unique respect for those who pursue work in public service. As Travis County Commissioner, Shea will work with AFSCME as a representative of and voice for the county's employees, and she vows to be a steadfast advocate for fairness and equality in the workplace.

“I was honored to have the AFSCME endorsement when I ran for city council, and I am just as delighted to get AFSCME's endorsement now,” Shea said. “AFSCME members work on the front lines in every department of the county and they have a deep understanding of county government. I am honored to have their support and look forward to working with them on the court.”

Of the three candidates for Travis County Commissioner, Precinct 2, Shea stands alone as a proven leader and the only former elected official. The AFSCME endorsement reinforces that Shea is the most qualified candidate for this job.

“Brigid has AFSCME's support because of her willingness to bring different parties together and work through situations,” Guthrie said. “Brigid demonstrates that leadership quality that we appreciate so much.”