CINCINNATI — Roughly two hours before kickoff, Brandon Marshall walked off the team bus wearing a suit, stylish headphones and staring straight onto the field. He looked ready for prime time. Yet, he would see no time.

Marshall missed Monday night’s game with a sprained right foot, the fallout from his absence glaring and far-reaching in the Broncos’ deflating loss to the Bengals.

The Broncos entered Paul Brown Stadium with a defensive edge sharpened over the past four weeks. They ranked second against the run, and owned a big-play secondary. It was set up to make Bengals quarterback Andy Dalton, who has spent a career paging Dr. Heimlich in big games, beat them.

Denver spoiled its own strategy by losing its identity, if not its fundamentals. Playing second and third-string linebackers makes for great copy, but not necessarily sold performances. Todd Davis, the waiver-claim replacement for Marshall (foot) and Danny Trevathan (knee), missed multiple tackles. Middle linebacker Steven Johnson became a victim of mismatches in coverage.

“There’s no excuses. We have to play better,” defensive end DeMarcus Ware said “We had new guys in there, but whether it’s the ones or the fours it just shows how much the little things matter.”

It was the inability of the Broncos to impose their will at the line of scrimmage that haunted them most.

The Broncos’ rush defense dissolved before the team’s eyes long before Peyton Manning’s unnerving fourth quarter interceptions and the endless special teams meltdowns.

Denver had allowed 71.6 yards per game on the ground going into the game. After Rams rookie Tre Mason eclipsed 100 yards at St. Louis — the first running back to accomplish the feat — the Broncos changed their practice habits. No more small gains, and easy tackles. Hard hits and a few scuffles ensued, according to Ware.

PHOTOS: Denver Broncos vs. Cincinnati Bengals, Dec. 22, 2014

“You can’t just turn the switch on,” Ware said. “It has to stay on.”

The absence of Marshall proved also damaging in the passing game. The Bengals exploited Johnson and Davis with throws to the backs and tight end Jermaine Gersham (11 targets, nine catches).

“It’s frustrating,” Johnson said. “Especially frustrated in myself. I could have done better.”

The Broncos insisted this game held meaning, preaching how a win was a playoff victory because it guaranteed a playoff bye. And yet the lights flickered, consistency elusive. Only Aqib Talib’s pick six and Von Miller’s rip fumble spared the defense its worst game of the season.

The fight that defined a month-long stretch was largely absent in the first half. Rookie Jeremy Hill ran 85 yards for a first-quarter touchdown, marking the second longest run ever against the Broncos. He didn’t break free as much as expose breakdowns. Davis missed an ankle tackle in the backfield. Safety Rahim Moore bounced off, and a pursuing Johnson couldn’t catch Hill near midfield.

“We had communication issues on Hill’s run,” Johnson said. “I just have to learn from this.”

Hill finished with 133 yards rushing, shoving himself into NFL offensive rookie of the year consideration alongside former LSU teammate Odell Beckham Jr. When Hill missed a series with a sore ankle, his replacement, Giovani Bernard, shredded the Broncos in the passing game.

“It’s up to me and Gio to get the running game going and get the pressure off Andy,” Hill said.

Defensive tackle Terrance Knighton said last week that he hated eyeing the scoreboard, and seeing the opponent with “even 50 yards on the ground.” It’s what made this game so discouraging for Broncos fans. This was supposed to be the different Broncos, a team that could take a punch to the stomach and deliver a jab to the windpipe.

“Their defense made more plays than our defense. We will bounce back from this,” Knighton said. “We have no choice. My confidence in this team hasn’t changed.”

The defense succeeded in one goal, making the loss more disappointing. The Bengals became one dimensional, Dalton a game-manager with less than 150 yards passing deep into the fourth quarter.

Dalton delivered an awful pass to Talib, missing wildly, early in the first quarter. Talib made an incredible diving interception near the right sideline, got up, and ran for a touchdown, making it 7-0 Broncos.

But it was a fleeting moment in a game where the defense couldn’t draw a line in the turf. The sand, or the rain.

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck