RENO, NV - Despite the fact that the unemployment rate in America continues to drop, having one job is still not enough for some people to be able to support themselves or their family. The national average for people who work more than one job has not changed much since the recession hit. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, it has stayed close to 5%, meaning roughly 7 million Americans are having to get creative when managing their time and their finances.

Danielle Lien is one of the many people who has had to reinvent herself to stay afloat since the start of the recession.

"After the economy tanked it became difficult to find the employment that I needed to make ends meet and be able to save for a future," she says.

For the past three years she has juggled being a nanny and running her own cheerleading gym in south Reno, which doesn't leave her with a lot of down time.

"From 6:30 in the morning until about 9:30 at night I spend my day with kids. From toddlers all the way up to teenagers," says Lien.

Yet, doing both jobs at the same location has made it easier for Lien to balance her daily tasks.

"I'm able to focus on getting some of those fine details taken care of, sending out emails, making return phone calls while the kids are sleeping. I didn't have the time to do that before because that extra time that I had before was spent on driving," she says.

Then, there's Ash Parr, who does graphic design and brand marketing for companies during the day and then runs his own taekwondo studio at night. Running two businesses while having a family has not been easy for Parr, but it also has its advantages.

"When one's not doing so good and one's doing better they kind of support each other back and forth, which has been a benefit that I've had both to fall back on," he says.

Parr has combined his two passions of fitness and graphic design to create other financial opportunities for himself. He recently helped develop an app called Fit Shuffle. It allows the user to choose different workout routines that will play in random order, similar to shuffling a music playlist.

"Hopefully it grows and relieves some of my time so I don't have to do as many things," says Parr.

Parr continues to push himself. He's already qualified twice to represent the United States in the World Taekwondo Championships. Now, he has a new goal in mind; to compete on the popular reality show American Ninja Warrior. Parr says it was his late father who gave him the inspiration he needed to submit an audition video to the show.

"He told me to continue to inspire and break world records," he says.

The data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics shows that the rate of people working multiple jobs here in Nevada has stayed between 4-5%, around the same as the national average.