Readers sound off on Tennessean front page with back of Obama's head, both pro and con.

Buy Photo Jan. 6, 2016, front page of The Tennessean, which had readers talking. (Photo: The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Respect the president

I was shocked, surprised and concerned when I saw the picture you published Jan. 6 on the front page of President Obama.

Your title was: "Obama takes aim at gun sales."

His back is pictured and the blue USA Today dot on his back.

I found it hard to believe that a professional newspaper would publish such an inflammatory picture of our President.

What were you trying to tell your readers?

Should they aim at the blue dot in support of guns?

This picture is disgraceful and a total disrespect to our president.

The Tennessean should report news in a neutral format and not indicate any partisan support.

It seems clear to me that your intent was to marginalize the president's position on gun control and placate to the NRA and overly conservative supporters against any common sense gun control.

Why picture the president's back and why place the USA Today logo on his back?

Many of my acquaintances locally and outside the state of Tennessee also see similar concerns in this picture.

In the future it is my hope that The Tennessean will give more thought to its articles and gather broader review before publishing.

Also note that it should be, "President Obama" and not just "Obama" as you printed; he is the President of the United States and deserves the respect.

Joseph Lewis, Brentwood 37027

Obama’s backward leadership

The front page of the Jan. 6 Tennessean, "Obama takes aim at gun sales," pictures Obama with his back to the reader.

That has been symbolically and literally his leadership style.

His "back to us" has been evidenced in handling border control, military strength and readiness, spending controls, health care effectiveness and logic, racial divide, fighting terrorism, consistently bypassing the legislative branch with executive orders on major issues, such as his latest action to stymie our rights to bear arms.

To initiate his warped idea of gun control he calls in his attorney general (note I didn't say "our" AG) to explore loopholes in the Constitution such that he can do an end run around congress.

Another technique he and his leftist buddies slyly inject to hamper our constitutional rights is to add excessive or complex regulations.

An anecdotal analogy recently coined explains Obama's logic: "Gun control is like trying to reduce drunk driving by making it tougher for sober people to own cars."

Twelve months and counting — I hope we can survive.

Milt Herring, Old Hickory 37138

Creating a target

If your purpose is to actively influence and impact a better quality of life in Middle Tennessee, you have totally missed the mark.

You have impacted our community for sure, but it won’t have the impact you say you want.

Not if you promote the shooting of our president the way you did in yesterday’s paper.

I hope you look at what you did soberly and promise me and all your readers to refrain from ever doing that again.

You put a target on the back of the president's head and then article after article poured out hatred toward him.

It couldn’t be more plain. Do you remember Dallas Nov. 22, 1963? Do you remember the motel in Memphis and the balcony? How about the hotel in San Francisco the night of an election? It doesn’t take much to have these situations.

When I saw your paper I simply couldn’t believe you would be so irresponsible. If you were not alive to remember these dates and places, I do. I remember President Reagan, George Wallace, President Truman, John Lennon, the list goes on. How could you be so callous!

Dixie Tanksley, Madison 37115

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Rhjqgg