Topics: Carly Fiorina, Chris Christie, GOP debate, GOP primary, Jeb Bush, John Kasich, Marco Rubio, Mike Huckabee, Rand Paul, The Republican Party, Video, News, Politics News

The GOP debate on Wednesday night was a largely snippy affair, with candidates accusing debate host CNBC of making things up until moderators pointed out — as just one example — that candidates had made the same claims on their own websites.

But there was a bright spot: Basically all of the GOP contenders rested on one particular set of assumptions, and the logical conclusion of those assumptions offers a plan for eliminating some truly horrible things in life, like American military adventurism and Ohio State football.

Candidate after candidate argued we need to get rid of government. When asked whether government should prevent profiteering pharmaceutical companies, Dr. Ben Carson admitted some companies are not considering patients, but went on to argue that costs come not from greed, but from regulations: “Every single regulation costs in terms of goods and services,” which hurts real people he argued, more than companies who rip off customers. Government employee Rand Paul said “I want government so small I can barely see it,” which would be easier to do if we eliminated 100 Senators and their staff, including Paul’s. Jeb Bush, the son and brother of former presidents, claimed that DC politicians continue to make things worse.

Two candidates even argued that government caused consolidation in private companies. In the Kiddie Table debate earlier in the evening, Rick Santorum claimed ObamaCare caused insurance companies to consolidate. While he’s right that the insurance market is dominated by a few players, that was true long before ObamaCare. Santorum claimed to be a lot less worried about consolidation in the watery beer market because, “There’s no town in American anymore that doesn’t have a brewery.” Given that alcohol is one of the most regulated markets, it’s odd that government involvement hasn’t created dangerous consolidation in bad beer.

Meanwhile, Carly Fiorina claimed that banks consolidate because they are afraid of government. Given that Fiorina herself contributed to the consolidation of the computer industry — but has always given market-based reasons, and not fear of the federal government, for her decision to merge HP with Compaq — that claim is particularly incredible.

Chris Christie, for his part, was outraged that various governments, mostly states, were considering regulating fantasy football companies Fan Duel and DraftKings, and that moderators might ask about regulating it. Christie, the governor of a state with a shrinking gambling industry, made the claim shortly after Jeb Bush bragged about being 7-0 in his fantasy football league, which was probably Bush’s most successful moment of the night.

Ultimately, though, these candidates were making an argument about the efficacy of government, an argument that is particularly odd from people auditioning to run the entire federal government. “Every time government gets involved in something,” Fiorina claimed. “It gets worse.”

If Fiorina’s claim, that every time — every single time! — the government gets involved in something it gets worse, then clearly the government should get out of the business of making war, right? It sounds like a good idea, because government involvement in making war will only make the ability for the U.S. to wage war worse. And without the half a trillion dollars the government spends on war each year, we’d probably have a lot fewer wars.