Public Health Spending Spiraling Downward, Despite Obamacare

By Christine Kern, contributing writer

Report highlights Public Health’s falling share of US health spending

A study published by the American Journal of Public Health study found public health spending is spiraling downward. Researchers found that, despite the fact the language of the Affordable Care Act places considerable emphasis on disease prevention, funding for public health programs to prevent disease has actually been declining in recent years.

The study, Public Health’s Falling Share of U.S. Health Spending, examined trends in U.S. public health expenditures by analyzing five decades worth of historical and projected National Health Expenditure Accounts data and found that per-capita public health spending increased from $39 in 1960 to $281 in 2008, but has fallen by 9.3 percent since then.

The study also found the public health’s share of total health expenditures is falling. After rising from 1.36 percent in 1960 to 3.18 percent in 2002, it fell to 2.65 percent in 2014 and is projected to fall to 2.40 percent by 2023. Public health spending includes disease prevention, cancer screenings, contraceptives, vaccines, and other population management initiatives.

The study concluded, “Public health spending has declined, potentially undermining prevention and weakening responses to health inequalities and new health threats.”

Patrick Bernet, a health finance researcher at Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton, FL, told Reuters that cuts in public health spending have an impact on all residents, not just individual patients, saying, “Public health activities offer a broad range of health and financial benefits: a longer, healthier life, more productive workers for industry, lower anticipated Medicare and Medicaid spending, lower insurance premiums for everyone else, and children better able to focus on their education and grow into healthy adults.”

The decline might seem counterintuitive in the wake of the Affordable Care Act since it promised a $15 billion boost in public health funding, according to study co-authors Dr. David Himmelstein and Dr. Steffie Woolhandler of the City University of New York School of Public Health at Hunter College, but a subsequent 2012 law struck $6.25 billion of funding from the initial bill, and other legislative efforts slashed it even further. According to the study, public health appropriations for 2015 are less than half of the $2 billion originally budgeted.

Dr. Woolhandler said, “Our healthcare system is dangerously out of balance. We’re spending more and more treating disease, but less and less to prevent it. We’re breaking the bank paying for hepatitis C and cancer drugs, while drug abuse prevention, needle exchange programs and anti-smoking campaigns are starved for funds. More resources need to go to public health programs that prevent illness, rather than just waiting for people to get sick.

One problem with securing public health funding is that, “It is hard to get people to agree to tax themselves to pay for a `public good’ which improves everyone’s health, but where attribution between cause and effect is less obvious,” Arleen Leibowitz, a public policy researcher at the University of California Los Angeles explained to Reuters.

The ACA also requires insurance to cover some services such as vaccinations that might have previously been provided by public health departments, Leibowitz added. “We can expect public health spending to account for a smaller share of total health expenditure in the future because the ACA will increase private health spending,” Leibowitz said.