The Eye

Paramore's Hayley Williams And Ellie Goulding Hang Out At Concert [SEE PICS]

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Instagram/EllieGoulding) Singers Ellie Goulding and Hayley Williams hung out at a recent New Found Glory concert

Paramore frontwoman Hayley Williams and Brit singer Ellie Goulding both posted photos on social media of themselves at a New Found Glory concert last night.

❤️ @yelyahwilliams A photo posted by elliegoulding (@elliegoulding) on Nov 11, 2014 at 5:46am PST

Lovely lovely @elliegoulding & I last night at @newfoundglory show ✨ pic.twitter.com/7AkL66hL7W — hayley from Paramore (@yelyahwilliams) November 29, 2014

In 2011, when Goulding's career was in its early stages, she told Billboard that Williams was a musical inspiration to her.

"There's been people that I used to love that like my music," Goulding said. "The first person who comes into my head is Hayley from Paramore, who tweeted about me ... I listened to a lot of her records when I was a bit younger and she helped me sing quite a bit."

The deluxe version of Paramore's 2013 self-titled album was just released on Monday, Nov. 24. Williams teamed up with former Civil Wars singer Joy Williams for a duet on the album. The ballad is called "Hate to See Your Heartbreak" and was composed by Hayley and bandmate Taylor York.

Hayley talked to NPR about the songwriting process

"We were both feeling a little melancholy," Hayley said. "We just sort of meshed each of our individual ideas and they fit together perfectly. As far as the old school vibe of it, I think down deep I had been dying to write a song like this for a long time. What I love about 'Heartbreak' in particular is that both vocal melodies are strong enough to be leads but they sort of act as harmonies to each other."

Hayley and Joy, both Tenneseans, have been friends for more than a decade.

"When we met, I was 12 and Joy was like 18 or 19, I think," Hayley said. "I was already a fan of hers. It was fate that we became friends. She was always giving great advice and listening to songs I'd written or big plans I had about becoming a real artist."

Hayley said that their duet signifies a "close friendship between women who share their stories with each other and who lift each other up and understand one another."

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.