After years of steadily rising rates for employee health coverage, small employers may finally get a little relief this year and next from the steep increases of the past.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, Priority Health and others propose to trim premiums for health policies that renew in the third and fourth quarters of 2015 or on Jan. 1, 2016.

Despite some lingering rate volatility, the reductions — albeit small — follow a period of moderating premium increases the last few years. In the latter half of 2015 and into 2016, the trend will shift for both insurers to statewide rate decreases, on average, for some small employers. However, there’s no guarantee reductions will continue over the long term.

For now, at least, health plans attribute their proposed decreases to several factors. Among them is a lower-than-expected medical claims trend from when they first filed 2015-16 rates with state regulators several months ago for small employers with 50 or fewer full-time equivalent employees.

“We just keep seeing better and better claims history in that population. It’s improved each year,” said Scott Norman, vice president of sales and client services at the Grand Rapids-based Priority Health.

In a recent rate filing to state regulators, Priority Health cites “somewhat better than expected” claims experience for seeking approval to implement a “small rate decrease” averaging 2 percent for policies renewing in the latter half of 2015, according to an actuarial memo filed with the rate request.

Priority Health then proposed to drop rates by a statewide average of 2.1 percent for 2016 for its small group HMO and point-of-service plans, according to its rate filing.

While acknowledging the future is hard to predict, Norman expects that a continued moderation in annual rate increases — and perhaps even some decreases — could continue beyond the projected period. Initiatives to improve how well people engage in their own health and to improve the cost of care will only continue to gain more traction in the years ahead and could have further influence on the medical claims trend, he said.

“There are a lot of things that are coming together and need to come together, but we are definitely moving in the right direction,” Norman said. “I suspect as time goes on, that (the improved medical claims trend) will sustain itself throughout as we start to really focus on those things that matter the most.

“I don’t know if you’re going to see continual decrease, but that moderation that you’re seeing now will continue over the next three to five years.”

RESULTS MAY VARY

At Blue Cross Blue Shield, employers in the small group market on average would see a 3.3-percent decline in their premiums for policies renewing in the second half of the year. Employers using Blue Cross Blue Shield’s HMO subsidiary, Blue Care Network, will get a nominal average premium increase of less than 1 percent for policies that renew July 1 or Oct. 1, and then a decrease in 2016.

In West Michigan, small business clients of the Blues will see their premiums decline an average of 2.9 percent from the present plan year. Blue Care Network premiums in West Michigan will increase an average of 1.4 percent under the latest rate proposal.

For Jan. 1, 2016 policy renewals, Blue Cross Blue Shield proposed a 2.2 percent average decrease statewide, and an average 4.8 percent decrease for Blue Care Network policies. In West Michigan small businesses could see premiums decrease an average of 1.35 percent for Blues policies and 3.95 percent for Blue Care Network in 2016.

Blue Cross Blue Shield had previously proposed an average 2 percent rate increase for policies renewing with the third and fourth quarters.

Actual premiums adjustments will vary — in some cases widely — based on employers’ benefits packages and where they are located in the state. Averages also are calculated prior to employers making any changes in their benefits packages when they renew policies.

In 2014, some employers experienced significant volatility in rates as new underwriting criteria kicked in with the Affordable Care Act, causing wide fluctuations in rate increases and decreases between individual employers well above or below reported averages.

“That volatility inside the average is something we haven’t seen before,” said Shannon Enders of Lakeshore Employee Benefits in Norton Shores.

VOLATILITY REMAINS

Enders reports premiums increases averaging in the mid-single digits for midyear policy renewals. Small employers still using a health plan that does not comply with the coverage mandates of the ACA could face rate volatility when they do convert, he said.

“There’s still going to be some bumps in the road for those (employers) going forward,” Enders said.

While rate increases have moderated of late, Enders also notes that in the 20 years he’s been in the business, he has seen cycles come and go. The rate proposals from Blue Cross Blue Shield and Priority Health could reflect both an underwriting cycle and changes occurring in the industry that are affecting the medical claims trend, he said, noting rate spikes could still return.

“We’ll have a couple good years, we’ll have a couple bad years,” Enders said. “That will go back and forth.”

In West Michigan, the average premium for health insurance was $13,860 for a family policy in 2014, more than 17 percent higher than just four years earlier, according to the annual survey of health care costs by The Employers’ Association and the Alliance for Health that spans employers of all sizes.

BETTER COORDINATION

Other factors affecting medical claims trends that directly drive annual premium adjustments include the move over the last decade to high-deductible health plans and having employees share more of the cost of coverage, the adoption of workplace wellness by employers to improve employee health, and efforts by insurers and providers to improve care coordination and manage high-cost chronic medical diseases.

Priority Health attributes 80 percent of its medical claims to members who have one or more chronic medical condition such as diabetes, asthma or cardiovascular disease.

An April article in the industry publication Health Affairs highlighted a study on Blue Cross Blue Shield’s patient-centered medical home initiative that’s credited with avoiding $50 million in costs in 2013 through improved care coordination and management.

Blue Cross Blue Shield also reports that its patient-centered medical home initiative that involved 1,420 physician practices and more than 4,000 doctors generated $155 million in cost savings over a three-year period from 2011 to 2013 because of the ER visits and hospital stays that were avoided.

OBAMACARE’S IMPACT?

The federal Affordable Care Act, by requiring all health insurers to accept all people seeking coverage no matter their health status, also has eased adverse selection, which Blue Cross Blue Shield says left it with a risk pool that had been the costliest to insure. Prior to the ACA’s passage, Blue Cross Blue Shield was the only carrier in Michigan required by state law to issue policies to everyone.

“The ACA has definitely put some stability into how the rates are set,” said Nicole Winters-Smith, director of business segment performance for Blue Cross Blue Shield’s middle and small group sales. “There is no longer an opportunity for other carriers to (set rates) based on previous conditions or to even exclude coverage based on pre-existing conditions. Everybody has the same factors to rate with. So that does level the playing field a bit.”

Nationally, an annual outlook issued last June by PricewaterhouseCoopers’ Health Research Institute noted that the medical cost trend across the U.S. had experienced slow growth for the previous five years, a trend that “left many wondering whether health care costs were bound to run away again.”

The PwC report projected net medical costs for the U.S. to rise 4.8 percent in 2015, a slight uptick after five years of significantly slower growth, “but it does not guarantee a return to the double-digit increases of the past.

“In fact, the contained growth is evidence that structural changes aimed at delivering better quality care at lower costs are starting to hold health care spending growth in check,” the PwC report stated.

Over the long term, the cost of health premiums will depend on the medical claims trends and decisions individuals make when seeking care, Norman said. He notes Priority Health’s push for transparency in health care pricing could help as it allows consumers to look up the cost of an elective procedure beforehand and compare care providers based on price and quality.

“A lot of it depends on us. A lot of it depends on how accountable we are as consumers of health care and making sure we’re doing things to stay healthy and being good consumers,” Norman said. “If we want to be sustainable, these are the things that have to happen long term.”