How business conferences keep social media users engaged

A communications team posted and tweeted snippet quotations and photographs on Facebook and Twitter to followers around the world last May from the fourth annual TEDxGR Grand Rapids.



That same attention was given to live streaming and social media last September at the West Michigan Policy Forum in Grand Rapids.



No one at either conference would have dreamed of asking members of the audience to silence their smartphones, tablets or laptops. Those devices played important social media communication roles for not only the audience but also event organizers.



Eddie Tadlock, assistant general manager for the DeVos Place convention center, DeVos Performance Hall and Van Andel Arena in downtown Grand Rapids, said attendees of meetings and conferences in his venues carry, on average, 2.5 devices — laptops, tablets and smartphones.



Those with devices are connected to social media in the rest of their lives, so why shouldn't they be at a business conference?



"You want them alive, enthusiastic and engaged. And that can be facilitated through the use of technology," said Adrienne Wallace, digital director for 834 Marketing and Design, a Grand Rapids marketing and communications agency.



An audience full of people reaching for their smartphones is actually helping event organizers deliver their messages to the people within their networks who might not even be in the room.



With social media, an event that attracts hundreds or thousands to a brick-and-mortar venue can be expanded to hundreds of thousands or even millions around the world who join the event through Twitter, Facebook or a live stream broadcast.

Austin Langlois, who is in charge of public relations and communications for TEDxGR, said social media and live streaming of the event, held in the Grand Rapids Civic Theatre downtown, allows the organization to reach a worldwide audience.



"If someone is tweeting a question or something someone just said, we kind of chime in as the official voice of the organization to steer the conversation," he said.



Any organization that plans to use social media during an event should have a war room ready to go with at least two or three people on duty, Langlois said.



"It's a lot of work for just one person to be posting at the same time as responding to comments and blocking spammers," he said.



Organizers of the West Michigan Policy Forum used a custom-made, temporary app in connection with the forum's existing social media platforms to conduct conversations and gauge feedback before, during and after its 2014 conference.



A link to the app was given to forum attendees before the event so they could view speaker bios, conversation topics, a list of other attendees and key logistical information.



Wallace and Langlois said keeping an audience engaged during an event is only one leg of a three-legged stool. Attraction and retention are also critical components of a social media strategy.



Over the past four years, TEDxGR used Twitter, Instagram, Facebook and YouTube to attract a total of more than 3,000 people to its annual events.



Langlois said it is easy to share photos and pictures from previous TEDxGR events on Facebook, and sharing stories from people who have attended TEDx events in Grand Rapids has proved to be an excellent way to expand the audience the next year.

Wallace said an event's target population should drive how heavily an organization invests time and effort in social media to attract an audience. But it can't be ignored, she said.



"Creating an audience on social before you need them to work on behalf of the event is especially critical in this endeavor," Wallace said. "Don't build the bridge as you walk on it, if you can help it."



Langlois said the creation of an official hashtag before the event is also close to mandatory. It can be used to combine conversations into a single stream.



But the hashtag is also one more thing to worry about and monitor.



"When you have a really prominent hashtag, it catches the attention of a lot of robots online and a lot of spammers," Langlois said. "There's a big burst, and then it usually levels out and dies off in the first 30 minutes."



Wallace said using social media to stay engaged with your convention audience members after they have gone home can be as important as engagement during the event. She advised creating an established content calendar for recurring events that can be used year round to help create the event environment.



"If you have an engaged audience, keep serving them content and share-reuse their content," she said. "A big mistake planners make is only using social for the time that the event is taking place."



The most important thing to remember about social media, Langlois said, is also the most important thing about TEDxGR.



"It is about engaging our community in a conversation," he said. "Social media is a part of that strategy."