Robert Gray of Terry, who won the Democratic primary for governor, stands outside the governor's office at the state Capitol in Jackson on Wednesday. (Photo: Rogelio V. Solis/AP)

Robert Gray’s CB handle is “Silent Knight.”

His new title is Democratic nominee for governor.

Gray, a 46-year-old truck driver from Terry, created a political maelstrom Tuesday when he won the nomination. He won without political experience or name recognition. He won despite his campaign finance reports showing zero money raised or spent. He won in spite of too many things to list.

How?

“I went to a couple rallies. I’m not a people person. I don’t like invading people’s privacy. They knew I was running for governor. I talked to a few people. I got to speak in Meridian. We got like five minutes.”

With perhaps the most unlikely political victory in modern Mississippi history in his back pocket, Gray moves to November’s general election against incumbent Republican Gov. Phil Bryant.

Gray is admittedly shy and doesn’t talk much. He didn’t tell his mother, or any other family or friends, he was running. His mom called him Tuesday and told him she’d voted for him, thinking she’d cast her ballot for a candidate with the same name. By midday Wednesday, Gray said, he had not spoken with friends or family since he secured the nomination.

“It’s not every day the average Joe decides to run for governor,” Gray said. “They know my personality. They know I’m low-key. Jumping into a situation like this, they probably in their wildest imagination never thought it was me.”

His CB nom de plume is a reflection of his preference to stay quiet. It’s also the perfect descriptor for his candidacy. “I’m here, and nobody knows anything about me,” he said.

That anonymity will soon evaporate. Gray is unmarried and has no children. He’s a graduate of Provine High School. He attended Hinds Community College and held a series of sales jobs before getting into the trucking business in the 1990s. He owns his own big rig and does business as Fancy Horse Transportation. Gray formed the business in 1998, according to records kept at the secretary of state’s office. The business is in good standing.

He recently has run over-the-road routes that have taken him to the northeastern United States. Later this week, he’ll haul a load of sweet potatoes to Pennsylvania.

Politically, Gray sounds a lot like Dr. Valerie Short and Vicki Slater, the two women he beat in Tuesday’s primary. Gray said the state “absolutely” should expand its Medicaid program under the Affordable Care Act, citing layoffs at hospitals and the need for physicians in the state.

The Mississippi Adequate Education Program, the formula that determines how much money each school district receives from the state, should be fully funded, too. Gray said he will vote in November for a ballot initiative that would constitutionally mandate full funding of the adequate education formula. (Voting for anything in November would be a divergence for Gray, who admitted personal errands he ran around Jackson on Tuesday kept him from voting.)

Education and health care have served as talking points for Democrats at every level in Mississippi since the last statewide election cycle.

More recently, the state flag has entered the discussion. Though a smattering of Republicans — including House Speaker Philip Gunn — has endorsed removing the Confederate emblem from the official banner, the majority of anti-flag rhetoric has come from Democrats. Gary added his name Wednesday. “It’s no benefit to the state,” he said. “If the people that want it, it can be their flag, but it can’t represent the state.”

Gray would like to discuss the issues with Bryant in a debate. “I figured that was part of the situation,” he said.

State Democratic party officials got the first crack at Gray on Wednesday afternoon. He was scheduled to meet with them after he wrapped up an informal Q&A with media at the Capitol.

Gray said he had little contact with party chairman Rickey Cole since campaign season started but did meet him in Meridian.

“I imagine they have a lot of questions for me,” Gray said.

Contact Clay Chandler at (601) 961-7264 or cchandler@gannett.com. Follow @claychand on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://on.thec-l.com/1SQBPBY