COLUMBIA - An audit has found data on child deaths from the Department of Social Services and other state agencies is unreliable and potentially inaccurate.

The Legislative Audit Council released its long-awaited audit Friday, which also said DSS does not ensure its workforce is well-qualified or paid competitively when compared to similar positions in South Carolina.

The report also noted that the state's data on child maltreatment deaths, especially of those involving DSS, is "not reliable and should not be used as a measure of agency performance."

Further, a State Law Enforcement Division database that is supposed to track violent, unexpected and unexplained child fatalities is incomplete and lacked at least 152 fatalities.

The audit has been in the works for nearly two years. It was ordered in 2012, when Rep. Jenny Horne, R-Summerville, and more than two dozen members of the Statehouse Republican Caucus asked the council to review DSS. The council conducts independent performance audits of state agencies and programs.

Haley's gubernatorial opponents seized on the report as a sign that the state needs a new leader, and lawmakers also voiced concerns.

"Clearly, what we've come to understand today is that this report confirms what we we've all known," said Sen. Joel Lourie, D-Columbia. "That this is an agency that has been in complete dysfunction for some time and the result of this has been complete tragedy."

Problems in 34 of 46 counties

The audit said the missing cases from the SLED database could mean the number of child maltreatment deaths may be underreported to the federal government.

Using data from several other state agencies, including the Department of Public Safety, auditors found those fatalities - for various reasons - were not entered into the database between 2009 and 2013.While discussing the audit with the Senate's DSS Oversight Subcommittee on Friday, LAC Director Perry Simpson said an issue of coroners underreporting deaths to SLED was not isolated to one part of the state or one county.

"What we found was that there was at least one case in 34 counties," Simpson said. "It was basically a statewide issue."

Further, the reports DSS turns over quarterly to SLED are compiled from various sources, including media reports, which creates a discrepancy in numbers and an inaccurate measure of cases with prior DSS involvement.

Some deaths were listed as accidental or natural, and the audit concluded that many deaths - even in instances where DSS was involved - might not have been preventable.

"It is likely that a substantial number of the deaths with prior DSS involvement resulted from circumstances in which it is questionable whether DSS could have intervened to prevent the fatality," it said.

Lawmakers skeptical

When it comes to DSS employees, the audit found the agency does not require workers have college degrees in social work, behavioral sciences or that they at least have relevant experience. Studies show that workers with degrees in the field are linked to lower voluntary turnover rates, auditors reported.

But turnover rates at the child welfare agency vary depending on whom you ask. The audit said DSS has inaccurately reported the agency's turnover rates.

On Thursday, DSS touted it had a 24 percent turnover rate, which is below the national average of 30 to 40 percent. But the audit said the agency had a turnover rate that exceeded 65 percent between 2011 and 2013, and exceed 58 percent between 2011 and 2014.

The audit said DSS reported they had 1,178 employees in 2013-14. Data calculated by auditors, however, found that in 2013 the agency had 577 caseworkers. DSS Acting Director Amber Gillum said Friday the agency had 676 caseworkers as of Sept. 16.

Gillum also told The Post and Courier Thursday the agency is on an aggressive hiring plan and intends to add 221 staffers by the end of the fiscal year. But Sen. Katrina Shealy was skeptical about the agency's ability to do so, especially after learning about the turnover rates.

"How in the heck are you going to hire so many people when you've got as many people leaving as you've got coming," Shealy, R-Lexington, said after the hearing.

Further, there is no central record of training and certifications of workers who stay. There's also no central record of the workers' continuing education, which results in an increased chance of caseworkers who are not meeting the agency's requirements.

Yet, keeping central records was one of many recommendations made by the LAC during its 1985 audit of the agency.

Sen. Tom Young, R-Aiken, who is chairman of the DSS subcommittee, recommended Gillum review previous reports to ensure issues are addressed.

"It's going to be important for us to continue our work and for the agency to continue to be focused in these areas," Young said. "We don't want to have to keep kicking the can down the road and seeing the same issues pop up if at all possible."

'Excessive' caseloads

The audit also found caseloads for workers were "excessive and inequitable" from county to county. The agency had 19 percent of workers statewide with more than 50 children, 11 percent with more than 60 children, and 3 percent with more than 75 children.

"There's a dramatic spread in caseloads between counties," said Andrew Young, the audit's manager. "Even within the small counties there is variation."

In Charleston, for example, caseworkers' loads were 73 percent higher than the agency's standard, while their loads in Beaufort were 46 percent higher.

And when it comes to screening and investigating children who have been abused or neglected, the agency does not have "an adequate system," auditors said. Almost one in four children whose cases were deemed for investigation were not seen within 24 hours, according to the report. Plus, the agency allows for county offices that screen abuse and neglect reports to delay the decision on whether an investigation should be initiated for up to 24 hours after a report is received.

The audit also found the likelihood of the agency investigating a case of neglect or abuse has dropped, because DSS instead directs cases to third-party companies that offer services such as mental health counseling, parenting classes, and alcohol and drug abuse counseling, when a child is deemed to not be under "substantial risk" of harm.

But that has placed children at "greater risk," the report found. The probability of children who became victims of abuse and neglect, after being referred to a third party increased by 114 percent when comparing 2010-11 to the 2012-13 fiscal year, which is when the program was implemented for a full year.

"Those numbers to me are just shocking that we have that many abuse and neglect cases," Shealy said. "That's just showing we're not doing our job when we push it on somebody else. It's our responsibility to take care of children."

Political fallout

The operation of DSS - one of Gov. Nikki Haley's cabinet agencies - has loomed as a larger issue in her Nov. 4 re-election bid.

At least two of her opponents seized on the audit Friday.

Democratic challenger and state Sen. Vincent Sheheen, Camden, said DSS has been in crisis while "Haley and her administration have been lying about the numbers to cover their backs.

"We need honest leadership and real accountability to end this tragic failure of leadership immediately," he said. "I have put forward a plan to address this crisis, but without a governor who is more concerned with child safety than her own political career, we'll never make real progress."

Independent Candidate Tom Ervin also released a statement saying the report confirms what he has been saying in the campaign, that "not only is DSS unable to protect our vulnerable children, it forces some children to remain in harm's way."

"Gov. Haley's blanket refusal to address these problems is a sign that it will not improve under her reign," he said. "South Carolina desperately needs new leadership in the governor's office to deliver the change and reform our children deserve."

Haley spokesman Doug Mayer said the audit highlights the importance of the new direction DSS has been pursuing.

"The fact is, DSS has been hard at work for over a year making improvements and that work has produced solid results - including the creation of a statewide law enforcement liaison, a new methodology for lowering caseloads, and the ability to bring on 74 new frontline workers since this past June," he said.

"Governor Haley fully supports the agency's ongoing efforts to deliver the best possible services to the at-risk children of our state and her upcoming Executive Budget will make providing the needed resources for these goals to be met a top priority."

Reach Cynthia Roldan at 708-5891.