Colorado Gov. Bill Ritter addressed the crowd at the dedication of the Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site on May 27, 2007. ( Kenneth Jessen / Special to the Reporter-Herald )

Part three of a three-part series on the Sand Creek Massacre.

On May 27, 2007, the Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site was dedicated.

A color guard consisting of the American flag, the flag of the POW-MIAs along with the flags of various Indian nations started a solemn 2 ½ -hour dedication.

Off in the distance in a grove of trees were Cheyenne lodges, something that had not been seen in this location for over 140 years.

The chanting of tribal songs and prayers were presented, one after another concluding with the song that White Antelope sung the day of the attack. It is a song that has been kept alive by the Cheyenne and passed from generation to generation.

Colorado Gov. Bill Ritter addressed a crowd of about 2,000 on the importance of remembering the events that took place on Nov. 29, 1864.

Former U.S. Sen. Ben Nighthorse Campbell spoke to the crowd retelling the events of that day. He recounted the heroic efforts of Capt. Silas Soule who refused to fire on the unarmed Indians. A year after the massacre, Soule was gunned down on the streets of Denver. Campbell also emphasized how no one was brought to justice.

The dedication of the Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site was a time of healing. Cheyenne and Arapaho led prayers of forgiveness and for a future of respect between the peoples of the United States. They talked about their traditions, oral history and the future of the American Indian, some of it delivered in their native language.

Advertisement

Eugene Little Coyote of the Northern Cheyenne provided emotion and significance associated with the dedication of this site. Richard Little Bear, president of the Chief Dull Knife College, added his plea for the financial help that was once given to tribes for improved health care.

Those non-Indians who were instrumental creating the Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site were presented with blankets. This included David Halaas, former president of the Colorado Historical Society (now called History Colorado), who made public the horrific events that day in November 1864.

To recreate the scene, the Cheyenne and Arapaho set up lodges along Sand Creek. At the time of the dedication, it had been well over 140 years since Indians had camped at this location. (Kenneth Jessen / Special to the Reporter-Herald)

It has been a long struggle to designate this place on the endless prairie.

In 1998, Nighthorse Campbell introduced a bill that resulted in legislation to study the site. It directed the National Park Service to identify and locate the actual site of the massacre where an estimated 163 Cheyenne and Arapaho Indians were slaughtered.

Archaeology, tribal traditions, aerial photographs and historical documents were brought into play.

Based on these findings, President Clinton signed into law the Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site Act. It was long overdue and finally recognized the significance the conflict between American Indians and white settlers.

Little Robe and his family were at the Sand Creek massacre in 1864. (Library of Congress)

The National Park Service was able to purchase 920 acres on either side of Sand Creek with another 1,465 acres owned by the Cheyenne and Arapaho tribes. The Indian land was conveyed to the United States to be operated as a land trust.

The Sand Creek Massacre Historic Site is located in Kiowa County east of Eads and north of Colo. 96. County Road 54 leads north for seven miles to County Road W.

Heading east on County Road W, the entrance to the site is about 1.3 miles on the north side of the road. At the site is a small visitors station open on a limited basis.

There are several trails, one leading to an overlook of the south end of the massacre site. There aren't any trails in the creek bed due to the sensitive nature of the land. Because of the remote nature of the site, the National Park Service is in the process of building a visitors center in Eads, but this is years in the future.

There is another side to this tragic story. As presented by contemporary historian Gregory Michno, he provides the military side of this event as a battle rather than a massacre. According the military accounts, the Indians put up a fierce fight. In the process, upwards to 25 soldiers were killed according to Michno's highly detailed research.

For more information, contact Alexa Roberts, Superintendent, Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site, 719-438-5916 or at Bent's Old Fort, 719-383-5012.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years. This year his columns will focus mainly on the history of Rocky Mountain National Park.