States pushing back January enrollment deadlines - Microsoft vet to lead HealthCare.gov repair - Finance’s Clapsis to Caesar’s

By Kyle Cheney

With help from Jennifer Haberkorn, Jason Millman, Paige Winfield Cunningham and Brett Norman

Story Continued Below

OBAMAS TO BRING MOMS TO THE OVAL OFFICE FOR HEALTH CARE CHAT — President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama will talk health care in the Oval Office today with a group of mothers who support the Affordable Care Act. It’s part of an effort to highlight the health law’s provisions allowing kids to stay on their parents’ health insurance until age 26 — and as a reminder that moms are often the ones who make health care decisions for their families. Michelle Obama also plans to do three pro-ACA interviews with radio hosts Yolanda Adams, Al Sharpton and Joe Madison. It’s the latest media blitz, according to a White House official, that has also included high-level interviews with Women’s Day, Parents Cosmopolitan, Marie Claire, Glamour and others.

STATES PUSHING BACK JANUARY ENROLLMENT DEADLINES — It’s not just HealthCare.gov scrambling to smooth things over by the New Year. States running their own enrollment systems are pushing back deadlines for people to enroll in coverage by Jan. 1. Maryland announced yesterday that it would push its deadline back to Dec. 27, just a few days after the Obama administration formalized a plan to set the deadline to Dec. 23 for the 36 states relying on HealthCare.gov. And Rhode Island went further, giving consumers until Dec. 31 to sign up for a plan effective Jan. 1. In each case, the deadline for enrollees to pay their premiums extends into January. Illinois, too, is eyeing a change to the payment deadline. http://politico.pro/1bYVQz7

Happy Wednesday and welcome to PULSE, where we’re wishing a happy birthday to Medicaid Watch — the Pro Health feature that tracks what the states are up to on the major Obamacare coverage expansion. Any guesses for which states, if any, will flip in the New Year? Send ’em to kcheney@politico.com Check out the map as it stands today: http://politico.pro/1keAa5l

“Just a wanderin’ PULSE, I go from town to town.” (h/t Peter Ashkenaz)

COUNTDOWN TO ENROLLMENT DEADLINE FOR JAN. 1 COVERAGE: 5 days.

MICROSOFT VETERAN TO LEAD HEALTHCARE.GOV REPAIR — The Obama administration tapped a Microsoft veteran to take over HealthCare.gov oversight, a move that will allow the current overseer, Jeff Zients, to transition to the National Economic Council, which he’ll lead for President Barack Obama. Pro Tech’s Alex Byers reports: “[Kurt] DelBene’s responsibilities over the next several months will cover the full gamut of running a major Web presence, if HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius’s announcement is any indication. He’ll provide management expertise, oversee the site’s operation and even advise on marketing and communications.” The pick already won high praise from former Microsoft chief Bill Gates. http://politico.pro/1cPjsWY

PULSE SCOOPLET: FINANCE’S CLAPSIS TO CAESAR’S — Senate Finance Committee staffer Tony Clapsis is departing the Hill for a new job at Caesars Entertainment. He’ll be a vice president and executive associate to CEO Gary Loveman, who has made a name for himself as an innovator of employee wellness programs. “Leaving here is hard. I think this is the greatest job I’m going to have,” Clapsis told PULSE, adding that he’d like to stick around to see SGR repealed. “But it’s been a 4.5-year run for me. I’ve been looking forward to a new challenge as well.” He started at the Finance Committee in April 2009, just as Chairman Max Baucus was holding the first roundtables on the bill that would become the ACA. Clapsis says he’ll be based in DC but “on the road extensively” for the Las Vegas-based company, which might be why he asked for shout-out to his “exceptionally loving and supportive wife, Christine.”

ADMINISTRATION PLANNING RESPONSE ON ISSA MEETING ARRANGEMENTS — The Obama administration says it will respond to a letter today from House Oversight Committee Chairman Darrell Issa agreeing to a meeting with officials over documents about the security of HealthCare.gov. HHS spokeswoman Joanne Peters said the website is compliant with federal security standards, pushing back against charges by Issa that the administration failed to warn the public about security problems before the site launched Oct. 1. Documents released to the committee late last week under subpoena show that private contractor MITRE warned of significant data vulnerabilities in the system, Issa said. But Peters said that the website was tested before Oct. 1 and that all security concerns have either been fixed or are part of strategies and plans to get fixed.

HEALTHCARE.GOV SURVEY ON CANCELED PLANS APPEARS, DISAPPEARS — A survey asking about health insurance policy cancellations briefly appeared today on the Obamacare enrollment website. “Have you recently received a notice from your insurance company saying they’re no longer offering you coverage?” the HealthCare.gov survey read. The survey, which appeared before the page allowing website visitors to create an account, also asked if people currently had insurance or had gone a long time without it. A POLITICO inquiry to CMS shortly before noon wasn’t returned until after the survey was taken off the site just over an hour later. “As part of our ongoing effort to understand and improve the consumer experience on HealthCare.gov, we will have periodic surveys for users,” said CMS spokesman Aaron Albright in an emailed statement.

NRCC ATTRIBUTES MATHESON RETIREMENT TO OBAMACARE – Rep. Jim Matheson (D-Utah) may have voted against Obamacare, but the NRCC is convinced that his decision not to run for reelection next year is a signal that the law is going to “become a total nightmare for any Democrat running in 2014.” “If it’s this bad for him, imagine how bad 2014 will be for the vast majority of Democrats who actually supported ObamaCare from its start,” NRCC Chairman Greg Walden said in a statement.

GLENN CLOSE ON THE HILL – The actress will visit Capitol Hill this morning to help tout the mental health bill championed by Sens. Debbie Stabenow and Roy Blunt, a version of which was added to the Senate Finance Committee’s SGR legislation last week. It would establish a demonstration program where community mental health providers would offer a broader range of services under Medicaid. Close, whose sister and nephew both have bipolar disorder, has started a foundation to bring attention to mental illness. She also attended a White House conference on mental illness last spring.

** At Philips, our mission is to create a company that makes a difference to you. We believe the way to achieve this is through innovation — making cities safer and people healthier. Others may focus on what innovation does; we focus on what it does for you. http://www.usa.philips.com/**

DOCTORS GROUP TOUTS POLL ON PATIENT CARE PREFERENCES – A new Ipsos poll commissioned by the American Academy of Family Physicians suggests Americans overwhelmingly prefer physicians over non-physicians for their medical care. It’s a new salvo in an intensifying conversation about the nation’s supply of doctors, and it comes as some states are turning to physician’s assistants and nurse practitioner to help fill gaps in primary care. “[Americans] understand that physicians have the medical expertise necessary to know whether an apparently simple symptom signals a complication of a chronic condition, the onset of a new condition affecting multiple organs, or a short-term and easily treated problem,” said AAFP President Reid Blackwelder, in a statement accompanying the poll. “They want that expertise for themselves and their loved ones.” The poll of 1,000 adults, conducted from Nov. 8 — Nov. 15 carries a 3.5 percentage point margin of error. http://bit.ly/18OJfdm

A LOOK AT THE NEW OBAMACARE DICTIONARY – American Action Forum has a new resource for the acronym-challenged: ACADictionary.com The site is intended as a resource for researchers, journalists and others who need a quick reference to the OED-sized lexicon associated with Obamacare: http://bit.ly/1fk0ibp

PCORI ANNOUNCED $93.5M IN AWARDS — The Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute has awarded $93.5 million for 29 research data networks that together will make up PCORnet, a new nationwide network intended to integrate diverse health information in support of a wide range of study designs for comparative effectiveness research. The awards will fund 11 clinical research networks involving clinics, hospitals and health systems, as well as 18 “patient-powered” networks of patient groups and their partners to target specific conditions. The institute, which was charged with furthering comparative effectiveness research by the federal health care law, also announced $97.3 million for 53 CER projects. That funding also was announced at a PCORI Board of Governors teleconference today.

WHAT WE’RE READING, by Jason Millman

Consumers and insurers are still waiting on HHS guidance on a “special enrollment period” for those who’ve struggled to sign up for coverage, USA Today reports. http://usat.ly/JFPo5Y

While the White House billed yesterday’s meeting with tech CEOs as health care-focused, a source familiar with the discussion told CNN that the tech chiefs came to D.C. to talk about surveillance. http://cnn.it/1czBCsg

Minnesota’s exchange board will speak publicly today about former executive director April Todd-Malmlov’s abrupt resignation, the Minnesota Post reports. http://bit.ly/1enskGv

In Virginia, a special legislative panel is still far apart on whether the state should expand Medicaid, the Associated Press reports. http://wapo.st/1bParMo

The Massachusetts exchange, going through its own tech struggles, has removed CGI’s eligibility software from its application processing system, the Wall Street Journal writes. http://on.wsj.com/1bP9lQV

Conservative columnist Jonah Goldberg wonders at what point insurers, who stand to benefit from the ACA, will revolt against the Obama administration for the bungled rollout. http://lat.ms/1cPYqHy

New Jersey’s largest insurers aren’t taking the option to renew canceled individual health policies for another year, the Bergen Record reports. http://bit.ly/1caElNN

** At Philips, our mission is to create a company that makes a difference to you. We believe the way to achieve this is through innovation — making cities safer and people healthier. Others may focus on what innovation does; we focus on what it does for you. http://www.usa.philips.com/**

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **