A few years ago, Steve Martin was hosting "Saturday Night Live." During one of the night’s sketches, Martin played a family man that cannot control his spending. As Martin and his wife sit around a table wondering why they are still in debt, a spokesman played by Chris Parnell chimes in, “Did you know that millions of Americans live with debt they cannot control? That's why I developed this unique new program for managing your debt. It's called 'Don't Buy Stuff You Cannot Afford.'”

As an economist, I want to find this satirical pamphlet and mail it to President Barack Obama and congressional Democrats during ongoing budget negotiations. Like Parnell, when asked about funding certain pet projects, I want to respond, “Nope, you shouldn’t buy stuff when you don’t have the money.” We literally do not have the money, and the hole is increasingly getting deeper and deeper.

Luckily, the budget committees in Congress are doing their job. And this week, the House passed a GOP budget that aims to balance within nine years through significant spending reform. It turns control over certain mandatory programs over to the states and repeals Obamacare. The Senate Republicans passed a similar budget blueprint early Friday morning.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

Although both plans stay under the discretionary spending caps, the bipartisan agreement made in the Budget Control Act, over $90 billion has been shuffled into defense spending to do it. It’s a better budget to be sure, but one still filled with old tricks and gimmicks.

Economists and free-market advocates rightly remain skeptical of certain assumptions, but House and Senate Republicans should be credited with passing a budget that is drastically different than President Money Bags’ utopian vision. Obama’s recent budget request never balances, raises taxes by $1.8 trillion to pay for new spending and attempts no reforms to entitlement spending. Clearly the White House and the budget committees in Congress have two different visions for our nation’s future finances.

The appropriation process is still ongoing and fiscally responsible lawmakers should be guided by their principles more than ever. If confused, as seems to happen these days, Republicans can look to Americans for Prosperity’s outlined principles when evaluating budget priorities. These lay out commonsense ways for protecting taxpayers and controlling spending using the budget process. (Full disclosure, I serve on the organization’s board of directors).



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Democratic Party]

In particular, lawmakers should continue to pursue the repeal of Obama’s health care law. In this regard, it is not an overreach but absolutely necessary to rein in overspending. In many ways, our budgetary crisis is inseparably related to our current health care crisis.

In addition, comprehensive tax reform is needed to not only rectify our broken domestic tax code but to put us in a position to be competitive in a global economy. Currently, the maze of deductions is a system of picking winners and losers; the loser traditionally being small business. If America’s tax code became efficient, fair and competitive, corporate incentives would not be needed to level the playing field. House Ways and Means Chairman Paul Ryan should pick up where his predecessor, former Rep. Dave Camp, R-Mich., left off and engage in comprehensive tax reform.

Republicans should also tackle big issues that are lurking below the surface. For example, recently Democrats and Republicans in the House passed the “Doc Fix” bill. The Doc Fix is nothing more than a special "appropriation that keeps Medicare providers from seeing big drops in [their] federal reimbursements." The problem with the Doc Fix is that, according to the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, the measure's costs would total $214 billion over the next ten years, $141 billion of which "would come from deeper budget deficits."



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Congress]

Oftentimes, Republican governors raise fees instead of taxes to appear to be fiscally conservative without actually reforming or shrinking government at all. In Congress, Doc Fix-like provisions make it almost impossible to tackle real spending reform. Whether the sacred cow is defense spending or Medicare spending, special interests will squeal when real reform is attempted.

America really is at a crossroads, it is not a strategic tactic to score political points, and kicking the debt can down the road only continues to make the problem worse. When our spending is out of control, innovation, entrepreneurship, world respect and almost every other measure of American success suffers. We need Republicans to continue to fight for a responsible and sustainable budget.

Luckily, if Obama and congressional Democrats need more than or do not understand the pamphlet "Don't Buy Stuff You Cannot Afford," Parnell has them covered. At the close of the sketch Parnell pitches, “If you order now you'll also receive, 'Seriously, If You Don't Have the Money, Don't Buy It!' along with a 12-month subscription to 'Stop Buying Stuff Magazine.'”