Rivals rip Rauner during Republican governor debate

But Rauner continued to attack his rivals as “career politicians” and said his proposed constitutional amendment for legislative term limits had 275,000 of the 300,000 signatures needed as a first step to put the measure on the ballot.

Republican governor candidates Kirk Dillard and Bill Brady on Tuesday sought to sully front runner Bruce Rauner, contending the wealthy venture capitalist was spending an “obscene” amount of money and risked gridlocking Springfield like ex-Democratic Gov. Rod Blagojevich.

Republican candidates for governor of Illinois, from left to right, Bill Brady, Dan Rutherford, Kirk Dillard, and Bruce Rauner prepare to speak a a public form at the David and Reva Logan Center for the Arts at the University of Chicago in Chicago on Tuesday. (Terrence Antonio James / Chicago Tribune)

The comments came as Rauner, Dillard, Brady and state Treasurer Dan Rutherford marked two weeks until Election Day with a debate — one of the final three ahead of the March 18 primary.

The hour-long forum was co-sponsored by WMAQ-TV Ch. 5, the University of Chicago’s Institute of Politics and the Harris School of Public Policy. It was broadcast from the university’s Logan Center for the Arts' Performance Hall.

Both Dillard and Brady have been actively vying to become the chief alternative to Rauner in the minds of Republican voters. But each has acknowledged they have some catching up to do after Rauner dominated fundraising and TV airtime while they have struggled for attention.

Rauner has put $6 million of his personal wealth into the race while raising another $8 million, an amount far exceeding what his opponents have generated combined.

Dillard, a state senator from Hinsdale, said he believed there was a “healthy medium” between raising outside money and self-funding a political campaign.

“But what Mr. Rauner has done is he’s just made it obscene,” Dillard said. He lashed out at Rauner’s contention that he, Brady and Rutherford were merely career politicians.

“When Bruce stands here and says the three of us are part of the problem — all three of us are (civilian) legislators,” said Dillard, a lawyer. “We all have private sector experience and I’m not part of the problem.”

Brady, the 2010 GOP governor nominee who defeated Dillard by 193 votes in the primary, took his criticism of Rauner even deeper — comparing him to Blagojevich, the disgraced and imprisoned former governor.

“The more I hear Bruce Rauner speak, the more he sounds like Rod Blagojevich. That’s the way he (Blagojevich) came to Springfield. You have to bring people together. But you have to be decisive. You can’t be divisive,” said Brady, a state senator from Bloomington making his third consecutive bid for governor.

“Mr. Rauner continues to berate the legislature and the experience of the legislature like Rod Blagojevich did. That didn’t solve our problems. We need a leader.”