Jonathan Cohn has a useful, comprehensive summary of what we now know about premiums under Obamacare, and does a very good job of keeping his temper in the face of the obscurantists. As I read it, however, I found myself hankering for a simple way to characterize what’s going on. So I’d like to throw out a stylized diagram, which looks like this:

Photo

Remember the three-legged stool: the same policies available to everyone, regardless of preexisting conditions, the mandate, so that almost everyone (we hope) joins the risk pool, and subsidies to make insurance affordable to those with lower incomes. Who loses under this system — that is, who is better off with the present non-system? Well, if you’re very healthy you might be able to get a cheap policy now, or feel reasonably secure going without insurance. Under Obamacare, someone blessed with good health might find his (or, more rarely, her) premiums going up, and if he’s wealthy as well as healthy he might not get much if anything in the way of subsidies (and if he’s very wealthy he’ll face new taxes). So we’ve know all along that there were going to be at least some people in the northeast corner of my box, doing worse under the new system. The question has always been, how many?

It’s not an easy question to answer, even now — but all the evidence coming in suggests that my dotted line is further up and to the right than previously believed, implying fewer losers and more winners from Obamacare.

How have the right’s health pundits responded? Not with contrary evidence, but by telling us things we already knew, and pretending that they are startling and destructive revelations. Some of it simply amounts to saying that there are indeed some people in the northeast corner of my box. Not everyone wins from the policy! Well, duh.

But at least that’s a valid comparison. The other main argument is that if you look at average premiums under Obamacare, they will be higher than the premiums currently paid by young, healthy people in states without community rating. Again, well duh: insurers are now going to be covering people with health problems who weren’t covered before, so it would be a miracle if the premiums they charged were the same. It is, as Ezra Klein has said, a comparison of apples with oranges you might not even have been allowed to buy.

The thing is, supporters of Obamacare could have been negatively surprised by the premium results. Some people were clearly going to win, but if the bids had come in high both the number of losers and the cost of the subsidies would be looking uncomfortably high. As it turns out, however, the news is looking pretty good.