Photo

WASHINGTON — Officials representing state medical boards across the country have drafted a model law that would make it much easier for doctors licensed in one state to treat patients in other states, whether in person, by videoconference or online.

The plan, representing the biggest change in medical licensing in decades, opens the door to greater use of telemedicine and could alleviate the doctor shortage, a growing problem as millions of people gain insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

The draft legislation — in the form of an interstate compact, a legally binding agreement among states — was developed by the Federation of State Medical Boards, composed of the agencies that license and discipline doctors.

“The proposed compact would create a new pathway to speed the licensing of doctors seeking to practice medicine in multiple states,” said Dr. Humayun J. Chaudhry, the president of the federation. “It would allow doctors to see more patients than ever before, if they want to.”

The proposal could increase access to doctors by people in underserved areas. It could also allow people with complex illnesses or rare diseases to more easily consult experts at places like the Mayo Clinic using telemedicine technologies, which connect a patient in one location with doctors in another.

Sixteen senators — 10 Republicans and six Democrats — commended state officials and endorsed the idea in a recent letter.

Under the proposed compact, doctors who meet certain standards could sidestep a longstanding requirement that they apply for licenses state by state. But it would preserve the authority of each state to regulate the practice of medicine within its borders.

Doctors would still have to comply with the laws and rules of each state in which they chose to practice. By definition, the compact says, “the practice of medicine occurs where the patient is located at the time of the physician-patient encounter,” regardless of where the doctor may be.

A compact is essentially a contract among states that approve and adopt it as part of state law. The compact on medical licensure would be administered and enforced by an interstate commission.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Working through the commission, a doctor licensed in one state could seek an “expedited license” from one or more additional states. To be eligible, a doctor would have to be certified in a medical specialty and have no history of being disciplined, penalized or punished by a court, a medical licensing agency or the Drug Enforcement Administration. (About three-fourths of doctors have been certified as specialists.) Moreover, the compact says, a doctor could not obtain an expedited license if the doctor was “under active investigation by a licensing agency or law enforcement authority in any state, federal or foreign jurisdiction.”

As part of the compact, states would agree to share information on doctors who had been disciplined or were under investigation. The commission would serve as a clearinghouse. If a license is revoked or suspended in a doctor’s home state, then all licenses issued to the doctor by other states participating in the compact could be automatically revoked or suspended.

The proposal comes as more doctors and hospitals are exploring the use of telemedicine.

The Mayo Clinic, in Minnesota, for example, has established links with more than two dozen hospitals and health systems including: Dartmouth-Hitchcock in New Hampshire; NorthShore University HealthSystem in the suburbs of Chicago; Baptist Health Care in Pensacola, Fla.; and ThedaCare in Wisconsin.

Mayo experts, working with local doctors, help evaluate patients and make treatment recommendations. Robots allow stroke experts to observe and examine patients hundreds of miles away.

“Cross-border licensure is a strategic imperative as we move forward in this brave new world,” said Kathleen M. Harrington, who is in charge of government relations at Mayo.

Interstate compacts have been used since the nation’s early years. More than 200 are in effect today. Initially they were used to settle boundary disputes. Many allocate water rights among states. The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey was created by an interstate compact, as was the transit agency that runs subways in the Washington area. Other compacts govern use of the Great Lakes, the supervision of juvenile offenders and enforcement of state tax laws.

Mari E. Robinson, executive director of the Texas Medical Board, said her agency had voted to support the compact and would share its views with the State Legislature.

“The compact would make it easier for physicians to get a license to practice in multiple states and would strengthen public protection because it would help states share disciplinary information that they cannot share now,” Ms. Robinson said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Dr. Jon V. Thomas, a member of the Minnesota Board of Medical Practice, said the compact would bring licensure up to date for the 21st century, accommodating the rapid growth of telemedicine technology without any loss of state authority.

From time to time, members of Congress have suggested a larger federal role in the licensing and regulation of doctors.

But Dr. Thomas said, “A federal solution for a problem that can be solved by the states would be wasteful, cumbersome and inefficient.”

Blake T. Maresh, executive director of the Washington State Board of Osteopathic Medicine and Surgery, said the criteria for an expedited license would be higher in some ways than the current licensing standards. For example, he said, states generally do not require that doctors be certified in a medical specialty.

The Obama administration is promoting the use of telemedicine and has provided several hundred thousand dollars in grants to the federation to increase cooperation among states in licensing doctors.