UHC Vows To Appeal Ruling Against Cutting Doctors From Network

Decision Came Just Two Days Before Saturday's Enrollment Deadline

The insurer, however, warned that the ruling — just two days before the Saturday enrollment deadline — would confuse patients, and it promised to appeal.

Doctors associations and public officials on Friday celebrated a federal judge's decision to block UnitedHealthcare from cutting thousands of doctors from its Medicare Advantage network in 2014.

How it all plays out is likely to be watched closely by other states, including Ohio, New York, and Florida, where the insurer also has notified physicians they would be dropped.

"This is setting a precedent," said Dr. Robin Oshman, president of the Fairfield County Medical Association. "They are watching to see what happens in Connecticut."

In his decision to issue a temporary injunction, filed in U.S. District Court in Bridgeport on Thursday, Judge Stefan R. Underhill said the Fairfield County Medical Association and the Hartford County Medical Association showed that the removal of 2,250 doctors from the UnitedHealthcare Medicare Advantage network could cause irreparable harm.

The injunction prohibits the health insurer from dropping any of the associations' doctors from the network, from notifying patients of any of those terminations for 2014, and from removing those doctors — 810 primary care physicians and 1,440 specialists — from its directories for next year.

Mark Thompson, executive director of the Fairfield County Medical Association, said the injunction will keep those 2,250 doctors in the network for 2014. "This will lock those patients in with their doctors for another year," he said.

A UnitedHealthcare spokeswoman on Friday said she could not speculate on whether the doctors would be in the network for the entire year.

UnitedHealthcare is the largest private Medicare insurer in Connecticut.

Soon after the ruling was made public Thursday, company spokesman Terence O'Hara said in an email: "We respectfully disagree with the court's preliminary ruling and intend to appeal immediately. We believe the court's ruling will create unnecessary and harmful confusion and disruption to Medicare beneficiaries in Connecticut."

Connecticut Attorney General George Jepsen on Friday hailed the ruling.

"This decision confirms my view that these terminations — unprecedented in scope — offend public policy and threaten irreparable harm to patients whose relationships with their doctors are at risk of disruption," Jepsen said in a written release.

"United's lack of transparency for both physicians and patients has been of great concern," Jepsen said. "I urge United to abide by the court's decision and its clear contractual obligations to all affected physicians, not just those who are members of the Fairfield and Hartford County Medical Associations. Its failure to do so will only compound the confusion United has already caused to thousands of vulnerable Connecticut patients and prospective Medicare Advantage enrollees, who deserve much greater care and respect."

Last month, the state's congressional delegation wrote to the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services, which determines whether an insurer's network is adequate for patients, with their concerns about the situation with UnitedHealthcare. The center, which could restore the doctors to the network, has not responded to the letter.