Justice The St. Louis County Police’s Shockingly Insensitive Tweet About A 12-Year-Old Gunned Down By Cops CREDIT: AP Photo/Mark Duncan Activist Art McCoy holds a photo of Tamir Rice before a protest.

This morning, the St. Louis County Police Department published a shockingly insensitive tweet about Tamir Rice, the 12-year-old boy fatally gunned down by Cleveland police on November 22 for holding a toy gun — and then denied first aid for minutes. The first line of the post, “Kids will be Kids?” immediately triggered a storm of criticism and negative feedback on Twitter.

At the time of his death, Rice was playing with a toy gun that was missing the orange warning tip that is supposed to identify it as fake. The St. Louis PD tweet, which linked to a longer post (that has since been deleted) from the St. Louis County Police City of Fenton Precinct Facebook page zeroed in on this detail, arguing that airsoft guns, despite being toys, resemble real guns and thus don’t impact how “officers are trained to respond.”

“Police will respond as though it is a real gun until it can be confirmed one way or the other,” read the post. “If an Airsoft pistol is tucked in your pants like a holster then obviously the orange tip is no longer visible. The police will respond lights and sirens and come to a screeching halt in the area where your child is playing with the gun.” The post (replete with grammatical errors) then offered advice for parents: “Do not run away. They need to no longer have the gun in their hands, throw it away from them. They need to comply with officers instructions. They may be ordered to lie down on the ground.”

The Facebook post couldn’t have been more poorly timed. It comes on the heels of a string of recent incidents of police brutality against black men — including the non-indictment of Officer Darren Wilson in the shooting death of teenager Michael Brown, which sparked widespread protests throughout Ferguson, Missouri, and the rest of the country; and a grand jury decision in Staten Island yesterday that refused to indict NYPD Officer David Pantaleo in the chokehold death of Eric Garner, an unarmed man stopped for selling untaxed cigarettes.

The post, however, declined to address allegations of police brutality or a shoot-first culture within law enforcement. “This article is not about a boy losing his life, whether this was a justified shooting, or whether the cops acted too fast,” it read. “Kids will be kids”, and your children will continue playing war in the common grounds.”