Who will make it to the finish line? (Photo: Adam Zyglis)

Who’s going to step up?

I have been carefully watching and listening to the speeches and debates among candidates for President of the United States. So far, there is no one who is outstanding on the issues, but there is more than one who is disqualifying themselves from consideration based upon their religious zealotry.

Being a person of faith adds trustworthiness to their character, but evangelizing brings an unwanted element of intolerance. I do not want your religion, with all its restrictions and dogma, in control of my government. I believe there are many who share my opinion.

George Silberzahn

Wilmington

Front the bill

Our County Executive, Tom Gordon wants to give $700 bonuses to all county employees. He says it is for all of their hard work. Let’s call it what it is Tom, you are just buying some votes for the next election. You and the rest of the county employees already have a health insurance plan that would cost the non-government employed citizens of Delaware $1,000 to $1,500 per month. That is an extra $12,000 to $18,000 per year in addition to the salary. Most people cannot even afford the quality of the health insurance plan the county and state employees now enjoy at taxpayers’ expense.

Bonuses are usually given by employers in the private sector out of their own pockets. With your generous county pension and salary that you now collect I think you can afford to pay the bonuses yourself. If you cannot, take up a collection from the rest of your friends that are also collecting pensions on top of their salaries. That should do it!

Richard Johnson

Newark

Headed in the wrong direction

We all see the current regime under Gov. Markell, Speaker Schwartzkopf and Senate Pro Tempore Blevins, want a state property tax to help balance an unfair budget. Why must the homeowner, the middle class working person, pay to cover the embarrassing spending associated with this governor and the current General Assembly? The regime sees fit to tax the middle class rather then make the cuts in government required to get spending under control.

Many Americans must be covered under Obamacare, yet teachers, government employees, and politicians get cadillac medical insurance and retirement benefits. These benefits as well as salaries far exceed those of people working as mechanics, technicians, retirees and working at our stores.

We need responsible governance or else Delaware will find itself in the same predicament as Detroit, and most recently Puerto Rico. A place that is going into bankruptcy.

Tom Koval

Bear

The Trump Show

Donald Trump is dominating the Republican primary preseason. With glitz and bombast, charm and feistiness, Trump has sidelined his 15 challengers. National media outlets of all stripes play to Trump’s strengths as a showman; they do not, or cannot, pin him down and get him to provide details of how he would govern as president. Perhaps the media expects that his candidacy will eventually fizzle or implode, but this failure to dig into his policy views – in contrast to covering his often-outlandish comments – allows his candidacy to go largely unchecked, at the expense of other candidates in the Republican field, and the nation.

Trump’s quadruple bankruptcies raise serious questions about his ability to critically assess future risks and manage growth for a large organization in a sustainable manner. His ability to overcome multiple bankruptcies also demonstrate his great ability to convince people to see past his mistakes, embrace his bold vision, and join him in his next endeavor – even if it puts more of their funds and future at risk. He must be counting on that charisma to woo Republican voters, and America, to invest our votes and our future in him. If we are to take him seriously, we need to assess the entirety of his track record as a leader and gain confidence that he would not lead the United States into his fifth organizational failure.

Michael F. Reilly

Wilmington

Formal complaint policy needed in Seaford

Quite recently, the City of Seaford has made some significant progress toward more open, citizen-friendly government by establishing a “Public Comment” section as a regular part of meeting agendas and providing some documentation (albeit last minute) to clarify meeting agenda business for citizens.

However, there is still much work to be done, especially regarding the handling of citizen complaints. In the last couple of months I have twice attempted to lodge a complaint about the actions of a top level city employee. Seaford’s mayor dismissed the first complaint saying, “We have answered these questions.” However, this complaint contained issues never before brought to the attention of the mayor or city council. In a second instance, I requested a hearing to complain about unethical behavior by the very same top-level city employee.

The City of Seaford clearly needs a citizen complaint policy which utilizes the chain-of-command sequence, as well as guarantees fair and objective hearing(s), due process and fair and objective response to citizen concerns. After all, our form of government was founded, in part, on the principle that citizens be able to seek and obtain proper redress of grievances from their elected representatives.

Dan Cannon

Seaford

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1Nrns09