Clouds hover around the tops of the 13,911-foot Mount Meeker, center left, and the 14,259-foot Longs Peak, center right, on Sept. 8, 2014. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff photographer )

Johnnie: I've always wondered if Longmont should have been called Meemont since the mountain that is most prominent to the west is Mount Meeker. As a longtime resident, I'm unfamiliar on how this mountain got its name. Can you enlighten me? — EH

EH: I promised Howard Hanson of Estes Park that the next time I got a question about mountain names, I'd turn to him. He had helped set me straight on which peaks are the Twin Sisters.

So, I asked Howard, and he lead me right to where I should have gone to start with, the U.S. Geological Survey.

According to the USGS, Mount Meeker was named for Nathan Meeker, the former agriculture editor of the New York Tribune who founded the town of Greeley in 1869.

So I went to greeleyhistory.org, where I learned that Meeker, whose publisher was Horace Greeley, "wrote an article for the Tribune in 1869 ... asking for 'hardy volunteers' to form a new community in Colorado.

"Nathan Meeker," according to the website, "was the founder of Greeley, Colorado.

"He organized a group of settlers in a company called the Union Colony. The pioneers, along with Meeker, came west in the spring of 1870 to build an utopian society based on temperance, religion, agriculture, education and family values."

Meeker's story is prominent in Colorado history.

Debt led Meeker to take on a job as the Indian agent for the Utes with the the White River Agency in 1878. His views clashed with those of the Utes, as did his actions, leading to a massacre on Sept. 29, 1879, at a site about three miles from the current town of Meeker.

(You can find an informative column about Meeker online, written by The Denver Post's Joey Bunch.)

As to why Longmont isn't Meemont or Meekmont or even Meeker, it likely would have something to do with the fact that Nathan Meeker was still living at the time of Longmont's founding and that nothing else prominent around here already had Meeker's name.

I found one reference to Mount Meeker getting its name in 1873. The town of Meeker was incorporated in 1885.

Stephen Long, who had explored and surveyed much of this area, died Sept. 4, 1864.

Send questions to johnnie@times-call.com.