Native of Germany had emigrated to the U.S. when he was 8

Hanno Jensen, at home at his residence in Lyons. "I think he was known and liked by most everyone in town," said the owner of a neighboring business to Jensen's Lyons General Store. ( Kathy Jensen / Courtesy photo )

Hanno Jensen, longtime owner of the Lyons General Store and a pillar of the town's business community, collapsed and died Wednesday. He was 68.

His wife, Kathy Jensen, said that he'd been battling cancer for four years, and had been deteriorating in recent weeks.

Dale Katechis, founder of Lyons brewery Oskar Blues, said "We're all kind of saddened and shocked" by the loss.

"He was a down-to-earth guy who loved Lyons, like all of us do," Katechis said. "It won't be the same without him."

That Jensen, who ran the General Store on Main Street for about 15 years, ended up operating a pack-and-ship/drycleaning shop — the store's name is a bit of a misnomer, but Jensen didn't want to be limited by title when he first opened — was a surprise, given the way he'd spent his life to that point.

Born in Buckeburg, Germany, and raised by a single mother, he immigrated at the age of 8 to the United States, going by oceanliner to New York, then by bus to Los Angeles. At a rest stop somewhere in the Midwest, the bus drove off without him, and his mother shouted at the driver until he turned around to pick Jensen up.

In Malibu he learned to surf, something that, along with fly-fishing, remained his greatest hobby up until his death.

He married at 21 and had two daughters, Dana and Kim. After a divorce roughly a decade later, he found himself working for the high-tech California company Ampex, where he met Kathy, a Chicago girl who moved to L.A., mostly for the warm weather, as soon as she was 18.

Advertisement

She found him charming and funny, and the two stayed married for 33 years.

"He had this very sarcastic sense of humor, and I think that there were a few people who just didn't get it," Kathy said. "But you could jokingly spar with him and have a good time."

They moved to Lyons, expecting to resume their careers in the high-tech industry in Longmont. But Jensen was laid off by Maxtor in 2002.

"He said, 'Well, I'm going to have to make a job for myself,'" Kathy said. "So we sat down and looked at what the town of Lyons needed. We asked ourselves, 'What do we always have to drive to Longmont and Boulder for?'"

Shipping and drycleaning, they decided.

Leonard Arnold, a longtime friend who moved to Westminster from Lyons after losing his home in the 2013 flood, said every trip to the store was a pick-me-up, and always came with a piece of chocolate from Jensen's desk.

"More than once, my wife and I had a choice of taking our packages over to the local FedEx in Westminster, and we drove clear over to Lyons just to see Hanno," Arnold said. "It's a far drive, but Hanno was just the kind of guy you wanted to see."

Those who didn't have to drive 45 minutes to see him felt the same way.

"I think he was known and liked by most everyone in town," said Kelsey Deems, manager of The Barking Dog coffee shop, which sits adjacent to the Lyons General Store on Main Street.

Jensen came in twice a day, almost every day, Deems said. And each time, he made the same order: a small, flat, decaf latte served extra hot.

"He felt like a family member to us here," Deems said.

"He always had a smile for you," added Angela Porter, the Jensens' neighbor since 2001. "And he was a fixture, just because he was so easy to approach, so laid back, and he took everything as it came and just rolled with it."

In that way, Katechis explained, Jensen exemplified what Lyons is about.

"No pretention. People just felt comfortable with him," he said. "He's going to be sorely missed."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness