After KAKE News aired his story Friday evening, a Wichita man whose trailer was stolen last weekend says it was found and returned to him in one piece.

John White has to leave his cargo trailer in the parking lot of a hotel at Kellogg and Rock Road after his band finished a gig at a nearby venue last weekend. It was gone the next morning.

A he drove to lunch Thursday, a truck pulling his trailer turned in front of him at Harry and West. He followed and called 911.

The driver stopped at a scrap yard at Harry and Orient. White waited in his car, keeping an eye on the suspect's truck.

“He was walking back to his truck and an officer did pull up,” White said. “Then another officer pulled up behind him and he jumped back in his truck and took off.”

The dispatcher told White not to follow the police pursuit, which reached speeds of 70 miles-per-hour. The chase was called off and the suspect got away with the trailer.

A woman and her neighbor noticed the trailer sitting outside their homes, which had been there since Thursday afternoon, White said. Neither of them knew whom it belonged to until they saw social media posts about the stolen trailer. White said it was returned to him Saturday night.

All of its contents, except for his generator, were inside. “That’s OK,” he said. “I have the most important thing!”

The location where the trailer was found was not disclosed. No arrests have been made in the case.

A Wichita man is still hoping to find a trailer that was stolen from him last weekend. For a time, he thought he would have it back by this weekend.

John White, who is not related to the reporter, had to leave his cargo trailer in the parking lot of a hotel at Kellogg and Rock Road after his band finished a gig at a nearby venue Saturday night. By Sunday, the trailer was gone.

"I would love to get it back in one piece," White said.

The stolen trailer contained a generator and air compressor. Luckily, the band's instruments and sound equipment were not inside.

"Some stuff is irreplaceable," White said. "The blood, sweat and tears behind the equipment."

White assumed he would never see the trailer again, but as he drove to lunch Thursday, a truck pulling his trailer turned in front of him at Harry and West. The pickup headed east on Harry. White decided to follow and call 911.

He described the trailer and the truck pulling it to a 911 operator as he continued to follow it. The driver stopped at a scrap yard at Harry and Orient.

As White waited for police to show up, the dispatcher urged him not to get involved.

"I don't want you to do anything that's going to place yourself in any danger," the female dispatcher said.

White waited in his car, keeping an eye on the suspect's truck.

"He was walking back to his truck and an officer did pull up," White said. "Then another officer pulled up behind him and he jumped back in his truck and took off."

The dispatcher told White not to follow the police pursuit.

That pursuit reached speeds of 70 miles per hour, so it was called off. The suspect got away with the trailer. However, White hopes it will turn up again.

"Let's keep our eyes open because he's probably still out there somewhere," he said.

Anybody who knows where the trailer is should call Wichita Police or Crimestoppers at 267-2111.