'You should be voting for your dreams,' Clinton tells students. Clinton: Vote for your dreams

FAYETTEVILLE, Ark. — Former President Bill Clinton on Tuesday made a tailored pitch to young voters, urging students to back Democrats on the 2014 ballot because they are “too young” to cast votes of “resentment.”

Those comments came at the University of Arkansas’ flagship campus on the third stop of Clinton’s two-day, four-stop tour stumping for Arkansas Democrats.

Story Continued Below

“Why are all these people trying to get you to cast resentment votes?” Clinton, the state’s beloved former governor, said of national Republicans. “You’re too young. You should be voting for what you’re for. … You should be voting for your dreams.”

It was an echo of remarks he made a day earlier, when Clinton argued that the GOP was trying to convince Arkansans to view the midterm elections as their last chance to vote against President Barack Obama, who is deeply unpopular here. Clinton has been making the case that Sen. Mark Pryor (D-Ark.) and Democratic gubernatorial candidate Mike Ross should be viewed on their own merits and that the national party is irrelevant in their races.

( Also on POLITICO: Why the Supreme Court punted on gay marriage)

But polls show that Ross is behind GOP candidate Asa Hutchinson and Pryor is in one of the closest races of the cycle, against Rep. Tom Cotton.

Clinton’s emphasis here, speaking to a pavilion packed with cheering students, was more focused on the importance of the youth vote — a group that tends to back Democrats but also tends to stay home during midterms.

“The reason this keeps happening is, you don’t show up in midterms!” he admonished as he lamented congressional gridlock.

As he did in earlier stops, Clinton noted that the polls show the Democrats either locked in close races or trailing — but he said that was based on the assumption that young people don’t vote.

( Also on POLITICO: CIA didn't know it had 'torture' report)

“This is all about whether you show up,” he said here, saying that midterms are “every bit as important to your future as elections when there is a presidential candidate on the ballot.”

Clinton zeroed in on issues like student loans and equal pay for men and women, hot-button issues for the base. But he couldn’t help waxing nostalgic about his past. He reminisced about the “broad-based prosperity” enjoyed during his administration. And he described his time teaching law at this school as among the happiest times he and his wife — possible presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton — experienced.

“I got to live my dreams,” he said, hitting the podium as he reflected on the “six jobs” he worked through law school, the gig he held down as an undergrad and his eventual ability to pay down his student debt. He argued that the Democrats on the ballot want to make that kind of future more accessible for everyone — and that students here should care about that, too.

Clinton, reminding the students to take the election personally, told the crowd: “I’ve got more yesterdays than tomorrows. You’ve got more tomorrows than yesterdays.”