Editor, I can’t help it. I just have to write about the insanity that is engulfing our country today. In my 70-plus years, I have seen a lot of change, but nothing like the crazy things that are transforming our country from one that was founded on religious liberty — as most Americans believe God has a special relationship with the United States — to a nation that has turned its back on God.

Your religious beliefs are no longer upheld by the government, as the First Amendment is ignored by the government and the courts in favor of the demands of society’s outcasts.

Why are so many supporting a socialist for president? Do you people understand what socialism is? It is a system of society in which there is no private property and in which the means of production are owned and controlled by the state. For instance, Obamacare.

We elected a black socialist for president just because he was black. Now, there are many who want to elect a woman just because she is female. Forget that she is under investigation for jeopardizing national security, or that she ignored the call for help from our diplomatic mission in Benghazi. This is who you want to be commander-in-chief of our military?

Society is being herded like sheep by a minority few, such as Black Lives Matter. They don’t care about black lives. If they did, they would be in Chicago demanding that something be done about the gangs and the black-on-black killings that are running rampant. This statistic should blow your mind: From 2001 to 2015, 7,401 blacks have been killed in the Windy City, almost as many as soldiers killed in the Middle East — 8,321.

We have mentally disturbed men, dressed as women, who want to invade women’s restrooms. How long will it be before we see a jump in sexual crimes committed this way? Before a man considers himself a woman, he should be fully "transgendered."

OK, so you want to be paid $15 an hour. The University of California, Berkeley, is laying off 500 workers because they can’t afford the higher minimum wage. The food industry could be hurt the most. In Japan, they now have fully automated restaurants. A robot greets you and shows you to your table. You then order from the computer tablets on the table.

Applebee’s is rolling out 100,000 such tablets. You also pay through the tablet. Your food is delivered on a conveyor, and dirty plates are removed the same way.

Allowing illegals to stay in the country because they have been here a long time is like a burglar saying that he should keep what he stole because he has had it in his house for many years. Immigrants are welcome as long as they come legally.

Rand Paul said that paying taxes is tantamount to slavery. He’s right. You slave every day just to give your money to the government to waste.

Patrick Henry said, "Show me that age and country where the rights and liberties of the people were placed on the sole chance of their rulers being good men, without a consequent loss of liberty."

I want my country back.

Len Calderone

Midway