The medical device industry’s plea to repeal the tax on its products that helps fund health reform keeps attracting an audience, with the Senate Finance Committee holding a hearing last week to take a “fresh look” at the issue. Instead, of course, it was a rehash of the same stale arguments that my colleague Paul Van de Water continues to persuasively rebut.

Here’s the background, courtesy of this Van de Water paper. The president and Congress carefully designed health reform so it will not increase budget deficits. To help pay for expanded health coverage for millions of uninsured Americans, the Affordable Care Act either reduces Medicare payments to providers or raises taxes on industries that will benefit from health reform because more people will buy their products or use their services. Providers and industries affected include not just medical device manufacturers, but also hospitals, home health agencies, clinical laboratories, health insurance providers and drug companies.

Health reform doesn’t single out the device industry for unfair treatment. It creates greater demand for its products. In return, since 2013 manufacturers pay a 2.3 percent excise tax on sales of some types of devices.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

We’re not talking about consumer products here. The tax doesn’t apply to eyeglasses, contact lenses, hearing aids, wheelchairs or any other medical device that you buy at retail for your own use. We’re talking about a broad range of products used in doctors’ offices, hospitals and laboratories, such as surgical gloves, dental instruments, coronary stents, artificial knees and hips, defibrillators, cardiac pacemakers, irradiation equipment and advanced imaging technology.

We’re also not talking about an industry dominated by small businesses (though the industry has many). Johnson and Johnson, Medtronic and 17 other firms account for half of industry sales, and fewer than 60 firms account for about three-quarters. The tax has had no obvious adverse impact on industry sales and profits since it took effect in 2013. Indeed, stock prices have generally risen sharply, according to the National Center for Health Research, and profits have remained very strong. Sales and spending on research and development have also risen.



[READ: The Business of Health Care]

Why should you care if the industry doesn’t get to keep all the profits that health reform has generated for it? Industry lobbyists say it will shift jobs overseas, substantially reduce industry employment and stifle innovation. But an understanding of the law and careful analysis, along with testimony from industry participants, say otherwise.

Let’s first discard the myth that the tax will shift jobs overseas. The tax applies to medical device sales in the United States, wherever the devices are produced, and devices that the industry produces here for sale abroad are exempt from the tax. A manufacturer can’t avoid the tax by shifting production abroad, doesn’t pay the tax for devices it produces here but sells abroad, and suffers no competitive disadvantage from foreign producers, who also have to pay the tax for devices that they sell here.



[READ: Curing What Ails Us]

In a careful evaluation, the Congressional Research Service noted that the tax should not affect location decisions and it’s too small to have more than a tiny effect on jobs. Depending on how much producers can pass the tax on to device purchasers who, in turn, buy fewer devices, the Congressional Research Service estimated that industry job losses could range from 47 jobs (.01 percent of industry employment) to at most 1,200 workers (0.2 percent of jobs). More likely, however, the higher industry sales generated by health reform would generate higher demand and somewhat higher employment.

Martin Rothenberg, who heads a device manufacturer in upstate New York, calls lobbyists’ arguments about job loss and outsourcing "nonsense." "If our new device proves effective and we market it effectively,” he wrote, “this small increase in cost will have zero effect on sales. It would surely not lead us to lay off employees or shift to overseas production."

The same goes for innovation. The tax is too small to have much effect and, in fact, health reform may well spur medical device innovation by promoting more cost-effective ways to deliver care.