Rep. Bill Kramer (left) answers questions after Kramer was elected as new Republican Assembly majority leader in September. Credit: Associated Press

Assembly Majority Leader Bill Kramer may resign from his leadership post as soon as Saturday after being accused of sexually harassing at least two women while in Washington, D.C., for a GOP fundraiser.

Sources said the allegations against the 49-year-old Republican lawmaker involve a 33-year-old female lobbyist and at least one other woman. The Journal Sentinel has decided not to name the women.

Kramer, 49, could not be reached for comment and was not at his Waukesha home Friday night. His chief of staff, Cameron Sholty, said the lawmaker would be meeting with staff Saturday and would be talking with fellow Republican lawmakers over the next 48 hours. He declined to comment further.

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos issued a statement calling the alleged conduct "reprehensible." He said the issue would be resolved quickly.

"Recently I was made aware of serious allegations regarding inappropriate behavior by Rep. Kramer. Since I learned of those allegations I have been consulting with legal counsel and other legislators to understand what options are available.

"The alleged behavior is reprehensible and won't be tolerated."

Top Republicans from the Senate and Assembly were in Washington on Wednesday for their annual fundraiser at the offices of the lobbying and public relations firm BRG Group.

Donors could give up to $5,000 to host the event supporting Republicans in the state's two legislative houses.

Sources said one incident involving Kramer and the women occurred shortly after the fundraising event. Another incident occurred on the Thursday flight back to Wisconsin.

Kramer is accused of groping at least one of the women and making lewd and inappropriate remarks to at least two women.

"Part of it is supposedly verbal and some of it is physical," said a source.

Late Friday, Vos called a leadership meeting to discuss the allegations against Kramer. One source said it appeared all of the Republican Assembly leaders believed Kramer should step down as majority leader.

It is expected that the speaker and Kramer will sit down this weekend to discuss and decide Kramer's political future.

Kramer, who is single, was elected to his post in September after Rep. Scott Suder took a job in Gov. Scott Walker's administration.

Walker officials said Friday that they were unaware of the allegations.

During the nominations before the vote for majority leader, state Rep. Chris Kapenga accused Kramer of acting inappropriately at a recent meeting of the American Legislative Exchange Council in Chicago. Kapenga backed Rep. Dean Knudson, Kramer's opponent.

According to Wispolitics.com, Kapenga said in September that Kramer has often displayed poor behavior at various events.

"That cannot happen ever," Kapenga told Wispolitics.com. "We can't have sexual innuendos. We can't have bad language in the public. I don't have any concerns with Dean. I don't. None. I do have those concerns with Bill."

One source said Friday that it is well known that Vos favored Knudson over Kramer in that election.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@journalsentinel.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice or on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.