Kentucky Senator Rand Paul has officially made his entry into the 2016 presidential nomination pool, and that is sad news for Senator Ted Cruz, who no doubt will be quickly forgotten now that he is no longer the only candidate for media people to cover.

But Senator Paul, despite his short political career, already comes with an amazing amount of baggage that will need to be sorted through before he is likely to ever win the GOP nomination. Despite being the son of longtime Congressman Ron Paul — which means an impressive pool of money, political connections and other advantages to put him ahead of the pack — being Rand Paul comes with its own set of complications, too. And much of it is self-created.

Now that Paul has announced his campaign launch, here are five big controversies from his political career:

1. The campaign head stomp.

The 2010 midterms was a massively aggressive campaign cycle, and no place was it worse than in Kentucky, where one of Rand Paul’s campaign volunteers attacked a progressive activist prior to the debate, and then literally stomped on her head. The Paul volunteer, who was actually a campaign coordinator, later blamed the activist for the attack and said she should apologize to him for provoking him. If she had just stayed down when he put his foot on the back of her head, he wouldn’t have been forced to stomp. After all, he had a bad back.

2. Healthcare reform is slavery!

Pretty much every GOP politician freaked out over the Affordable Care Act, but perhaps non so hard as Senator Paul, who declared that giving everyone access to affordable health insurance, even if they have preexisting conditions, was in essence forcing doctors into slavery. Sadly, his reaction shouldn’t come as too much of a surprise, since the Senator was just as opposed to people being on Medicaid. In 2010 when he first ran for Senate he called the system “intergenerational welfare,” and that too many people who are an it don’t really need it. At that time when Paul was claiming Kentuckians abused the Medicaid system and didn’t really need the support, “400,000 of those on Medicaid lived below the poverty line [and] nearly 365,000 of those receiving Medicaid were children.” Luckily, Obamacare has come in since then to provide more medical coverage in the state, but a President Paul would be more than likely to repeal health care reform

3. Let my potty go!

Rand came in early in his Senate tenure with some pretty evocative political theater. He demanded that we stop making it so hard on energy companies by forcing them not to give their workers black lung.

But one of his greatest legacies was his war on bathroom regulations, starting with the government trying to force pesky, energy efficient light bulbs but quickly rallying to fight the anti-low water toilet crusade. “Frankly, my toilets don’t work in my house. And I blame you and people like you who want to tell me what I can install in my house, what I can do. You restrict my choices,” Paul said in 2011.

4. Fertilized eggs are people! (But you can murder them with emergency contraception if you want.)

Senator Paul has had a massively evolving position when it comes to the reproductive rights issue. I still get weekly emails from the National Pro-Life Alliance telling me Rand Paul has a message for me to explain to me how we can declare life begins at conception and it will bypass Roe. Meanwhile, at the same time he is telling groups that there is no way that you can get rid of birth control — not even emergency contraception — even though many on the right believe wrongly that EC is an abortion. The response from the Christian conservatives? There goes his chance at the presidency.

5. The Aqua Buddha

Oh come on, we all knew I couldn’t get through a Rand Paul retrospective without a trip to Aqua Buddha land, and a reminder that once, in college, he allegedly smoked weed, kidnapped and tied up a female college student, and took her outside to “worship the ‘Aqua Buddha,’” did we? And, when confronted about it in a news interview, he ran for the hills. Then again, Paul has always been an excellent runner. After all, remember how fast he ran when Rep. Steve King was cornered on immigration?

Photo credit: Gage Skidemore, via Wikimedia commons