Capitalism loves its Cheshire cat’s grin. Cloaked in angelic vestments is a devil that chases greed and calls it good. It is thus easy to picture a corporate office, any given weekday. Cubicled on a strict principle of rank and file, emblazoned by white light and chilled to a wounding high, the space rises above marble floors, cold and hard. There are specimens, stiff in neckties folded over wrinkle-resistant shirts, blindly staring into screens. At any point, the contents on every single screen are visible to a curious amount of people. There’s a coffee machine, a little stained in its own produce and a terrace for setting cancer sticks up in flames. Inside, free spirit is being bifurcated into spreadsheets and ideas fall flat before hierarchy. Under a slick, glossy frontage is an ugly underbelly that monitors efficiency in biometric records and close circuit filming; a prison-like surveillance is legitimised in the glorious cause of ‘making a living’. And, that is how beautifully capitalism keeps liberals confused, socialists irritated and all of academia extremely cynical. An exact science.

The norms of mechanical physics dictate, the more airtight the container is, the more clever ways there are to throw it open. Enter: collaborative spaces, where a structure and community of an office job is combined with the creative independence of a freelancer.

In essence, it is a workspace shared by a diverse group of professionals, not necessarily working on the same project. At any point, a novel idea can germinate from a random interaction between the coworkers. They could then use each others’ support in executing it. Less than a month ago, the Karnataka government partnered with Nasscom to pump in nearly Rs 5 crore into India’s first ‘Hackcelerator’ within the coworking space Startup Warehouse in Bangalore. This combination of a hackathon and an accelerator will act as a test lab for entrepreneurs to come together to find partners, test and refine their ideas before launching their start up. Currently, the place that houses 28 startups is about 8,000 sq ft. This is expected to go up to 50,000 sq ft to accommodate 500 entrepreneurs.

A real world optimism of ‘making things happen’ is changing the way Modi’s India believes in making money. In the NDA government’s first budget, Finance Minister Arun Jaitley allocated a Rs 10,000 crore venture capital fund that is aimed at making equity investments and granting soft loans to the start-up sector. The fund and risk capital is of particular benefit to small and early stage ventures. “While it is necessary that money keeps coming in through private and public sources, it is important to nurture an ecosystem within which this money can be put to good use,” says Sijo Kuruvilla George, founding CEO of Kochi-based technology incubator Startup Village. “Coworking spaces are the libraries of the 21st century, offering all the right resources within an environment, which stimulates mental growth and social skills,” he declares the coworking trend as totally in sync with the ways of a young and bold democracy.

A nod of approval from old hats in the corporate race has set the ball rolling. T V Mohandas Pai, Chairman, Manipal University, recently began his stint as an individual investor by floating Exfinity, a Rs 125 crore domestic fund for start-ups. For him, coworking is part of a very broad trend of B to C start-ups that are geared at attracting consumers. “Whenever the masses are involved, design and creativity become extremely important. A shared workspace is a cross-pollination of talented people who are all trying to market an idea.” He feels this perpetuates intense creative competition and matures the economy. It rests on a healthy dynamic of mutual dependence. So, an app developer creates, a content writer keys in the text, a graphic designer styles and a PR executive promotes the complete brand.

“The Silicon Valley dream of young guys in jeans and sneakers toying with gadgets in a garage has catapulted into a more organised, more widespread trend,” says Rajesh Sawhney, former president of Reliance Entertainment. He runs GSF Global Accelerator, which offers a 13-week programme to provide select start-ups access to venture and business networks, along with mentoring and initial capital.

Naresh Narasimhan, managing partner of Bangalore-based architecture and urban design firm Venkataramanan Associates, approached the issue with his genius. He feels his 3,000 sq ft Cobalt BLR marks a shift from the business centre to the business shelter. “Bangalore is a city of migrants, mostly young and in search of the like-minded. A virtual social network space built on its terrace gives these ‘knowmads’ the opportunity to connect in real time.” He points to social evenings organised here every Friday as an opportunity for entrepreneurs and activists to bond. The attempt is to cultivate a community, so much so that its coworkers are called ‘cobalters’. In the overarching spirit of unorthodox amalgams, the space also recently added a works-in-progress art gallery where budding artists can seek and gain guidance right through the creative process.

Community is the operative word. A corporate structure isn’t done away with in the romantic cause of anarchy; it is merely replaced by a warmer, nurturing, far more compelling formation. In 2011, Godrej Culture Lab (GCL) started in Mumbai to curate events on a variety of topics like books, music, literature, cinema, politics, education and urban policy. In collaboration with organisations like the Taj group of hotels, Centre for Internet & Society, Brown Paper Bag, Dasra and art galleries Volte and Chemould, it has hosted more than 200 events since its inception. “Knowledge creation doesn’t need to happen only in prudish academic environs. It takes place wherever intelligent perspectives are shared,” notes founder Parmesh Shahani. One of the speakers at GCL’s recent Architecture of Collaboration summit, Archana Prasad, happens to be the founder of Bangalore’s community-based art, tech and activism project Jaaga. It started out as a not-for-profit on a palette rack building in 2009 and has grown into two large campuses, of which one is a 7,000 sq ft penthouse on Richmond Road. “Once we have screened and inducted a group of entrepreneurs who are team players and can enrich the community, they gain access to our 7,000-strong mailing list,” she says, listing the recycle flea market Second to None, and the afforestation group Afforestt as some of its proud beneficiaries.

But communities aren’t merely built on outreach. They thrive on a shared belief in a common goal within a team. Arunabh Kumar, founder of online youth entertainment network The Viral Fever has a team of 25 people who were hired as writers, editors, graphic designers, account servicing executives, but are often seen acting in the cleverly written satirical videos the brand churns out. “We strive to create a workspace that lets people evolve the way they want to. Aping a Google or Apple work culture is counter-productive because what clicks for them might not click for us,” says the electrical engineer from IIT Kharagpur, who chose film-making as a career and now enjoys a community of nearly a million followers.

fotocorp In 2014, to be is to be on the internet. Is an online presence more effective than a physical office space? The folks at Social Offline don’t buy that no more. This cafe-bar-workspace is the brainchild of Riyaaz Amlani, owner of Impresario Foods. His company shot to fame for its chain of affordable-yet-sassy Mocha cafes, a decade ago. Within a month of its opening, the place has made it possible to visit Delhi’s Hauz Khas Village for a cause greater than beer, wine and a helping of comfort food. Plugged into laptops, exchanging business ideas, there’s now a young and vibrant community that pays Rs 5,000 a month to sit around and work at Social Offline, and parties its heart out at sundown. It should be known that the amount too is redeemable in food and drink. “Being in the tasting business for 14 years, we saw how restaurants were gradually turning into venues for power lunches and business dinners. People love being social over something productive, they meet more people through work,” says Amlani, who launched yet another Social Offline in Mumbai’s Colaba. Pranav Sawhney, the culture manager at Social, reveals plans of hosting theatre, art and comedy evenings in the coming months, as community strengthening exercises. “The extension of Work from Social will accommodate nearly 70 more,” the young manager says, confessing to have met the most exciting people in the first month of operations.

Coworking isn’t just a cool, cushy departure from organisational convention, even its financials pan out smoothly. At Gurgaon-based 91 Springboard, Anand Vemuri’s team of community managers is empowering young start-ups with expertise on issues like conducting a business sale, along with taking care of legal and regulatory concerns, connecting entrepreneurs to the right people within a week, all for a mere Rs 7,500 per month. “Institutional incubators now qualify for CSR funding, and will grow exponentially in the coming years”, says the former in-charge of IIM-A’s incubator. Meanwhile in Chennai, the Start Up Centre is being headed by Vijay Anand, who managed the IIT Madras incubation centre for six years before this. He brought on board a group of angel investors to fund new companies. “We identify creators who have a promising prototype and help take them to their first customers. For those who have customers, we put in about Rs 10 lakh to help them scale up,” says Anand, whose company charges Rs 50,000 and takes two per cent equity on graduation. “Ordinarily, commercial websites have to pay a hefty hosting fee. But our stack partners like Amazon Webservices, Deskaway, SendGrid offer credit worth $5,000, which addresses this concern,” he adds.

Aside from technical costs, the usual suspects like water & electricity bills, maintenance fees and fatter rent receipts continue to haunt entrepreneurs. And, who resonates with this better than the space-constrained Mumbaikars. Shekhar Gurav runs The Playce, in a 5,000 sq ft space in Mulund, which was leased out from Marathon real estate developers, one-and-a half years ago. “I was working out of a matchbox of a house in Wadala, and my dream of starting an online venture hit a roadblock. Luckily, my partner and I tried the co-working model as an experiment in an old, unused office owned by Marathon. We invited 30 to 40 people to come work out of a shared space and it did the trick,” says the man who now customises work-packages depending on the co-workers’ needs. Here, one can either opt for a daily Rs 500 package or a private cabin for up to six people for Rs 20,000 a month. And, then there guys like Rahil Siddiqui, a fresh engineering graduate from Osmania University who converted a 200 sq yard segment of his Banjara Hills home into a coworking space, inviting coders, programmers, designers and app developers to come share a work space with him. “More people mean more creative engagement, and without such entertainment, the mind burns out,” he says. He believes if people are doing what they love, then work is play and office is home.

Crawling out of trenches—dimly lit basements and rundown garages—an army of ideologically charged foot soldiers is marching into major buildings and raiding important streets. In work, like in war, they carry a will to desire, seize and destroy from within.

Behold, the revolution has just begun.

Jaaga Bangalore

Jaaga provides infrastructure and mentoring to tech startups, conducts educational workshops for aspiring students, and supports local groups and individuals who are engaged in social and environmental issues. It hosts Electronics Lab where people work on next generation lighting systems, and a Media Lab that trains people in new media technologies. It includes web enabled co-work spaces and multi-level spaces for screenings, workshops, lectures and performances.

The Valley Hyderabad

Started by young tech enthusiasts from Osmania University, this is a 200 sq yard space within a residential property in Banjara Hills. In collaboration with Android Inc. they organise hackathons to draw in app developers.

Social Offline Delhi

An unfinished space that looks out into the Haus Khas lake is a two-floored shared workspace that is equipped for 50 people, and 75 at maximum capacity. During day, it is a cross between a café and an office, furnished with three Wi-Fi networks, conference rooms, printers and white boards. By night, it turns into a dark bar-side where a live DJ and molecular cocktails keep the crowd abuzz.

Cobalt BLR Bangalore

In the heart of Bangalore, this uncluttered and open office space is based on a model called Society 3.0, which encourages transactions in ‘social capital’, the wealth of ideas. The place organises weekly design evenings and movie nights for people to network over. The terrace is a social network space for people from within and outside the network to interact and its work-in-progress gallery nurtures unknown artists.

CoWork Café Bangalore

The no-frills workspace is essentially for early stage startups and freelancers who find it better to be a shared space instead of a home or a café. Furnished with ergonomic chairs, laptops, 4G dongles, power backup and coffee and food, the workspace charges Rs 4,000 a month and Rs 300 for one day. It runs in India, US and UK shifts.

The Hive Mumbai

This cultural hub located in an old Portuguese bungalow holding 25 tables is a venue for magic & illusion shows, western and classical Indian dance programmes, open-mic nights, short-film screenings, fitness, dance and poetry slams, aside from serious education & policy related seminars.

p91 Springboard Gurgaon

Supporting more than 150 entrepreneurs on a full-time basis, the company takes on their logistical, legal, marketing, design and technology concerns. The community is kept engaged in workshops & pitch events.

The Playce Mumbai

The spacious 5,000 sq ft coworking space that can accommodate 60 start ups, coders, designers and freelancers, providing affordable access to hackathons and start up events. There’s a Study Room to cultivate a student learning community through seminars. Recently hosted In 50 Hours, a service jam that lets people create a prototype to solve a global public sector problem.