Mitchell's A.C.T is growing bigger than ever

Cast members for the upcoming performance of Into the Woods on Wednesday night at the Pepsi Cola Theater. (Matt Gade/Republic)

Banners are shown along the walls of the Mitchell Area Community Theatre, which is celebrating its 10th anniversary this year. (Matt Gade/Republic)

Long the mantra of thespians everywhere, that held true for the Mitchell Area Community Theatre in 2004 when the group's beloved State Theatre burned to the ground. Before the smoke had cleared, ACT members were resolute they would rebuild.

"We knew we could do it. We knew the Mitchell community and all surrounding towns would get behind the theater, just like they had been coming to shows," said Paula Deckert, who was the ACT's office manager in 2004. "There was just no doubt in anybody's mind that ACT would live on."

Although the fire was a devastating moment for Mitchell's Main Street, it didn't end operations for the three organizations or the two connecting businesses damaged by the blaze. All five still operate in different locations on Main Street.

In less than a year and a half, halfway through 2005, the ACT had found a new home, the former balloon museum at the corner of Seventh Avenue and Main Street. This year marks the 10th anniversary of the group's relocation to the Pepsi-Cola Theatre for the Performing Arts. And despite a period of rebuilding, ACT leaders say the program is stronger now than ever before, boasting more memberships, bigger shows and better attendance.

'Like waking up to a nightmare'

Though the theater has seen membership increase in the past 10 years, that momentum began before the State Theatre fire. "Hello, Dolly!"—the last show performed at the State Theatre—was well attended and well received, Deckert said.

For those who worked and played in the State Theatre, its loss was devastating. Built in 1915, the State Theatre building was located at 313 N. Main St. It had three storefronts and apartments on the second and third floors.

On May 1, 2004—a Saturday—the building burned to the ground in an early morning fire that destroyed The Scoreboard sports bar, Weber's store, The Little Red Hen, and the theater itself, which was owned by the Mitchell Area Community Theatre. The fire ended 98 years of theater at that site on Main Street. Prior to the State Theatre, the Gale Theatre sat in the same location from 1906 to 1914.

Deckert, who worked for the ACT for seven years, remembers getting a call in "the wee hours" of the morning that the theater was on fire, and described it as an unbelievable—and horrible—moment.

"I went down there and, it was just like waking up to a nightmare," she said.

She remembers worrying about the people who lived in the building, and the sense of relief when she knew the tenants in the building escaped safely. But for ACT members, the building's destruction was all the more heartbreaking because the theater had just been painstakingly renovated. Replaced carpet throughout the theater, a new sound booth, new directors rooms in the basement—not to mention the "blood, sweat and tears" invested in the building—were all lost in the flames.

"It was like losing a family member," said ACT Board of Directors President Terri Jacklin. "It was very, very sad."

Through their tears, people rallied immediately.

Jacklin, who has been a board member off and on for about 14 years, said the group members gave themselves about a week to process. Then they started making plans.

"We said, 'We're still an entity, and we're still going to put on plays,' " Jacklin said.

The theater group moved quickly to find a new home, and the city deeded ACT the site at Seventh and Main, the former balloon museum. Once fundraising started in March 2005, it took six months to raise $394,000 and renovate the balloon museum into the Pepsi-Cola Theatre. The building is smaller than the State Theatre — about 400 seats fewer — but provided modern amenities and a new home.

"A year and half isn't very long," Deckert said. "It's a long time to be without a home, but in retrospect it happened very quickly."

With no permanent home for about a year, Deckert said the theater became something of a traveling playhouse. She worked from a temporary office on Main Street, which housed what items had been salvaged from the State Theatre. That summer, the group performed "Grease" at Mitchell High School; they performed another play at Dakota Wesleyan University.

It was difficult, Deckert said, but made easier by support from the theater's loyal members, patrons and an invested community.

"We kind of limped along for a year," she said. "It was tough. Everybody just pulled together and got to that first opening show—and it was amazing when it did happen, when we got into the new building."

The first show, "Anything Goes," played to sellout crowds on the opening weekend in fall 2005.

Deckert and Jacklin credit the theater's quick transition to strong support from the community, from volunteers and board members to even the contractors who transformed the former museum into a proper theater.

The building's new name came from the group's largest donor, Earl Nordby, then-owner of the Pepsi-Cola Bottling Co. in Huron. Nordby, who heard about the project from his son-in-law, Dan DesLauriers, donated $100,000.

DesLauriers and his wife, Diane, former owners of the Mitchell Pepsi-Cola Bottling Co., still attend every show with Nordby, who Diane described as a huge supporter of local arts from music to artwork—"anything that has to do with kids," in particular.

"He's just an incredibly generous man for the communities that he had businesses in," Diane said. "He's very loyal to South Dakota and South Dakota arts."

It's an investment that was well worth it, as far as DesLauriers is concerned. She praised the Pepsi-Cola Theatre, from the venue itself to its location next to the Corn Palace.

"I think the new facility is incredible," she said. "The nice thing about this is, local people chipped in. It was really a community effort, which is the only way you're going to get things done in a small community."

New place, new opportunity

Jacklin still remembers the musty smell of the State Theatre.

What started as a vaudeville performing house had retained many of the intimate touches that long-time ACT lovers remember. Some miss its acoustics; many recall the theater's balcony. Jacklin said she particularly misses the "old-time theater appearance" of the building.

"It was just neat," she said.

But, ACT members admit there were limitations to the State Theatre.

"It was heartbreaking to lose that old, historic building," Deckert said. "But with an old building, you kept fixing and putting on band-aids and patching things."

The State Theatre wasn't particularly handicapped accessible, and lacked some modern amenities, according to ACT leaders. Jacklin remembers the limited technology in the theater—things like the old "Frankenstein" electrical panel.

"You got electrocuted once in a while," she said with a laugh.

In the Pepsi-Cola Theatre, that's no longer the case. It is more handicapped accessible, and features modern lighting and sound systems, along with better amenities for patrons—things like bathrooms, and concession areas. The new location also has better parking options with the adjacent city parking lots—unless there's a basketball game.

"We really stepped forward," Deckert said.

And patrons have responded.

Since the ACT moved into the Pepsi-Cola Theatre, memberships have steadily increased. A total of 243 memberships in the 2005-06 season rose to to 369 in the 2014-15 season, according to theater manager Carm Roster. So far this year, Roster said there are 301 memberships sold. ACT Managing Director Megan Reimnitz believes about 80 percent of memberships have been sold for the year, but noted they usually continue selling well through December.

Show attendance has slowly crept up in recent years, too. Of the five shows in the 2010-11 season, Roster said there was a total attendance of 6,451 people; the five shows that made up the 2013-14 season sold 7,906 tickets.

Though Reimnitz has only worked for the theater a little more than a year, as an area native and DWU graduate, she has seen the ACT grow into a theater with an anticipated regular season, supplemented by touring performers and other community events.

"We're a big part of the community now," Reimnitz said. "The growth is amazing."

Reimnitz, Roster and others attribute the growth to a number of factors, including the increased quality of shows. In the six years Roster has worked for the ACT, she's noticed a growing following of patrons, eager to see what the ACT will bring.

"People are more excited about our seasons, what the shows are," she said. "They always seem to be anxious to see what we've put on for the year."

She and others agree the caliber of shows has improved over the years, which ACT leaders chalk up to improved collaboration with DWU, more talented people getting involved and the new facility.

"The capabilities here have definitely helped us grow," Reimnitz said of the Pepsi-Cola Theatre. "There's a lot of shows you can't do unless you have the technology to do them."

Lighting and sound are vital to make some productions come alive, or to assist in scene changes—like "Into the Woods," the musical production that will open the ACT's 2015-16 this year on Thursday.

"A lot of people didn't think we could do it," Reimnitz said of the play, which features several scene changes between the mashup of fairy tale characters the play follows through woods, waterfalls, castles and overgrown beanstalks.

Celebrating 10 years

In honor of the ACT's 10th anniversary in the Pepsi-Cola Theatre, Reimnitz said ACT leaders have several things in mind, from extra events to the show season itself. This year's shows, from "Into the Woods" to "Love, Sex and the IRS" are typically popular among theater patrons, Reimnitz said—a nod to the patrons who have remained loyal to the ACT through the years.

"This is really more of a season for our patrons to experience," she said.

She said the ACT has also added a Thursday night show to two of its musical performances—"Into the Woods" and "Nunsense." Reimnitz said those nights have been dubbed family night, meaning patrons who buy two adult tickets get half-off the price of a ticket for a child 10 and under, and a free small pop and popcorn.

Also in honor of the 10th anniversary, the theater plans to launch its new music and movement series, which Reimnitz said is geared to bring unique options to the community, such as electric violinist Tracy Silverman. Equal parts performance and workshops, Reimnitz said the series will likely start in November and last through the year. Noting that it will be different than the other concert series that come to town, Reimnitz said the ACT wants to complement other entertainment options in Mitchell, not compete with them.

"I thought, this would be a great way to bring something the community hasn't seen and not only entertain, but also educate," she said.

It's also an opportunity to showcase the Pepsi-Cola Theatre, which Reimnitz said is much more than a play house. The building is open for other community events like birthday parties, anniversaries, business meetings, special speakers or performances—even weddings.

"You can have a unique venue for your wedding that no one else really ever had," she said.

Deckert, who left the ACT in 2009, still attends shows and performs when she can. She said even though she's not as involved with the theater as 10 years ago, she still loves it, and is glad to see its growth and continued support from the community.

"I just think it's a testament to the importance of theater and arts in our community, that so many people did help to make the Pepsi-Cola Theatre a reality," she said. "It takes everybody. It took everybody to make it happen."

Read next:

‘Into the Woods’ opens new ACT season