Smart Talk is a daily, live, interactive program featuring conversations with newsmakers and experts in a variety of fields and exploring a wide range of issues and ideas, including the economy, politics, health care, education, culture, and the environment. Smart Talk airs live every week day at 9 a.m. on WITF’s 89.5 and 93.3. Listen to Smart Talk live online from 9-10 a.m. weekdays and at 7 p.m. (Repeat of 9 a.m. program) Host: Scott LaMar

What to look for on Smart Talk Monday, February 29, 2016:

Gov. Tom Wolf's announcement last week that he has been diagnosed with prostate cancer stunned many people across the state. Even though the governor described his cancer as treatable and said he wouldn't need chemotherapy, Pennsylvanians were concerned.

Wolf's announcement brought attention to prostate cancer -- one of the most curable cancers. When diagnosed in its early stages, prostate cancer can be treated with a high degree of success.

However, prostate cancer presents few symptoms in its early stages and that's why screening is so very important.

Monday's Smart Talk examines prostate cancer. Appearing on the program are Kristine Warner, Executive Director of the Pennsylvania Prostate Cancer Coalition, Dr. Charles Reninger of Hematology and Oncology Consultants of Pennsylvania, Dr. Suzanne Merryll, Urologic Oncologist at the Penn State Cancer Institute, and prostate cancer survivor Retired Colonel James E. Williams Jr.

Outside of the Keystone State, Pennsylvania Dutch is often synonymous with the Amish or Mennonites. Many visualize buggies, no electricity and handmade furniture. But within Pennsylvania's borders it is more nuanced than that. For many Pennsylvanians, there's a cultural history and ancestry connected to Pennsylvania Dutch.

The Pennsylvania Dutch language is the focus of Monday's Smart Talk.

Appearing on the program is Mark L. Louden, professor of Germanic linguistics and co-director of the Max Kade Institute for Germanic-American Studies at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. He's also the author of a new book, Pennsylvania Dutch: The Story of an American Language.

Louden, a leading scholar and fluent Pennsylvania Dutch speaker discusses the origin, evolution and linguistic features of Pennsylvania Dutch, which he has found is a booming language even in the 21st century.

Louden talks about the differences between the "Fancy Dutch," the "Plain People" and the fracturing of the language into different forms.