Roseville-based urban farmer Tyler Stowers is aware that entrepreneurship, agriculture and government must coexist; though lately he also understands maintaining one can pose challenges to the others.

“I never expected to be talking to city councils,” said Stowers, a UC Berkley graduate who recently appeared at Roseville City Hall to give statements on how the city’s ordinances pertain to urban farming — not to mention the sale of crops produced by it.

But Stowers never saw himself becoming a farmer to begin with. He is part of a small but growing group of first-generation farmers in California. Now Stowers has run into some issues operating his business, mainly in the form of the city receiving complaints about signage posted in a residential area near his farm. Stowers has been running the tiny farm since March, about the same time Sacramento approved new ordinances to accommodate urban farmers.

Sacramento’s new codes look to create opportunities for a generation seemingly short on farmers. According to the Environmental Protection Agency, the average American farmer is 57 years old. Costs associated with acquiring large lots of rural land are prohibitive to many, making urban environments the most accessible and pragmatic.

“My family didn’t have land to give me or anything,” Stowers explained. “I’m from California. That’s expensive. There’s a lot of hurdles to get over.”

Roseville’s current ordinances do not provide for customer contact or off-sight signage for home-based businesses, according to city staff.

City of Roseville Planning Manager Gregg Bitter told the Press Tribune those will be part of policy considerations as the city responds to Stowers’ public statements.

“We need to look at parking, traffic, signage, all of these issues,” Bitter said. “One of the reasons our home-based businesses don’t allow for customer contact is we want to maintain that residential character…It could be a fundamental shift in the way we look at home-based businesses.”

Farmers markets are one option for people like Stowers, but like other traditional farming environments, they require capitol investments, greenhouse costs, infrastructure, soil testing, participation fees, water supply and transportation.

According to the United States Department of Agriculture, 23.5 million Americans do not live within one mile of a supermarket. A rise in the number of urban farmers may provide a convenient opportunity for residents to purchase in their own neighborhoods.

Under the terms of Sacramento’s new ordinances, customers may merely walk across the street to a neighbor’s home and legally purchase produce.

“We’re looking into it,” Bitter said. “We’re still in the fact-finding stage so that we can provide information to the city council to see if this is something they want to pursue …We have looked through what Sacramento did, and I think it’s more limited than what some people realize.”

Roseville’s current zoning ordinances allow for “a non-residential business activity carried on within a dwelling by its inhabitants … that does not change the character of the surrounding residential area by generating more traffic or storage of materials than would normally be expected in a residential zone.”

Roseville staff will also examine the policy of West Sacramento and other nearby cities. There is no immediate plan to bring an item on urban farming to the Roseville City Council’s agenda, though members of the city’s staff expect to be far more familiar with the issue when it does come up.

“The end result is going be to provide our city manger’s office and the city council with information on what other jurisdictions are doing, maybe describe the differences on how their codes are set up and see if they want us to contemplate this,” Bitter emphasized. “I imagine this would require quite a bit of public outreach…There are folks out there that would like to take advantage of this, and there’s also are folks who don’t necessarily want a farm stand and folks driving up and down their residential streets purchasing produce. I think we need to take all of that into consideration.”