Stack of birth control pills (Photo: Eliza317, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Catholic leaders in Michigan criticized a federal court ruling today that ruled against them and affirmed the contraception mandate for employers in Obamacare.

A three-judge panel ruled against nine Catholic groups in Michigan and Tennessee, including the Michigan Catholic Conference and the Catholic diocese of Kalamazoo, who were plaintiffs in the lawsuit filed against federal agencies, including the Department of Health and Human Services. The lawsuit challenged the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare.

The 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Ohio released a decision that reaffirmed its previous ruling that the mandate requiring employers to provide birth control in health insurance doesn't violate the Religious Freedom Restoration Act.

In a statement posted today on its Twitter account, the Michigan Catholic Conference said: "Disappointing decision today from 6th Circuit re HHS (Health and Human Services) Mandate; we will proceed prudently w/direction from legal counsel."

The Michigan Catholic Conference is the main lobbying and advocacy arm of the Catholic archdioceses in Michigan.

The legal battle is one of several that have taken place in recent years over religious liberty and the right to affordable health care for women.

Conservative Catholics and some others felt that the contraception mandate violated their freedom of religion. Observant Catholics say that using contraception violates their faith, and so employers who are observant Catholics believe that they shouldn't have to provide contraception for their employees.

The mandate provides exemptions for religious groups, which the judges noted today. And so the Catholic groups in Michigan would not be forced to pay directly for employee contraception.

But the Catholic groups felt they are still being made to pay for contraception indirectly through insurance providers.

The Obama administration and liberal religious groups say that attacks on their mandate are unfounded. The White House has said that it "exempts churches, other houses of worship, and similar organizations from covering contraception on the basis of their religious objections."

The policy "accommodates religious liberty while protecting the health of women."

The White House and liberals have noted that an overwhelming majority of women have used contraception and so including it as an option in health plans is needed.

"Today, nearly 99 percent of all women have used contraception at some point in their lives, but more than half of all women between the ages of 18-34 struggle to afford it," says the White House

Associated Press contributed to this report.

Contact Niraj Warikoo: nwarikoo@freepress.com or 313-223-4792. Follow him on Twitter @nwarikoo

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1JbbPtu