Topics: Barack Obama, Boston Herald, Debo Adegbile, Editorial cartoons, Mumia Abu-Jamal, Politics, Racism, slideshow, Sonia Sotomayor, Media News, Politics News

The conservative-leaning Boston Herald on Wednesday published an editorial cartoon roundly condemned as racist, seizing on the case of the White House intruder to peddle racial stereotypes.

After the Washington Post revealed that intruder Omar Gonzalez made it much farther into the White House last month than previously reported, the Herald’s Jerry Holbert depicted an intruder in the bathtub as a shocked President Obama brushes his teeth. “Have you tried the new watermelon-flavored toothpaste?” the intruder asks Obama:

The Herald’s editors issued a tone-deaf non-apology, expressing “regret” if the cartoon “inadvertently offended anyone”:

Editors @bostonherald: "We sincerely regret if we inadvertently offended anyone" with today's Holbert cartoon. #wbz pic.twitter.com/XWWOIHF9KQ — Joe Mathieu (@JoeMathieuWBZ) October 1, 2014

The Herald, alas, isn’t alone in publishing incredibly offensive, racist cartoons about President Obama. Here’s a compilation of six others.

1 of 8

of Close

Fullscreen

Thumbnails Previous Next 7 disgustingly racist anti-Obama cartoons The Boston Herald Obama Watermelon Cartoon After it emerged that White House intruder Omar Gonzalez made it much farther into the White House than previously reported, the Boston Herald peddled racial stereotypes with an October 1, 2014 cartoon depicting a shocked President Obama brushing his teeth as the intruder bathes and asks Obama if he's "tried the new watermelon flavored toothpaste."

Previous Next 7 disgustingly racist anti-Obama cartoons Complex.com Obama Pimp Cartoon After Georgetown Law student Sandra Fluke testified before Congress in support of contraceptive access, syndicated cartoonist Mike Lester depicted President Obama as Fluke's pimp. CORRECTION: This slide originally stated that the cartoon appeared in the Rome, Georgia News-Tribune. While Lester was then an employee of the paper, it did not run the cartoon.

Previous Next 7 disgustingly racist anti-Obama cartoons Politics Daily "Suicide Obama" Cartoon Amid the April 2008 controversy over then-Sen. Obama's remarks about "bitter" voters, The State of Columbia, South Carolina ran a cartoon lampooning Obama's remarks by portraying the presidential candidate as a suicide bomber.

Previous Next 7 disgustingly racist anti-Obama cartoons Complex.com "Talkin' So White" Cartoon After Sen. Obama delivered a speech on fatherhood and African-Americans in June 2008, syndicated cartoonist Pat Oliphant depicted a young black man lounging on a couch, while Obama asks him when he plans to "get up and take some responsibility for yourself and all those kids you've fathered," to which his interlocutor says that Obama needs to stop "talkin' so white" lest he lose the man's vote. Oliphant titled the cartoon "When did you ever vote?"

Previous Next 7 disgustingly racist anti-Obama cartoons Politics Daily Obama-Jeremiah Wright Cartoon In March 2008, Investor's Business Daily ran a cartoon criticizing Obama's relationship with his former pastor Jeremiah Wright, with Wright donning a shirt reading "Africa."

Previous Next 7 disgustingly racist anti-Obama cartoons Complex.com Sotomayor Pinata Cartoon As Sonia Sotomayor geared up for her Supreme Court confirmation hearings in the summer of 2009, The Oklahoman ran a cartoon depicting the Puerto Rican-descended jurist as a pinata about to be attacked by Senate Republicans. Wearing a sombrero, President Obama asks the Republicans, "Now, who wants to be first?"

Previous Next 7 disgustingly racist anti-Obama cartoons Media Matters Debo Adegbile "Cop Killer" Cartoon On January 23, 2014, the print edition of the Washington Times ran a cartoon calling Debo Adegbile, President Obama's nominee to head the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division, a "cop killer" for his appellate representation of Mumia Abu-Jamal. The cartoon, which peddled racial stereotypes, was condemned as "race-baiting" by the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. It was never posted on the Washington Times' website.

Recent Slide Shows "The Bachelorette" men are the worst: 7 reasons why this season is going to be a glorious disaster Script to Screen Donald Trump is a horror movie: No, really! Blood moon magic: 17 amazing images of the supermoon around the world Previous