Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-New Hartford (Photo: Special to the Des Moines Register)

Moses is among 23 lawgivers from history represented above the gallery doors in the chamber of the U.S. House of Representatives, each figure chosen for his contribution to the principles influencing American law. Ten days ago, Pope Francis was there addressing Congress and reflecting on Moses for his just leadership.

Legal codes of conduct have existed for millennia to keep law and order in civilized society. For example, the ancient Hammurabi Code is a collection of 282 laws that spelled out standards of justice in the 18th century B.C. The code is perhaps most famous for its “eye for an eye” restitution for wrongdoing.

In the second decade of the third millennium, 21st century American society has flourished in large measure thanks to the principles of self-governance and individual freedoms enshrined in our very own founding charter, the U.S. Constitution.

For the last several months, I’ve listened, worked, negotiated and built consensus with my colleagues on an important public policy that governs crime and punishment and has a sweeping effect on the citizenry. The nation’s criminal justice system serves the accused and the aggrieved in our society. And the taxpaying public foots the bill for our courts, law enforcement and prisons that protect public safety and serve justice.

When violent crime rates soared a few decades ago, Congress responded by reforming the penal code and adopting more stringent sentencing guidelines to help law enforcement root out the scourge of violence and criminal activity on America’s streets and in our neighborhoods.

The sentencing tools helped prosecutors hook bigger fish operating among international crime rings, for example, with mandatory sentencing that has helped to put dangerous, violent offenders behind bars.

Notwithstanding the merits of mandatory minimums that are designed to promote the public good and public safety, federal sentencing has come under increased scrutiny for locking up low-level offenders and incarceration rates that are running up an unsustainable tab to American taxpayers, roughly $80 billion annually. There’s no doubt that drug and human trafficking and gang-related crimes continue to persist and poison the well of civic life, endangering public safety daily. And yet, there’s room for sensible reforms that improve the criminal justice system so that it’s fair and just to victims, the accused and taxpayers. The right policy mix of reforms can give low-level offenders who have paid their debts to society a second chance to rejoin their families and find employment in their communities.

This week I introduced the bipartisan Sentencing Reform and Corrections Act of 2015. It reflects carefully crafted sentencing reforms to achieve fairness, justice and fidelity to the rule of law.

Our proposed reforms give the courts more flexibility in federal sentencing laws for non-violent, low-level drug offenders, including the elimination of the three strikes mandatory life provision. We also expand the existing safety valve and add a second safety valve that provide relief from the 10-year mandatory minimum for certain low-level offenders. It would retroactively apply the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010 that reduced the sentencing disparity between crack and powder cocaine criminal drug offenses.

We also target and expand some of the existing mandatory minimums so that law enforcement can continue to pursue violent repeat offenders and gun criminals. And we create new mandatory minimums for crimes involving interstate domestic violence and the export of weapons and other defense articles to prohibited countries and terrorists.

The scales of justice require equal rights under the law for the accused and for victims of crime. Fairness in a criminal justice system also must consider the opportunity for reintegration. Our bill would require the Department of Justice to classify all federal inmates and assign qualifying prisoners to a recidivism reduction program. This may include job training, drug recovery, faith-based and work and education programs that provide eligible inmates an opportunity to earn early release.

There’s a fine line between leniency and levelheadedness. That’s why I’m working for balanced reforms that do not compromise public safety and national security.

Our founders declared that Americans have the inalienable right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Our criminal justice system needs to reflect these values. The bipartisan coalition of lawmakers supporting these reforms may not see “eye to eye” on every proposal, but we are committed to upholding America’s promise for liberty and justice for all.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Lb0ZWv