On May 23rd 2010 the first flight took off from The Northwest Florida Beaches International Airport .

"We were in the glorious booming time of the new airport, the addition of Southwest, and Delta was transitioning to bigger jets and it was a great time to be at the airport," said ECP Executive Director, Parker McClellan.

ECP has come a long way in the past five years. When the airport first opened they had about 8 percent of all Panhandle traffic, and now they have around 22percent, which means since the development of the airport, their share has nearly tripled.

"When the airport was in downtown Panama City it was a Bay County asset. Now that we're out in West Bay we are a regional asset and we serve a bigger market area and it really has proven to be beneficial for us," said McClellan.

And many visitors think so too.

Kathy Leuders own condos in Sandestin and says since ECP opened she's come down twice as much.

"We just came down about two months ago and we're here again, and we looked at each other my husband and I and we're like this is wonderful because we use to drive it takes about 12 hours," said Kathy Leuders.

The past few months have been busy for the Panhandle airport. In March ECP added United and Silver Airways, which not only added new flights and cities, it also created the opportunity for people to travel to other parts of the Sunshine State.

"I've heard the analogy we can now fly from Florida to Florida so that's a really big thing because the state of Florida is really a very expansive state and flying intrastate has been a challenge," said McClellan.

And more travel options, means more visitors coming to our community.

Greg Lavigne says it was the promise of the airport that convinced him to buy a condo down here.

"It's great for people coming down to see us, it's very accessible to us to where we live on the beach and the place is immaculate and the people here are great," said Greg Lavigne.

"We hope we have a clear vision of the future and as you know the vision is not always clear, but we've seen great successes and we want to keep building on those successes that we've built for the last 5 years and in the next 5 years continue to grow. We want to add businesses to the airport, that's been a focus, because businesses are jobs," said McClellan.

McClellan says the airport has big plans for the future, from adding more flights, airlines, and bringing more business to ECP.