Action Points The USPSTF reviewed the evidence of benefits, harms, and sensitivity and specificity of screening instruments for cognitive impairment in older adults.

It concluded that is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of screening for cognitive impairment in community-dwelling adults who are older than 65 years and have no signs or symptoms of cognitive impairment.

Routine screening of all older individuals for cognitive impairment is not supported by the available evidence, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) has concluded.

After reviewing 55 studies examining the accuracy of screening instruments, and more than 130 studies of interventions aimed at slowing or stopping cognitive decline in patients who tested positive for cognitive impairment or relieving caregiver burdens, task force members determined that a clear benefit for screening has not been established, relative to the potential for harm.

Their report, appearing online in Annals of Internal Medicine, indicated that current drug treatments such as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors may have "a small effect on cognitive function measures in the short term for patients with mild to moderate dementia, but the magnitude of the clinically relevant benefit is uncertain."

For nonpharmacological interventions, the same was true -- for example, the task force concluded that trials of cognitive stimulation with or without a specific training component had yielded "inconsistent evidence." And, in those trials showing a benefit, the magnitude was of only borderline clinical significance.

The task force, led by chair Virginia Moyer, MD, MPH, of Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, summarized the findings in an "I" statement, indicating insufficient evidence to draw a conclusion about the balance between benefits and risks of screening. Panel members noted that evidence for harms was lacking as well, but would certainly include drug side effects.

Thus, despite many new studies of cognitive screening and interventions since 2003, when the USPSTF last visited the issue and issued an "I" statement, the overall conclusion remained the same. The task force emphasized that the review covered only routine, universal screening for older patients without clear signs or symptoms of cognitive impairment.

The new "I" statement was not a surprise, as a literature review conducted for the task force last year also found no clear evidence for a benefit from dementia screening.

However, the neutral statement is at odds with the Alzheimer's Association guideline on screening. Now that Medicare is covering cognitive screening for all beneficiaries as part of the "Annual Wellness Visit" -- part of the Affordable Care Act -- the Alzheimer's Association has recommended that Medicare enrollees take advantage of it.

On the other hand, the American Geriatrics Society has taken no position on cognitive screening in the absence of patient or caregiver complaints, although the group does recommend certain assessment and management approaches for patients selected for screening.

Huntington Potter, PhD, an Alzheimer's disease specialist at the University of Colorado in Denver, told MedPage Today that screening can have value, but the decision to screen a patient has to be individualized.

"There doesn't seem to be, on a group basis, a clear way to decide whether there is sufficient benefit to justify screening ... but patients may think differently for themselves, and individual physicians may think differently," he said.

Potter said that screening can help patients take steps to reduce the chance of progression to more serious impairment. "They can begin to change their lifestyle, perhaps reduce their cholesterol which will help reduce their risk for dementia later on, perhaps get more exercise."

Although anxiety resulting from a positive screen has been cited as a potential harm of screening, Potter added that a study had specifically examined the issue and found little risk of that sort.

In their report, Moyer and colleagues noted that one 2006 study "provided some information on the potential harms" but only indirectly. In it, 3,573 individuals were offered screening and nearly all accepted -- but of 434 with positive screening results, 207 refused a more definitive follow-up assessment -- presumably because they didn't really want a firm diagnosis.

On the subject of benefit from drug therapies, last year's literature review for the USPSTF had included a meta-analysis of 33 randomized trials. Pooled data from those indicated improvements of 1.36 to 3.06 points in scores on the 70-point Alzheimer's' Disease Assessment Scale-Cognition (ADAS-Cog) test.

Moyer and colleagues indicated that a 4-point improvement is the minimum for clinical relevance.

In other areas, such as caregiver burden, interventions at the stage of mild impairment also appear to be of minimal benefit, according to the literature review, which the full USPSTF endorsed. Pooled data from two dozen studies of group, individual, and telephone-based interventions pointed to a statistically significant but clinically questionable benefit.

But the review did provide clear guidance for clinicians in one area. When they do choose to perform screening, the review identified eight instruments that appear effective for identifying mild impairments in the primary care setting:

Clock Drawing Test

Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly

Memory Impairment Screen

Mini-Cog

Abbreviated Mental Test

Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire

Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test

7-Minute Screen

In contrast to the 2003 statement, Moyer and colleagues said there is now adequate evidence to judge the utility of these screening tests.

The evidence review was funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. One task force member reported a past relationship with Genentech/Roche. Other members indicated they had no relevant financial interests.

Reviewed by Zalman S. Agus, MD Emeritus Professor, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania