Ten insurance companies presented their health plans and proposed premium changes in the individual and small-group markets for 2016 before the Virginia State Corporation Commission in Richmond.

Proposed rate changes varied from single-digit decreases for several small-group plans to a more than 30 percent increase for an individual off-exchange platinum plan presented by United Health Care.

Most fell somewhere in between, but still varied widely. Aetna proposed an average increase of 19.4 percent for some individual plans, but just 6 percent for another popular plan. Anthem, Optima and CareFirst all pointed to average increases of 8 percent to 9 percent in the individual market.

With all the variations cited, from risk pools to locality fees, smoking premiums to federal subsidies, and variations in benefits, deductibles and out-of-pocket costs,straight comparisons between plans are virtually impossible to make.

The presentations — on plans offered both on and off the Affordable Care Act's federally facilitated marketplace — are the first step in a month-long review process by the commission, the Bureau of Insurance and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, according to spokeswoman Katha Treanor.

Each company was required to justify its rate increase; all used the same categories of population morbidity (or disease), trend (facility payments, managing care and quality), and "other." However, not all interpreted the categories in the same way, some including morbidity statistics in the "other" category.

The greatest uniformity occurred in the "trend" category — essentially medical costs — largely pegged as increasing at a rate of 6 to 7 percent. Depending on past plans offered and their risk pools, and experience of pent-up demand, the morbidity numbers had significant range, but it was the "other" category that served as a largely undifferentiated driver at around 20 percent.

Within this, most cited the expense of the phase-out of the reinsurance program, in which the federal government is gradually transferring the costs for the most expensive patients to the private sector, a move that will be complete in 2017.

Another cost driver cited by several was in pharmaceuticals, specifically the expensive drug Sovaldi, used to treat hepatitis C. "That wasn't included in 2015," said Stephen Arnhold of Humana, which requested a 12.4 percent increase for its most popular plan, a silver-level PPO offered off the marketplace.

Those offering the same plans outside the marketplace over several years noted a growing stability and little change in rates, while others talked about the costs of pent-up demand and the lack of certainty surrounding federal subsidies, which the U.S. Supreme Court upheld in June.

"Those are tough to predict," said Arnhold of Humana, which is working to incentivize use of lower-tier drugs and instituting a co-pay to discourage emergency room use. Others, such as United Health Care, also talked about controlling costs through emphasizing health and prevention with wellness coaching, 24/7 access to a nurse line, and value-based contracting.

Amy Ovuka of Aetna said this was the first year that the company had "a solid view of the individual market," since the full roll-out of the Affordable Care Act in 2014. The monthly premium for its most popular plan will increase from $239 to $275 for the youngest age bracket, she said, with the 15.1 percent increase the same across all age groups.

Typically the increase in PPO plans is higher than for HMOs, based on a sicker population served, according to Kenny Kan of CareFirst.

Virginia does not have caps on premiums but all plans must meet a 75 percent threshold for medical loss — money spent on claims. The reviews for actuarial accuracy will be completed by Aug. 25, according to Treanor of the SCC.

Salasky can be reached by phone at 757-247-4784.

Want to comment?

The public can view the filings and the rate review presentation at the SCC web site, www.scc.virginia.gov, and is invited to submit written comments via email to ACAFilingInfo@scc.virginia.gov.