Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Illinois has launched four new coordinated care groups as the state's dominant insurer works to lower medical costs while improving care.

Blue Cross' latest accountable care organizations are partnerships with Chicago-based Presence Health, one of the largest hospital networks in the state, with 11 hospitals; Alexian Brothers Health System, a five-hospital network based in northwest suburban Arlington Heights; NorthShore University HealthSystem, a four-hospital network based in Evanston; and Kane County IPA, a physicians group.

With the addition of these new groups, Blue Cross now has nine ACOs in Illinois, and four more are in the pipeline, said Jerry Bradford, vice president of network development at Chicago-based Blue Cross. The ACOs collectively include more than 450,000 patients, according to Blue Cross.

ACOs are a relatively new innovation in health insurance. Physicians and hospitals get incentives to focus on preventive treatment and coordinate patient care, such as avoiding duplicate tests and making sure patients take their medicine. Doctors and hospitals can receive a bonus for meeting various quality measures and lose money if they don't.

Blue Cross has been at the forefront of the ACO movement. Of the nearly 750 public and private ACOs across the country, only 21 payers have more than five, said David Muhlestein, who tracks ACO activity as a senior director of research and development at Leavitt Partners in Salt Lake City.

“Blue Cross is so big (in Illinois) that it has the ability to really influence what's happening on the commercial side,” Muhlestein said.

Doctors and hospitals that treat a large portion of Blue Cross patients likely want to work with the insurance company paying the bulk of their claims, he said. Another incentive is that insurers, doctors and hospitals are experimenting with what makes an ACO successful and what doesn't. Providers that don't participate now might not have much say later if these types of contracts become standard, he said.

A PRODUCT OF OBAMACARE

ACOs emerged in the wake of the 2010 Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare. Doctors and hospitals traditionally were paid for each service provided, which did little to encourage physicians to monitor how many tests they performed or how much medicine they prescribed.

Dr. David DiLoreto, chief clinical officer of Presence Health Partners, a network of about 2,500 physicians affiliated with Presence Health, said the system is treating about 230,000 patients under contracts that reward the health system for keeping patients healthy. That's a “significant” increase from about 40,000 patients just three years ago, DiLoreto said. The system is now participating in four different ACOs.

The Presence ACO with Blue Cross includes about 33,000 patients, he said. A three-year contract with Blue Cross began on Jan. 1.

“One of the things we're hearing from people who pay for health care, whether that's employers or the government, is that the cost of care is too high and the quality doesn't seem to support the cost of care,” DiLoreto said.

The new ACO with Blue Cross is the first such effort with a private insurer for Alexian Brothers Health System, said Don Franke, vice president for clinical integration at the health system. Alexian plans to take lessons it learned in its only other ACO, with Medicare, and apply them to the 14,000 patients in the Blue Cross effort, he said. That includes considering issues at home that might impact patients' health, such as not having transportation to get to a doctor.

“We're able to . . . identify patients who we think would benefit by having their care better coordinated,” Franke said.

J.P. Gallagher, chief operating officer at NorthShore, said in a statement that “as the health care landscape undergoes remarkable change, such partnerships are imperative, and NorthShore is pleased to be part of an initiative that will improve efficiency, coordinate care and enhance value for patients.”

A representative for the Kane County IPA did not provide comment.