(Photo: Doug MacGregor)

Church goal should be peace

Rev. Dr. Jeffrey DeYoe fails to indicate in his letter “Seeing the real Israel, ” Dec. 29, that he is a proponent of the BDS (Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions) movement as a leader with the Presbyterian Church USA’s Israel/Palestine Mission Network. The BDS campaign focuses not on criticism of Israeli policies, but rather demonization and delegitimization of Israel itself. BDS proponents use harsh rhetoric, ignoring Israeli public support for a two-state solution and the government’s willingness to engage in negotiations. Incitement, terror, and violence by Palestinians are overlooked.

Those who are supportive of a two-state solution should promote reconciliation between Israelis and Palestinians through constructive measures. Instead of boycotting Israeli products, Rev. Dr. DeYoe should be supporting Israeli and Palestinian companies and institutions; instead of divesting from American companies doing business with Israel, he should be investing in companies that enhance both economies; instead of sanctioning, he should be encouraging more engagement with both peoples.

We should ‘see’ these diatribes for what they are, and in context. Criticism of Israel, as for any country – including our own – can be legitimate. Yet, contorting Israel and Israelis into a pariah status is unfair, disproportionate, ignores facts, and ultimately negates the goal of two peoples living side-by-side in peace.

- Hava L. Holzhauer, Florida Regional Director, Anti-Defamation League

Mel’s 2016 consumer resolutions

I always enjoy the Tell Mel column in your paper.

Her New Year’s resolution suggestion column was the best! (Jan. 3, Consumer resolutions for 2016)

She suggested for people who continue the chain of emails check them out before forwarding to others.

That reminded me of an email urging women to dial some number like *22 for immediate help from the highway patrol if they felt in danger.

I checked it out and it wasn’t true at all. I asked the sender if she had checked it before forwarding and of course she hadn’t.

The same goes for repeating false stories about candidates you do or don’t like.

I heard a man tell a story about a current candidate in which a man claimed he fired the candidate for lying and cheating years ago.

I looked it up on fact checker and Snopes and a few other sites Mel mentioned and found the story is totally untrue.

Turns out the man making the claim admitted he never was the boss, the person in question was never fired and the story was totally made up, yet it gets passed around as if it’s true.

I hope that we all take Mel’s suggestion for 2016 to fact check before passing around a juicy story or new cure or whatever we pass on to others.

Thank you Mel for all the wonderful tips you have given us this year to prevent being scammed

- Pat Deptuch, Cape Coral

TSA fast lane

I am a big supporter of the Fort Myers-Naples area and often tell people what a wonderful job we have done developing RSW. With the new terminal, roadway connections, additional airlines, etc. it has become a real asset to our community

Now we are in danger of blowing the whole thing over RSW’s reluctance to staff TSA lines properly in the three concourses. Like me, many RSW passengers who travel frequently have paid their money and undergone interviews to obtain our “pre-TSA” status. In virtually every other airport in the U.S. that designation saves us 50-70 percent of waiting time in line. However at RSW it saves us nothing because rarely, if ever, is the TSA line open.

Let’s correct this situation before people start using Ft. Lauderdale, Sarasota or other Florida airports who have their act together. Hopefully we will do it before visitors discover that it can be lots easier to visit these competing Florida vacation locations.

- John Fiedler, Sanibel

New go to column

Bravo to The News-Press. David Moulton is my new go-to on Sunday’s sports section, it used to be me checking which NFL game is on the local stations but now I stop and read Moulton’s commentary, like last week’s commentary on the Hall of Fame votes, I don’t even like baseball (sorry to the fans), but I found his opinion very interesting and informative. Nice job keep it up!

-Dan Shannon, south Fort Myers

Skyscraper city

Wake up residents of Bonita Springs/Estero. A city of high-rises may be on the way!

My husband and I moved to Bonita Springs from Naples because of the overdevelopment in Collier by the water and the way developers there stretched the legalities on what they built. We chose Bonita because things seemed more settled. Yes there are high-rise clusters in Bonita Bay, and the Colony in Pelican Landing, but there is also open space, golf courses, and wetlands. We even bought in a high-rise to enjoy those wonderful views. But then bam, we find out that just north of the Hyatt Regency Resort, WCI has plans to tear up part of the Raptor Bay golf course and build 4 high-rises. And next to that there are plans to build perhaps 4 more on the former sleepy Weeks Fish Camp. Eight high-rises, plus the Hyatt? A wall of concrete will block the sunsets. And what will happen to the fragile wetlands, and Estero Bay? WCI tells us that its plan has nothing to do with the Weeks’ land, which was public access and now may go private. But the Bonita Springs City Council should look at all this together.

The rezoning application for the WCI land is tentatively scheduled before the Bonita City Council on Jan. 20. The big public comment hearing may be Feb. 3. Put these dates on your calendar and show up! The future of this beautiful area is at stake.

- Diane Ketcham, Bonita Springs

Let Arabs solve own conflicts

I was enthralled with the article the other day regarding the schism between the Sunni and Shiite Muslims. It appears that this feud has been going on since the birth of Islam. And that is about 1,500 years ago. Here we are, the western powers mostly led by U.S. ideas and forces that are trying to resolve this dilemma. We supply arms to some groups, openly fight with others, try to “pick” who the right leader should be and, for all intents and purposes, have really gotten nowhere. Just who are we to step in and try to resolve/solve or otherwise defuse a religious belief that has been in conflict for 1,500 years? All I can say is that our involvement has only made the problem bigger, more expensive in dollars and lives, and for what? Get out, stay out and let the Arabs solve their own conflicts.

- Donald R. Plitnick, North Fort Myers

Fictional accomplishment

It was noteworthy that President Obama in his end of the year broadcast boasted of job creation, low oil prices and gay marriage but never mentioned the disaster of his foreign policy or terrorism. It was surprising that he even mentioned job creation since the job participation rate is at 62 percent, the lowest in 70 years, or oil prices, which are a result of fracking, a technology he has adamantly opposed or even gay marriage which he did not support until a little over a year ago when he realized that the gay lobby was making some gains. I guess it’s understandable that he brags about these fictional accomplishments since no one else will, not even Democratic presidential candidates who constantly bring up low wages, inequality, a disappearing middle class and a poor economy, all things that Obama promised to fix. Obama will ride off into the sunset next year with this fictitious vision of himself as a president of the stature of Roosevelt, Reagan and Truman when in reality he’s going to have to pull out all stops just to get into Jimmy Carter’s class.

- J.F. George, Sanibel

Scott’s waste of space

I am a lifetime, dyed-in-the-wool, somewhat conservative Republican. I have never voted for a Democrat in my life. When Rick Scott came on the scene, I thought he was a circus shill and soon found he was a big time shill who had by a hair on his chinny chin chin stayed out of prison beating a fraud charge. His primary opponent was the current Governor (I forget his name so lets call him FGN) FGN was a total failure and I sure could not vote for him. I simply did not vote on that item on the ballot. In the next two elections the same two bums were my choice. I again declined to vote for anyone. I didn’t actually gain much by my tactic but then I could tell every one “it’s your own fault you, not I, voted for him”.

Well Jan. 7 the Views section was robbed of valuable space. Why did you give Scott a single line to create a legacy? Certainly the law does not obligate you to do so? Did I read what he wrote? Heck, no. Why would I tax my diminishing sight trying to read the teeny weeny print and somewhat illegible font?

- Jim Walsh, Fort Myers

Veterans, Americans healthcare

Re: “Setting record straight about vet’s health care,” Jan.6, Phillip Viersen.

I served four years in the service and am very proud of it. I feel attached to the United States in a way that if you never served I don’t believe you can relate. I also think it is everybody’s responsibility to serve in some way before you set out on your journey of life. Viersen’s quote, “you must realize that for every dollar you take away from that veteran in any form, you have cheapened their life and their service for those who did not serve, and they may be broken mentally, in spirit or in body”. Think about it, somebody is fighting for your freedom while you do your own thing for personal gain. The least you can do is give free medical care for life for these veterans.

A good quote to remember, “your greatness is not what you have, it’s what you give”.

Re: “Affordable care act not working so well in Florida,” Jan. 6, Stephen Parente, Ph.D.

I think Dr. Parente has hit the nail on the head. By 2025, 40 million Americans will choose to be uninsured because of rising costs. 40 million is a greater number than the number of uninsured before the unaffordable care was put into place. And Hilary claims the Affordable Care Act’s working well! Now that is a true Democratic liberal statement.

Personally, I ask you how is the act working for you. You do the math.

Another reason to vote for a free thinker like Donald Trump.

- Ken Spangler, Bokeelia

Misuse of slush funds

Just saw where Harry Reid wants to use his campaign money when he retires as his own slush fund about $600,000. I guess he used $17,000 as a gift to his granddaughter over a couple of years. They made him pay that back. Our local female county commissioner went to federal prison for misuse of her campaign funds. She was a Republican though. I guess federal laws are entirely different for Democrats.

- Leo Amos, Matlacha

When does ‘no’ mean no?

Almost four years ago the proponents of legalizing marijuana lost on the election ballot. The majority of Floridians said ‘no’ to the thinly veiled ‘medical’ marijuana bill. Now they are trying it again. They are like a spoiled child that keeps pestering, whining and throwing tantrums over and over and over until the parent gives in, just to shut them up and have a little peace.

I think any bill voted down by the majority of Floridians on a legal ballot should not be able to be put back on the ballot for ten years. In a recent election there were so many amendments besides voting for candidates that voting took hours instead of minutes. The amendments were in ‘legalese’ only lawyers can understand and trying to decipher them took lots of unnecessary extra time, making voting a real unnecessary chore.

I have friends and relatives who have cancer and a friend who has a grandchild with motor skill problems. The doctors, through the pharmacy, give them a derivative of Marijuana. It is there now in Florida for the ones doctors feel need it, and only pharmacies can dispense it.

The proponents of this new bill, as with the last one, think the people of Florida aren’t very smart. Who do they think they’re kidding? Many of the people in Florida are baby boomers and we know what marijuana is and we know why they want to pass this bill. It’s not just to help cancer patients or those with epilepsy or AIDS etc. It’s a loophole for recreational drugs.

I have friends in Denver where pot is legal and they stop on the way home from work on Fridays to the marijuana store to buy ‘chocolates and cookies’ with marijuana for parties on the weekend to ‘relieve stresses of the week’ and ‘relax’. That’s what would happen here. Denver has more DUI’s for driving under the influence of drugs now than alcohol and regardless of the alcohol issue, which is another separate issue, legalizing marijuana will not make our state better or help cancer patients more. ‘No’ should mean no.

Any politician willing to write a bill to do this?

- Ray Corbitt, LaBelle

Trumps ideas are good, but the man, not so much

I agree with most of the things Donald Trump says he stands for, but I find him to be a hard man to like. His egomaniacal, Braggadocio behavior and his facial grimaces and body language remind me of Nazi dictators Benito Mussolini and Adolph Hitler. I hope I never have to hold my nose and vote for him, in preference to Hillary Clinton.

- Merrill Donoho, south Fort Myers

Refusing responsible action

I find it fascinating to listen to senators Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz rant on about how President Obama is responsible for the fact that our Air Force is the oldest of all our allies; that our Navy is the smallest it has been since before WWII.

Both Rubio and Cruz are members of the Senate. Both could have introduced and championed bills to authorize spending to modernize the Air Force. Both could have introduced and championed bills to authorize building of new ships. Neither one did. Of course, with the amount of time both have been absent from the Senate, how could they?

And they claim that we have to refuse to allow Syrian refugees into the country because they would pose a security threat, yet both voted against the bill that would have prevented people on our terrorist Don’t Fly List from legally purchasing guns.

When are the voters going to stop being fooled by rhetoric and start holding these guys responsible for actions they have refused to take to protect our national security.

- Mike Newes, south Fort Myers

More gun control

President Obama is talking about more gun laws when he gets back to Washington even if it takes Executive Orders by him. Instead of creating more gun laws going after law-abiding citizens, here is a novel idea. Why not start enforcing current gun laws on the books and going after the criminals and making it mandatory that they are sentenced for them!

Chicago, the President’s hometown, has some of the strictest gun laws, but also leads the country in shootings. Here in Florida, in 1999 we instituted the 10-20-Life Law mandatory minimum sentencing for crimes committed with guns. The problem is our legal system. When crimes are committed or even false paperwork is filed to apply for a gun (a felony), our legal system either doesn’t go after them or allows the criminals to plea bargain their charges down to lesser ones sometimes avoiding jail time entirely. That’s why you see young criminals with lengthy rap sheets with many of the charges involving guns and when they do something news breaking, everyone wonders how can that be? It shouldn’t be. They should have been sitting in jail where they belong!

- Ray Uryga, Cape Coral

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1RfnddT