SHARE Searchable Database



Milwaukee area restaurant inspections



Our interactive database, updated monthly, includes food safety violations for restaurants in Milwaukee, Waukesha, Washington and Ozaukee counties, with some records going back to January 2012.

By of the

Editor's note, March 17, 2014: This article has been updated to clarify that Wauwatosa is able to provide in paper format some information about restaurant inspections, but has denied the newspaper's request for a copy of its electronic database. The updates also clarify that Wauwatosa cited provisions in the public records law to support the reasons for denial.

Wauwatosa residents: Interested in knowing which of your local eateries has a roach situation, or conversely, which ones have been religiously following food safety codes?

It could take a while to find out.

Since October, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel has been asking for the Wauwatosa Health Department's database of restaurant inspections.

But the agency says it can't turn over the database because it contains medically sensitive information.

In other words, the Health Department paid $7,000 in taxpayer money for a database that, by its design, has barriers to public access.

Nearly a decade ago, the Health Department's current head, Nancy Kreuser, approved the creation of a homegrown environmental health database because, according to the city attorney's office, the city lacked alternatives.

The database includes restaurant inspections, a public record that details food code violations of restaurants, as well as other information the agency collects, such as test results for food-borne illnesses that it says are confidential under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, or HIPAA.

According to a letter from the city attorney's office, the software doesn't have the capability of selecting one set of records from another. It isn't compatible with any common formats or commercial software, which would allow dissemination of the public records.

The department says it isn't planning to update the software because of budget concerns.

"The City honors open records requests and in paper format for this kind of record," Kreuser said Friday in an email.

The Wauwatosa city attorney's office, however, denied a Journal Sentinel open records request for the database late last year.

"The city's current database includes personally identifiable information within the meaning of HIPAA. The database cannot be released in its current form," a letter from the city attorney's office said.

Virtually all health departments in Wisconsin are able to release their restaurant inspections databases.

The state offers a database to municipalities for free that many agencies in Wisconsin have joined. Kreuser said the state's database isn't a viable option for Wauwatosa because it doesn't contain certain necessary features.

In the four-county area that includes Waukesha, Washington and Ozaukee counties, only Wauwatosa does not make its database available.

In January, the agency agreed to provide individual reports of restaurant inspections as they occur. While the Journal Sentinel will begin making any recent reports available on its website each month, these won't provide the tallies of violations and quick searching and comparing of restaurants that the originally requested database would allow.

"It's astonishing that their system is so screwed up, they can't isolate restaurant inspections from other kinds of data," said Bill Lueders, president of the Wisconsin Freedom of Information Council.

Lueders also questioned the application of HIPAA.

"Everything involving a physical condition is not a medical record," Lueders said. "I seriously question the application of HIPAA to people who contact a government agency to say that they got a tummy ache. That's not a medical record."

In an email, a Wauwatosa city attorney wrote on behalf of the Health Department that medical information in the database varies widely but can include actual medical records as well as reports of medical conditions.

These could be, for example, tests or lab reports created in response to complaints for food-borne illnesses.

Usually, records with private medical information are separate from restaurant inspections.

For example, the City of Milwaukee has restaurant inspections in one database, and investigations into outbreaks that contain protected medical information are in another.

The state Department of Health Services said its restaurant inspection database isn't intended to store any confidential medical records.

The City of Wauwatosa denied other freedom of information requests related to the database.

The total cost of creating the program was around $7,000, but the city attorney's office declined to provide documents mentioning the cost of acquiring or creating the database. Relying on public records law, the city said the records request was too broad and lacked a time limit.

The city wouldn't disclose any contracts related to creating the software, citing the same reason of an overly broad records request. Finally, the city was hush-hush about whether it hired programmers or firms to create the software, calling that information a "trade secret."

When asked in December whether more access to the restaurant inspections database would be in the public's interest, or whether they'd be in favor of plans to update the software, Mayor Kathleen Ehley and Ald. Bobby Pantuso, who is on the Board of Health, deferred to the city attorney's office.