President Barack Obama today gave a speech talking about the 2014 election results and working with the Republican Congress. During the course of the speech, Obama also spoke about giving illegal immigrants amnesty, winning the war on ISIS, and repealing Obamacare.

In a related report by the Inquisitr, already some people are suggesting that a GOP-controlled Congress should impeach Obama for “treason,” although the potential executive order on immigration reform is considered a major factor.

When President Barack Obama gave a speech today about the 2014 election results he claimed there’s a belief that if he issues an executive order this will make it harder for Congress to pass comprehensive immigration reform. But Obama believes there is a “cost to waiting” that hurts the economy. Obama also spoke about securing the border and how the mis-allocation of resources may cause families to be separated. The President addressed the Republican Congress by saying that he would appreciate if they created a comprehensive immigration reform bill, although it was made clear he’s still considering issuing an executive order if no action is taken.

When President Obama was asked directly if the United States is “winning” against ISIS, Obama admitted it’s too early to say. He added that it’s a long term plan to build up nations like Iraq in the Middle East and create an international coalition to defeat the Islamic state. Overall, Obama believes the U.S. military operations have made it more difficult for ISIS to operate, although he believes it would be best to find a moderate group to work with in order to combat ISIL. He believes the number one mission is to eventually push the ISIS in Iraq out of the country.

President Obama also spoke on a variety of topics, including Obamacare. If a Republican Congress does attempt to repeal the entire Affordable Care Act he reiterated that he will not sign the bill. Obama believes that the Affordable Care Act has worked and that $180 billion has been saved by passing the law. He does say that he’s willing to discuss modifications to the existing law, but not any key components that would make Obamacare non-functional as initially conceived.

Obama specifically addressed the Obamacare individual mandate, pointing out that if it was stripped out then people could wait to enroll in a health insurance plan until they were sick or hurt. The President also admitted that many people did not sign up for health plans because of the “screw up” with the Obamacare website, but he claims everything will be “triple-checked” before the new enrollment period begins.