Not since they were called the Hartford Whalers have the Carolina Hurricanes won a game in Denver (0-9-2). That win, a 3-2 Whale triumph at the old McNichols Sports Arena, came on Feb. 9, 1996. I recently actually went back and watched the entire VHS tape of that game and documented it all in one of my “Watching Old Avs Games” pieces on the blog. Give it a read for what life was like back in 1996.

Anyway, I thought the Hurricanes would break the hex tonight. The precise moment I really thought that was in the second period of a 3-1 game and Alex Semin had just a tap-in to make to make it a 4-1 game. Even Semin, one of the biggest underachievers in the NHL right now, would make that one and nobody ever comes back from a three-goal deficit anymore. Game over, I thought. But Calvin Pickard did kind of a reverse, backhanded glove save and also with his stick to keep it still a two-goal game.

The Avs ended up pulling it out 4-3, with beleaguered veteran Jarome Iginla being the hero with the tying goal and setup pass to Zach Redmond to win it. Pickard, in relief an an awful Reto Berra (10 shots, seven saves, six goals allowed on last 36 shots), made 17 saves for his first career win.

Here’s how he described what it was like to come in suddenly, and on making that miracle save:

It’ll be interesting to see who gets the start Tuesday in Arizona, assuming Semyon Varlamov will still be out (and I think he will be out still). Does Patrick Roy come back with Berra, or reward the kid Pickard with the start? We’ll find out Monday at practice.

Here is Iginla on being the Jarome Iginla of old – not just an old Jarome Iginla.



Here is Redmond, rocking the Movember stache, on his big game:



I thought Erik Johnson showed a real leadership moment with that second-period goal. It came two seconds after a PP expired, and you could just sense the major frustration building at that point. He deked a defender down and found the corner with a shot that really got them back in the game in a serious way. Johnson told me after the game he used to make that move all the time as a Minnesota Golden Gopher, but stopped doing it in the NHL as much after some turnovers led to goals going the other way. I say he keeps doing it more again.

And finally, here are more post-game notes and quotes from Avs PR staff:

• Calvin Pickard stopped all 17 shots in relief to post his first NHL victory…Pickard is the second goaltender in franchise history to earn his first career win in relief…Quebec’s Brian Ford also accomplished the feat on Dec. 27, 1983 vs. Hartford.

• Zach Redmond scored a career-high two goals, including the game winner.

• Nathan MacKinnon tallied a career-high three assists tonight…The three points matched his career best for points in a single game (Feb. 1, 2014 vs. Buffalo).

• Andrew Agozzino made his NHL debut tonight and picked up an assist for his first NHL point.

• Andrej Nestrasil scored his first NHL goal.

• Justin Faulk appeared in his 200th NHL game.

• With a goal and an assist tonight, Jarome Iginla moved into a tie with Sergei Fedorov for 48th place on the NHL’s all-time scoring list with 1,179 career points.

MOST POINTS, ALL-TIME (No. 46-50)

46. Dino Ciccarelli 1200

47. Rod Brind’Amour 1184

48. Sergei Fedorov 1179

Jarome Iginla 1179

50. Bobby Hull 1170

• Tomas Vincour became the first player in Avalanche/Nordiques franchise history to wear #81 when he made his season debut tonight…Vincour wore #24 in his previous stint with the Avs in 2012-13.

• Vincour’s assist tonight marked his first point in the NHL since April 26, 2013 at Phoenix.

• John-Michael Liles scored his first goal of the season for the Hurricanes…It was Liles’ 35th career goal here at Pepsi Center, second to only Hall-of-Famer Rob Blake (40) for the most goals by a defenseman in this building.

• Tonight wrapped up a stretch of seven consecutive games versus Eastern Conference opponents (Avs finished 4-3-0)…Colorado has already played 13 (or 41%) of its 32 ‘non-conference’ games this season.

Colorado LW Andrew Agozzino

On His First NHL Game And Point: “It was unbelievable. I mean, to have that start and get an assist early in the game was an unbelievable feeling. The way we came back in the second and third period and got that win, I can’t even really describe it to be honest with you. It was unbelievable.”

On The Success Of Their Line Tonight: “Well, that’s the thing, we have played together before so we are comfortable with one another. We just told each other, ‘Let’s go out and play like we have been down in Lake Erie.’ You know, we were getting pucks deep and skating really well and I think that’s just translating into success for us.”

Colorado D Zach Redmond

On The Confidence Of Playing On The Power Play: “[The] power play is something that I love to do. It’s an opportunity that I need to take advantage of. Tonight was a good start. None of us have played together up until that point, so it was good to kind of find early chemistry.”

On His Game-Winning Goal: “It’s hard for forwards to read D-men coming down the backdoor, especially when everyone is gripping their stick tight with the last minute there. I was able to kind of time it and Iggy (Colorado RW Jarome Iginla) found me with a perfect pass so he made it easy for me.”

Colorado G Calvin Pickard

On The Fourth Line’s Success Tonight: “It looks so good. I mean, they were great all night. You know, they’re a line down in Lake Erie and they come up here and it’s the same way. They are buzzing and moving the puck and they have good chemistry. They are all great people too and that makes it that much better.”

On Getting The Win Tonight: “Yeah, I mean it was nice. Coming in [replacing Colorado G Reto Berra] in Ottawa, I thought we deserved that game. I thought we played pretty well there. A couple bounces didn’t go my way there and the team’s way there but tonight, we stuck with it. It was so much fun to play behind that team and if we play like that going forward, we are going to win a lot of hockey games.”

Carolina C Andrej Nestrasil

On Scoring His First NHL Goal: “You know what, right now it means nothing. You score the first one and you lose, it doesn’t count right? So, we obviously need to play better to win the game. On the other hand, it gives me more confidence because I went 13 games without a goal. So, it might help me a little bit and hopefully it’s going to get better.”

On His Line Quickly Forming Chemistry: “Obviously, (Carolina F Nathan) Gerbe is unbelievably fast, it’s incredible. I think it was good because we were talking a lot on the bench and we knew where the other guy is going to be. We support each other really well and on my goal, Nasher (Carolina F Riley Nash) made a really nice play and it was kind of a lucky goal but I needed that.”

Carolina D John-Michael Liles

On Carolina’s Quick Start Tonight: “We started how we wanted to. We took it to them, I think, early on in the game. I have to give them credit, they battled throughout and maybe we just let our foot off the gas a little bit.”

On Scoring In His First Game Back In Colorado: “It was pretty emotional. I spent eight years here with a lot of great friends, made a lot of great memories and it’s a different feeling being on the visiting side. It would’ve been nice to get the win along with the goal, but it was still a nice feeling coming back to this building and getting the start from coach too.”