When President Barack Obama responded to the recent Supreme Court decision concerning gay marriage, he made some comments that made pro-life advocates take notice because the underscored the way in which Obama ignores the plight of unborn children victimized by abortion.

LifeNews writer Rebecca Downs, writing at LiveAction’s blog, noticed the interesting comments from Obama. The president said:

OBAMA: Our nation was founded on a bedrock principle that we are all created equal. The project of each generation is to bridge the meaning of those founding words with the realities of changing times — a never-ending quest to ensure those words ring true for every single American. We are big and vast and diverse, a nation of people with different backgrounds and beliefs, different experiences and stories but bound by the shared ideal that no matter who you are or what you look like, how you started off or how and who you love, America is a place where you can write your own destiny.

We are people who believe every child is entitled to life and liberty and the pursuit of happiness. There is so much more work to be done to extend the full promise of America to every American. But today, we can say in no uncertain terms that we’ve made our union a little more perfect.

Downs responds, ” Most striking is his utterance that “we are people who believe every child is entitled to life and liberty and the pursuit of happiness.” President Obama’s stance as the most pro-abortion president appears in direct conflict with the values he espouses. Why does Obama not see preborn children as worthy of basic human rights? How can any child “write [his] own destiny” if he has been aborted?”

She continued: “President Obama talks about love. What about love for the preborn? Shouldn’t we respect people, at least enough to allow them to born? Why should it matter if they are still developing inside their mother’s wombs?”

Obama also left out unborn children earlier this month.

On June 9, President Barack Obama spoke before the Catholic Health Association and said that his first job out of college taught him that “every human being, made in the image of God, deserves to live in dignity.” According to CNS News, he also said that “all children…ought to have the opportunity to achieve their God-given potential.”

Obama’s speech is literally mind blowing, considering his radical support for abortion-on-demand in America and around the world. As LifeNews previously reported, in 2009, Obama started his presidency with a bang by giving China, one of the worst countries in the world for sex-trafficking, millions of dollar to fund their brutal one-child policy. Then he promised the American people that his health care policy, Obamacare, would not fund abortion. However, four years later, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a report that showed that Obamacare plans cover abortion and receive taxpayer subsides.

Click here to sign up for daily pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

Of course, Obama has also rallied behind Planned Parenthood, the largest abortion business in America. In 2013, Marjorie Dannenfeiser, the president of the pro-life Susan B. Anthony List, said the following about Obama’s support for Planned Parenthood: “There is no industry that President Obama is more willing to protect than the abortion industry and particularly Planned Parenthood, the nation’s biggest abortion provider, which in a single year performed more than 333,000 abortions. The president has defended federal funding for Planned Parenthood to the point of being willing to shut down the government over the continuing resolution battle, and in return they spent a record amount to reelect him in November.”

Additionally, in 2013, he praised the abortion giant and said he wanted God to bless them. He said, “As long as we’ve got to fight to make sure women have access to quality, affordable health care, and as long as we’ve got to fight to protect a woman’s right to make her own choices about her own health, I want you to know that you’ve also got a president who’s going to be right there with you, fighting every step of the way. Thank you, Planned Parenthood. God bless you.”

Most recently, President Obama has showed his extreme abortion views by threatening to veto the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, which would protect babies after 20-weeks from abortion based on the concept that they can feel pain. In January, the Obama administration said in a press release: “The Administration strongly opposes H.R. 36, which would unacceptably restrict women’s health and reproductive rights and is an assault on a woman’s right to choose. Women should be able to make their own choices about their bodies and their health care, and Government should not inject itself into decisions best made between a woman and her doctor.”