GE Healthcare pavilion at Arab Health 2014 brings the hospital environment to life, highlighting solutions for advanced care

A walk-through of GE Healthcare's pavilion offers visitors insights into the modern hospital environment with special sections dedicated to different medical specialities and showcasing the advanced offerings of GE in the field.

Maher Abouzeid, President and CEO of GE Healthcare for the Middle East and Pakistan, said: "We have designed the pavilion to demonstrate to visitors the range of GE's healthcare portfolio across the hospital setting. Through this approach we have imagined both the patient and clinician and the different procedures and interactions experienced in their journey through the hospital. Each segment in the pavilion highlights some of our newest technologies and solutions in the respective care areas, demonstrating to visitors our innovative approach to advanced care delivery."

Under the theme, 'Advancing Healthcare, Together,' GE Healthcare's pavilion includes segments for cardiology, woman & child care, oncology, radiology, critical care, the operating room and other advanced solutions.

GE's cardiology portfolio stretches across a suite of clinically relevant solutions that reflect a commitment to fighting cardiovascular disease. With a broad, technologically advanced portfolio, sub-specialties include the cardiac cathlab, cardiovascular imaging, electrophysiology, cardiology IT and nuclear cardiology.

The Woman & Child section provides a broad, technologically advanced portfolio across the spectrum of female-specific conditions. Areas of specialty include breast health, and maternal and newborn health including solutions for pediatric intensive care.

In oncology, GE Healthcare is bringing 50 years of global experience to the Middle East, with a focus on advanced diagnostics for the early detection of cancer. Covering the spectrum of care, GE's comprehensive offerings support clinicians in cancer screening, diagnosis and disease staging to treatment planning and monitoring.

A global leader in general radiology solutions helping clinicians see more, earlier, GE Healthcare is also bringing to Arab Health 2014 an advanced range of diagnostic imaging services focused on delivering optimal patient care, comfort and productivity to diagnose or treat disease.

In critical care, offerings include a variety of technologies developed to meet the diverse needs of patients and clinicians designed to translate in both high and low resource settings. The portfolio includes patient monitoring, ventilators, diagnostic ECG cardiology information and analysis systems, algorithms and parameter technologies, information technologies and clinical consumables.

In the operating room, the company's broad portfolio of solutions enable minimally invasive surgery by helping surgeons see inside the body during general surgery and vascular procedures, while its offerings in anaesthesia, ultrasound, monitoring and healthcare IT complete the portfolio providing efficiency and quality of care throughout the high acuity pathway.

As one of the few global healthcare providers with the scale to support a more holistic system-wide approach to address key customer needs, other GE Healthcare offerings on show include Healthcare IT, Services, healthcare design and advisory support. Leveraging these capabilities and the entire product portfolio, GE is focused on creating and delivering outcomes-based solutions in partnership with leading organizations to improve healthcare across the Arab world.

GE Healthcare is the Platinum Sponsor of Arab Health 2014, and also extends support to leading conferences held on the sidelines of the event, including the Big Data Conference, Leaders in Healthcare, Middle East Anaesthesia and Radiology Conferences. Visit GE Healthcare's pavilion at Sheikh Saeed Hall, Booth No: S3B10.

Join the conversation at our GE Hewar blog: middleeast.geblogs.com/

About GE:

GE works on things that matter. The best people and the best technologies taking on the toughest challenges. Finding solutions in energy, health and home, transportation and finance. Building, powering, moving and curing the world. Not just imagining. Doing. GE works. www.ge.com.

GE Healthcare:

GE Healthcare provides transformational medical technologies and services that are shaping a new age of patient care. Our broad expertise in medical imaging and information technologies, medical diagnostics, patient monitoring systems, drug discovery, biopharmaceutical manufacturing technologies, performance improvement and performance solutions services help our customers to deliver better care to more people around the world at a lower cost. In addition, we partner with healthcare leaders, striving to leverage the global policy change necessary to implement a successful shift to sustainable healthcare systems.

Our "healthymagination" vision for the future invites the world to join us on our journey as we continuously develop innovations focused on reducing costs, increasing access and improving quality around the world. Headquartered in the United Kingdom, GE Healthcare is a unit of General Electric Company (NYSE: GE). Worldwide, GE Healthcare employees are committed to serving healthcare professionals and their patients in more than 100 countries. www.gehealthcare.com.

For more information, please contact:

Lisa Farrugia

GE Healthcare -Middle East & Africa, Russia, Turkey & Central Asia

+90 530 387 1850

Lisa.Farrugia1@ge.com

© Press Release 2014

© Copyright Zawya. All Rights Reserved.