Hillary Clinton has released an aggressive new attack ad, fanning fears about the main Republican presidential candidates to make the point that she, and no other Democrat, “can stop them.”

On Screen

Campaign trail footage shows Donald J. Trump profanely promising to bomb the Islamic State and Senator Ted Cruz promising to “carpet-bomb them into oblivion.” A narrator warns in a deep, ominous tone: “One of these Republicans could actually be president.” Gov. Chris Christie is seen menacingly ordering a New Jersey man to “sit down and shut up.”

The narrator invokes “their agenda,” as Jeb Bush says he wants to “repeal Obamacare,” Mr. Trump says that “wages are too high” and Mr. Cruz calls for defunding Planned Parenthood.

“They’re backward, even dangerous,” the voice-over warns. Lumping the four Republicans, with an eyes-downcast Senator Marco Rubio, together on screen, then squeezing them out of the frame, the ad asks, “Who’s the one candidate who can stop them?” The answer it provides is Mrs. Clinton, with a clip of her delivering testimony before the House committee investigating the Benghazi attacks. “Tested, and tough,” the narrator calls her. “To stop them, stand with her.”

The Message

Though the ad blasts the Republican contenders, it draws an unstated contrast between Mrs. Clinton and her main rival for the Democratic nomination, Senator Bernie Sanders, suggesting that he lacks the experience and toughness to defeat any of them in November. The image of Mrs. Clinton withstanding some 11 hours of questioning in the Benghazi hearing reinforces her point, and allows Mrs. Clinton to turn that ordeal into a positive. She had recently refrained from attacking Mr. Trump, but the ad opens with a quick clip of the candidate, and calls him one of the five “backwards” candidates.

Fact Check

Mr. Trump has said that in his remark about wages, in a Republican debate in November, he meant that the minimum wage should not be raised, not that wages generally were too high.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Where

New Hampshire and Iowa broadcast stations.

Takeaway

This is an ad meant to resonate with the Democratic base, magnifying the danger posed by the potential Republican nominees to make Mrs. Clinton’s battle-hardened experience seem an essential asset for whomever Democrats choose as their standard-bearer — and one that only she possesses.