<p>July 26, 2014 ? Carmen Galabiz, 13, an eighth grader at Riverdale School, performs with other members of the Riverdale Ropers during the Germantown Municipal Schools kickoff party at Germantown Municipal Park. (William DeShazer/The Commercial Appeal)</p>

By Jane Roberts

In a county that now has eight school districts — with open enrollment agreements between most of them — the first day of school and the critical weeks that follow create a new shopping season of sorts here: Depending on how parents feel, they are either going to be sold on their school choices and settle in for a happy year, or have buyer’s remorse and look around.

All the school districts know this. From a customer service standpoint (and public relations too), the next six weeks are the most significant touch point school boards have in the whole year to get things right and make allies with their customers.

The earliest telltale signs will be how efficient the buses run, how smoothly the cafeterias operate and, in a week, how clean the buildings are.

The merged district stumbled last year in each area, plus a few more, including an errant payroll system that messed up payday for hundreds of employees. Even though Shelby County Schools said only about 1 percent of employees were affected, the recurring images of the first few weeks were teachers waiting to get paid and families driving their children to school when the school bus, in some cases weeks later, was unreliable.

“The first cardinal rule is just do a good job,” said Tom DeLapp, who advises 420 school districts in California in crisis communication, public engagement and customer service. “That enables people to have confidence that their system knows what it is doing.”

“If the buses run on time, the presumption is that other things work in the system,” he said. “If the buses don’t work, then it raises the question, ‘What other things do not work?’”

Last week, superintendents in the suburbs — not midlevel managers — were driving bus routes, looking for unsafe left-hand turns and glitches that make buses late while also monitoring the news on a possible Teamster strike that threatened to undo their planning.

For months, the districts have been looking at operations, trying to put their money where they have their largest interface with families and where they can get the most efficiency. One of the first decisions the suburban superintendents made was to decentralize lunch operations and put the school “lunch ladies” back to work.

“Honestly, that was one of the easiest decisions we made,” said Lakeland Supt. Ted Horrell. “There was almost no discussion. We wanted the food served to our students to be cooked in our kitchens.”

To do it, they are giving cafeteria employees more hours, hoping to reduce the high absentee rates that plagued schools across the county last year when hours were cut to save money in the merger. And by making each cafeteria autonomous, leaders say they can also avoid the food-quality problems that cut participation in the school lunch program last year.

“Just like a business, if you aren’t making a profit, you can’t keep the staff in the cafeteria. Last year, we had positions cut in the middle of the year,” said Germantown Supt. Jason Manuel.

“In the merger, they changed the positions. We used to have a cafeteria manager and a lead cashier. Those jobs were reduced to lower hours, which meant less pay and fewer benefits. It made it challenging to find people willing to do the work,” he said.

At one point last year, SCS was transporting substitute workers to suburban cafeterias to cover the holes. The other problem was food delivery.

“Oh my gosh, it was terrible,” said Manuel, who was principal of Houston Middle until he took the superintendent’s job in December. “My cafeteria manager would get shipments she didn’t order. That continued through the year. You could not send them back. You had to keep it in the freezers.”

Because the menus were centralized, cafeteria managers had no authority to serve the items that students liked and that they thought could have increased lunch participation.

“We were able to take the good and bad of last year and learn from that,” said SCS board chairman Kevin Woods. “And hopefully we have made some drastic improvements, and I think the public will notice.

“But it’s not just operations. We also learned how to respond to mistakes and get out in front and address them head on. We learned a lot about being more prepared and how we communicated.”

SCS, which this year is serving free breakfast and lunch to all students, is taking a calculated risk that participation won’t jump through the roof. It hasn’t budgeted extra funds for food service, even though other states offering universal free lunch programs have seen double-digit increases in the number of takers.

“Some districts saw a lesser increase,” said district spokesman Christian Ross. “We will monitor actual participation during the first six weeks of school and, if warranted, submit a resolution to our (school) board to revise our budget, including staffing adjustments.”

SCS had its own headaches with food last year. The intensity shows in a 10-page memo school board members received last week with contingency plans for most visible operations problems, including transportation and building cleanliness. Food service problems took up half the space.

By July 18, SCS had identified 125 cafeteria tech vacancies (pay is $11.78 hour) out of total of 953 and was offering them to people on the substitute list. But the more difficult problem to handle is the no-shows, whose absence at work gums up lunch operations.

This year, SCS will have a pool of substitute workers at the Central Nutrition Center on Jackson Avenue on Monday, “ready to take immediate assignments as we learn of previously unidentified vacancies,” according to the memo.

The district has also rented vans and scheduled drivers to get workers from the CNC to the cafeterias with no-show workers. The names of cafeteria workers who did not show up for training the week of July 21 were flagged. If they do not report to work this week, their jobs will be posted.

In talks with teachers and principals last week, Woods was clear that all customers, teachers, parents and students, have never had the options that exist in Shelby County today. “Quite honestly, it starts with the day they call in to express an interest in Shelby County Schools. How are they treated on the phone and when they walk through the school doors?”

Last summer, SCS Supt. Dorsey Hopson set up a customer call center at the Teaching and Learning Academy at 2485 Union to field the calls in the central office, capture data on the nature of them and to monitor how long it took to resolve the issues.

Initial data show half the calls came from district employees.

“By knowing what information needs to be out there, we’ll be able to make improvements and have a better-educated workforce on many issues,” Woods said.

“We know that eyes are on Shelby County Schools as it relates to how well we treat our customers and how well we run our school system,” Woods said. “I think folks will be proud of the work we have done. We still have a long way to go. We welcome criticisms and suggestions. We are open.”

___________

On the road

Thirty thousand Shelby County Schools children ride school buses on 460 routes each day.



Meal time

SCS central kitchen will serve free breakfast and lunch to children in 228 schools.



On the job

By late July, SCS had filled 99.3

percent of its teaching jobs.



Smaller Operations

The number of schools in the new municipal districts ranges from one in Lakeland to 11 in Bartlett.



Back in Control

This year the suburban districts return to cooking meals in their school cafeterias.



Updates online

Follow the first day of school with us at commercialappeal.com.