Published Aug. 16, 2015 at 5:06 a.m. Tweet

Every week in 2015, OnMilwaukee.com and local design company Too Much Metal join forces to introduce the latest member of the Milwaukee All-Stars – a team of unfamiliar winners living in the city who consistently and diligently make it shine. Each week, a new member will join the team – based on your recommendations – and at the end of the year all will come together in a Rally of the Raddest Milwaukeeans. We're not sure what that means quite yet, so for now, meet …

Tory Lowe

Tory Lowe is an activist looking to change the socioeconomic issues and assuage the racial tensions still prevalent in Milwaukee. Recently, his main focus has been the "Stop the Violence" campaign to end gun violence in Milwaukee and Chicago.

Earlier this month, he walked from Milwaukee to Chicago to raise awareness of gun violence. The 100-mile walk took him five days and on Saturday, Aug. 8 he arrived in Chicago. Upon his arrival he wrote the following on his Facebook page:

"Along the way I stopped and spoke to the residents. Many gave their solutions to the problem and we all had the same conclusion. Many said that we need all new leaders who will fight for jobs, better education and invest back into our youth. We need to restore the broken home structure and reshape how we look at our community when it come to loving our neighbors. Discipline starts at home."

Tory Lowe is a homegrown social justice crusader and a straight-up Milwaukee All-Star.

OnMilwaukee.com / Too Much Metal: How long have you worked at this?

Tory Lowe: I got back home in February 2011. Started really going full time working in the community March 28, 2012. So I'd say three years.

OMC / TMM: What time of year / season is your favorite in Milwaukee and why?

TL: Fall is my favorite season cause that means it's time for football.

OMC / TMM: What's your favorite or least favorite smell in Milwaukee?

TL: Hmmm… I like waking up in the morning and taking that first breath of fresh air. That means God has blessed me with another day to get things right.

OMC / TMM: What's your hope for Milwaukee?

TL: My hope for Milwaukee is all new leadership. 2016 is coming up and I'd like to see the people vote in all new leaders. We just need a new philosophy in our city. A whole new class of elected officials to lead our city into the future.

OMC / TMM: When / how did you fall in love with Milwaukee?

TL: I was born and raised in Milwaukee. I love my city.

OMC / TMM: What neighborhood do you live in?

TL: I won't give my exact location due to my dealings with my community. What I can tell you is I am still in the inner city near 49th and Center.

OMC / TMM: Why do you do what you do?

TL: I believe God put it in my heart to help my people.

OMC / TMM: What's your one guilty pleasure?

TL: I love to eat.

OMC / TMM: Name a Milwaukeean you would like to high five?

TL: Fred Gillich.

Do you know a Milwaukee All-Star? OnMilwaukee.com and Too Much Metal are looking for true-hearted folks living in the city of Milwaukee who love what they do – and do it with zest and style. Email fred@toomuchmetal.com or molly@onmilwaukee.com with recommendations.