Presidential candidates do a lot of talking.

But, despite all those words, there aren't many data sources that can provide a comprehensive look at what candidates talk about most. For members of Congress, however, the Congressional Record chronicles debates on the floor of the Senate and the House of Representatives.

Capitol Words, a tool from the Sunlight Foundation, provides a data set containing words entered into the Congressional Record – broken down by day, senator and party. To calculate the most popular words used by lawmakers, the Sunlight Foundation employed a formula that gives higher weight to words and phrases used more frequently by a particular lawmaker than by other lawmakers.

Using the tool, the nonpartisan nonprofit has also calculated the lawmakers who use the most SAT words, how different parties talk about gay marriage and the declining complexity of speech in the Congressional Record.

Because the popular words feature shows words used most by lawmakers that are least similar to words used frequently by everyone, it provides an interesting look at the priorities and small verbal ticks of members of Congress.

We're using the tool to look at presidential candidates who are also legislators.

Sen. Marco Rubio: Currently serving as a Florida Republican



Courtesy Sunlight Foundation

Rubio talks a lot about his interns compared with other legislators, which is really kind of sweet. Of all people using the word "intern," he uses it the third-most often. He has also given "tributes" to his interns on the Senate floor.

For example, on July 22, 2014: "Madam President, today I recognize David Fonseca, a 2013 summer intern in my Washington, D.C., office, for all of the hard work he has done for me, my staff and the people of the state of Florida. David is a freshman at Liberty University in Lynchburg, Virginia. Currently, he is majoring in political science. David is a dedicated and diligent worker who has been devoted to getting the most out of his internship experience. I would like to extend my sincere thanks and appreciation to David for all the fine work he has done and wish him continued success in the years to come."

I'm sure that meant a lot to David.

In terms of verbal ticks, Rubio uses the phrases "American miracle" and "job creator" the most of anyone.



Courtesy Sunlight Foundation

Many of the phrases used most by legislators have to do with their committee assignments. For example, Rubio is on the Senate Intelligence and Foreign Relations committees. He was a supporter of the U.S. intervention in Libya, which explains "Qadhafi" and "Libya."

Sen. Rand Paul: Currently serving as a Kentucky Republican



Paul logged many of his favorite – and some would say unusual – words during his March 2013 filibuster, when he held the Senate floor for over 12 hours to protest the potential use of drones on American soil against U.S. citizens.



Courtesy Sunlight Foundation

In the speech, he referenced Kentucky anti-slavery activist Cassius Clay, saying, "I have often said I am a fan of Cassius Clay. Cassius Clay's weapons of choice were said to be his pen and his Bowie knife. He was said to be so good with the first, that he often had recourse to the latter. He was a fierce abolitionist. He didn't suffer fools, and he didn't compromise often. But what I would say is that it is worth fighting for what you believe in."

He also used the words "patriot," "warrants," "records" and "surveillance" multiple times, according to the 190-page transcript of his filibuster.



Courtesy Sunlight Foundation

Paul frequently references the Germaneness Rule, which is a requirement that an amendment to a bill address the same subject as the underlying bill. Paul has taken an interest in the way Congress operates, and forcing lawmakers to be more efficient was a focus of his campaign launch. He has introduced a proposal that would require bills to concentrate on one subject at a time, and another that would require each member voting in favor of a measure to sign an affidavit stating that he or she has actually read the bill or been present for the entire reading of its text.

Sen. Bernie Sanders: Currently serving as a Vermont independent



Courtesy Sunlight Foundation

"Vermont" is Sanders' top word, which likely says more about the amount other legislators talk about Vermont than about how often he talks about his own state.

Although Sanders caucuses with the Democrats and is seeking the Democratic nomination for president, he identifies as a socialist. He is known for his ideas on economic reform, which play into many of his most popular words and phrases: "wealthiest people," "billionaires," "tax breaks," "wages," "profits," "richest," "CEOs," "childhood poverty" and "liheap," which is an acronym for the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program.



Courtesy Sunlight Foundation



Sen. Ted Cruz: Currently serving as a Texas Republican

When Cruz held the floor for 21 hours and 19 minutes for his Obamacare speech, he spoke about 113,000 words. According to the transcript, 546 of those words were "Obamacare," which should make his most popular word overall no surprise. Still, Cruz is actually the congressman who uses the word second-most in the Congressional Record, behind Rep. Steve King, R-Iowa.

The next two words on Cruz's list are people whom he referred to in his Obamacare speech, as well as on other occasions. "Hoffa" refers to Teamsters union President James Hoffa, who wrote a letter decrying Obamacare and its effect on the 40-hour workweek, as Cruz said in his speech. He's referred to the letter several other times.

Cruz uses "Rand" the most of any lawmaker. He's praised his fellow senator and now fellow presidential candidate for his filibuster on drones, calling Paul a friend and saying that he will "go to [his] grave in debt to Rand Paul." Cruz has also said that "if you want to talk about a rock star, you should see when Rand Paul shows up in Texas, the huge number of fans who come out for Sen. Paul and for his dad."



Courtesy Sunlight Foundation

Cruz's favorite words also reflect his interest in local D.C. politics. In March, for example, he introduced measures to stop a district law dealing with discrimination over reproductive choices and another to allow religious colleges in D.C. to refuse to fund gay and lesbian student groups.