ABC Family announced on Wednesday that Tyler Blackburn will be returning as a series regular for the upcoming fifth season of Pretty Little Liars.

Blackburn joined the cast of the short-lived spinoff Ravenswood in 2013, but he is now returning to his home, and rejoining the liars, Aria (played by Lucy Hale), Spencer (played by Troian Bellisario), Hannah (played by Ashley Benson), and Emily (played by Shay Mitchell), in Rosewood.

Sadly, Ravenswood was axed after its first, and only, season. For those of you who missed the chance to watch the show, ABCFamily.com explains the idea behind Ravenswood.

“This new drama series centers on a town, not far from Rosewood, PA (the home base of Pretty Little Liars), which has suffered under a deadly curse for generations. Five strangers suddenly find themselves connected by this fatal curse and need to dig into the town’s mysterious and terrible history before it’s too late for each of them.”

Ravenswood seemed promising at first, but viewers quickly realized that it could not live up to Pretty Little Liars, and the ratings, in return, suffered.

“I’ve got some big news,” Blackburn said, during a statement on the YouTube series Behind the Curtain. “I’m heading back to Rosewood and I will be back this summer on Pretty Little Liars. Thank you so much for all of your support, I love you guys.”

Thank you all for welcoming me back! Season 5 of @ABCFpll is going be intense!! — Tyler Blackburn (@tylerjblackburn) March 12, 2014

It looks like Blackburn’s return will lead to a serious love triangle between his ex-girlfriend Hannah, and her new love interest Travis. When Caleb left for Ravenswood, he and Hannah decided to part ways, but they left the door open for a possible rekindling of their romance. However, since Caleb has been gone, Hannah has been getting pretty cozy with Travis, and it looks like she may have moved on for good.

According to ABC Family, Blackburn’s return will happen early in the fifth season, and will be a “lovely reunion”. Are they talking about a reunion with the liars as a whole, or more specifically just Hannah? I guess we will have to wait and see how it play out.

The fourth season of Pretty Little Liars will wrap up on March 18, and the fifth season will kick off on June 10.

Do you want Hannah and Caleb to get back together, or do you think she should stay with Travis? Leave your comments below.

[Image via BlogSpot.com]