John Overton High School is one of the most diverse schools in the country, with 70 percent of the students living in non-English speaking households; and it is an environment of student achievement.

Buy Photo Joined by her sister, Elwaad, second from right, and her mother, Ken Hersi, Ruwayda Mahamoud gets an enthusiatic response from Overton High School senior Simale Abadula, left, while talking about attending the high school during last year’s First Choice Festival at the State Fair Grounds in Nashville. (Photo: Mark Zaleski / File / The Tennessean )Buy Photo Story Highlights Academies of Nashville focus success.

Academic performance and student responsibility improving dramatically.

From language challenges to bright futures.

"We are what we believe we are."

That observation from C.S. Lewis came to mind when I visited John Overton High School last week with a group of business leaders for the kind of "dog and pony show" we have mostly associated with the city's charter school operators.

Overton, on Franklin Road, is Tennessee's most ethnically diverse school: It is 35 percent white, 27 percent Hispanic, 23 percent African-American and 10 percent Asian. The students there come from 63 countries and speak 38 languages; almost 70 percent of the students live in homes where English is either not spoken at all or is not the family's native language. Many of the students are refugees from the place they were born.

The ethnic diversity is not reflected in economic diversity, 76 percent of the youths who attend qualify for free or reduced-price lunch.

Nashville, Overton change

Overton opened in 1958 to serve the Crieve Hall neighborhood; it started with seventh- and eighth-grade students and graduated its first class in 1963, the year before Metro was consolidated. I had dinner Thursday night with Overton graduate Charles Grant, who raved about his experience there.

Nashville grew and changed, and many families made alternative choices when schools were forced to integrate. But as recently as 1999, Overton was a throwback. Of the 1,258 students 70 percent were white. It had no non-native English-speaking students. And only 13 percent qualified for free or reduced-price lunch.

Change came fast to Overton, and by 2007, the school was in crisis — as were many schools in the district — and many doubted it would ever return to being the proud institution it once was.

Today, seven years later, Overton feels like a school that believes in itself, and the energy is palpable.

A bright future

My tour guide, senior Amad Amedi, who plays on the soccer team and kicks for the football team, has a strong list of schools, including Harvard, he would like to attend as a pre-med student. Obviously, he is not a typical Overton student, but he is far from unique. I met engaged, smiling students who were planning to attend some of the best colleges in the country.

Overton, like many, perhaps even most of our schools, has a long way to go, but it is on a trajectory that we should note.

Principal Shuler Pelham credits commitment to the Academies of Nashville as the key to improvement. Overton, which was not part of the original academies program, is host to four programs: engineering, information technology, health science and music performance. The academies, he said, create smaller communities within the larger high school, which now has over 1,900 students. Each academy has its own leader, an assistant principal, who forms the core that gives the school direction and consistency, essential ingredients that were lacking before 2008.

The business community has stepped up to help. There are 305 businesses partnered with Metro schools in the 12 academies, offering externships to teachers, internships to students, mentors, services and money, too.

Measures of improvement

How does improvement look at Overton?

The number of kids with perfect attendance in the first quarter has grown dramatically — 89 in 2012, then 440 in 2013 and 740 this year — and daily attendance has risen to 94 percent. The number of students achieving a 21 or better ACT score has increased each year since the academies program was started, and the school's four-year graduation rate increased nine percent last year to almost 82 percent of students.

The academic attention also has had a beneficial effect on discipline, with an 86 percent decline in in-school suspensions and a 77 percent decline in out-of-school suspensions.

Overton has had strong, consistent leadership since 2008, which helps sustain high expectations of academic and personal responsibility and encourages engagement from teachers, parents, local businesses and students.

Overton has lots of challenges to be sure, but its community clearly believes that it can be a great high school.

Reach Frank Daniels III at 615-881-7039 and on Twitter @fdanielsiii.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1wsDn6V