A woman from Garner, North Carolina, has gained thousands of followers after a video of her ranting about the struggles of getting health insurance became viral on Facebook.“I’m so mad right now, I could scream,” Tessa Stanton says in the video.“These are people, human beings that are dealing with this that are sick. Our nation is sick. And my mom is sick and I can’t get her the help she needs.”Stanton’s problems started after her mother was unable to get an important prescription refilled because of problems with her health insurance. She soon realized that thousands of people all over the country are facing similar problems.Stanton’s mother – who is currently moving in from Alabama – is battling various health issues and had recently changed to an Affordable Care Act insurance plan. When her medication started running low, she started searching for a new doctor.“She called numerous, numerous offices and they would not take the insurance and they would not tell her why they wouldn’t take it. That’s what was very frustrating,” said Stanton.Since the plan was purchased in Alabama, Stanton called the Alabama Department of Insurance to check if it was a state issue.“I called their office to find out you know, what it is that she needs to do with this insurance. And the woman I spoke to was very frustrated. She said she had numerous calls about the same thing. She didn’t have the answers. And the best answer she could give me was to call Obama.”In an effort to leave no stone unturned, she tried calling the White House, but was unable to reach the President.That was the last straw, and Stanton decided to use social media to try and look for answers. As of last Saturday, her video has been viewed around 8.5 million times and thousands of people who have faced similar problems all over the country have reached out to her. Stanton says that listening to those stories has compelled her to do what she can about health insurance-related issues.After a lot of searching, Stanton’s mother was able to find a doctor willing to take her insurance. But, she won’t be able to consult the physician till October, and may have to forego her medication till then.Stanton, on the other hand, is looking for another health insurance plan for her mother.“Something more stable and maybe I can get answers for her,” she said.