He wants to raise the retirement age for Social Security, limit immigration reforms, toughen the Cuban embargo and replace Obamacare.

When former Gov. Jeb Bush launches his long-awaited presidential campaign in Miami on Monday, look for him to stick to controversial positions honed since he was a self-described "head-banging conservative" two decades ago.

Bush watchers in Florida say his wistful hope of running "joyfully" is giving way to a tough-minded determination to put the nation on a center-right course, reflecting his domineering style as governor.

"It looks like his happy warrior approach is going to change quickly," said Matthew Corrigan, author of the book "Conservative Hurricane, How Jeb Bush Remade Florida."

"What sticks out is what he hasn't changed," added Corrigan, a pollster and chairman of political science at the University of North Florida. "There is pressure on Republicans to bash Common Core [learning standards] and bash immigration reform. Gov. Bush hasn't taken that bait."

Education

The budding presidential candidate shows no sign of backing away from "Common Core," which sets goals for what a student should know at the end of each grade.

Tea party conservatives fiercely oppose these learning standards for fear the federal government will shove them down the throats of local schools. Liberal critics and some educators also object, saying such standards may lead to excessive testing of students and unfair grading of teachers and schools.

But Bush, who shook up Florida with intense testing and evaluations, sees this as a conservative cause to hold schools accountable.

Education reform is his signature issue. He is not about to abandon it, though he avoids using the hot-button phrase "Common Core" and acknowledges that his views "might be in the minority some of the time."

Immigration

Pressed from all sides of the explosive immigration debate, Bush opposes creating a path to citizenship for 11 million foreign residents, including 632,000 in Florida, who are living in the country illegally. He seeks a more limited reform.

"I'm for a path to legalized status, where people get a provisional work permit, where they pay taxes, pay a fine, learn English, don't commit crimes, don't receive federal government assistance and where they earn legal status," Bush said in May on CBS' "Face the Nation."

This compromise position is too generous to suit many conservatives — and most of his Republican rivals — who cannot abide "amnesty" for law-breakers. Yet it does not go far enough to satisfy immigrant advocates, who are loathe to leave millions stuck with what they call second-class citizenship.

Bush also infuriated immigrant advocates by vowing to undo President Barack Obama's executive action to shield 5.2 million well-established foreign residents from deportation. Bush says immigration reform should come from Congress, not through executive powers.

Social Security

Bush waded into the politically treacherous waters of Social Security financing last month when he proposed gradually raising the retirement age for full benefits to 68 or 70.

"And that by itself will help sustain the retirement system for anybody under the age of 40," Bush said on "Face the Nation."

He also supports "means testing" for Social Security, which would reduce the benefits paid to higher-income recipients to help shore up the program's long-term financing.

His comments sparked rebuttals from Democrats and others who oppose benefit cuts and would rather lift the cap on yearly earnings that are taxed for Social Security, currently set at $118,500. This is a sensitive issue in Florida, where one in five residents receives a Social Security check.

Health care

"On health care in general, we've created a monstrosity of consolidating power in Washington, D.C.," Bush said in March while campaigning in Iowa.

Like most other Republican candidates, he wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare.

Bush envisions a government safety net that covers "catastrophic" costs from major illnesses and injuries, supplemented by insurance with fewer federal requirements.

"If you have a hardship that goes way beyond your means of paying for it, the government is there, or an entity is there, to help you deal with that," he said in Iowa.

Foreign policy

Bush as governor had limited experience in foreign policy. But as a young man, he studied in Mexico, lived in Venezuela, married a Mexican woman and learned to speak Spanish fluently.

In Miami, he advised international banks. As governor, he presided over a state often dubbed the gateway to Latin America and Caribbean.

As a result, his foreign policy views are shaped by close relations with Florida's trading partners. His foreign-policy team includes two former Florida congressmen, Lincoln Diaz-Balart of Miami and Porter Goss of Sanibel, a former CIA director.

Bush's visit to Europe this week was designed to burnish his foreign policy credentials before his campaign announcement on Monday. Along the way, he has called for a vigorous policy that shows solidarity with allies, notably Israel, while confronting adversaries, such as Russia.

"I am my own man," he declared, while still relying on advice from his father and brother, former presidents George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush.

Cuba

Just two weeks before Obama announced his historic outreach to Cuba late last year, Bush delivered a stern speech in Coral Gables calling for a strengthened embargo "to put pressure on the Cuban regime."

Bush also criticized "a lot of Republicans who were saying, 'We need to lift the embargo so that we can sell things to Cuba,' as though Cuba would pay it back."

Opponents of the new policy are counting on Bush to reverse Obama's rules, which opened Cuba to more American trade and travel.