Three months into the job, Mayor Eric Garcetti’s bookshelves in his City Hall office are largely empty. There are some art books, a Jimi Hendrix biography and a framed newspaper obituary of his grandfather, clothing store founder Harry Roth, but not much else.

Like Garcetti’s new office, much about this administration feels lean. As the mayor hits his 100th day in office today, he is solidifying a reputation for a low-key approach and a focus on governing.

He has held few major press conferences since taking office. Despite an emphasis on job growth in his campaign for mayor, no major economic policies have emerged.

And his biggest news — bringing in a high-profile movie exec as his new film czar — came via a written announcement. His predecessor, Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa, likely would have held a glitzy press conference at a Paramount Pictures lot.

Since becoming the 42nd mayor of Los Angeles, Garcetti has spent much of his early administration examining the nuts and bolts of the more than 30 departments that power the city. Part of his goal, he said, is to change the culture of City Hall. Included in that process was re-interviewing dozens of department heads, some of whom are now being let go.

“My main focus I had was building a team,” Garcetti said, recounting the past three months of his term in an interview. “It’s not changing the world in the first 100 days, it’s building a team that can implement my vision for the city.”

The 100-day stretch is a political yardstick that dates back to the FDR administration, a test of whether a newly elected official is living up to his or her campaign goals. In his first three months, Villaraigosa traveled numerous times to Washington, D.C., seeking money for a promised Westside subway.

Newly elected officials usually leverage their popularity to unroll big policies, but Garcetti is “rejecting the honeymoon approach to governance,” said Dan Schnur, director of the Jesse M. Unruh Institute of Politics at USC. “It looks like he has decided to dig into the workings of city government much harder. It sort of keeps him off the media and public radar, but he believes the long-term benefits are worth it.”

Not that Garcetti isn’t visible. On a recent Saturday, he addressed the Annual Congress of Neighborhood Councils at City Hall, earning the largest applause when he told leaders he’d pushed for reforms at the Department of Water and Power.

Advertisement

Later he attended a South L.A. health care fair, reminding participants to enroll in the Affordable Care Act, before heading to Koreatown to ride atop a white convertible in a parade down Olympic Boulevard.

An accomplished musician, the mayor also popped by performer Moby’s show at the Fonda Theatre in Hollywood to play keyboards on a song. Longtime friends, Moby and Garcetti share a number of personality traits: Both are cerebral and thoughtful. At Thursday’s show they wore matching dark T-shirts. The singer, who lives in Los Angeles, introduced the mayor as the “future president of the United States.”

Setting priorities

Music gigs aside, the inner workings of City Hall are what’s consuming Garcetti’s attention. His office this week will unveil a new website to track city services, such as trash pickup rates and response times. He’s also helping to develop an app for constituents to report problems.

Among Angelenos, the first 100 days finds the mayor firmly in get-to-know you mode. According to a poll of 501 registered voters conducted by the Edmund G. “Pat” Brown Institute of Public Affairs at Cal State L.A., Garcetti rang up a 56 percent approval rating — and a 5-1 edge of positive over negative feelings on how he is performing his job.

At the same time, the survey found a third saying they are still developing an opinion. “Though the majority of voters have positive views of Garcetti personally, relatively few offered specific reasons for either liking or disliking him,” said Raphael Sonenshein, executive director of the institute. “The voters do not yet know him well, but they seem to be giving him a strong opening to be successful.”

One focus of Garcetti’s has been an overhaul of the city budget, helmed by Rick Cole, a former Ventura city manager, and Bob Stone, a former adviser to President Bill Clinton. An emphasis on job creation and restoring city services will guide the process, Stone said in a recent interview. Though the mayor gave few details on how departments will be re-prioritized, he indicated he was looking at the Los Angeles Fire Department, among other areas of the city.

“If you’re a mayor that wants to do things differently,” Stone said, “you better find a (new) way to do the budget.”

As part of his top-to-bottom assessment of City Hall, Garcetti has asked all of his general managers to reapply for their jobs. He personally interviewed 34 managers, asking them to offer ideas on job creation for the city, and sustainability within their own departments, he said.

Most general managers, who oversee such services as the city’s animal-shelter system, park maintenance and street sweeping, make more than $200,000 a year.

In the first sign of a shake-up, last week his office announced Geraldine Knatz, executive director of the Port of L.A., was moving on. More resignations are expected in the coming days.

He has yet to name a deputy mayor for economic development, which he has said is the most important position at City Hall, and has turned to an executive search firm to fill the post.

Gary Toebben, president of the Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce, has known Garcetti for more than a decade and believes the lengthy search for the economic-development post indicates the mayor is serious about the role and not rushing to fill the position and create headlines.

“He has been cautious in his appointments, at his news conferences and in his promises,” Toebben said. “I think he is trying to make sure he isn’t overpromising.”

But Garcetti also is aware the public wants to see bigger policy initiatives. During his interview, he dropped hints of some of those goals, like a Great Streets Program to make some of the city’s major thoroughfares, such as Ventura Boulevard, more pedestrian friendly.

He’s also said he will unveil a few economic policies in the coming weeks.

“My first focus is basic services, which isn’t about policy,” he said. “You can do grander policy when you take care of the nuts and bolts. Across the city, during the campaign, people said to me, just fix things — make them work.”