Mitchell, SD

With a $150-million dollar economic boost last year, pheasant season brings a lot of money to South Dakota, and to local businesses. Cabela's in Mitchell is seeing an increase in traffic and higher sales this year.

Georgia native Herman Davis was looking for a Browning vest for his afternoon pheasant hunt.

"We'll look and see what they got and probably go out of here with a few hundred dollars’ worth of stuff," Davis said.

Some hunters say pheasant season can burn a hole in their pockets. To be prepared, Davis spent all year saving up for state-wide event.

David Werner is searching for a hunting rifle. Some of the guns are priced over $100,000. Werner says the therapeutic relief he gets from shooting guns is worth every penny.

"Not having to worry about all the busy-ness around you. I mean you go out, and there's nobody else for miles. That's the best part I think," Werner said.

The pheasant bird count is up 42 percent this year and that's bringing sales up for the outdoor store.

Cabela's workers say business is booming. They estimate about 14 thousand people have come through the doors this weekend, buying blaze-orange clothing, guns, and other hunting gear.

Some of the store's items are pricey, but marketing manager Trish Oswald said hunters are willing to pay for it all.

"They're looking to spend what they need in order to have that quality product”, Oswald said.

Hunters say you can't put a price on the joy of hunting, what they call their outdoor therapy.

Cabela's employees said they don't know how much money they've racked up just yet, but they're expecting to have higher sales than last year.

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.