Former GOP presidential candidate Jon Huntsman and Sen. Joe Manchin, D-W.Va., are the political faces of the group No Labels. And while they’ve worked together in that regard, they’ve played too, as Huntsman can attest.

“We hang out, we’re friends, our families are friends,” the ex-Utah governor tells Whispers at Wednesday’s National Strategic Agenda conference in Washington, being put on by the No Labels Foundation.

So what do they do exactly?

Well, first, they fish. “I did out-fish him,” Huntsman says. “I think I caught three fish and he may have caught one and a half – it was so small I counted it as a half.” The duo, whose group tries to give Capitol Hill Republicans and Democrats political cover to work across the aisle, has spent time together both in West Virginia and in the nation’s capital, where the Huntsmans reside these days.

They’ve also taken at least one joy ride. “Driving the country roads of West Virginia,” Huntsman says, pausing before he reveals more details. “Well, is somebody going to send me a speeding ticket ex post facto?”

Huntsman took Manchin out in a Ford Shelby Mustang. “I’m on the board of Ford Motor Co. – I only drive one kind of car,” Huntsman explains, saying the West Virginia Democrat wasn’t nervous. In fact, Manchin wanted to see what the car could do. “And I said, ‘Well, is this road capable of high-performance vehicles?’” Huntsman recalls. “He said, ‘I built this road as governor, I can vouch for this road.’”

More seriously though, both men became governors in 2004, and that’s when they first got to know each other. It hasn’t always been fun and games. “We became particularly close when, tragically, Utah had a mining disaster not long after West Virginia had a very high-profile mining disaster,” Huntsman says. “I had no playbook – they don’t tell you how to handle these things when you’re elected governor.” So Huntsman rang up Manchin.

In 2010, they announced a new partnership in No Labels, a group aiming to be an antidote to today’s extreme partisanship. This cycle so far, No Labels has mostly been known for creating awkwardness among Senate Democrats when, as Yahoo News reported, the group supported Republican Cory Gardner in the Colorado Senate race over Manchin’s Democratic peer, Sen. Mark Udall. (No Labels later clarified and explained that any pol who becomes a member of the organization gets its “support.”)

A leaked document, also reported by Yahoo, didn’t help matters because it hinted the group would gain from Republicans taking the Senate.

“Should the balance of power in the U.S. Senate flip following the 2014 midterm elections and Republicans gain control, No Labels sees an opportunity to bridge the gap between Congress and the White House,” the document read.

But Manchin continues with the group, sharing the podium with Huntsman for most of the morning. At least one other Senate Dem, Sen. Chris Murphy of Connecticut, also showed (though he argued aggressively with Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wis., over immigration).

A bipartisan assortment of House members joined the gathering as well, including Reps. Adam Kinzinger, R-Ill., Matt Salmon, R-Ariz., Kurt Schrader, D-Ore., and Ami Bera, D-Calif., who’s in a politically precarious situation going into the midterms. Being part of No Labels, Bera touted, might help him.

“I’m in one of the most contested races in the country, but this is about … building relationships,” Bera proclaimed.