By Mark Boshnack, The Daily Star, Oneonta, N.Y. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

March 21 --Former Oneonta City School District Principal Scott Rabeler will be resigning Dec. 8 , following a recent decision by the school's board of education. He is on leave until then, according to documents provided to the Daily Star under the Freedom of Information Act, about actions taken during the school's March 17 board of education meeting.

Following an executive session at the session held in the district office library, the board agreed to the "resolution of potential litigation with a particular district employee" and authorized Superintendent Joseph Yelich to sign the agreement between the district and Scott Rabeler . Rabeler had been principal at Greater Plains Elementary School for four years, until July, when he was transferred to administrative principal at the start of Yelich's tenure. Before that, Rabeler had served as high school principal until he was transferred from that position by Superintendent Michael Shea .

The current documents show that Rabeler, who is a tenured employee, will remain on paid leave until the resignation becomes effective. He will be receiving his bi-weekly gross salary of $4,837.81 . On Jan. 15, 2015 he will receive the difference between his wages and $150,000 . He will be entitled to health insurance benefits before and after his retirement in accordance with an agreement between the district and the Oneonta Principals' Association .

Yelich said Thursday that he could not discuss the reasons for the agreement because of confidentiality restrictions. He signed the agreement the same day he received authorization. Rabeler signed it several weeks ago, and has been on paid leave for a similar period, Yelich said. Several efforts to find a phone number to reach Rabeler were unsuccessful. The number listed in the phone book was not in service.

In other business at the meeting: the board approved a memorandum of understanding with Bassett Healthcare Network to assist with the development of a district wellness plan. It is a shared service and there is no cost the district, Yelich said.

Contracts were awarded for work on the district's $4.6 million building project approved Jan. 2013 . Work will start during the April break, but most of the project that includes safety upgrades will occur during the summer to avoid disruption of classes, Yelich said.

___

(c)2014 The Daily Star (Oneonta, N.Y.)

Visit The Daily Star (Oneonta, N.Y.) at www.thedailystar.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 388

[jetpack-related-posts]