Health insurance and women

Richmond, Va.: Voicer Emily Martin of the National Women’s Law Center criticism about long-term care insurance pricing practices has it wrong. While it is our policy not to comment on pending litigation, Genworth’s pricing practices are fully compliant with both federal and state laws. Insurers must be able to have premiums accounting for the risks being insured. One of the assumptions that has been variable is the mix of men and women with coverage. While women own 58% of policies, they account for 67% of claims and 71% of dollars paid. Men usually pay more for auto, while life insurance rates for women tends to be lower. The decision to raise long-term care premiums is not made lightly. With 10,000 people turning 65 every day for the next 18 years, long-term care looms as one of our most important social problems. Medicare, most health plans and the Affordable Care Act do not cover long-term care, leaving most Americans unprepared. Tom McInerney, President and CEO, Genworth

Snow job

Carmel, N.Y.: In reality, Mayor de Blasio cannot hire just anyone to shovel his sidewalk. If he could even find someone to shovel for $20, does that person have liability insurance, a work permit and does he pay the required income taxes on his labor? That’s the reality of it all. Sue McCormack

Where did the curb go?

Brooklyn: Curbs: I hope Sanitation remembers what they’re for, to cross the street from, which is not happening, because all the snow is piled onto the curbs, which makes it impossible to cross the street. Forget Sochi — trying to cross the street in Brooklyn is a new obstacle course. Marie Walsh

Fair use for fair relic

Brooklyn: I was so happy to hear that the new Queens Borough President Melinda Katz has committed to saving the New York State Pavilion in Flushing Meadows Park. For too many years, this unique and highly visible structure has been neglected and its potential squandered. Thanks to Matthew Silva, Christian Doran and the People for the New York State Pavilion for getting this project the attention it deserves. I hope the structure will embrace its historical past while providing a multi-use, dynamic, and cutting-edge forum. Christine Gallo

Baseball, and more

Whitestone: So many of us older baseball fans will miss Ralph Kiner, baseball great, classy guy and a truly entertaining broadcaster. The first time I saw Kiner at Ebbets Field, it was 1955 and Sandy Koufax (pitching in a double header with Don Newcomb) was so wild he left early. Ralph hit a rocket for a home run, and I became a fan at age 10. When he teamed up with Lindse y Nelson and Bob Murphy for play-by-play for Casey’s Mets, it was fun and funny every day. I still have a short article he wrote in the 1954 Louisville Slugger Yearbook advising youngsters to figure out if they are home run hitters or singles hitters to make the best use of their talents. I recall when he was asked about his arranged date with a very young Elizabeth Taylor. Kiner said it was pretty boring. He had the rare ability to be entertaining and totally honest at once. He was one of a kind. Michael J. Gorman

Keeping tabs

Brooklyn: To Voicer Ora Reed re Avonte Oquendo’s tragic death: Perhaps doors shouldn’t be locked, perhaps there is no way to patrol all doors at all times, but three minutes after Avonte left through those open doors a school safety officer saw the open door and closed it. Had it been reported that a door was found ajar, an immediate review for missing students could have been enacted and perhaps Avonte could have been found before this tragedy happened. Linda Calabrese

Protecting kids I

Manhattan: I strongly believe that ACS should take responsibility for the death of that 4 -year-old boy whose father was unavailable for nine visits by ACS workers. Nine visits and no one could get in contact with the father. Absurd. Sounds like neglect to me. Anyone else feel the same way? No red flags after nine visits. I’m outraged. Ernestine Morrison

Protecting kids II

Bronx: “When in doubt, pull them out,” was once the mantra of child-protection service workers. As a result, there were high numbers of children in foster care. ACS was labeled as too punitive and accused of victimizing the children and their families. Reform was demanded and limits were put on removals, residential and group homes were closed, and the numbers in foster care declined. Everyone was happy — until the next death occurred. After Nixmary Brown ’s death, field offices were opened 24 hours. Investigative, medical, mental health and substance- abuse consultants were hired and placed in the field offices, and you know what? Still another death, and another and another. Be fair and place blame where it belongs: on the caretakers who are ill equipped to care for their child. It’s a shame no one ever mentions the countless lives that have been saved. Mia Meschell-Johnson

The right way to write

Forest Hills: I agree with Assemblyman Jeff Dinowitz about introducing a bill in A lbany that would make writing in script a part of public school education. As a veteran teacher, we used to teach cursive when children entered third grade. It was part of the curriculum and still is in C atholic schools. However due to increasing demands in test prep and Common Core standards, teachers are told not to teach cursive anymore because it is just busywork. Cursive writing should be an automatic part of the curriculum, and teachers should not be penalized for teaching it in their classrooms. It is sad that we need to have a bill passed to teach something so basic. Just let teachers teach. Ellen Zakin

Apples and oranges

Highlands, N.J.: Re your Feb. 6 editorial, “Haves and have-nots”: Once again you have manipulated the numbers to promote your point. The reason that the average municipal worker’s salary appears so high is due to the large number of skilled, senior workers with over 30 years time working for the city. The reason that the private sector average salary appears so low is because of the large number of people working for minimum wage in our city. A fairer comparison would be to see what a police officer or firefighter takes home versus what a Wall Streeter takes home. Bryant Phillips

Woody’s weirdness

Manhattan: Contrary to what Voicer Ruth Biller writes, it was Mia Farrow’s daughter Dylan who said that Woody Allen molested her. No one who reads Dylan’s account could ever doubt her truthfulness. At the time it happened, Dylan was interviewed but at age 7 the prosecutor did not think she was old enough to testify at a trial. Even if you do not believe Dylan, Allen at that time also took nude pictures of Soon Yi-and put them in a place where Mia could find them. That alone is evidence of a perverted and sick man. Reba Shimansky

No Bigots Need Apply

Manhattan: The only thing more despicable than the St. Patrick’s Day Parade’s bigotry against gay people is that the Irish themselves were treated like second-class citizens and had to fight for hundreds of years for equality. And now they do this same evil to others? We need a hypocrisy tax so the staggering dishonesty of people like this reimburses society for such evil, because hypocrites are the worst people in the world. Also, any American who doesn’t support equality should be automatically deported, since the foundation of America is equal rights for everyone. Send these bigots to a nation that doesn’t like equality. Like Iran. Remy Shapiro

Meet the Beatles

Waretown, N.J.: On Feb. 7, 1964, the Beatles arrived in America. If you were to say that 50 years later that Ringo Starr would be the best-looking Beatle, everyone would have said you were nuts. Matthew Giuliano

Save the swans

Brooklyn: I am a member of a grass-roots movement to Save Our Swans. The state Department of Conservation (DEC) has a plan to kill all the mute swans in the state. The public is welcome to comment on this plan until Feb. 21. The swans were brought from Europe to be pets in the 1800s, and some escaped to the wild. The swans are not dangerous, and their beauty is a joy to behold. After interviewing many park rangers, I discovered swans do not harm the other birds. They do not overeat and do not overconsume fish. The DEC is concerned that their poop makes the water dirty. Write to the DEC and demand they do not kill our swans. Tell them to oil or remove eggs from the nests in the spring. Demand they use trap-neuter-release when necessary. We can save our swans. Janelle Barabash