Disappointed: Diamonds coach Lisa Alexander. Photo: Graham Tidy

Diamonds coach Lisa Alexander has expressed disappointment at New Zealand's selection of Australian shooter Ameliaranne Wells for the upcoming Constellation Cup series, while seeking a review of the ANZ Championships' import rule that limits opportunities for home-grown players on both sides of the Tasman.

Bundaberg-born Wells, 23, whose father is a New Zealander, has spent the past four years as a bench player with the Queensland Firebirds, struggling for opportunities behind star Jamaican goal shooter Romelda Aiken.

After being recruited for next season by the Wellington-based Central Pulse, where her paternity allows her to play as a non-import, Wells is one of four changes to the Silver Ferns' team that lost the Commonwealth Games gold medal game 58-40 to the Diamonds in Glasgow.

Alexander described as "perplexing" the decision to recruit a player who was on the Australian selectors' radar but yet to demonstrate she was ready to take the steps necessary to be considered for the national squad. Wells has represented Australia at 19-and-under and 21-and-under level.

Advertisement

"I didn't actually know she had the New Zealand parentage, and I think we just have to be a little bit smarter with our pathway and kind of the questions we ask," Alexander said.

"Not that we're going to stop people being in our pathway just because of that; we just need to know so that we can mitigate the risks of the investment we put into athletes, that's all. At the end of the day, Ameliaranne is now the opposition and that's how we'll treat her. It is disappointing; there's no other way to say it."

Alexander favours a policy change in the trans-Tasman league that allows clubs to import one international player. In practice, the majority are either tall goal shooters (eg. Aiken, Carla Borrego, Jo Harten) or goal keepers (Geva Mentor, Sonia Mkoloma).

"If Romelda wasn't a shooter, well, maybe Amarelianne would have had a go with us earlier," Alexander said. "That's the decision that's been made with the TTNL, and our board is part of that decision making, and that's the risk you take.

"I don't know how we (change) it. I like what imports bring to our game, per say, but as an Australian coach, certainly the numbers say it keeps out five of our players. And you'd have to argue it's the same (for NZ). There aren't a lot of shooters, particularly in New Zealand, so you can see why they might have said that this opportunity was just too good to miss."

In a TV interview during the Ferns' selection trials, Wells said the move was "something that we've kind of thrown around in our family for a long time as a bit of a joke - never thinking I would actually do it".

So, now she has. Alexander said Wells had been contacted by Netball Australia's athlete pathway manager Stacey West, Queensland and Diamonds captain Laura Geitz and Firebirds coach Roselee Jencke when her intentions became known. Players are not tied to a country until they contest either a Commonwealth Games or Netball World Cup.

As a wannabe Diamond, Wells is theoretically still eligible, but has not yet come close. "Obviously we have intelligence on her that the Kiwis don't have which makes our decision making the way it has been," Alexander said. "They will think differently. They've brought her in. They've said she's done well at trials and they're prepared to give her a go, so they're obviously having a crack at it. Good luck to them."

The Silver Ferns will be without shooter Maria Tutaia (injured) and defender Anna Harrison (pregnant) for the four-Test series that stars in Invercargill on Thursday, with Melbourne to host the second match on October 2, and Australia defending the title it claimed 4-1 last year after losing game one.

Only retired vice-captain Bianca Chatfield is missing from the triumphant Glasgow squad in what will be the last meeting between the teams - with two tests also scheduled against much-improved world No.3 England - before Sydney hosts next year's Netball World Cup.