Divers and sonar on Sunday located the fuselage of a small plane from Alabama that crashed into Ridgway Reservoir on Saturday afternoon, but no bodies have been recovered, Ouray County spokeswoman Marti Whitmore said.

Five people are presumed to have died in the crash. Crews did not have the equipment available to raise the single-engine Socata TBM700 from the lake Sunday afternoon, Whitmore said.

“Based on sonar images obtained today, it appears that the fuselage is intact and that the wings are still attached,” Whitmore said

Efforts to recover the bodies will begin Monday. The names of those thought to have died in the crash have not been released.

Newspapers in Alabama identified the victims Sunday as Jimmy L. Hill, president of Gadsden Tool; his cousin Seth McDuffie; Katrina Vinzant Barksdale; and her two sons, Xander and Kobe.

Comments from friends on Barksdale’s Facebook page indicated she was among of the victims. Hill’s LinkedIn page states he is an instrument-rated pilot.

The 1996 model fixed-wing aircraft is registered to Gadsden Aviation LLC of Rainbow City, Ala., according to the FAA

Hill is listed in public records as the official representative of Gadsden Aviation. No one answered the phone at Gadsden Tool’s office or at Hill’s home Sunday evening.

Flight records show the plane departed from Gadsden, Ala., at 8:30 a.m. Saturday then stopped in Bartlesville, Okla., where it departed at 12:12 p.m. en route to Montrose. The crash site is about 20 miles south of Montrose.

Officials have not speculated on the cause of the crash, although the Federal Aviation Administration and National Transportation Safety Board began their investigations Sunday.

Whitmore characterized the water as cold, murky and up to 100 feet deep where the plane went down, about 90 feet from shore, just before 2 p.m. Saturday.

Witnesses who were attending a wedding onshore saw the plane spin into Mears Bay in the northeast corner of the 1,030-acre reservoir in Ridgway State Park.

The park remains closed.

A sheriff’s deputy who was quickly on the scene Saturday afternoon reported finding debris and an oil slick but no sign of the plane’s occupants. The tail and other parts of the plane have been recovered but not the main body of the plane, which includes the cabin.

Joey Bunch: 303-954-1174, jbunch@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joeybunch