Open enrollment for subsidized private health insurance, sold through the state exchanges established by the Affordable Care Act, starts Nov. 15 for coverage in 2015. Virginia is among 20 states with a "federally facilitated" state exchange, and among 23 that have not expanded Medicaid.

To help consumers navigate their options, Celebrate Healthcare, a Peninsula-based health advocacy and outreach organization, will hold its first events for the 2015 coverage season on Tuesday and Wednesday.

During the 2014 enrollment period, the group led by Gaylene Kanoyton held 35 events throughout the region. It helped to enroll more than 1,500 people in health insurance plans through the exchange, http://www.healthcare.gov, and educated 5,000 Virginia residents, mostly in Hampton Roads, on their health care options.

Partnering with Celebrate Healthcare in its educational outreach efforts are the Urban League of Hampton Roads, Bon Secours Hampton Roads, TFA Benefits, the Virginia Poverty Law Center and Virginia Consumer Voices for Healthcare.

"The ACA is very personal. No two people and no two groups are the same. Low-income individuals can get really good coverage through the exchanges," said Richard Herzberg, president of TFA Benefits.

Kanoyton is particularly hoping to reach the so-called "young invincible" demographic — adults under 30, veterans without benefits and minorities.

Celebrate Healthcare will also advise consumers who fall into the "health-care gap" — mostly the working poor — on other resources available to them. Those include the estimated 195,000 Virginia residents who qualify for Medicaid under the expansion allowed by health-care reform, but which the Virginia legislature has rejected. They are people who earn between 100 and 138 percent of the federal poverty level, making them ineligible for subsidies through the federally run state exchange.

The pre-enrollment events will give participants updated health coverage information and answer questions for those already enrolled; they will also advise those interested on how to become a certified application counselor to work with enrollment.

Speakers will include Melissa A. Herd from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Rev. Derrick Harkins of Enroll America and Deepak Madala of Enroll Virginia!, a project of the Virginia Poverty Law Center.

Salasky can be reached by phone at 757-247-4784.

Want enrollment info?

Celebrate Healthcare events are free and open to the public.

• 5:30-7 p.m., Tuesday, Oct. 7, at the Rupert L. Sargent Building, 22 Lincoln St., Hampton.

• 10-11:30 a.m., Wednesday, Oct. 8, at YWCA South Hampton Roads, 5215 Colley Ave., Norfolk.

For more information, call 757-287-0277, or go to http://www.celebratehealthcare@gmail.com