At about 3:45 a.m. police say 89-year-old Doris Fore became missing from the Senior Village Nursing Home in Blanchard.

An elderly woman missing from a Blanchard nursing home is found dead.

Doris Fore, 89, disappeared from the Senior Village Nursing home in Blanchard early Friday morning.

The staff noticed Fore was missing during a bed check at 3:30 a.m. The administrator says bed checks are scheduled every two hours and she was accounted for at 11 p.m.

Still, it's unclear how Fore managed to get out of the facility without the staff knowing. Her son believes it was an accident.

"My mom has had some issues with her mind," Keith Fore said.

Keith Fore and Blanchard Police searched for her for more than an hour before finding her dead inside a van parked in front of the facility.

"It was pretty hard to find out that she was out in the cold," said Keith.

Keith believes she passed away due to hypothermia.

1/24/2014 Related Story: Police Identify Missing Blanchard Woman Found Dead

Senior Village Nursing Home administrator Bob Simmons said Fore was not considered a risk for wandering away from the facility. Simmons mentioned Fore was evaluated upon arrival at the facility and did not have mental related problems or dementia.

Blanchard Police Chief Walt Thompson said her records indicated she suffered from dementia and depression when she became a patient three years ago. Thompson said Fore also told staff, earlier in the night, that she did not want to be at the nursing home and planned to leave.

Her son explained, Fore had said she wanted to go be with the Lord, and was likely confused.

Blanchard Police are now working with the State Health Department to investigate the incident. Thompson said it is unlikely anyone will be charged with a crime.

Keith Fore considers that a relief, he believes his mother received professional care while at the facility.

"The staff here has been excellent in helping her and helping her work through some of the issues she had."

The administrator pointed out this is the first time something like this has happened at the facility.