Colorado gained about 4,000 more jobs during the first quarter than previously thought, according to analysis by the state Department of Labor and Employment.

Based on employer reports, which include worker head counts, the nonfarm payroll estimate through July will be revised upward to 2,456,200. The gain is attributed to construction employment being revised by an additional 8,600 jobs in the first quarter.

“That is the sector that signals the strength of other areas of the economy,” the labor department’s chief economist, Alexandra Hall, said. “Another remarkable aspect (of construction) being revised by 8,600 is just how harsh of a quarter we had weather-wise.”

The employer reports, made available through the 2014 Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages Program, show fluctuation in the various work sectors.

What’s important, Hall said, is whether each sector

is demonstrating solid growth over the year, and most are. The over-the-year payroll jobs growth statewide is being revised to 2.9 percent from 2.7 percent, Hall said.

“And when you start looking at average growth rates, like the 12-month moving average, Colorado has been consistently, month-after-month, showing a 3 percent rate of growth,” she said.

The segments making the biggest gains for the quarter included trade, transportation and utilities, up 3,900 jobs, and financial activities, up 1,600. The segments with the greatest downward revisions were professional and business services, down 5,100 jobs, leisure and hospitality, down 3,900, and government, down 1,500.

In metro Denver, the jobs roster is expected to be revised up by about 5,900 jobs, compared with increases of 700 in Grand Junction and 200 in Colorado Springs.

In Greeley, where the fastest job growth has been reported, the total will be revised up by 1,500 jobs, Hall said.

Gary Horvath, a private economist in Broomfield, said there may be a dark cloud trailing the otherwise sunny report: too few skilled workers available for openings in key occupations may drive labor costs up.

For example, oil and gas, construction and food manufacturing are competing for a relatively meager pool of manpower in northeastern Colorado. Along the Front Range, high-tech companies are having to import skilled workers from other states.

“The industries that are going to win out are going to pay higher wages,” Horvath said.

Howard Pankratz: 303-954-1939, hpankratz@denverpost.com or twitter.com/howardpankratz