The Supreme Court may have ruled this year that employers can’t discriminate against pregnant workers, but we still have a long way to go in empowering U.S. workers. Here are a few pieces of workers’ rights legislation we’d like to see for 2016.

1. Pass laws tailored to a growing “gig economy.”

More workers than ever before make their living doing freelance or contract work, as opposed to working for a single employer. In fact, experts estimate that 40 percent of the workforce could end up in those on-demand positions in the next five years.

This introduces a handful of problems, says Paula Brantner, executive director of the nonprofit Workplace Fairness. For instance, she sees some more companies call their workers independent contractors when they should be employees because they work for just one company.

Contractors aren’t guaranteed tax withholding, workers’ comp, and anti-discrimination, wage and overtime protections like employees are. Legislation would make the distinction crystal clear.

2. Raise the federal minimum wage.

The “Fight for 15” campaign made headlines last year, as low-wage workers walked out for higher pay to support themselves and their families. Cities and states across the U.S. have adopted wages higher than the federal minimum of $7.25, but it’s past time for the feds to step up.

Activists’ $15-an-hour goal may not even be enough. According to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a worker supporting one child in the state with the lowest cost of living, Tennessee, would need to make $20.26 an hour working full time to make a living wage.

3. Pass the Equality Act.

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ruled this summer that discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity is against federal law. The proposed Equality Act would write nondiscrimination for America’s LGBT folks into the law itself.

“The law is literally changing on a daily basis right now,” says Brantner. “I think a few years from now, we’ll look back and [gender identity and sexual orientation will] be with other forms of discrimination that people expect to not have to deal with in the workplace.”

4. Pass the Paycheck Fairness Act.

While the U.K. recently passed a law requiring companies to publish what they pay men and women, U.S. law has done little recently to improve the gender wage gap. Statistics show women make an average of 77 cents to every man’s dollar. While many factors figure into this number, the Paycheck Fairness Act would hold employers accountable.

Sadly, GOP lawmakers have blocked the act four times. Let’s hope the fifth time’s the charm.

5. Guarantee paid sick leave.

The United States is the only rich country in the world that doesn’t guarantee workers paid sick leave. Whether someone heads to work at a restaurant ill because they don’t want to lose a day’s wages or they send a sick child to school because they can’t stay home to care for them, the need for change is great.

6. Guarantee parental leave too.

The U.S. is also one of the few well-off countries that doesn’t guarantee paid maternity leave. (Many others provide leave for fathers as well.) Those working at medium and large companies can take 12 weeks off and not be fired, but that’s it for existing protections.

Photo credit: Thinkstock