Eleven hospitals made Fortune's annual list of 100 best places to work this year, with Baptist Health South Florida taking the top spot among medical workplaces.

The healthcare workplace list is part of the publication's broader annual list of 100 best employers. Companies are graded on a combination of benefits, workplace culture and career paths.

Of eleven hospitals that made the healthcare list, the top five were:

Baptist Health South Florida, with a ranking of 25 on the overall list. Baptist Health has held a slot on the overall list for 16 consecutive years for features such as paid holidays and a 401(k) matching program, according to Fortune. Southern Ohio Medical Center, with a ranking of 29 on the overall list. The medical center earned its slot on the strength of its internal promotion policy and benefits such as tuition reimbursement. A full 95 percent of employees praise the company's employee rewards, according to the article. St. Jude's Children's Research Hospital, number 35 overall. When asked if they took pride in their work, no 99 percent of St. Jude's employees said yes. The company offers an array of perks for employees, including a free gym and tuition reimbursement. Scripps Health, with a ranking of 42 on the overall list. Scripps' commitment to top-quality outcomes begins during the application process, Talent Adviser Lee Pinn told Fortune. "We look for exceptional talent and provide multiple opportunities for the cream to rise to the top," he said, "with culture assessments and patient care simulations being part of the application process to give the brightest the chance to shine." Texas Health Resources, number 46 on the overall list. At Texas Health, 96 percent of employees reported a sense of pride in their work. The company also offers benefits such as salary-dependent medical premiums and tuition reimbursement.

Also making the list: OhioHealth, Encompass Home Health and Hospice, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlantic Health System, Mayo Clinic and WellStar Health System.

To learn more:

- read the list

Related Articles:

How Scripps Health CEO Chris Van Gorder engages employees every day

What went wrong in first U.S. Ebola case--and how to fix it

Informal leadership rounds result in major patient safety improvements

How Chris Van Gorder turned Scripps Health around

3 healthcare leader strategies