With No. 509 etched in the NFL record book, quarterback Peyton Manning and the Broncos can now begin the quest for the only number that really matters: Super Bowl XLIX.

“For me, the touchdowns I’ve thrown have helped us win a lot of football games, and that’s the reason (the record) is special,” Manning said Sunday, after Denver routed San Francisco 42-17.

It was a night with 509 reasons to smile for all 77,047 witnesses in Sports Authority Field at Mile High.

The record was beautiful. But a ring is the thing.

On a warm-and-fuzzy Colorado autumn evening more perfect than the Broncos’ 5-1 record, Manning surpassed Brett Favre as the man who has thrown the most TD passes in NFL history, and did it in 56 fewer games than it required Favre to establish the mark.

In the manner sports so perfectly takes a snapshot of time and place in America, Manning’s moment to remember was recorded for posterity in a way that shouted 2014, as the stadium lit up with untold thousands of electronic fireflies, with nearly every fan in attendance holding a smart phone to record the feat.

On its way to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in Canton, Ohio, the football that Manning dropped in the hands of Demaryius Thomas to break the record was used as a prank on the Broncos’ quarterback, known to teammates as the ultimate prankster.

After Thomas scored on an 8-yard strike inside the right pylon with 3 minutes, 9 seconds remaining before halftime to give Denver a commanding 21-3 lead, the Broncos played a game of keep-away as the 38-year-old star trotted to collect the record-setting ball.

INTERACTIVE: Breaking down all of Peyton Manning’s career TD passes

“I’ve lost my vertical leap,” Manning quipped. His childhood decision to play quarterback instead of receiver? It was a wise choice. Manning is obviously much better at throwing a football than catching it.

As Manning lunged, D.T. tossed the ball to Emmanuel Sanders, who toyed with the veteran QB before flipping it to Wes Welker, who ran read-option before pitching it back to Sanders, who completed the double-cross double-play with a perfect strike to tight end Julius Thomas on the sideline.

And here’s the really funny part: It was no prank. Manning “actually planned it,” confessed Demaryius Thomas. Now that is quintessential Manning. Football’s ultimate puppet master staged and practiced the speciously spontaneous scene that celebrated the historic touchdown, as fans holding giant cardboard numbers 5, 0 and 9 danced in the stands.

But we all know the truth: The rap against Manning is that he’s Mr. October.

“Congratulations, Peyton, on your touchdown record, a great achievement,” New England quarterback Tom Brady said in a congratulatory message, before adding this little zinger from the team that has proved to be Manning’s toughest rival: “We’ll see you in a few weeks.”

Nobody does it better in the regular season than Manning. By the time he is done, the NFL record book will be the Book of Manning. Once he proved that the scar on the back of his neck or the nerve damage in his throwing arm could not chase him from the game, No. 509 was inevitable for Manning after moving from Indianapolis to Denver.

What Manning needs, however, to elevate him above John Elway and Joe Montana to become the greatest QB of all time can’t be found in the record book. It must be earned on the field, in the Arizona desert, on the first day of February.

The record is in Manning’s pocket. But the real quest has only just begun.

“It’s really not about the record,” Sanders said. “It’s about the journey and what we are trying to achieve at the end of it.”

Records are meant to be broken. Championships live forever.

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or twitter.com/markkiszla