Centennial Elementary School fourth-graders Kylie Foust, 9, left, Lucero Gomez Andazola, 10, center, and Sydney Skarajunsky, 9, right, sell a bracelet to kindergartener Nathan Lowe, 5, far left, during lunch Friday at the school. The girls are selling the bracelets, which they made during their free time, to raise money for the family of a second-grader at their school who has been diagnosed with leukemia. ( Jenny Sparks )

LOVELAND -- Three Centennial fourth-graders figured a little orange could go a long way toward supporting a second-grader in love with the color.

Kylie Foust, Lucero Gomez Andazola and Sydney Scarajunsky are selling rubber band bracelets in the color that also represents leukemia, which the second-grade girl was diagnosed with in early January.

"We can make all these bracelets to donate the money to her family," said Kylie, 9.

Kylie got the idea for the bracelets when she realized she and many other students didn't have orange clothes to wear for the school's orange day, held every Wednesday since Jan. 8 in support of the second-grader.

Wanting a little help, Kylie asked her friends Gomez and Sydney to help her make and then sell the bracelets before school and during lunch and recess on Wednesday and Friday -- they will be selling them again next week.

"What color do you want?" Gomez asked half a dozen students Friday as they gathered around a table to check out the piles of different shades of orange bracelets.

"Well, they're all orange," Kylie pointed out.

The three girls brought the idea to Kim Tymkowych, principal of the school.

"I gave them a few things to consider," Tymkowych said about pricing the bracelets and advertising the sale. "Otherwise, they did it on their own."

Advertisement

The girls decided to sell the bracelets and grippers for pens and pencil for $1 and displayed handmade posters throughout the school. They each made about 100 bracelets the previous weekend and during the school week and plan to make more for next week's sales.

To make the bracelets -- which take 5-10 minutes each -- they loop the rubber bands together for the single-strand and more complicated fishtail styles.

"It's not a real fishtail. It's made out of rubber bands," Kylie informed a few of the students stopping by the selling table.

The girls said they want to help the second-grader's family pay for chemotherapy.

"We're making the bracelets to support Ellory just in case her family needs it, because her she might waste a lot of money on medicine," Lucero said.

Sydney said, "If they need some help getting something for the whole family, we should probably help out with that."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.