Obamacare Open Enrollment Deadline Is Almost Here: eHealth Publishes Five Essential Tips for Last-Minute Shoppers

Today eHealth, Inc. (NASDAQ: EHTH) (eHealth.com), the nation's first and largest private online health insurance exchange, released its top five tips for last-minute shoppers who still need to enroll in 2016 health coverage before the Obamacare enrollment deadline.

"It's now or never for last-minute health insurance shoppers," said eHealth CEO and Chairman Gary Lauer. "The end of the Affordable Care Act's 2016 open enrollment period is almost here, but consumers should know that they still have options. A few good shopping tips can go a long way to help you find the quality, affordable coverage you need for 2016."

The nationwide Obamacare open enrollment period for 2016 health insurance plans is scheduled to end on January 31, 2016. After that date, consumers may not be able to get a new health insurance plan until 2017.

Five Essential Tips for Last-Minute Obamacare Shoppers

To learn more about your coverage options before the January 31 deadline, visit eHealth.com.

Notes:

1 See eHealth's October 2015 Coverage Satisfaction Index report.

eHealtheHealth, Inc. (NASDAQ: EHTH) owns eHealth.com, the nation's first and largest private health insurance exchange where individuals, families and small businesses can compare health insurance products from leading insurers side by side and purchase and enroll in coverage online. eHealth offers thousands of individual, family and small business health plans underwritten by many of the nation's leading health insurance companies. eHealth (through its subsidiaries) is licensed to sell health insurance in all 50 states and the District of Columbia. eHealth also offers educational resources and powerful online and pharmacy-based tools to help Medicare beneficiaries navigate Medicare health insurance options, choose the right plan and enroll in select plans online through PlanPrescriber.com (www.PlanPrescriber.com), eHealthMedicare.com (www.eHealthMedicare.com) and Medicare.com (www.Medicare.com).

For more health insurance news and information, visit the eHealth consumer blog: Get Smart - Get Covered or visit eHealth's Consumer Resource Center.