Tips from Katy I clearly needed some professional help, so I sat down with Katy Parsons one afternoon at the spa. Here is what she told me: • What products do you use? I use regular lacquer or gel polish and itty, bitty, tiny paint brushes. I don't have a favorite polish line, but I do look for a consistency when I'm shopping for polishes. A lot of drugstore brands or simple colors can be tricky because they're runny and watery, and that's not good for nail art, unless you're trying to achieve a water color effect. • What are some tips to giving yourself a good manicure? One of the biggest things people don't realize is your nails need to be totally dry. Not only in the sense that it doesn't feel wet, but the nail plate has to be stripped of moisture. Use polish remover or alcohol and swipe the nail. It will get kind of chalky. That's a good way to prep your nails for polish. Moisturize your cuticles with some sort of oil: cuticle balm or even coconut oil. Slap it on, rub it in and go to bed. You're lying there for eight hours, so you may as well do something. • How to you make your polish last? Always prep the nail, always use a base coat and always use a top coat. Beyond that, a lot depends on your body chemistry. Just like your skin, your nail plate naturally exudes oils onto your nails. Some people just have oily nail plates. Also, don't touch your cuticles. As soon as that separates from the polish, you have a little lip there and it's susceptible to chipping. Did you know? If you wear your own flip-flops to a pedicure at the Spa at St Julien, you get a complimentary glass of champagne. The St Julien doesn't use disposable pedi-flops. It gives clients real flip-flops. So even if you don't wear your own in, you leave with a free pair of shoes. Either way: win-win.

I'm pretending it's an ultra-authentic, Halloween-themed, marble manicure. The gray-purple polish is not chipped; it's intentionally distressed. Underneath is not a nauseating black thumbnail that I slammed in my car door four months ago, but it's still black (are you freaking kidding me?), which is the base coat of the fancy marble effect.

I swear.

My sister-in-law has thumb insecurities. She is self-conscious about her thumbs, which she believes are too big and weirdly shaped. Like two apples on toothpicks.

I've never actually witnessed her distressing thumbs. She has made a habit of tucking them inside her fist or casually bending them underneath her other fingers at all times. You cannot distract her or trick her. No one else has ever seen these things, possibly not even my brother.

Obviously, this has compelled me to taunt her ("thumbs-up" replaced waves and high-fives years ago) and wonder how awful her thumbs could possibly be to warrant such permanent, life-altering behavior.

Until the car door mutilated mine.

Katy Parsons (Courtesy photo)

My thumbnail is now lumpy and splintery and gory and looks like Little Jack Horner who stuck his thumb into his plumb-filled Christmas pie.

Now, I carry nail polish in my purse for touch-ups. In the past few months, I've spent more time in the nail salon than my entire life combined. I've emo-ed back to black polish, trying to embrace the injury. But the only solution that made me feel better was my sister-in-law's famous thumb hide-and-don't-seek game.

Then I discovered Katy Parsons.

Let me tell you about Katy Parsons.

Connect with Katy • Twitter: @blognailedit • Tumblr: blognailedit.tumblr.com • Facebook: .facebook.com/blognailedit • Instagram: @blognailedit • Web: blognailedit.co

Parsons, 26, of Boulder, is a nail technician at the Spa at St Julien who has taken nail art to a whole new level. In fact, her blog, Nailed It (BlogNailedIt.co), recently was awarded the Favorite Nail Blog award in Marie Claire's Most Wanted Beauty Awards.

Parsons uses tiny, sable-hair brushes, her collection of more than 800 bottles of nail polish and a lot of patience to create some of the most intricate, unique nail designs you can imagine. Stripes, patterns, flowers, galaxies, birds, even 10 different font styles of an ampersand. Spider webs are a given in October — and it turns out also a great cover-up option for unfortunate thumb wounds.

But Parsons did my Hallow-nails differently. Instead of the predictable black polish with a white spider web, she painted my nails a sophisticated cream, with tiny, perfect black webs on the ring finger "accent nails" — lines so miniscule they put nail stickers to shame. Much to my surprise, two coats of the OPI color "You're So Vain-ella" covered my Jack Horner thumb just as well as black, without making me look like I'm headed to Goth Night at The Church in Denver.

Parsons says she has converted mutliple clients to cream or off-white polish. It makes your hands and toes look tan, but more important, when it chips, it's barely noticable, she says. This gives your manicure longer shelf life.

Parsons began her nail blog on the side just for fun, while working at a software company. But as the intricacies of her designs expanded, so did her audience (her Instagram now boasts more than 18,550 followers), until her blog was so well known she decided to quit her software job, get trained as a nail technician and pursue that passion full time. She joined the St Julien staff in the spring.

Her blog also has been nominated for InStyle Magazine's Social Media Awards for the Most Inspiring Manicure and Cosmopolitan's Blog Awards for the Best New Beauty Blogger.

Beyond just showing off her elaborate and meticulous designs, Parsons also offers plenty of tutorials and tips on how to give yourself a home mani and re-create some popular looks.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Aimee Heckel at 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/Aimeemay.