Writer, consultant and customer service representative topped the list of the most common work-from-home careers, according to data from telecommuting job search site FlexJobs.

Telecommuting has become a more prevalent option in the United States in recent years, increasing by 35% from 2000 – 2010, according to data from the United States Census Bureau, with 9.4 million employees working from home.

Even President Barack Obama has gotten behind the need for more flexible job options, signing a Presidential Memorandum in June to improve workplace flexibility for all agencies of the federal government.

Though more companies are getting behind telecommunication and flexible work options, some positions are better suited for working-from-home.

Researchers at FlexJobs spend their days finding work-from-home job opportunities, allowing them to notice trends in telecommunication hiring. They have identified 20 of the most common positions that hire remote workers:

Writer Consultant Customer Service Representative Sales Representative Engineer Account Executive/Manager Software Developer Case Manager Medical Coder Adjunct Faculty Systems Analyst Program/Project Manager UI/UX Designer Travel Counselor Insurance Adjuster Graphic Designer Bilingual Interpreter SEO/Marketing Assistant Director of Business Development Marketing Manager

Though the common telecommuting positons vary by field, many of the top positions come from business, accounting and finance industries.

Data from the U.S. Census Bureau also shows that 1 in 4 employees who telecommute are employed in the finance, management or business field.

Majority of U.S. employees who work from home have at least a bachelor’s degree (more than 50% of people who work exclusively from home and 63% of people who work part-time from home).

People who hope to work from home one day should pay attention to which fields are hiring remote workers and which degrees may help them obtain those jobs.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments