Although official comments were due to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services about the agency’s Medicare Part B drug payment demo last week, lawmakers are continuing to raise concerns about the proposal.

A group of 25 House Democrats sent a letter to CMS Acting Administrator Andy Slavitt on Friday urging the administration not to move forward with the proposal. They raised some of the same concerns, such as how the proposed rule would affect small and rural providers, as a group of Senators — mostly Democrats — who on the same day urged CMS not to move forward with the proposal until the concerns were resolved.

While many congressional Democrats have brought concerns about the proposal to the administration that they say should be addressed before CMS moves forward, only a handful of others have called on the agency to withdraw the proposal.

The proposal would change the way providers are reimbursed for Medicare Part B drugs, aiming to reduce costs and improve quality for beneficiaries. The lawmakers say they believe the proposal would do the opposite, and say the proposal does not include any metrics to measure access or patient outcomes.

The members say the demo could force small and rural providers to force patients to seek treatment further away or opt to buy and administer the Part B-covered drugs at a financial loss to their practice.

“We are opposed to any demonstration that would result in underserved patients having to travel farther to more expensive infusion centers to access needed care,” the House letter says. “The proposed demonstration neglects the transportation barriers and challenges faced by senior patients in accessing vital specialized care and its impact on treatment adherence and outcomes.”

The lawmakers also say they have “strong support” of the Affordable Care Act, which “demonstrates that we all share the goal of reducing health care costs.”

“We stand ready and willing to work with you to craft a solution that better suits the needs of our seniors without negatively impacting their access to critical lifesaving drugs,” they write.