The details surrounding Ryan Pekar’s 2014 death in one of Kenneth “Kenny” Chatman’s sober homes unregulated sober home industry reveal practices experts say should be avoided to help people safely recover from addiction.

The home in suburban Boynton Beach was coed. Pekar shared a room with his girlfriend. In the early stages of recovery, experts say, addicts need to focus on themselves, not relationships.

RELATED: Police reports link sober home operator to prostitution, 'flop' houses

In California, where coed homes are more common, men and women are required to have separate bedrooms and bathrooms, and overnight visits by a girlfriend or boyfriend aren’t allowed, said Dave Sheridan, president of the National Association of Recovery Residences.

+ Richard Graulich The home where Ryan Pekar, 27, died in 2014. Richard Graulich ×

“It would be absolutely forbidden in a home where people would be new in recovery,” Sheridan said. “If somebody’s in (active treatment), they shouldn’t be sharing a room with their girlfriend.”

Another potential problem with Chatman’s home: It had locks on the bedroom doors. Pekar, 27, died of a drug overdose behind the locked door of his bedroom.

While locks can be justified for safety, the industry frowns on the practice.

+ Family photo Ryan Pekar came to Florida in 2013 with his two brothers, all three of them Ohioans with a mission to get ... read more Family photo ×

“In our experience, locks on the doors indicate that we may be looking at something that isn’t really run well,” Sheridan said. “If the residents are really operating as a family, then locks are really kind of a disrespectful way to treat your housemates.”

Experts also recommend sober homes have available Naloxone, also known as Narcan, a drug that can stop overdoses.

“I feel very strongly that there’s just no reason why sober homes should not have those kits on hand,” Beth Fisher Sanders, a past president of the national group, said. “There’s just no reason or need for overdose anymore with this medication so readily available.”