For months, Marco Rubio has run a low-key campaign, designed to keep a slow and steady pace. The past two weeks explain why.

RIding a post-debate high in the polls, the newly threatening Rubio suddenly became a 2016 pin cushion, pierced by friends (Jeb Bush), rivals (Donald Trump) and strangers (Harvard professor Lawrence Lessig) alike.

Story Continued Below

On Thursday evening, the ascendant Florida senator got whacked again as news of his surprisingly anemic quarterly fundraising went public — he raised just $6 million between the end of June and the end of September, hardly the haul of a candidate with a bead on the GOP nomination. It was twice as much as struggling Sen. Rand Paul raised, but only half as much as another Senate rival, Ted Cruz. Rubio wasn't even in the same ballpark as first-time candidate Ben Carson, who announced $20 million in contributions.

For Rubio, it was a sharp reminder of the perils of rising too fast — and of the inflated expectations now facing his campaign.

During two days of private meetings with top donors at the Bellagio hotel in Las Vegas on Thursday and Friday, Rubio campaign officials coolly outlined the path forward. Donors were reassured about the disappointing fundraising performance, with Rubio staffers explaining that they still had a substantial cash-on-hand figure. And thanks to a low-budget approach, over the course of the quarter the campaign raised more than it spent. The month of September, they pointed out, was the campaign’s best since its spring announcement.

Despite the increasing frequency of attacks on Rubio, campaign officials said they had no immediate plans to launch a serious offensive against any of their rivals — including Bush, the fellow Floridian whose own fundraising performance is expected to far outpace Rubio's.

“Essentially the message was we are going to keep running a positive race and believe our candidate is our best asset," one Las Vegas attendee said.

But that lay-low, stay-the-course approach won't be easy to sustain now that Rubio is facing the level of scrutiny afforded top-tier candidates. In a sign of Rubio's progress, there were around 150 bundlers at the Las Vegas retreat — four times the number of people who attended the campaign's last retreat, held in Washington a few months ago. The pressures to grow the campaign's relatively small staff will only become more heightened as the first contests draw closer. And the costs of competing as a top-tier candidate — in the early states, across the South on March 1, and in the 10 major TV media markets of Florida on March 15 — will demand a far more robust fundraising operation.

The campaign may also need to engage more forcefully with its critics. For now, it's content to dismiss punches from rivals like Trump — aside from knocking Rubio over his age and his record of missing Senate votes, earlier this week the billionaire sought to needle the Florida senator by sending a case of Trump-labeled bottled water to Rubio's Washington office.

Looming above it all is Bush, and his financial juggernaut. Rubio has already surpassed his one-time ally in the national polls, but fundraising is another story.

"My sense is Rubio's always had to compete with the Bush people for his money and even though he's done well, I don't think there's a whole set of new people coming to the forefront," said Republican political consultant Ed Rollins.

The bigger hurdle, Rollins said, is the set of Republican primaries in March 2016.

"The biggest problem that [Rubio] has is March 15," he said, pointing to Republican primaries that day in Florida, Illinois, Missouri, North Carolina and Ohio. Some of those states have some of the most expensive media markets in the country. "He's gotta win Florida; Bush does too."

A Republican political operative connected to Rubio's campaign said he expected cash-on-hand numbers at the beginning of 2016 to be more important than the current third-quarter numbers.

"That's when people are going to start voting, and these things are going to remain fluid until then. I think every campaign starts out with a strategy, and one of them is going to be right," the operative said. "[Rubio's strategy] is still playing out."

Alex Isenstadt contributed to this report.