The Republican candidates for president are gathering in Milwaukee for their fourth debate Tuesday, and CNN's Reality Check team is spending the night putting their statements and assertions to the test.

The team of reporters, researchers and editors across CNN are selecting key statements and rating them: True; Mostly True; True, but Misleading; False; or It's Complicated.

Rand Paul

Reality Check: Paul on Democrats presiding over income inequality

By Kevin Liptak, CNN

Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul alleged during the debate that income inequality "seems to be worst in cities run by Democrats, states run by Democrats and counties currently run by Democrats."

A look of Census data provides a clear picture of where the gap between rich and poor is greatest in the United States, and it's not as cut-and-dry as Paul suggests when it come comes to political responsibility.

For starters, the elected leaders in states and cities have switched from Democrat to Republican, or vice versa, over time. Policies enacted by politicians from both parties have contributed to each place's current economic picture.

The most commonly used indicator for income inequality is the Gini index, which uses wage data to assign a number to each location. According to Census data, the five metropolitan areas with the greatest income gaps are Bridgeport, Connecticut; New York City; Miami; McAllen, Texas; and New Orleans.

Three of those cities are currently run by Democrats; the other two are led by Republicans.

In the states, the picture is similarly mixed. The state with the highest score on income inequality is New York, where a Democrat has governed since 2007. Before that, a Republican held office for a decade.

Next on the list in Connecticut, where a Democrat has occupied the statehouse since 2011, preceded by 15 years of Republicans.

Louisiana is third, currently helmed by a Republican governor but previously governed by Democrats. California and Florida -- two more states that have had governors from both parties over the past two decades -- round out the top five.

Among the 10 states with the highest income disparity, six currently have Republican governors.

On the other end, Republican governors led seven of the 10 states with the lower levels of income inequality.

While Democrats do run cities and states where income inequality is high, Republicans do too. It's not accurate to say Democrats are predominantly in charge of places where it's the highest.

Verdict: False

Donald Trump

Reality Check: Trump on 'Operation Wetback'

By Sonam Vashi, CNN

Billionaire Donald Trump claimed Dwight Eisenhower successfully deported 1.5 million immigrants after sending them deep across the border.

Trump said, "Dwight Eisenhower ... moved a million and a half illegal immigrants out of this country, moved them just beyond the border. They came back. Moved them again, beyond the border. They came back. Didn't like it. Moved them way south. They never came back."

Eisenhower's policy, named "Operation Wetback," was implemented in 1954 and deported undocumented immigrants deep into Mexico. Many of the undocumented had come through wartime Bracero programs, when American labor needs led to a policy that allowed Mexicans to come to the U.S. for temporary agricultural work. When the temporary contracts were not renewed, many workers became illegal.

The exact number that the operation deported is unclear. Eisenhower's attorney general, Herbert Brownell, Jr., said in 1955 that the operation had deported 1 million people, but other researchers put that number closer to 250,000. Between 1953 and 1955, the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service recorded more than 800,000 apprehensions, according to Mae M. Ngai's "Impossible Subjects: Illegal Aliens and the Making of Modern America." Some research shows that more Mexicans may have left the U.S. voluntarily due to fears of apprehension.

However, Trump never mentioned the inhumane practices that occurred when the INS deported the workers back into Mexico in the 1950s. The transfer process was widely criticized as inhumane. Some deportees were transported in over packed trucks or were dropped off without resources in the desert and died from heat stroke; others drowned after transport on overloaded ships, according to Ngai's book.

Verdict: True, but misleading

Ben Carson

Reality Check: Carson on minimum wage and unemployment

By Tami Luhby, CNN Money

Asked whether he supports a $15 hourly minimum wage, retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson said, "Every time we raise the minimum wage, the number of jobless people increases."

Whether raising the minimum wage prompts businesses to shed jobs remains a matter of debate. Many studies exist on either side of the argument. But there's at least one case where the jobless rate went down: In 1997, the minimum wage increased to $5.15 an hour, from $4.75 an hour. At the start of that year, there were 7.2 million Americans without jobs. The number of unemployed subsequently fell each month until October 2001. There have been other times when the number of jobless was lower a year after Congress raised the federal minimum wage: 1950, 1961, 1967, 1978 and 1996.

Verdict: False

Mike Huckabee

Reality Check: Huckabee on corporate taxes paid on goods made in China

By Sonam Vashi and Eve Bower, CNN

Former Gov. Mike Huckabee said, "China is beating the daylights out of us. They can build stuff we can't because they are not taxing it. When they don't tax capital and labor, and we do. They bring something over here and it's automatically cheaper even without the regulatory environment because they are not embedding the taxes. We are."

Huckabee claims that China does not tax capital. The definition of "capital tax" varies widely, and can refer specifically to corporate income tax or other types of capital, or both. If "capital" is understood as being all of a corporation's capital, exclusive of spending, it is correct that China does not have a "capital tax," according to a 2015 report on taxation in China by the international consulting firm Deloitte. Contrary to Huckabee's claim, however, the United States does not have a federal "capital tax" either, according to a 2014 Tax Foundation report. China does have a corporate income tax rate of 25%, whereas the U.S. rate is 35%.

Huckabee's claim about taxes on labor is also incorrect. According to the World Bank, in 2014, Chinese businesses paid an effective labor tax rate of 49.3%. Businesses in the United States paid a far lower effective tax rate at 9.7%.

Verdict: False

Reality Check: Huckabee on firing the chair of the Federal Reserve

By Tami Luhby, CNN Money

Asked whether he would change leadership at the Federal Reserve, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee said "absolutely."

So, could Huckabee get rid of current chair Janet Yellen when he takes office? Yes, but he'll have to wait until February 2018, a year into his presidency. That's when Yellen's term ends.

As much as they may disagree with the Federal Reserve chair, neither the president nor Congress can fire any member of the Fed Board of Governors in the middle of their terms.

Fed governors serve 14-year terms. The president appoints the chair every four years.

Verdict: True

Chris Christie

Reality Check: Christie stopped Obamacare in New Jersey

By Kevin Liptak, CNN

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, defending his record in resisting President Barack Obama's signature health law, said "we stopped Obamacare in New Jersey because we refused to participate in the federal exchange."

That quote itself is false -- no governor is able to refuse participation in the federal health insurance exchange created by the Affordable Care Act.

Christie likely meant that as governor, he refused to establish a statewide health insurance exchange. In December 2012, he vetoed a measure that would have created such an exchange in the Garden State. Like many Republican governors, Christie resisted establishing such a marketplace because of his deep opposition to the Affordable Care Act.

But that doesn't mean New Jersey residents aren't able to participate in Obamacare. Without a state exchange, consumers rely in the federal marketplace accessed on HealthCare.gov.

Indeed, thousands of New Jersey residents have obtained health plans that way. The latest estimate from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services indicates 194,194 people in New Jersey had signed up for plans through the federal marketplace.

Christie's assertion also omits another aspect of the Affordable Care Act, in which the federal government expanded Medicaid for low-income American adults. States had to opt-in to the expansion, and many Republican governors resisted since they claimed their states would end up paying more down the road.

Christie announced in 2013 he would accept the federal Medicaid expansion for his state.

Since then, Medicaid enrollment in New Jersey has increased 36%. More than 1.7 million New Jersey residents are in Medicaid and CHIP, the children's health insurance plan, up more than 463,000.

Christie himself has touted the decision to accept the expansion dollars on the campaign trail, saying it was "the right decision for New Jersey."

Verdict: False

The-CNN-Wire

™ & © 2015 Cable News Network, Inc., a Time Warner Company. All rights reserved.