<p>Karate instructor Jenny Lykins (left) demonstrates self-defense techniques with University of Memphis graduate student Casey Flannery during the annual Fogelman Promise Day at U of M. The Fogelman college of business and economics hosts the yearly event which promotes fiscal, mental, physical and social well-being. Students and faculty enjoyed complimentary healthy meals, live dance music, and a variety of booths demonstrating ways to move toward a healthy lifestyle.</p>

By Jane Roberts

(Editor's note: Dr. Carol Danehower was misidentified in an earlier version of this story.)

Hundreds of students, community sponsors and staff milled around the Promise Day fair at Fogelman College of Business and Economics Thursday, the most visible sign of the college’s growing commitment to health — emotional, fiscal, mental, physical and social.

“The whole aspect of the Affordable Care Act, which we hope will make people healthier, also encourages an individual focus on good health,” said Dr. Kathy Tuberville, director of the Avron B. Fogelman Professional Development Center in the college.

Fogelman Fit, now a staple in the college, includes exercise classes, plus yoga, karate and self-defense for students and university employees.

Students preparing to be leaders in corporate America will be expected to mirror their companies’ commitment to good health, which will play an increasing role in the bottom line and corporate culture as executives dig in to contain insurance costs.

“It’s a long-term process because there are so many cost variables,” Tuberville said. “If our students, as future leaders, can help their employers be more focused on preventive health not only will health care costs be maintained or be lower, but productivity will go up. People who feel better, work better.”

Promise Day is a tutorial in the underlying habits. Every student in the college was expected to visit three of five booths — representing Fogelman’s pillars of health. They included the Fogelman Feud table, where students were rated on how well they responded to stress.

Participants that met the requirements got a healthy, free, 600-calorie lunch, prepared by Dan Bamrick, food and beverage director for the Fogelman Executive Center and Holiday Inn-University of Memphis.

“It’s a day of everything coming together,” said senior Brandon Allen. “It’s like the reckoning of all you have worked for throughout the year.”

Tuberville ties them all up in a three-credit class, Managing Employee Wellness, now mandatory for students in the management track.

“One of the things this class is about is training students to understand the importance of health for corporations,” said Tuberville. “But it first starts with them. At the beginning of the semester, they take a health assessment just like they would in a company. Each part of the semester focuses on something they are working on: maybe exercising, eating better or handling stress.”

A big part of the class is the workplace-like health fairs students are required to put on with local agencies. A group of students, for instance, assigned to learn all they can about domestic violence in Memphis might pair with the Memphis Area Women’s Council.

They are graded on how compelling they make their presentations, including their booth’s curb appeal.

Tuberville designed and teaches the course. She and Dr. Carol Danehower, also at Fogelman, will present the course’s framework this summer at the Academy of Management annual meeting in Vancouver, British Columbia.

“This is such a new part of HR, no textbook is complete. The employers are part of our curriculum,” she said, ticking of a half-dozen corporate leaders who are guest lecturers, including Michael Drake, found of master IT here; Mary Spangler, occupational nurse at International Paper; and Jeff Weintraub, regional partner in Fisher & Phillips law firm.

The University rebranded Promise Day two years ago, hoping to raise the profile of what it takes to be healthy, ethical business leaders.

“We get to know each other. It breaks down the barriers in everyday life and makes it a more sociable event,” said student Ashley Minks.