Political parties (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto) Story Highlights The columnist and a fellow passenger have a powerful conversation on their flight.

We can disagree on issues but still be agreeable to each other.

I was flying into Nashville from Newark recently, when the man in the adjacent seat said to me, “I can’t stand the political writers at The Tennessean. I’ve read your pieces and I don’t agree.”

“That’s OK,” I replied, half-smiling, thinking Uh-oh, he’s recognized me. I was worn-out; this was the third leg of my journey after two eight-hour flights.

But my co-passenger looked friendly. “Are you traveling for business or pleasure?” he asked. “Well, I’m returning from a trip to India to see my ailing dad,” I said.

What followed was a civil, quite candid conversation where we touched upon different topics: race, politics, Hillary, Obama. I’m paraphrasing some bits from memory.

I gathered that he is a 63-year-old Franklin resident traveling back from business, that he is a devout Christian and member of the Religious Right.

And he asked about me. “Are you married?” “Children?” And “How many languages do you know?”

“Yes,” I replied, “I had an arranged marriage. “Two sons, 18 and 20; four languages.”

He: “I can’t imagine how arranged marriages work.” “Well, it’s been working for me for 23 years,” I said.

We talked quite a bit about race. He said he doesn’t like the term “Caucasian” in referring to white people.

He: “What race do you think Obama is? He had a black father, a white mother, was raised by white people,” Me: “He’s biracial, but he looks like a black guy, so he probably had the black experience as a young man.”

He: “Have you been talking to my wife? Because she feels a little like that.” “But that last bit was quite condemnatory,” he said. Me: “We can’t deny there’s institutional racism in many areas.”

He: “True; I don’t know what it is to wake up in the morning, black. I can’t believe what’s happened in Ferguson and elsewhere. But eventually, intermarrying will hopefully solve our race issues.”

On Hillary, he felt she’d be a “stronger” president than Obama on foreign policy. I held my tongue. That Mrs. Clinton is a hawk is precisely one problem some Democrats like me have with her.

Meanwhile, he shared a bag of peanut M&Ms with me. I like those too, the ones with peanuts — see, who says there can be no common ground between political opposites?

He worried, he said, that he’d see Shariah law in his lifetime in places like Dearborn, Mich., with its high concentration of Arab Americans.

“To me, the bigger threat to our democracy is right now with the oligarchy calling most of the shots. We voters are kind of going through the motions in our democracy,” I said. It seemed like he concurred.

And so it went, an interesting back-and-forth. At flight’s end, we shook hands, each saying we enjoyed talking to the other. I meant it, and I think he did, too.

People, whatever their politics, are usually better than the groups to which they belong. I often see this in conversations with friends and acquaintances of different political persuasions. It’s when the bigger groups jockey for political power that things often go awry.

I am not naive and am aware that we live in a very polarized political climate. The failure of Insure Tennessee so far, the Indiana religious freedom law, and our gun laws here highlight that.

But in the individual face-to-face interactions you often notice a little more nuance and give-and-take, a little more reasonableness from both sides that you wish were part of the bigger picture.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1GrTHtD