For the past two years, Hagop Kantarjian has complained about the price of cancer medications. As the chairman of the leukemia department at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, one of the premier facilities in the U.S., he says that he sees a growing number of patients who have difficulty affording treatment. In response, he has become an outspoken critic of the cost of medicines and last year told CBS’s ’60 Minutes’ that prices are “unreasonable, unsustainable and, in my opinion, immoral.” Yet he has seen little change. And so this week, he is leading a new effort – an online petition in which he hopes to gather up to 1 million names to convince the White House and Congress to take action. We spoke with him about his plan. This is an excerpt…

Pharmalot: When did you first become concerned about the prices?

Kantarjian: It was about two years ago. In 2012, we approved – our group at M.D. Anderson – three drugs for cancer. But when I looked at the prices, I was shocked. They were more than $300,000 a year [each was priced at more than $100,000 a year]. So I started to look at prices of cancer drugs and found, in general, they rose 5 to 10-fold from before 2000 until 2012. And so, I was thinking they were harming our patients, because they were not able to afford them.

Pharmalot: Is that what you were hearing?

Kantarjian: Yes, I was hearing that from my patients. When I prescribed the drugs, they could not afford the out of pocket expenses, in general.

Pharmalot: So what did you do then?

Kantarjian: I started writing about it in several editorials [in the media]. I discussed that prices are increasing at catastrophic levels and harming patients and that we needed to do something about it.

There [have been] discussions among [different] parties – drug companies, insurance companies, pharmaceutical distributors, pharmacies and hospitals, patient advocacy groups, and sometimes physicians. I was involved in some of these discussions. There was, for example, a meeting in Washington, D.C., where we agreed to disagree. Each party seemed more interested in apportioning blame rather than accepting the fact that high prices are harmful. But pharmaceutical companies decide prices. Medicare can’t negotiate. Physicians can’t negotiate. [But over the past] two years, nothing has happened. There [hasn’t been] enough pressure on elected representatives to do something about it.

Pharmalot: Yes, but pharmacy benefit managers are trying to pressure drug makers.

Kantarjian: But the real culprit is the pharmaceutical company. I’m all for them making a profit, but they have a social responsibility to make them affordable while making profits.

Pharmalot: So how is a petition supposed to change any of this?

Kantarjian: The only people who can affect the process are the patients. If they are hurting enough, they have to do something to make their voices heard. So we need a patient-based grass roots movement to petition the White House and elected officials about the harm of high cancer drug prices and propose a solution.

Pharmalot: And what is the solution?

Kantarjian: Simple – First, allow Medicare to negotiate drug prices. Two, allow the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute [which was created as part of the Affordable Care Act to assess treatments] to put the prices of drugs in their evaluations of benefits. Three, allow importation of drugs across borders. Prices in Canada are half of what they are in the U.S., so insurance companies would save money, patients would save on out-of-pocket costs and drug companies would make money because the patient who can’t afford the drug here would then make a purchase. Fourth, we should prevent drug companies from making deals to protect patents, like pay for delay, and prevent patent evergreening [which allegedly involves tweaking a patent to extend its life]. And fifth, we should encourage organizations that represent patients with cancer to develop treatment pathways that incorporate drug prices – what they call drug value or treatment value.

If we put these in place, it will allow market forces to work in a more favorable way.

Pharmalot: And you hope to start the petition when?

Kantarjian: Next week. We’re going to use all aspects of social media- Facebook, Twitter. I’m going to ask for organizations and people with a lot of followers to publicize it and include a hashtag.

Pharmalot: Who’s working with you on this?

Kantarjian: Patients and other physicians. We have a core group of about 10 to 20 people, but I don’t want to say who’s involved yet.

Pharmalot: How many signatures do you hope to collect?

Kantarjian: I think we need 100,000 to get traction, but I think I’ll need to 1 million to put enough pressure on the White House and elected representatives to do something. All of the [proposed] legislation about prices is never passed – allowing Medicare to negotiate prices, preventing pay for delay, allowing importation. None of those are going anywhere. I think 1 million American signatures can put some pressure on our representatives to represent patients and stop representing pharmaceutical interest groups.

Pharmalot: What makes you think it will make a difference?

Kantarjian: At some point, somebody has to be ashamed if American lives are being taken away for profits. If 1 million don’t make a difference, maybe we’re not in a democratic system. Maybe we’re in a plutocratic system. But I think 1 million signatures will matter.

Pharmalot: How long will you give it?

Kantarjian: I’ll probably give it a year and if it doesn’t work, I’ll probably just abandon it. This saps my quality of life, because it takes away from my time as a leukemia researcher. But it’s an important issue and so I want to devote time to it. Somebody has to do it, because it’s harming patients who may not be able to afford high-priced cancer drugs. [UPDATE: He later sent us this thought: “I will give the issue as much time as is needed to lower cancer drug prices. This is an important issue that affects the lives of millions of people with cancer in the U.S. and worldwide. We need to continue our efforts until cancer drug prices become more reasonable and affordable to all patients with cancer.”]