Kaitlynn Hanes, 12, back, braces herself in the cloverleaf bullseye as a water-soaked sponge thrown by Natalie Fischer, 12, heads toward her at the Twin Mounds 4-H Club's Sponge Throw booth Saturday during the 4-H Carnival at The Ranch. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

For $100, carnival-goers could select one of the items Saturday in the pile of puzzles, teddy bears and toys.

The bill — which they had to catch in the money machine — is the only piece of paper money that's a darker shade of green than the rest of the $1, $3 and $5 bills. A few lucky children grabbed the right cash in the blast of air as they stood for 15 seconds in the booth, but most came out with fistfuls of the smaller denominations, good for purchasing candy and toy prizes.

"It's a different booth, being in there catching money," said Dennis Greenwalt, co-organizational leader of the Friendly Few 4-H Club in Fort Collins. "Everybody gets something. They don't go away empty handed."

The Friendly Few took up three of the 25 to 30 booth spaces operated by 4-H clubs in Larimer County during the 55th annual Larimer County 4-H Carnival and Crafts Show at The Ranch. The club's other two booths were for a Plinko game and a coconut toss.

"It's a lot of fun, because there are a lot of different things going on," said Rod Johnson, co-chairman of the carnival with his wife, Beth.

An average of 2,000 to 5,000 people come to the one-day crafts show and carnival each year, Johnson said.

"It's crowded all over. It's a real good turnout," he said.

Advertisement

The 45 booths for the craft show took up the south hall of the First National Bank Building, while the north hall held the carnival booths, food sales and two live auctions. The carnival booths, operated by 4-H club members, presented a noisy, colorful playground of ring toss, skee ball, fishing, marksmanship and spinning-wheel games.

Club members selected the game, or games, they wanted to offer, decorated their booths and sold tickets beforehand that could be used for games or food. They earned $25 for setting up the booths and a percentage from ticket sales with proceeds going to the Larimer County 4-H Foundation to support 4-H projects for the next year. Tickets also were sold the day of the event.

The North Forty 4-H Club brought back the jailhouse game, where 4-H members wore plastic sheriff badges and sought out "inmates" after their friends or family members handed over four tickets to have them locked up for two minutes.

"It's a big hit. All the ages seem to like it," said Jane Kincaid, one of the leaders of the Wellington club.

The sponge toss, a game that has been at the carnival for 36 years, cost three tickets to throw a damp sponge at a member of the Twin Mounds 4-H Club or five tickets to sponge blast a friend.

"The younger kids actually throw better than most of the older kids," said 12-year-old Saguora Glasser, a member of Twin Mounds in Loveland, adding that the booth is an attraction for its unusual offering. "You normally don't get to do that a whole lot."

The Big Thompson 4-H Club operated the funny photo booth with a variety of hats visitors could wear for digital or print photos, costing three or six tickets respectively.

"They have a lot of fun because they get to dress up in funny hats," said Anna Parrish, troop leader of the Loveland club, who brought back the game from 13 years ago. "I wanted to do something to stand out."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at 970-669-5050 or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.