In era of health reform, Medicaid expansion, free clinics evolve to care for more than just the uninsured

Free clinics: definition and data What is a free health clinic? Most free clinics are small organizations staffed by a few paid employees, with volunteer physicians, nurses and social workers offering care and assistance.



1,007

Free clinics operating in the U.S.



$287,810

Mean annual budget last year



18

Average number of hours per week a clinic was open



Hours range from once a month in a small office to several times a week in larger operations.



Source: Survey, AmeriCares U.S. medical assistance program

What free clinics treat Most free clinics emphasize primary medical care, but some offer other services, including dental, eye and behavioral health care. A breakdown on what clinics provide.



73%

Provided care for chronic diseases



81%

Conducted physicals



62%

Provided urgent and acute care



87%

Dispensed medications



In Michigan: Most free clinics have trained staff to help patients enroll in an expanded Healthy Michigan Medicaid or in private plans on the insurance exchange, according to Free Clinics of Michigan, a Grand Rapids-based nonprofit network of free clinics in the state. Each clinic reports that it has signed up 30-150 people for coverage since April.



Source: Survey, AmeriCares U.S. medical assistance program

Many of the 75 free health clinics in Michigan are changing their business models to become more flexible providers as hundreds of thousands of previously uninsured people gain private coverage under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the expansion of Healthy Michigan Medicaid, clinic directors say.



Some free clinics, which historically have not treated patients covered by health insurance or Medicaid, are adopting new policies to take care of the underinsured — people with high-deductible health plans who can't afford to pay $1,500 to $5,000 in out-of-pocket expenses before nonpreventive coverage kicks in.



Other free clinics are becoming hybrid operations to accept Medicaid, private insurance and self-pay based on income.



Many people who use free clinics are employed but earn too much for Medicaid. Some — who recently have purchased a lower-cost, bronze-level private plan — are going back to free clinics after dropping coverage because they can't afford to pay the deductibles, clinic directors say.



One free clinic in Southeast Michigan, Joy-Southfield Free Clinic in Detroit, changed its business model when it merged its health care operations last fall with Covenant Community Care, a federally qualified health center now with six sites.



Free clinics in Petoskey and Traverse City also recently merged or converted into federally qualified health centers, the Ann Arbor-based Center for Healthcare Research and Transformation said in a recent report. The federally qualified designation means the clinic meets guidelines for staffing, services and quality.



"We're in the process of transferring clinical care to a co-located federally qualified health center (Covenant Community Care) that will dramatically enhance access," said David Law, executive director of the Joy-Southfield Community Development Corp., the parent of the clinic.



This month, Law said, Joy-Southfield will change its mission from providing clinic services to providing health care education, wellness promotion, community development and social health services.



When Covenant Community is fully ramped up, Law said, it will "do 12,000 visits a year. We are doing aggressive enrollment (in Medicaid and private insurance on the exchange) and will see both uninsured and insured patients."



Pam Haratsis, executive director of the Gary Burnstein Community Health Clinic in Pontiac, said clinic leadership has talked about becoming a federally qualified health center to diversify its revenue base under health care reform.

"We couldn't help any more people than we do now," Haratsis said. "We are now covering the uninsured and those with private insurance as well. Some people have horrendous deductibles."



To accommodate higher demand, Haratsis said, Burnstein plans to expand this year into a 7,000-square-foot building at 45580 Woodward Ave. in Pontiac. The building was a donation from the Robert S. Peterson Family Foundation that will enable the clinic to see patients in Wayne, Macomb and Oakland counties.



Haratsis said the clinic currently operates in 1,500 square feet with four medical rooms, four dental rooms, a dispensary and radiology.





Free clinic evolution

Sister Mary Ellen Howard, president of Free Clinics of Michigan, said free clinics are evolving their missions in a variety of ways to keep up with patient demand.



"Free clinics tend to provide more comprehensive services than other places," said Howard, who recently retired as president of the Cabrini Clinic. "People who come to us need a lot of help besides medical."



For example, Howard said, Cabrini conducts an initial visit with a social worker to determine patient needs.



"Do you have food in the house, heat? Are your utilities turned on?" she said. "We help them through the process. Many never had insurance before. We are enrolling them every day, every hour."

Marianne Udow-Phillips, director of the Center for Healthcare Research and Transformation, said many free clinic directors and boards are concerned that fewer people will donate to free clinics.



"Free clinics are worried that people assume (the Affordable Care Act) eliminates the need for free clinics. We know that is not true," said Udow-Phillips, noting that at least 400,000 people in Michigan will continue to be uninsured in 2016.



"Many free clinics are changing their focus ... they are still the clinic of last resort."



Howard also said some free clinics are developing billing capacity to provide health care for patients with Medicaid and maintain their relationships with patients.



In Michigan, free clinics planning to accept Medicaid include Catherine's Health Center, Grand Rapids; Faith Medical Clinic, Pinckney; Health Intervention Services, Grand Rapids; and Holland Free Health Clinic, according to the Center for Healthcare Research and Transformation.



But Leslie McGuire, director of AmeriCares' U.S. Medical Assistance Program, which provides free clinics millions of dollars in supply assistance, said only about 8 percent of clinics are expected to start billing for services or accept Medicaid.



Currently, only about 4 percent of the nation's 1,007 clinics receive reimbursement from third-party payers, AmeriCares found in a survey taken last year.



"(In) states that have expanded Medicaid programs, like Michigan, the problem shifts from the uninsured to the underinsured," McGuire said.



Underinsurance is commonly defined as out-of-pocket costs greater than 5 percent of income for someone earning up to 200 percent of the federal poverty level.





Accepting patients with coverage

Kim Sibilsky, CEO of the Michigan Primary Care Association, said federally qualified health centers are ramping up their efforts to collaborate with free clinics.



"We have always collaborated with free clinics," Sibilsky said. "An interesting dynamic now is the free clinics are becoming hybrids and starting to participate in Medicaid."



Still other free clinics will work with the health centers to coordinate care for the uninsured or those who now have health insurance.



"They will help people with private health insurance or Medicaid enter the health care delivery system and find physicians or other providers, Sibilsky said.



Over the past four years, health centers have become one of the primary care focal points for people lacking easy access to private physicians. The federal government has allocated more than $1.3 billion to health centers over the past four years to hire staff, purchase equipment and expand services.



"We are seeing a lot of people with high-deductible plans coming in with a silver or bronze-level" plan purchased on the health insurance exchange, Sibilsky said. "If someone has a policy like that, it creates a major gap in coverage. We have a procedure for people underinsured like that, and a sliding fee can be established for those families."



In Detroit, five federally qualified health centers operate more than 23 individual clinic locations. They are Covenant Community, Detroit Community Health Connections, Community Health and Social Services, Western Wayne Family Health Centers and Advantage Health Centers.



There also are three "look-alike" health centers: Wellness Plan Health Centers, Health Centers Detroit Medical Group and Oakland Integrated Healthcare Network, which operates at three locations and plans to expand to 10 sites. These centers provide many of the same services as federally qualified health centers.



"We are growing into larger operations with the expansion of Medicaid, but we will still be a place the uninsured will go," Sibilsky said.



While some experts predicted declining need for free clinics, McGuire said many Michigan clinics are expected to see more patients under health care reform, especially if newly insured patients have difficulty making timely appointments.

Still needed, even after reform

Last year, an AmeriCares survey indicated that 32 percent of free clinics nationally expect to see more patients as a result of the Affordable Care Act.



"Free clinics will see you and help transition you to another clinic that accepts your insurance," McGuire said.



Udow-Phillips said health centers and free clinics also will continue to have an important role in delivering mental health and dental services, especially with ongoing changes under Healthy Michigan.



From 2007 to 2011, free clinics' mental health visits increased 128 percent and dental care visits 36 percent, said a recent report from the Center for Healthcare Research and Transformation.



Udow-Phillips said dental care under Medicaid will improve under health care reform because reimbursement to dentists will increase to commercial rates.



"Very few dentists took Medicaid in the past because the reimbursement was so low," she said. "Delta Dental now is using a commercial fee schedule, and dental access will be significantly enhanced."



But Howard also said recent policy changes in how Michigan funds mental health services have increased demand at some free clinics.



"There has been a big influx of patients who were dropped by the county mental health system and are now showing up at free clinics," she said. "These are really sick people. We need to find them help."



Udow-Phillips said some community mental health agencies have reduced funding because of state budget cuts. Those cuts have translated, in some instances, into lower levels of mental health care, she said.



"This is a real problem that the state Legislature wants fixed," Udow-Phillips said. "One of the problems is timing. The agencies used to be paid before services (were rendered). Now they are paid after. There is a cash flow problem."



As with mental health, Howard said, free clinics are watching to identify gaps in services and what people will need in the future.



"We are not sure what will be met and not be met by the Affordable Care Act," she said.



"As we enroll patients, we are losing them, so we need to do other things. This doesn't mean there won't be many uninsured people to treat. Once the dust settles, there will be plenty of needs for free clinics."



Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325, jgreene@crain.com. Twitter: @jaybgreene

Related Links