Timothy E. Ryan (Photo: Courtesy Tim Ryan For Ocean County Freeholder )

An email blast sent to local media Thursday morning sounded the alarm in its subject line: "Freeholder Vicari under investigation by federal and state authorities" it said in all capital letters.

The email came from the campaign of Democrat Timothy E. Ryan, who is running for Ocean County freeholder against longtime Republican incumbent Joseph H. Vicari this fall. However, as the day unfolded, it became clear the Ryan campaign had no evidence to support the claim beyond the fact Ryan himself has previously asked state and federal authorities to investigate Vicari.

"Both the FBI and the state Attorney General are conducting investigations that target corruption allegations against Ocean County Freeholder Chairman Joseph Vicari, according to information being released by Tim Ryan, Vicari's opponent in the November election for freeholder," read the first paragraph of the Ryan campaign email.

Later in the day, the Ocean County Republican Organization issued a rebuke to the Ryan campaign through their own statement.

"Mr. Ryan is a desperate candidate who cannot win on the issues so has resorted to lies and innuendo to attempt to revive his failing campaign," the GOP statement read. "Ryan can produce no evidence that the FBI or the state Attorney General are investigating the unsubstantiated allegations made by Mr. Ryan and his supporters."

However, the Ryan campaign claimed to have a smoking gun — a copy of a subpoena that was evidence of a criminal investigation.

When a reporter from the Asbury Park Press requested a copy of that subpoena, the campaign emailed it over. However, the subpoena was from August 2012 and there was no mention of Vicari in the order from a state Superior Court judge in Mercer County.

The subpoena was issued to Ocean County to turn over all of its documents related to their dealings with the engineering firm Birdsall Services Group, which then was the subject of a state criminal probe.

At the same time, similar subpoenas were issued to the municipal governments of Toms River, Brick, Barnegat, Tinton Falls, Wall, Manalapan, Holmdel and the government of Monmouth County, among others.

The Birdsall firm and seven of its executives would later be indicted on charges they derived millions of dollars from public contracts by circumventing the state's pay-to-play laws. The firm, through its attorney, pleaded guilty to corruption charges in 2013 and later was assessed a $1 million criminal fine and $2.6 million in civil penalties.

However, no elected official in Ocean or Monmouth counties was ever implicated in the scandal.

Erik Larsen: 732-557-5709 or elarsen@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1vVlkH9