Rep. Chuck Fleischmann is out with his third television ad in the past month attacking his Republican primary challenger.

Chuck Fleischmann: "Now We Know"

The latest ad alleges that Weston Wamp is unwilling to criticize President Barack Obama because his financial well-being depends on the Affordable Care Act, a deeply unpopular piece of legislation amongst conservative voters.

A campaign news release draws a link between Wamp and Obamacare through American Exchange, a health insurance agency affiliated with Lamp Post Group. Wamp is communications director for the tech company incubator, and in statements and ads, he has described himself as a founding director for Lamp Post Group.

The 30-second spot begins with a large image of Obama superimposed over a background of "spiraling debt." Wamp says in a sound bite, "You’ll rarely hear me criticize the president."

It jumps to a photo of Wamp; his father, former Congressman Zach Wamp; and Ted Alling, a Lamp Post Group founder, meeting Obama when he toured Amazon’s Chattanooga facility last year.

"And now we know why," the ad’s narrator says. "Weston is founding director of a company invested in Obamacare. Why would he criticize the president when Obama is making him money?"

The Wamp campaign denied the allegation in an email Thursday.

"There is no basis for this claim," said campaign manager Marshall Brock. "Like all of the recent actions from Congressman Fleischmann, it is absurd and an insult to voters."

Since early voting began, Fleischmann has released a wave of negative ads attacking the challenger. One hits Wamp on immigration. Another features Scottie Mayfield reminding voters that Wamp secretly recorded a conversation between the two men earlier this year.

Fleischmann’s campaign has distributed Photoshopped mailers of Wamp burning a passport. Another mailer has an image of a smoking revolver with a caption that reads, "Voting for Weston Wamp is like playing Russian roulette with your gun rights."

Brock said the ads are backfiring and turning voters against the congressman.

"They expect, as do we, that Aug. 7 will be a referendum on negative politics," he said.

Conner Ingram, a spokesman for the Fleischmann campaign, said the congressman is running an 11-county strategy based on his record as a legislator. He pointed to federal funding for Erlanger, the opening of three new Veterans Affairs clinics in the 3rd District and "standing up for Second Amendment rights."

"To say we’re just going negative is unfair. What we’re doing is holding Wamp’s record accountable, whether it’s on amnesty or Obamacare," he said.

Disclaimer: Nooga.com's parent company is Lamp Post Group, but editorial decisions for this publication are made independently of the Lamp Post Group.

Updated @ 9:52 a.m. on 8/1/14 to correct a factual error: three new VA clinics have opened in the 3rd District, not two, as originally reported.