MSNBC's Thomas Roberts surprisingly pursued Hillary Clinton spokeswoman Karen Finney on his Wednesday program over the ongoing controversy surrounding the undercover videos of Planned Parenthood officials discussing the sale of the organs of aborted babies. When Finney admitted that Mrs. Clinton had only seen clips of the videos, Roberts wondered, "Why not see the videos?" He later underlined that "not having seen, in full context, what the videos represent...makes a vulnerability for those people that are out there trying to defend it." [video below]

The anchor pointed out has Jeb Bush's recent answer on federal funding of Planned Parenthood "caused an uproar," and that Bush "clarified what he was saying – saying that he misspoke. But Hillary Clinton isn't buying into that – laying into what he said at an event that she had later in the day." After playing a clip of the former first lady's attack on the former Florida governor, Roberts turned to the spokeswoman and asked, "Is this an example of a new aggressive line of attack against Republicans?"

Finney, a former MSNBC personality, played up that "Republicans are doing it to themselves again. I mean, we've unfortunately seen this narrative from Republicans for a very long time. Women's health seems to be something that goes out the door pretty quickly." She continued that "Jeb also wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act, which would take away some of those clinics that he was talking about."

Roberts followed up with the topic of the undercover videos. He interrupted Finney mid-answer when she disclosed that Mrs. Clinton hadn't seen the videos in their entirety:

THOMAS ROBERTS: Karen, people are having a visceral reaction to watching these undercover Planned Parenthood videos. Do you know – has Hillary Clinton watched them in full, and does she have a reaction to that? Because in coming out against Jeb Bush about his statement about women's health care and funding, it is tethered to Planned Parenthood – it's tethered to those videos- KAREN FINNEY, CLINTON CAMPAIGN SENIOR SPOKESWOMAN: Well- ROBERTS: So, is she making a case for herself, basically, defending those videos? FINNEY: Well, let – let's be clear. I mean, she was actually asked that same question, and she answered. She was – she actually, I think, said that she's seen images or pictures, but she hadn't actually seen the videos. But Thomas, that's- ROBERTS: Why not see the videos? FINNEY: Hold on. But this is exactly what the group behind these videos is trying to do, in terms of conflating the issue. We are talking about defunding Planned Parenthood. We are talking about taking away health care from – what is it – 2.7 million people who utilize their services just last year.

The MSNBC anchor then asserted that "you make yourself vulnerable; and Hillary Clinton makes herself vulnerable; President Obama makes himself vulnerable; Josh Earnest makes himself vulnerable. If you don't not look at these videos in full context; but then, come out in defense of them – saying, well, I've seen clips; or I've seen a small portion." The Clinton campaign flack replied by returning to her talking points: "So we shouldn't be spending money on – you know, breast examinations or HIV/AIDS tests or birth control? I mean, you know, that's what Planned Parenthood does. That is the majority of the work that they do."

Finney also played up a recent Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll that found that Planned Parenthood was the "most popular organization above all the politicians – above the NRA." Roberts repeated his main point before moving on to the investigation into the classified material on the former secretary of state's private e-mail server: "You make a very good point about the extensive work that Planned Parenthood does. But when we have policy makers getting out in front of – defending certain things about what they're being attacked over, and not having seen, in full context, what the videos represent – I think it makes a vulnerability for those people that are out there trying to defend it." The former MSNBC host merely replied, "We just have to agree to disagree on that."

The transcript of the relevant portion of Thomas Roberts's interview of Karen Finney on his MSNBC program on Wednesday: