Be­hind every mem­ber of Con­gress is a small cadre of staffers, without whom law­makers’ jobs would be im­possible. They craft le­gis­la­tion, are ex­perts in ar­cane policy, main­tain hec­tic sched­ules, and help en­sure that con­stitu­ents get served by the gov­ern­ment they pay for.

But cuts to of­fice budgets — down 20 per­cent over the past three years alone — and changes to em­ploy­ee health care, along with near-con­stant threats of fur­loughs and shut­downs, have eroded mor­ale on Cap­it­ol Hill, and more seni­or staffers are look­ing to­ward the exits than in the past, ac­cord­ing to a new sur­vey re­leased Monday by the Con­gres­sion­al Man­age­ment Found­a­tion.

Con­gress may not work very well these days, but things would be much much worse if it was no longer able to at­tract top tal­ent and re­tain the unique in­sti­tu­tion­al know­ledge that long­time aides pos­sess.

CMF, a non­profit, non­par­tis­an or­gan­iz­a­tion that provides man­age­ment con­sult­ing for mem­bers’ of­fices, sur­veyed 163 House and Sen­ate chiefs of staffs and dis­trict or state dir­ect­ors in late 2013 un­der the prom­ise of an­onym­ity. The res­ults are troub­ling.

Thirty-eight per­cent of seni­or staffers sur­veyed said it was “likely” they would look for a job out­side their cur­rent of­fice in the next year, up 8 per­cent­age points from the last sur­vey, in 2011. Mean­while, the per­cent­age say­ing it was un­likely they’d look for a new job fell 13 points from 64 per­cent to 51 per­cent, a bare ma­jor­ity.

“When you look at the land­scape of changes, these are the most sig­ni­fic­ant changes to con­gres­sion­al of­fices in a gen­er­a­tion,” Brad Fitch, the pres­id­ent and CEO of the found­a­tion told Na­tion­al Journ­al. “It’s a folly to think that those changes are not go­ing to have an im­pact on staff re­ten­tion or re­cruit­ment.”

In ad­di­tion to budget cuts, many staffers are los­ing their fed­er­al em­ploy­ee health be­ne­fits and be­ing forced to pur­chase cov­er­age through the in­sur­ance ex­changes es­tab­lished by the Af­ford­able Care Act, a change Re­pub­lic­ans pushed for polit­ic­al reas­ons. Sen. Dav­id Vit­ter, R-La., and oth­ers even tried un­suc­cess­fully to pass le­gis­la­tion elim­in­at­ing staffers’ health in­sur­ance sub­sidy, while an­oth­er GOP sen­at­or re­cently brought a law­suit to do the same.

Re­spond­ents to the sur­vey were en­cour­aged to provide can­did thoughts on life as a seni­or aide, and many said the health in­sur­ance change and budget cuts have had a tre­mend­ous neg­at­ive im­pact on their lives and of­fices. “The most dam­aging ac­tion or lack there­of to mor­ale I have wit­nessed in my 40-year ca­reer as a com­mit­tee staffer and [chief of staff] for three mem­bers was the re­fus­al not only to ad­dress the staff health care mis­take but to fix it,” one said.

Said an­oth­er: “I hired well to build a com­pet­ent staff for a seni­or mem­ber. As a res­ult of the se­quester, I’m los­ing those staff to off-Hill po­s­i­tions that pay some­times double what pay on the Hill is, with more cer­tainty and no fur­loughs. This is a hor­rible situ­ation.”

Cuts have forced man­agers to do more with less, strain­ing re­sources and pa­tience. In 2011, 30 per­cent of re­spond­ents agreed that they have “too much to do to do everything well” — that num­ber doubled in the 2013 sur­vey, jump­ing to 62 per­cent. Mean­while, the per­cent­age say­ing “job burnout is a sig­ni­fic­ant prob­lem in my of­fice” climbed 10 per­cent­age points, from 30 per­cent to 40 per­cent.

And the de­cline of in-house re­sources cre­ates a va­cu­um that can be filled by out­side groups such as think tanks and lob­by­ists, aides fear. “The elim­in­a­tion of staff’s tra­di­tion­al health care has been a com­plete dis­aster,” one staffer said. “If you wanted a le­gis­lat­ive branch run by K Street lob­by­ists and 25-year-old staffers, mis­sion ac­com­plished.”

Of course, con­gres­sion­al aides have al­ways been un­der­paid and over­worked, but they keep com­ing back be­cause of a com­mit­ment to pub­lic ser­vice or a de­sire to have an im­pact. But there may be a point when salary and budget cuts go too far, even for the most ser­vice-ori­ented. “Is there a break­ing point at some point where Cap­it­ol Hill be­comes sig­ni­fic­antly less at­tract­ive and private sec­tor is more at­tract­ive, or an en­tirely dif­fer­ent ca­reer?” Fitch won­ders.

For any Amer­ic­an in­ter­ested in fix­ing Con­gress and hav­ing rep­res­ent­at­ives who can per­form their jobs well, let’s hope we haven’t already reached that point.