The interim CEO of Jefferson Regional Medical Center said if the Arkansas General Assembly fails to pass legislation funding the Arkansas Works program proposed by Gov. Asa Hutchinson, hospitals all over the state will suffer.

“We’re all in the same situation,” Bryan Thomas said. “It will effect every hospital in Arkansas.”

Arkansas Works would continue what is currently known as the private option, the state’s Medicaid expansion program, which uses federal dollars to help purchase private health insurance for people earning up to 138 percent of the poverty level. The General Assembly in a special session approved the enabling legislation by votes of 70-30 in the House and 25-10 in the Senate.

Those numbers, however, fall short of the 75 percent needed in each chamber to approve funding for the program and on Thursday, the senate turned down a bill to fund it.

Thomas said that without the legislation, JRMC stands to lose about $10 million next year.

That’s because patients who previously did not have insurance are currently covered under the private option, but if that ends, those patients would not be able to pay medical bills.

“It would be a significant setback,” Thomas said.

According to figures provided by the state, more than 267,000 Arkansas residents are covered under what is now the private option.

On Tuesday, Dan Rahn, the chancellor of the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, said during an appearance in Pine Bluff that UAMS would lose about $65 million, which would affect not only patient care but education and research.

Scott Barrilleaux, the CEO of Drew Memorial Hospital in Monticello, said Thursday his hospital would likely lose between $1.3 and $1.4 million.

“Now that we’ve been able to collect data for a few years, we know how the private option affects hospitals like Drew Memorial Hospital — It’s doing exactly what it should,” he said in a news release posted on the hospital’s website Wednesday. “In its first year, the private option led our hospital’s written off, uncollectable accounts to decrease by more than $1.3 million.”

Thomas said that if the legislation does not pass, there could be “some changes in the level of service” provided by JRMC.

“Some adjustments would have to be made,” he said.

Barrrilleaux said it “would be a double-edged sword” if funding for the program is not approved, with 8 percent of the population losing insurance on Jan. 1, 2017.

He said the hospital would see a large increase in bad debt, which would have a negative effect on the immediate area because federal funds, which were once used to offset the cost of providing health insurance — would no longer be available.

“Our hospital would lose on two fronts — increased uninsured patients and no money to cover the costs associated with providing that care,” he said in the news release. “As a top employer in Drew County, our financial health helps our local economy. Moreover, people losing insurance might choose to avoid or postpone medical treatment, continuing our negative regional health statistics and continuing to drive the cost of care upward.”

Barrilleaux said Drew Memorial employs about 350 people.

Thomas said JRMC employs about 1,500 people, and failure to adopt the plan could not only affect them, but could alter the plans to eventually replace the current building.

“If it is not approved, we would see a darkly negative impact on health care,” Thomas said.

State Sen. Stephanie Flowers (D-Pine Bluff) is one of those who supports the plan and on Friday had some harsh words for fellow senate members who opposed it.

“I don’t understand it,” Flowers said. “For them to be against health care for the working poor is disgraceful and says something about their morals and ethics.

“People who want to bash the Affordable Care Act don’t realize what good it has done the state,” Flowers said.

Flowers said a $30 million grant from the Obama Administration made it possible for UAMS and rural hospitals in the state to link up through a telemedicine system and doctors in those rural hospitals can get specialized help from doctors at UAMS at very little cost.

“A lot of those rural hospitals benefit without a lot of costs,” she said. “I don’t get it at all.”

Flowers said the Senate will try again on Tuesday and said Hutchinson was working hard to try and change the minds of at least two of the senators who voted no.

She also said most of those who voted against the program live in Northwest Arkansas, which is getting a medical school and a new hospital.

“It’s like they want to cut themselves off from the rest of the state,” Flowers said. “The people in those districts need to make their voices heard. It’s all about hating Obamacare. That’s the only logical thing I can make out of it.”