Scarlett Johansson is one of the female celebrities lending their support to assist Planned Parenthood in their campaign.

Sign Up for Newsletter

Scarlett Johansson is one of the female celebrities lending their support for Planned Parenthood in their campaign to inform Americans about the Affordable Care Act.

"We're grateful that Scarlett Johansson, Aisha Tyler, and Gabrielle Union are lending their voices to help make sure that Planned Parenthood patients learn about the law and how it will benefit them," Planned Parenthood president Cecile Richards said in a press release.

The 28-year-old actress recorded a phone message to encourage women to enroll.

PHOTOS: Scarlett Johansson Hot Magazine Covers

"Did you know you may be able to enroll in new, more affordable health insurance plans?" she is heard saying.

The message also directs listeners to a website which provides more information.

The Avengers star has been a vocal supporter of President Obama since before was first elected in 2008. The actress even sent e-mails to Obama to express her support, although the messages were misconstrued by the media.

PHOTOS: Scarlett Johansson's Best Red Carpet Photos

"I was merely trying to express my delight at Obama's commitment to his campaign in every aspect and his interest and his support (in) his surrogates and his staff and his fellows, and how wonderful and refreshing that is. And it was manipulated into such an unfortunate media frenzy of kind of a nonstory," she told The Associated Press in 2008.

Other actresses have also shown support for Obama's Affordable Care Act, including Nina Dobrev.

The 24-year-old Vampire Diaries star uploaded an Instagram photo earlier in October in which she held a sign across her bare chest that read "#getcovered." She captioned the shot, "Im Canadian. We have healthcare for all. If you dont have insurance go to HealthCare.gov and #GetCovered, Because w/o it, youre naked."

More celebrities have also posed with their own #GetCovered signs, including, Kate Bosworth, Rosario Dawson, Josh Hopkins, Emily VanCamp, Connie Britton, Kerry Washington, John Legend, Brian Baumgartner, Jenna Ushkowitz, Nick Wechsler and Torrey DeVitto.