I was away and off the grid last week but have been keeping up on the news – and on complaints from readers.

One of the biggest stories, of course, and easily the biggest source of reader email has been the Israel-Palestine conflict, ignited by the kidnapping and killing of three Israeli teenagers and the kidnapping and killing of a Palestinian teenager, apparently in revenge.

My office has received more than 1,000 emails from readers on this topic recently, with protests on both sides, and, in some cases, charges of bias coming from both sides. (The Times is far from alone among major news organizations in receiving strong complaints in this area. Here are treatments of the subject at The Guardian and at National Public Radio.)



Without delving into any larger issues, I will review here some of what I heard the most about from readers, with the intention of returning to this subject in a more substantial way.

1. An article and an editorial that included an error. An editorial picked up on a factual error in a news article, stating that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel had not responded immediately to the killing of a Palestinian teenager, and that “days of silence” had followed. The Times corrected the error, both on the news pages and the opinion pages. Many readers also objected to The Times’s interpretation of a poem quoted in the editorial, saying that its intended meaning was the opposite of that interpretation.

2. References to a gag order. Although gag orders are nothing new in coverage of legal matters in Israel, any mention of them brings protests from readers who believe that news is being covered up, or that journalists are being manipulated. A recent article by Steven Erlanger made direct references to a current gag order. I wrote about this several months ago, with comments from the foreign editor, Joseph Kahn, about how The Times deals with these restrictions.

3. Headlines. Readers objected to this headline: “Palestinian Death Toll Nears 100 as Hamas Promises More Attacks on Israel,” saying that its construction made it appear that Hamas was responsible for the Palestinian deaths. The headline was later changed to make its meaning clearer, as was another headline that originally appeared as “Missile at Beachside Gaza Cafe Finds Patrons Poised for World Cup.” Many readers complained, and I think reasonably, that the headline had the effect of trivializing the attack. Other readers objected to Times headlines that described Israel’s military attacks; these readers said that such attacks were responding to rockets launched by Hamas, and that headlines should clearly reflect that. Along with headlines, the display and choice of photographs is a constant source of complaint, on both sides.

4. Social media response. The Times’s Jerusalem bureau chief, Jodi Rudoren, used Facebook to give a detailed response to criticism of one piece of her reporting. Answering those who complained that she was guilty of “stenography,” she explained why she had quoted at length Micky Rosenfeld, a spokesman for the Israel Police, on the beating and arrest of a Palestinian-American teenager, Tariq Abu Khdeir, noting that it was only one small part of the reporting she has been doing in recent weeks. She wrote: “Part – part, I underline – of holding public officials accountable is airing their (often carefully crafted) statements so that people can make judgments about them.” The tone of the response under her post is one more indication of the polarized and passionate reaction not only to this continuing story itself, but to the way The Times is covering it.