HUDSON, Ohio--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The Health division of Wolters Kluwer, a leading global provider of information and point of care solutions for the healthcare industry, announced today that customers can access the newly-released Affordable Care Act Federal Upper Limit drug pricing benchmark, or ACA FUL, through two solutions from its Wolters Kluwer Clinical Drug Information business unit.

The Medi-Span® application line from Clinical Drug Information is widely considered the industry leader in providing drug pricing data, attributes, and analysis. Wolters Kluwer Clinical Drug Information is providing ACA FUL data through two Medi-Span offerings:

Medi-Span Federal Government Pricing File – Database provides the monthly value of ACA FUL, plus the Weighted Average Manufacturer’s Price (AMP), upon which the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is basing ACA FUL calculations.

– Database provides the monthly value of ACA FUL, plus the Weighted Average Manufacturer’s Price (AMP), upon which the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) is basing ACA FUL calculations. Medi-Span® Price Rx – Online drug pricing analysis tool will feature ACA FUL among the many price types included in its Product Information Reports. It will be available for inclusion in Custom Reports at a later date.

Published by CMS, ACA FUL is based on a new formula detailed in the Affordable Care Act. CMS anticipates it will be used to establish reimbursement for drugs covered under Medicaid. It will eventually replace the long-standing CMS FUL pricing type.

“For nearly two years, the Clinical Drug Information team has been monitoring development of ACA FUL and preparing for its release so that there would be little to no gap for healthcare professionals and businesses requiring efficient access to the data,” said Denise Basow, MD, President & CEO of Clinical Effectiveness at Wolters Kluwer. “Medi-Span offerings continue to be the standard for timely drug product and pricing data that help drive business processes and intelligence gathering for the nation’s top PBMs, pharmaceutical manufacturers, retail pharmacies, and healthcare organizations.”

About Wolters Kluwer

Wolters Kluwer N.V. (AEX:WKL) is a global leader in information services and solutions for professionals in the health, tax and accounting, risk and compliance, finance and legal sectors. We help our customers make critical decisions every day by providing expert solutions that combine deep domain knowledge with specialized technology and services.

Wolters Kluwer reported 2015 annual revenues of €4.2 billion. The company, headquartered in Alphen aan den Rijn, the Netherlands, serves customers in over 180 countries, maintains operations in over 40 countries and employs 19,000 people worldwide.

Wolters Kluwer shares are listed on Euronext Amsterdam (WKL) and are included in the AEX and Euronext 100 indices. Wolters Kluwer has a sponsored Level 1 American Depositary Receipt program. The ADRs are traded on the over-the-counter market in the U.S. (WTKWY).

Wolters Kluwer Health is a leading global provider of information and point of care solutions for the healthcare industry. For more information about our products and organization, visit http://www.wolterskluwer.com/, follow @WKHealth or @Wolters_Kluwer on Twitter, like us on Facebook, follow us on LinkedIn, or follow WoltersKluwerComms on YouTube.