Gov. Robert Bentley at some point has likely read "A Tale of Two Cities", Charles Dickens' classic work about life in Paris and London before the French Revolution and after.

Dickens' opening words of the great novel are iconic.

"It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it was the epoch of incredulity, it was the season of Light, it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct the other way..."

Dickens' words and his novel capture an important period of time in humankind's political, social and cultural evolution. So some might think it strange to use Dickens' words to sum up the life and times of Bentley. Over the last year Bentley has seen the best of times in his five-year-old governorship but also the worst of times in his personal life.

For Bentley 2015 was a season of light but also a season of darkness. It was a year of political evolution that saw Bentley emerge from the fits and starts of who some would say of an underwhelming first term governor to become in his second term a governor largely reinvented; a governor no longer content to follow the lead of a Legislature, a prescribed party dogma or the occasional bad advice of self-serving interests.

Bentley has emerged from 2015 as the most interesting and unpredictable figure in state politics. He is a man whose independent streak stubbornly keeps him from falling in line with what some observers think he should or will do. One lawmaker this year quipped, "One thing about Bentley, you never know what he's going to do."

It's a contradiction for a man who is so predictably tied to his routine: he ties his shoes at the exact same time every morning, wears Carhart jeans and Columbia shirts every weekend and has dinner every night at precisely 6 p.m.

For a Republican Governor not running for president in 2016, Bentley managed to grab a number of national headlines throughout the year for his unpredictable decisions.

"I think it was our best year," Bentley said of his fifth year as governor. "And I think several things caused that. It takes a while for people to accept you or understand where you are coming from and also it takes you a while to really get to the point where you feel very comfortable in your job."

But while Bentley began to hit his stride in his role as governor, 2015 was also the year Bentley's marriage of 50 years came to an abrupt end, when his wife Dianne suddenly filed for divorce, barely a month after their golden wedding anniversary.

Asked if this year was the best and worst of times, Bentley paused a moment.

"Yes. I would say that. I think that is correct," Bentley said.

In her filing Dianne Bentley never alleged infidelity on the part of her husband. But once the filing became public on August 28, online blogs - some discredited in courts of law and others with dubious histories - were almost instantly filled with unsubstantiated rumors of an extramarital affair between Bentley and a senior advisor.

As Bentley and the Legislature prepared for a second special session to try a third time to solve the state's budget crisis, the state's highest office holder was suddenly dealing with the worst personal crisis of his life.

Bentley acknowledged he was shocked by his wife's action. He said he never saw it coming, certainly not the way that it did, despite increasing tensions in the marriage.

If Bentley, most Alabamians and even Montgomery insiders were shocked by the news, a handful of bloggers didn't seem to be surprised. Within hours of the painful news, blogs rolled out posts featuring far-fetched stories with highly implausible details about the alleged affair.

What they did not roll out was any proof.

Since that time, searches of public records, including flight logs, official social media posts and public calendars have disproven much of the claims.

For instance, the divorce filing alleged the First Couple had been separated since January of 2015, something the governor disputed in the final paragraph of the divorce settlement agreement.

Records show that the Bentleys were together almost constantly either in Montgomery, at their home in Tuscaloosa, at their beach house or on trips. State Flight logs show the Bentleys spent their 50th wedding anniversary in July together at a plush resort in West Virginia. On Aug. 15th – just 13 days before Mrs. Bentley served her husband with divorce papers, the Bentleys attended a concert together in Montgomery.

Records show that even on the night of Aug. 27th, one day after divorce papers were signed by Mrs. Bentley, and the day before they were made public, the former First Lady spent the night at the governor's mansion with her husband. The two even appeared together at an event just two hours before the governor heard the news of his divorce from a television station.

A month after Mrs. Bentley filed, the divorce was settled out of court. And Gov. Bentley, who publicly releases his tax returns each year, released the terms of the divorce settlement to the public.

Throughout the ordeal Bentley, reluctant to talk about the deeply personal issue, would only say it was a personal, family matter.

And he never addressed the unfounded rumors of an affair.

Until now.

"The rumors were not true," said Bentley.

The governor then seemed to let out months of pent up frustrations.

"There were people on blogs and people in the press who crossed the line. They truly crossed the line. People on talk radio crossed the line," said Bentley.

Bentley said it's hard as a public official to address the kind of rumors that were being spread and he said he felt to directly address them would only serve in some cases to give them credibility.

Bentley said the rumors hurt many people.

"There were many people – my own family and there were a lot of other families – many people, people that I love, that I care about, they went through some difficult times because people were able to say whatever they wanted to say. They were just ridiculous. I don't know how anyone could ever believe them."

Asked if his now ex-wife believed the rumors, again there was a pause as Bentley lowered his head before answering.

"I don't know," answered Bentley.

Back inside the Capitol, Bentley became a governor who confronted a Legislature that had largely ignored him for four years and pushed it in an effort to solve problems.

Facing a $700-million shortfall in the state's General Fund, Bentley announced he would seek a long-term solution to solve the budget crisis. Bentley launched a hard push to raise taxes after having spent years towing the standard GOP line that taxes are bad. Earlier in his political life Bentley had even signed a no-tax pledge, a move he renounced in 2015 and said he regretted.

Internal polling by Republican lawmakers this fall shows Bentley may have seen his popularity among Alabamians slip because of the push to increase some taxes, but polls still finds a majority of Republicans support him.

Bentley strongly believes his push for new taxes to help fund essential state services was the right thing to do even after running for re-election touting that he had not raised taxes as governor in his first term.

"It was obvious to me we just didn't have enough revenue," said Bentley.

The governor said he and lawmakers knew that in 2012 when they had to borrow over $400 million from essentially a state savings account, depleting it to make ends meet.

Even before the borrowing of that money Alabama was only able to slide by financially due to additional federal stimulus dollars that had come into the state.

But all of that extra money ran out this year and Bentley said there was no real choice but to try to seek some tax increases and more importantly try to change how the state budgets.

While Bentley never convinced lawmakers to approve a $541 million tax hike he proposed, he and lawmakers did finally agree after three sessions of the Legislature to approve about a $100 million tax hike, far short of what was needed but more than most observers believed possible at the beginning of the year.

Bentley said decades of messaging by Republicans that government has plenty of money has harmed the ability to adequately fund essential state services.

"I really haven't changed my beliefs. I believe government does have a role but it should be a role that government protects and helps people make their lives better," said Bentley.

If Bentley broke from the mold in his push to raise taxes he wasn't finished yet as his independent streak made for more unpredictable decisions from the second-term governor.

In June, with no notice and little consultation with anyone, Bentley abruptly ordered the removal of confederate-era flags from the state Capitol grounds on the day he was set to make another surprise announcement. Global giant Google would be locating a call center creating 60 jobs in north Alabama. Bentley ordered the flags to come down as he left Montgomery to make the Google announcement in north Alabama.

The flag removal order came just days after nine black church goers in South Carolina were shot to death by a young white supremacist using the confederate flag to promote hate. Asked why he did it, Bentley said this:

"I have always been a person who empathizes and sympathizes for the thoughts of other people. And even though the flags don't bother me, they do bother some people. And if they do bother some people, we don't really need them.

"Those flags flying was a symbol of oppression to a large group of people in this state," said Bentley. And if it didn't matter to me that they flew, then we should take them down. I did that for the 27 percent of the people in this state who feel those flags are symbols of oppression in this state," added the governor.

Whatever good will Bentley gained among black Alabamians by removing the flags didn't spare him from at times harsh criticism by mostly black leaders who in October accused him of hurting black voter registration with closing of mostly rural driver's license offices.

Most of those lawmakers did not vote to adequately fund the Alabama Law Enforcement Agency in the three Legislative sessions despite warnings from ALEA Secretary Spencer Collier that a loss of $11 million would likely result in the reallocation of personnel needed to operate 33 driver's license offices in mostly rural counties.

With a sharp decrease in funding, ALEA announced the offices would no longer operate in the same manner they had prior to the budget cuts. A little less than half of those offices are in majority black areas. Black state lawmakers criticized the move calling it racially motivated and national black leaders like Jesse Jackson did as well. Democratic Party presidential candidate Hillary Clinton even joined in the attack.

Bentley eventually decided to pivot with ALEA announcing that some of the offices scheduled to close would operate with limited hours sending a license examiner to most of the offices one day a month. Some of the offices will be staffed two days or more a month.

Some critics of the initial decision to close the offices say the new plan is still not adequate. The governor said the new schedule could be adjusted according to need.

The criticism that race played a role in the decision to close the offices still stings as the year ends. Bentley said the decision he made had nothing to do with race and he resents having been criticized by some who used the race card.

"It always bothers me when I get hit with the race card because it's totally unjustified," said Bentley. "I don't believe the black community has ever had or may ever have a governor who cares more about them than I do. I am sensitive to where they are. And I am sensitive to the issues they have to deal with."

The unexpected had become the expected from Bentley throughout 2015. A lifelong Southern Baptist, Bentley in February refused to disobey a federal court ruling that the state's ban against same-sex marriage was unconstitutional, despite being pressured from the pulpit by his former church pastor and also by Alabama Chief Justice Roy Moore.

Bentley's decision came despite his personal belief that marriage is between one man and one woman. Bentley, like a number of his fellow Republican governors only said he would obey the law.

A southern conservative who has endorsed such ultra-conservative candidates as Mike Huckabee and Rick Santorum, Bentley surprised political observers in August with his unexpected public endorsement of Ohio Governor John Kasich for president. Kasich, viewed as a moderate Republican by today's strict Republican standards for a "true" conservative, expanded Medicaid in his state but also pushed his state to a billion dollar surplus.

And in November, Bentley set off a national political firestorm and a wave of resistance among the nation's governors and even in Congress when he announced late on a Sunday night that Alabama would block Syrian refugees from entering the state.

The announcement came two days after deadly terrorist attacks in Paris in which a Syrian refugee was eventually identified as one of the attackers. Just a day after his declaration, approximately 30 governors announced they would take the same action as Bentley, pushing Congress to revisit the refugee vetting process and pressuring the Obama Administration to acknowledge state's concerns.

And as this year ends, many eyes are on Bentley watching and waiting to see whether he is preparing to do what he has resisted doing for three years – to expand Medicaid through the Affordable Care Act.

Bentley who opposed the ACA since his first run for governor, said he believes the issue has now been settled legally by the U.S. Supreme Court. But Bentley warned that any possible expansion of Medicaid is some time off because the state can't afford it, and that the Medicaid system itself is not quite where it needs to be in order to effectively expand.

"We're not there yet," said Bentley.

Bentley, who uses words like "exciting" to describe his plans for the state in his remaining three years in office, has said he will focus on some of the state's lingering problems that have plagued Alabama for decades, particularly in rural areas.

While those plans haven't yet been revealed, 2015 proved that attempts to predict Bentley are likely an exercise in futility from a governor who's no longer content to simply mark time in his second term.

"I've always had plans for the long range for the future, for the state. But when you really know what you want to accomplish, you don't let anything deter you."