A car goes over the tracks at 21st Avenue in Longmont Sunday afternoon. Surface repairs for rail crossings are the responsibility of the railroad, in this case Burlington Northern Santa Fe. ( Johnnie St. Vrain/ Longmont Times-Call )

Dear Johnnie: Regarding rail crossings, a number of them around town have been wonderfully repaired in a way that seems will really last. For example, Third Avenue at Hover Street, Colo. 66 east of Main. They have done a very good job on these and a number of others.

One that needs attention is 21st Avenue east of Main. If taken at any speed higher than 5 mph, it will do damage to the car. Until it could be fixed, it would be good to have a sign both ways warning of "bad bump." Don't know if you have any clout with the powers that be who would be responsible to take some action. Thanks for your attention. — Jerry​

Dear Johnnie: Who is responsible for the repair of train crossings?

The crossing on Ninth Avenue between Hover and Airport results in a "shake, rattle, and roll" for any car driving over it. The wooden planks between the rails are very worn down in spots, and there is no way to avoid them. With the 45 mph speed limit on that stretch of road, it results in quite a jar! I'm sure last year's flood didn't help the crossing's condition either.

As someone who must travel this road several times a day, I'm wondering whether it's the city or the railroads who should fix this crossing for us. — Shaked, Rattled, and Rolled

Dear Jerry and Shake: Ultimately the surface repairs for rail crossings are the responsibility of the railroad, in this case Burlington Northern Santa Fe.

Advertisement

That answer came from Tom Street, engineering administrator with the city's engineering services department.

When it comes to the kind of "smoother riding precast concrete panel system" found at Third and Hover, he noted, the railroad typically requires financial participation from the city.

Street said that in the coming year, the Public Works & Natural Resources department will inspect several crossings to determine the highest priority. "Then we will start coordination with the BNSF RR to upgrade one crossing with the precast concrete panel system," Street said in an email reply to your questions.

He warned that the agreement process with a railroad typically takes "a considerable amount of time."

"So in the meantime we will determine if the Ninth Avenue (near Airport Road) and the 21st Avenue crossings require any urgent approach repairs or if appropriate signage is in order."

Send questions to johnnie@times-call.com.