When Boulder cyclists Taylor Phinney and Lucas Euser crashed descending Tennessee’s Lookout Mountain at the U.S. Road Cycling Championships last May near Chattanooga, Phinney lay seriously injured underneath a guardrail.

Euser could have continued in the race — and maybe gone on to win — but instead he quit the race and rushed to Phinney’s aid. For his selflessness, the U.S. Olympic announced on Monday that he will be the recipient of its annual Jack Kelly Fair Play Award, but for Euser it was a no-brainer.

“It never occurred to me to get another bike,” Euser said Monday. “It never occurred to me to continue the race.”

The accident occurred when a race motorcycle blundered into their path. Phinney suffered two compound fractures in his left leg. Euser, who races for the UnitedHealthcare team, walked away from his crash and hustled to Phinney’s side. Phinney races for BMC Racing.

“I don’t remember getting off my bike or getting to him, I just remember throwing my bike over a guardrail and diving underneath the guardrail to make sure (Phinney) didn’t move,” said Euser, 30. “It was all reactionary. Everything that I thought, I didn’t process, I just did. Everyone says, ‘Oh, it was so nice of you to stop and make that decision.’ It wasn’t a conscious decision, it was all reactionary. I’m more proud of that than anything, because that’s how I live my life, to make reactionary decisions like that.”

Euser said at first he thought Phinney’s leg had been cut off by the impact with the guardrail because there was so much blood.

“I hate to get too existential and say I had an out-of-body experience, but I’ve been in his position,” Euser said. “I’ve been hit by cars three different times, I’ve crashed and broken many bones. I know what it’s like to be where he was and know exactly what he wanted in that situation — it’s comfort and security. That’s probably one of the scariest things an athlete can go through, a traumatic injury like that. To be alone in that scenario is horrifying. He needed somebody there.”

Euser was nominated for the USOC award by Phinney and his parents, former cyclists Davis Phinney and Connie Carpenter-Phinney. He will receive the award Friday night in Chicago at a dinner in conjunction with the U.S. Olympic and Paralympic Assembly. Amy Van Dyken-Rouen will be the keynote speaker.