The Denver Zoo has suddenly run into a buzz saw of ill-advised opposition over its endeavor to install a waste-to-fuel plant that would convert animal poop and other waste into a power source.

The inventive $3.3 million biomass gasification process would shred and dry the material into pellets that would be heated at temperatures up to 1,470 degrees in an oxygen-starved environment, creating a gas that would power generators.

The zoo expects the plant would eliminate 1.5 million pounds of waste it trucks every year to the landfill and cut the amount of electricity it pulls from the grid by 20 percent.

Yet, a campaign to force the zoo to scrap the idea was energized recently by a letter sent to Denver officials by the city’s main neighborhood organization, demanding a City Council-led review of the plant’s safety and health risks and another public hearing.

The main source of agitation is over potential air quality problems in the park and surrounding neighborhoods.

However, the plant must perform under standards set by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. It cannot operate outside of those limits and must be continuously monitored to ensure compliance.

Will Allison, director of the state’s air pollution control division, said the standards in place will adequately protect the public’s health and environment.

“There are a lot of things in place to ensure this operation is done properly and safely,” Allison said. “We will ensure those limits are met, and we intend to review all reporting and documentation.”

Residents should know a lengthy process was undertaken that culminated in unanimous approval by the City Council in December after a public hearing in which only a handful of opponents spoke.

The zoo has been open about its plans since 2009. An article about the plant was included in a zoo publication that went to 65,000 people and information about the plant has been featured on the zoo’s website, e-newsletter and through large scale public events. Zoo officials met with council members, held open houses and tours of the building, presented plans to neighborhood groups and the parks advisory board and even held its own public hearing.

A 51-page engineering design and operations plan explained the project’s technical aspects.

The zoo is trying to reduce its waste footprint through an innovative way to capture energy. It is a smart plan, one that has gone through extensive review and approval. Continued gripes from some opponents are misguided and, frankly, way too late.

The only way the council can officially withdraw its support is if something has gone wrong. And that hasn’t happened. The project should move forward. We hope that it will become a model for how institutions can deal with waste and generate energy without endangering the health of the public.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.