Fourteen veterans recently graduated from a new electronics training program geared toward the aerospace industry that has been launched by Longmont-based Blackfox. With funding provided by grants from the Colorado Department of Labor and Employment's Veterans Services Division, Lockheed Martin worked with Blackfox to design the curriculum for the program. All 14 veterans that took the five-week course were hired by the company, and on Veteran's Day, Monday, another two dozen or so will begin the same five-week course with expectations of getting hired by Lockheed. (Photo courtesy Blackfox) ( Photo courtesy Blackfox )

LONGMONT -- Putting military veterans back to work is the goal of a partnership struck up among Longmont-based Blackfox Training Institute, aerospace company Lockheed Martin and the Colorado Department of Labor and Employment's Veterans Services Division.

A week ago Friday, the first class of 14 veterans graduated from the new five-week program that trains veterans to work in advanced electronics manufacturing. All 14 have been hired to work at Lockheed Martin's Waterton Canyon facility.

"Their date of hire will be Nov. 11, Veterans Day, and we have a new class starting that same day," said Al Dill, president and CEO of Blackfox.

Blackfox is using state grant dollars assembled by the CDLE to put veterans through the intensive course, with Lockheed having guaranteed to at least consider hiring each graduate who completes the program. Lockheed said it could end up hiring as many as 50 or more veterans through the program, with training continuing through at least March.

The program, launched in September, is specifically designed to train veterans for jobs in the aerospace industry. Andrew Stone, electronics manufacturing manager for Lockheed, said the company was having problems finding workers skilled enough to fill certain positions, specifically positions such as soldering technicians and cable and harness assembly.

Advertisement

Last year Blackfox, a firm that specializes in electronics manufacturing training, received its VA Facility Code, making its trainees eligible for funding through the Post-9/11 GI Bill. At the time, the company attempted to launch a training program specifically for veterans but it never generated enough interest from enough companies, Dill said. The difference this time was Lockheed stepping up and agreeing to not only help develop the curriculum but guaranteeing to hire graduates of the program.

Lockheed had worked with his company before, Dill said, but one day Stone called him and as they talked about his difficulty filling certain positions, an idea was hatched.

"Al and I sat down and talked together and worked with the veterans' work force program (at the CDLE) and we developed this program," Stone said.

The CDLE has funding available specifically to help veterans, according to Elaine Edon, the department's veterans programs coordinator. The state has about 44,000 registered veterans in its database, she said.

She said there are a lot of training providers in Colorado that solicit requests for funding to train veterans. But the CDLE wants more than just to put them through training -- it wants to put those funds where they will lead directly to either new jobs being created for veterans or to help veterans that have jobs increase their skill sets. The CDLE also scrutinizes the wages those jobs will pay and the opportunities for advancement, Edon said.

"Blackfox, they were able to deliver when they brought Lockheed," she said.

Since the program was launched in September, two other employers have expressed interest in participating, Edon said.

Graduates of the Blackfox program come out with four IPC certifications. The U.S. military and aerospace industries are aggressively adopting IPC standards to replace what used to be the old U.S. military qualification standards, Dill said. Companies such as Lockheed have to have their employees up to speed on IPC standards, he said.

Aside from the IPC certifications, graduates also come out with eight Blackfox skill certifications.

"They take that licensing and certification with them" if they transfer to another company, Edon said, which is another selling point for the program as far as the CDLE is concerned.

"After talking with Al, this is just the right thing to do," Stone said of the program. "It's the right thing for the veterans; this is just a win-win all the way around."

Although the Blackfox program is focused on military electronics, Edon said she hears from people in other industries who say they're having trouble finding qualified workers -- the auto repair industry being one example. As the coordinator for the CDLE's veterans programs, she is always looking for more ways to connect veterans with companies needing skilled workers, and with programs that will help the veterans get the training they need to acquire those skills.

Edon urged any job-seeking veterans to visit their local Workforce Centers to find out what help is available to them, whether it's job contacts or dollars available for training or school.

"A lot of veterans register on the Web, but they don't realize there are a lot of people at the Workforce Centers who can help them," Edon said.

Tony Kindelspire can be reached at 303-684-5291 or at tkindelspire@times-call.com.