By of the

UnitedHealthcare apparently took steps to ensure that it did not sell too many health plans on the federal marketplace during the current open enrollment period for the Affordable Care Act.

The steps included requiring paper applications and not giving brokers price quotes online.

"They could not have made it any more difficult," said Chris McArdle, a broker with the Rauser Agency in Milwaukee. "They could not have made it any more clear that they did not want to be writing this business."

UnitedHealth Group Inc., the parent of UnitedHealthcare, made headlines in November when it said it may not sell health plans on the federal marketplaces in the future because of losses on the business.

The potential move applied only to health plans sold to individuals and their families.

UnitedHealthcare, which began selling health plans for 2015 on the marketplaces in Wisconsin, had committed to selling plans for 2016 and could not pull out of the market.

However, the health insurer reduced the commissions it paid brokers for plans sold on the federal marketplace to 2% from 6% and later said it would no longer pay commissions on the plans.

It also required brokers to call the company to obtain price quotes that previously had been available online.

"They would get back to me in the next couple of weeks — maybe," McArdle said.

Brokers also had to fax paper applications to the company, resulting in some problems from lost applications.

"It's fairly apparent they don't want to write any business," said Todd Catlin of Transition Health Benefits.

In a statement, UnitedHealthcare said, "Our actions are consistent with our long-stated approach to continually evaluate the dynamics of exchanges as they evolve and adjust to changes in the market accordingly."

Consumers in the Milwaukee area could buy health plans from an array of companies on the federal marketplace set up through the Affordable Care Act and had other options for health insurance.

People also have the option of buying plans sold off the marketplace.

But the brokers said that UnitedHealthcare's plans appealed to some customers.

"It added complications that nobody needed during a compressed enrollment period," McArdle said.

The regulations imposed by the Affordable Care Act remade the market for health insurance sold directly to individuals and their families, and the market remains in flux.

For example, Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Wisconsin did not offer plans in Milwaukee, Racine and Kenosha counties this year. Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative stopped selling a popular plan. And Network Health, in which Froedtert Health has a 50% stake, began selling plans in the Milwaukee area.

As a result, customers often must move to new plans each year.

All this had to be done between Nov. 1 and Dec. 15 for people to have coverage on Jan. 1.

"The time frame is too limited," Catlin said.

McArdle also said the open-enrollment period is too tight, particularly given that the rates are not public and set until Nov. 1.

The brokers also reported problems with some UnitedHealthcare customers' getting their insurance cards.

"We have people who bought plans in December who still have not received ID cards," McArdle said. "It's very frustrating."

For a company that normally does so many things right, he said, the effort to limit the sale of individual policies has been poorly handled.

"It left a lot of individuals in a lurch," McArdle said.