Maybe, the strained quadriceps simply got the proper rest. Or perhaps, the healing period coincided with a nudge from Peyton Manning.

Either way, Broncos’ receiver Emmanuel Sanders was back on the practice field Thursday. He has been in and out of practice and the preseason because of his leg injury.

If all goes well, Sanders will have a chance to get his first preseason reception Saturday night against the Houston Texans in what will be a final tuneup to the regular season for Broncos’ starters.

“I know Peyton was happy for me to be out here,” said Sanders, who signed a three-year contract with the Broncos in March to replace Eric Decker. “He texted me last night and told me that he would like me to be out here today practicing and catching balls, so it was fun.”

Although another top receiver, Wes Welker, missed his second consecutive practice Wednesday for personal reasons, many Broncos’ first-stringers are getting healthy just in time for the third preseason game, which traditionally is the exhibition when the starters get the most playing time.

During practice Thursday against the Texans, Broncos running back Montee Ball got his first serious 11-on-11 activity since his appendectomy on Aug 4. Defensive tackle Kevin Vickerson (hip) and linebacker Von Miller (knee) also got a few more reps.

The final determination on whether those three will play Saturday against Houston won’t be made until game day.

Harris update. Starting cornerback Chris Harris definitely won’t play Saturday, although he’s coming along well in his recovery from anterior cruciate ligament surgery and is scheduled to start the season opener Sept. 7 against Indianapolis.

“Right now, I have a little split-second that I have to tune up,” Harris said. “That comes with practice reps. I’ve only been practicing for a couple weeks.”

Clowney gets Tamme’d. If he were the type, Broncos tight end Jacob Tamme would have stood with arms crossed and chest puffed during practice down time Thursday with the Texans. Instead, the unassuming Tamme seemed uncomfortable with the suggestion he got the better of Houston’s imposing rookie Jadeveon Clowney as they knocked heads during a 9-on-7 drill Wednesday.

Clowney sat out the rest of practice Wednesday and didn’t participate Thursday. If Clowney suffered a concussion, the Texans aren’t saying. His status for the game Saturday at Sports Authority Field is uncertain.

“Honestly, I don’t know what happened there,” Tamme said. “It was a pretty normal block. It might have been helmet to helmet. I’ve received about a thousand texts on it. Sometimes freak stuff happens on little plays like that if your helmets hit.”

Footnotes. There was little doubt Jordan Norwood was going to make the Broncos’ 53-man roster. He would have been their top returner while mixing in as a receiver. But Norwood suffered a torn left ACL during practice Wednesday and is finished for the season. “I’m very disappointed for him and for us, selfishly,” said Broncos coach John Fox. “I know he’s disappointed just like we are.” …

The Broncos and Texans started disliking each other during their first practice Tuesday. On Wednesday, tempers began to simmer. During practice Thursday, ill feelings rose to a full boil. During one, bench-clearing skirmish, a few haymakers were thrown, although none seemed to do any damage. “It’s kind of the nature of the game,” said Broncos left tackle Ryan Clady. “When it’s not your actual teammate, you’re going to want to lash out and fight.”