Most Popular

1 Bernie Sanders Is Hurting Himself by Playing the Victim

2 Elizabeth Warren Takes On the ‘Gig Economy’

3 Benedict Anderson’s View of Nationalism

4 The Most Reliably Democratic County in America Just Sent Hillary Clinton a Signal

5 No, Paul Ryan, Austerity Will Not Fix the Starving Puerto Rican Economy

Kasich’s push for the expansion does not represent a shift in his feeling for Obamacare, which he opposes. Rather, it reflects recognition of the economic benefits expected to result from accepting billions of federal dollars: it’s expected to save Ohio $404 million over two years. The Ohio Chamber of Commerce supported Kasich’s move, as did hospitals and clinics throughout the state.

Kasich’s decision may encourage other conservative governors to expand their Medicaid programs eventually, particularly if Kasich survives his re-election campaign next year. But a more likely trend has been set by Arkansas, which put forward an alternative model for low-income, uninsured adults through which federal money would subsidize the purchase of private plans on the state’s new insurance exchange, rather than go directly to the Medicaid program. Iowa is waiting for approval of a similar model, and Maine’s governor, who vetoed state legislators’ approval of the expansion, indicated that he will consider an alternative approach.

Certain measures in the Arkansas and Iowa plans could help reduce healthcare costs—for example, by encouraging preventive care and penalizing unnecessary visits to emergency rooms. But it costs the government more to subsidize beneficiaries on the exchange than to pay their bills through Medicaid, and it isn’t clear who would pick up the extra expense. And while Medicaid strictly limits deductibles and co-pays, many private plans offered through the insurance exchanges are expected to require significant cost-sharing.

In Pennsylvania, Republican Governor Tom Corbett has proposed a complete overhaul of the state’s Medicaid program in exchange for accepting federal funds to subsidize the purchase of private insurance for low-income residents. An analysis by the state’s Independent Fiscal Office concluded that these expansion funds would add a net $255 million a year to Pennsylvania’s budget, while a Rand Corporation study said expansion would add more than $3 billion to the state’s economy each year, along with 35,000 jobs. At the same time, Corbett wants to raise Medicaid recipients’ monthly co-pay, reduce the services covered by the program, and institute a work requirement.

Clearly these alternative plans aren’t perfect, but little about healthcare reform is. What’s significant is the slow-growing recognition in some red states that refusing to extend insurance coverage to poor Americans out of ideological spite simply doesn’t add up.

In contrast to the clear fiscal and ethical reasons for expansion, the arguments against it are seriously flawed. Citing data indicating that Medicare patients tend to be sicker than the uninsured, opponents claim that no health insurance at all is better than enrolling in the program. That’s an unsubstantiated conclusion, as Paul Krugman explains: “Sick people are likely to have low incomes; more generally, low-income Americans who qualify for Medicaid just tend in general to have poor health.” Many of those who forego insurance are young, therefore more likely to be healthy.

A functioning Healthcare.gov is critical to the healthcare law’s success, but the Medicaid expansion is its heart: about half of those gaining insurance through Obamacare were expected to be new Medicaid recipients, many of whom live below the poverty line but above the eligibility threshold set by their home state. Unlike the federal exchange, the Medicaid website is working, and enrollment is strong. That makes an interesting case for a simpler system for everyone else. Single-payer, anyone?

Kansas slashed its mental health services, and now its suicide rate is on the rise. Allison Kilkenny reports.