'We are popular because we are doing what Boulder wants'

Marketing manager Marily MacDonald demonstrates running while wearing the Adventure Vesta at Ultimate Direction in Gunbarrel.

When Boulder ultrarunner Scott Jurek popped a bottle of champagne July 13 on Mount Katahdin to celebrate his record-setting 46-day run of the Appalachian Trail, he made headlines the world over.

Pictures of him were splashed across front pages from Denver to Bangor, Maine, his lithe frame draped in the simplest of gear: shorts, shoes, socks, a tank top and a hydration vest.

No one wrote about the vest, made by Boulder's Ultimate Direction. But the story of the company's journey from pioneer to laggard and back again rivals Jurek's own personal tale of triumph.

In 2012, sales at the company — now under the larger umbrella of Exxel Outdoors, formerly American Rec — were under a $1 million. Three years later, sales have tripled, coming in at more than $3 million through August of this year, and new products are scheduled to roll out early next year.

Dealer service representative Brian St. Onge wears the PB Adventure Vest during a company meeting at Ultimate Direction in Gunbarrel. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

With Jurek and a trio of other top athletes as the face of the brand, Ultimate Direction is reclaiming its status as the "brand to have," 30 years after the gear maker broke onto the scene with an innovation that created an industry.

History of hydration innovation

Legendary runner and ultra-athlete Bryce Thatcher invented the modern hydration pack in Idaho in 1985 using his mother's sewing machine, and Ultimate Direction was born.

The company grew from Thatcher's garage, quickly gaining popularity with runners and cyclists and garnering a reputation for innovation by creating the first waist pack to carry bottles and the first strap pack to carry a hand-held water bottle.

Advertisement

"In the '90s, Ultimate Direction gear was the thing to have," said Henry Guzman, longtime runner and owner of Flatirons Running, 629 S. Broadway in Boulder.

"If you were a serious runner back then, you got Ultimate Direction."

But by the early 2000s, players such as industry leader CamelBak and the now-defunct GoLite moved into the hydration space, stealing market share.

"Those companies spent a lot of time asking runners, 'What do you need?'" Guzman said. "When that conversation was going on, UD was resting on their laurels.

Customer service representative Molly Brown holds a Bottle Body Plus during a company meeting at Ultimate Direction in Gunbarrel. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

"They kind of got left behind."

Designed by athletes, for athletes

Then came Buzz Burrell.

A running legend in his own right, Burrell brought more than 30 years of outdoor industry experience with him to Ultimate Direction. The former record holder for fastest known times on both the Colorado Trail and the California's John Muir Trail already knew what his first move as brand manager would be: Ask questions. A lot of them.

"If you want to be the smartest guy in the room, ask questions," Burrell said. "It's not that complicated, but no one does it."

Burell hit the streets, talking with retailers, media and — most importantly — athletes, getting back in touch with the community so integral to the success of outdoor companies.

Right away, he brought three Boulder runners on board to help develop new products: Jurek; two-time Leadville 100 winner Anton Krupicka; and Peter Bakwin, record holder on the Kokopelli Trail, which stretches from Loma, Colo., to Moah, Utah.

The trio wasted no time in asking for what they wanted: New gear that was evolved as the sport of running itself.

"I've used gear from many manufacturers, and there's a lot of great stuff out there," Bakwin said. "But it felt as though designs had stagnated while my own needs, and those of many other people I know, were changing."

Bakwin laid out his "wish list" — lightweight gear that could be used on multiday, 200-mile mountain runs. Packs that could carry tools for other sports, like climbing ropes, ice axes or crampons, and not bounce during a run.

"Buzz said, 'Just tell us what you want and we'll do it,'" Bakwin said. "And the designers and UD made it happen."

That collaboration with Bakwin, Jurek and Krupicka led to the creation of a whole new product: the hydration vest, which allows water to be carried on the front of the body via pockets for bottles.

"The vest changed the game," Burrell said. "Everybody is doing this now."

The product debuted in January 2013, and results were immediate. Sales doubled in one year, and the company was so overwhelmed with orders that manufacturing couldn't keep up.

"We just kept calling the factory and saying, 'Make more!'" Burrell recalled.

International dealer service representative Jeremy Hendricks wears a Hard Rocker Vest, above, and dealer service representative Brian St. Onge wears the PB Adventure Vest, below, during a company meeting at Ultimate Direction in Gunbarrel.

A new product line is debuting early next year, in collaboration with the original trio of athletes and a new addition to the team: American ultrarunner Timothy Olson.

The company also created the first ever hydration pack specifically designed for women, a result of work with Jurek's wife, Jenny. A "women's collective" meets twice a year at UD headquarters to brainstorm ideas for products and events, and it includes everyone from the "weekend warrior to the world-class athlete," Burrell said.

"Our slogan is 'Designed by athletes, for athletes," he said. "The products have very specific features due to our connection with our community.

"Our thinking is, if athletes want it, outdoor people want it. We want products to work for everybody, every day."

Community involvement driving growth

Such symbiotic relationships between companies and the communities they serve are a staple of the outdoor industry, according to Todd Walton, marketing communications manager for the Boulder-based Outdoor Industry Association (OIA).

"The outdoor industry is unique when it comes to being nimble (and) community driven," Walton said. "That's what makes these programs work, and UD's approach mirrors that.

"If you engage with people and listen, then you can really have a relationship with a customer and they'll keep coming back."

The outdoor recreation industry has reported steady but significant gains for the past few years, part of a larger national trend toward health and getting outside.

Within that growth, running has become one of the most popular ways for people to get moving. Running USA reported a 70 percent increase in regular runners over the past decade, and races from multi-mile marathons to themed runs have seen huge spikes in participation.

Analyst group Leisure Trends reported that sales of hydration gear rose nearly 10 percent from 2011 to 2013, when they topped $114 million nationwide.

Burrell said Ultimate Direction is experiencing significant global growth, resulting in new hires for the company in France, Italy and Spain. China remains the company's biggest global buyer.

Connecting with Boulder, connecting with the world

Burrell maintains that Ultimate Direction's global expansion was only possible because he first took the time to listen to people locally.

"Why are we popular? Because we're doing what Boulder people want," he said. "When I first started, I asked: What does the local market want?

"I connected with Boulder, and I ended up connecting with the global market."

Flatiron's Guzman agreed.

"You have to stay ahead of the game, finding out what the runner's needs are. You can do a great profit, but if you aren't recognized as a leader — not in how much stuff you sell but what you can do with the community you live in — then what's the point of having a business?"

Burrell has a similar business philosophy, focusing on filling a need rather than turning a profit.

"Other companies, they're trying to think of something new, something different, something that will sell," he said. "I'm not. I'm thinking of what we need. What will make our lives better?"

Burrell stresses that all the best ideas are not his own ("The way to be successful is to never take credit for anything."). The key, he says, is listening to what people have to say.

And he does — often getting approached in grocery stores and at restaurants by someone who has an idea or an unmet need.

"People are always stopping me — on the street, in restaurants — and saying, 'Have you ever thought of this?'" he said.

When asked if he minds the constant interruptions, Burrell shakes his head and smiles.

"It's great. I say, keep it coming."

Shay Castle: 303-473-1626, castles@timescall.com, @shayshinecastle