The Broncos handed the Cardinals their first loss of the season, 41-20, at Sports Authority Field at Mile High on Sunday. Here were some notable and not-so-notable moments from the Denver victory.

Sanders shines: Emmanuel Sanders fell into the Broncos’ lap as a free-agent signee. They knew Sanders provided speed. His hands have been breathtaking. He made a diving grab in the second quarter that initially was ruled a touchdown. Instead of a 77-yard score it became a 30-yard gain, but didn’t take away from the grab.

Von superb: Linebacker Von Miller continues to provide relentless pressure. He netted a sack for the third consecutive game. He generally gave right tackle Bobby Massie fits and knocked Drew Stanton out of the game with a possible concussion.

Welker record: Wes Welker set a record for most career catches by an undrafted free agent in NFL history, breaking Rod Smith’s mark.

WORSTS

Campbell shines: Calais Campbell, who netted 57 career sacks and averaged 22 points a game as a senior at Denver South, haunted the Broncos in his return. Campbell, hurt later in the game on a chop block, made a remarkable read and athletic play to intercept a Peyton Manning screen pass. The bad news? Manning prevented the pick six, registering his 11th-career tackle.

Running game woes: The Broncos running game remained a rumor in the first half. Multiple no gains on first downs from Montee Ball elicited boos. The Broncos had four rushing yards in the first half.

Dropsies: The Cardinals dropped eight passes, helping out a Broncos’ secondary that struggled in the first half.



INTERACTIVE: Grade the Broncos’ Week 5 performance

THUMBS UP, THUMBS DOWN

Offense: The Broncos entered the game determined to pass as a concession to the Cardinals’ strong run defense. They knew they would get blitzed, and were prepared to take chances downfield. Peyton Manning finished with a career-high 479 passing yards. Ronnie Hillman breathed life into the ground attack following Monte Ball’s groin injury. The Broncos set a franchise record with 568 yards. Grade: A

Defense: If not for a blown coverage on Andre Ellington’s 81-yard touchdown catch, it would have been a dominant performance. The Broncos also benefited from multiple dropped passes. However, the pressure from Von Miller and DeMarcus Ware forced early and inaccurate throws. Arizona finished 3-for-16 on third down. Grade: B

Special Teams: Brandon McManus caused some anxious moments, but finished with an acceptable performance. McManus had eight touchbacks and went 2-for-3 on field goals, ricocheting a 41-yarder good off the left goal post. The Broncos contained punt returner Ted Ginn Jr. Grade: B

Coaching: The Broncos decision to go with an empty backfield and throw the ball proved effective. It produced a battery of records for Manning, Demaryius Thomas and Wes Welker. Grade: A

GAME BALLS

Peyton Manning: 500 TD club, career-high in passing yards, Brett Favre’s all-time TD mark up next.

Demaryius Thomas: Finished with Broncos record 226 receiving yards.

Wes Welker: Is NFL’s all-time leader in catches by an undrafted free agent, breaking Rod Smith’s mark