Photo

WASHINGTON — Democrats, trying to recast the midterm election focus away from health care, are reaching out to the constituency that has delivered them the last two presidential elections, the Virginia governor’s race and a bevy of close Senate contests: women.

In a coordinated effort on Tuesday that bracketed President Obama’s signing of executive measures intended to close pay disparities, congressional Democrats called attention to the issue of gender pay equity. One by one Democrats marched to the Senate floor to inveigh against pay inequity and their Republican counterparts.

On Wednesday morning the Senate will vote on whether to take up legislation that would make it illegal for employers to retaliate against employees who discuss their salaries, expose employers to civil action for such retaliation, and require the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to collect pay information from employers. Democrats know the legislation will fail. That is part of the plan.

“For the third time, Democrats bring this legislation before the Senate, hoping Republicans will finally do the right thing,” said Senator Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, the majority leader. “In any other circumstance, Republican senators would be up in arms over this type of economic discrimination. They should be up in arms over equal pay for women, too.”

Republicans were dismissive of the tactic and pointed to the root problem for Democrats, an economy that for six years under Mr. Obama has seen women struggle and fall further behind. Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Senate Republican leader who has found himself in a tough re-election fight with a female candidate, pointed to rising poverty rates for women and declining median incomes since Mr. Obama took office.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Democrats chose to ignore serious job-creation ideas so they could blow a few kisses to their powerful pals on the left,” he said on the Senate floor.

Democrats, to cut through the headwinds against them in the midterm election, must revive the gender gap that has sustained them in campaigns for a generation and expand their political pitch to a broader middle-class audience. Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, paints the effort as an assembly of the electorate: Pay equity reaches women, who are 53 percent of voters; a minimum-wage increase appeals to about 25 percent but energizes the Democratic base, especially poorer voters who tend not to come out in midterm elections; and a coming push on student loans is aimed at 40 million people either in higher education or struggling with student debt.

Video

“Income equity is a big umbrella,” said Jennifer Duffy, Senate political analyst at the nonpartisan Cook Political Report, who gives Republicans a 50-50 shot at winning control of the Senate in November. “You can talk about a lot of things under it. They need something to hang their turnout efforts on, and this is it.”

Polling suggests Democrats are about where they were in 2010, a year they were drubbed on Election Day. That year, according to an exit poll conducted by Edison Research, Democrats held a six-point advantage with women. In February, in a New York Times/CBS News poll, that advantage was five percentage points.

In 2008, Democrats held a smaller, four-point gender gap but prevailed because 53 percent of men and 57 percent of women voted for them; in 2010, 43 percent of men voted for Democrats compared with 49 percent of women, and Republicans won in a rout. “You have to speak directly to women voters,” said Senator Kirsten E. Gillibrand, Democrat of New York. “If you’re not fighting for paid family leave or equal pay for equal work or raising the minimum wage or affordable day care or universal preschool, you’re not supporting women in the workplace.”

All this election year, Democrats have struggled to find a message that could both energize their core supporters and resonate with independents. A four-month push to renew expired unemployment benefits culminated Monday night in passage of legislation that would renew them retroactively for more than two million long-term unemployed and keep them going to June. On Tuesday, House Republican leaders showed no sign that political pressure was building on them to act.

Efforts to raise the minimum wage to $10.10 an hour have resonated in some Democratic states, where legislatures have acted. But such a narrow issue — while it polls well — is not moving the electorate to the Democrats’ side.

Democrats also have turned their attacks to the latest budget plan by Representative Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin and the chairman of the Budget Committee. That budget purports to balance in 10 years, largely by repealing the president’s health care law and slashing programs for the poor, such as Medicaid and food stamps.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The Democrats are doing anything they can to try to change the subject from the nightmare of Obamacare and the joblessness that we experience in our country right now,” Mr. McConnell said. “It’s been almost amusing to watch them talk about anything and everything other than what the American people have on their mind.”

Brad Dayspring, a spokesman for the National Republican Senatorial Committee, compared the Democrats’ campaign strategy to his own party’s efforts in 2006 to overcome an unpopular president, George W. Bush, and an unpopular war in Iraq. Then as now, the president’s party targeted key constituents with tailored legislation, like border security. Republicans trumpeted turnout operations and fund-raising, and tried to turn George Soros into an issue, just as Democrats are doing with the conservative billionaires Charles and David Koch.

The result: Republicans lost 31 House seats, six Senate seats and control of Congress.

Mr. Reid, citing polling that shows broad support for raising the minimum wage and extending unemployment benefits, evinced only a little concern. “We feel that we’re doing O.K., that if the election were held today, we’d be fine,” he said.