REDMOND — Four Republican candidates who hope to unseat Oregon Democratic Sen. Ron Wyden in November spoke fervently Monday about ousting the longtime incumbent and reducing the federal government’s role in the public’s daily lives.

A debate between the candidates was sponsored by the Redmond Patriots group and held at Highland Baptist Church. The primary election will take place in Oregon on May 17.

The Republican candidates include Mark Callahan, Sam Carpenter, Dan Laschober and Faye Stewart. About 40 people attended the debate in the church sanctuary.

A moderator asked candidates about their stances on the Affordable Care Act, immigration and climate change, as well as which federal agency they’d like to get rid of.

Callahan, of Portland, ran in the Republican primary for Sen. Jeff Merkley’s Senate seat in 2014. Monica Wehby won that primary election and went on to lose to the incumbent Democrat.

“Our government needs to live within their means,” Callahan said, when asked about the federal budget. “They need to be fiscally responsible.”

Callahan said he believes human-caused climate change is a myth and said he would support deporting immigrants who are in the United States illegally. “They break the law to get here, and so I would say, ‘Deport them,’” he said.

Carpenter, a Bend businessman, said a major part of his campaign will be fighting political correctness.

“We’re going to fight through this political correctness and we’re going to go after Wyden,” Carpenter said.

Carpenter said he would like to reduce the impact of the federal government on businesses and individuals.

“I will work toward weakening the federal government’s influence in this state,” he said.

Faye Stewart, of Cottage Grove, who has been a Lane County commissioner for 12 years, said there are several federal agencies he would like to drastically reduce.

“We have agencies that are trying to achieve zero risk,” he said. “They’re making it almost impossible for us to do anything.”

Stewart said private property rights have been taken away as federal agencies have become burdensome, passing more and more regulations.

Daniel Laschober, of Wilsonville, a software and finance consultant, said he is up at night asking himself whether the country is freer today than it has been in recent years.

“It’s time we had someone who can actually go there and do what he says he’s going to do,” Laschober said about being elected and going to Washington, D.C.

Laschober said he questions whether some federal agencies, such as the Environmental Protection Agency, are doing what they are supposed to do today compared with when they were created. “I don’t think we need these agencies to go in perpetuity,” he said.

All of the candidates said they were in favor of restructuring the Internal Revenue Service.

— Reporter: 541-617-7820, tshorack@bendbulletin.com