Left in the lurch: Alachua County CHOICES clients may not be eligible for Obamacare

The expansion of Medicaid would have accounted for $51 billion over five years had Florida not rejected it. A story published Sunday in The Sun misstated the amount involved in the expansion.

When the Alachua County CHOICES health services program expires on Dec. 31, many of the nearly 4,000 Alachua County residents enrolled in the program may not be eligible to receive a tax credit/subsidy to get health insurance through the Affordable Care Act, also called Obamacare.

And without the expansion of Medicaid in Florida, which was denied by state lawmakers, these residents may find themselves with no health insurance come Jan. 1, when the Affordable Care Act comes into effect.

Cynthia Moore Chestnut, a former Alachua County commissioner who founded CHOICES, said clients should qualify for a tax credit/subsidy to pay for health care under the Affordable Care Act, but income requirements and the rejection of the Medicaid expansion may leave many without insurance come Jan. 1. She urges CHOICES clients to talk to an insurance agent to discuss their subsidy status and to learn about options may be available to them.

Robbie Carstens, an agent for Ference Insurance Agency in Gainesville, said the only insurance carrier offering the Affordable Care Act subsidy market in Alachua, Levy and Gilchrist counties is Florida Blue, which is offered by Ference Insurance and Chip Williams & Associates Inc. in Gainesville.

“A number of CHOICES clients won't qualify for the health care reform,” Carstens said. “There are a lot of people (who) will fall through the cracks.”

Carstens said eligibility for the Affordable Care Act tax credit/subsidy will be based on estimated income for 2014. So even if you don't meet the subsidy income guidelines in 2013, Carstens said it doesn't matter because eligibility is based on 2014 income. People who qualify for the tax credit can get the funding via a tax refund at the end of the year or a subsidy paid directly to an insurance provider so the insured pays an affordable monthly premium after the subsidy kicks in.

Carstens said the federal government defines affordable health insurance to be 9.5 percent of a person's income. In Florida, a tax credit/subsidy may be available to people who fall between 100 percent to 400 percent of the federal poverty guidelines.

For example, an individual with an income between $11,490 and $45,960 may be eligible for a tax credit/subsidy. The same applies for a family of two with an income between $15,510 and $62,040, a family of three with an income of $19,530 to $78,120, or a family of four with income between $23,550 and $94,200.

In addition, the Affordable Care Act provides federal funding for states to expand Medicaid to people ages 19 to 64 whose income in Florida falls below the 100 percent federal poverty guidelines. But Florida rejected the expansion of Medicaid, which would have accounted for $51 billion over five years.

Alexis A. Lambert, communications director for Florida Department of Children and Families, said the Supreme Court ruled in 2012 that the states have the option to expand Medicaid to the new childless adult group ages 19-64, but Florida rejected the expansion. “During the 2013 legislative session, Florida opted not to expand Medicaid to this group,” said Lambert.

Chestnut said Florida ranks in the top five for the highest number of uninsured residents.

“It appears to me that because the Florida Legislature rejected the Medicaid expansion, Floridians will have to pay a substantially higher premium for health care than in Ohio, where the governor accepted the Medicaid expansion,” said Chestnut, adding that it's imperative for all Floridians to contact the governor and members of the Legislature.

“This is a disservice to the people of Florida and a travesty of justice,” Chestnut said. “I urge each and every Floridian to call the governor's office and the Legislature. The Medicaid expansion must be reconsidered in the March 2014 legislative session.”

To apply for insurance and for more information, call Ference Insurance at 494-1938 or Chip Williams at 373-0775.