Members of the JROTC Raider team practice a fitness challenge Wednesday outside Loveland High School. The team won the state championship on May 3. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Loveland High School instructor Harold Johnson expected his JROTC Raiders team to win the state championship earlier this month.

"There was no doubt in our mind. We knew they were going to dominate the competition," said Johnson, retired sergeant major in the U.S. Army and Army instructor for Thompson School District.

On May 3, the Raiders took first place overall during the state championships held at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, competing against 16 other teams. The team competed in two other statewide competitions earlier this year, winning both, and won all four the team competed in last year.

Next year, the Raiders hope to compete in the national competition in Georgia and will be fundraising for the opportunity.

The Raiders, an extra-curricular activity in JROTC, competes in physical fitness challenges through the school year, meeting after school to practice push-ups, sit-ups, running, litter carries and other exercises for fitness agility and obstacle courses.

Each branch of the military has a JROTC program, or the Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps, with the mission of motivating young people to be better citizens, Johnson said. The college-level program is ROTC, he said.

"We're not a recruiting tool for the armed services," Johnson said.

Raiders, the fastest growing activity in the JROTC at Loveland High School, is one of three extra-curricular activities, alongside drill and color guard, Johnson said. JROTC is offered as an elective, four-year program that covers history, civics, geography and other topics and develops leadership and communication skills, he said.

Advertisement

"We had to work really hard to get to the level we're at," said 2nd Lt. Niko Navas, a cadet in JROTC and a member of the Raiders team. "It's a fire that pushes us to do better."

The team trains all school year and meets after school on Wednesdays.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at 970-669-5050 or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.