Topics: AlterNet, Capitalism, Koch Brothers, Republican Party, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

It is time to stop talking about the Koch brothers and instead talk about the Koch Party, the nation’s third largest political network that is a full-blown but privatepolitical operation. The Koch Party has come into view in 2014, as some of the country’s best investigative reporters have traced and exposed various elements of their operation.

The Koch Party is not as large as the Democrats or the Republicans, but is still unprecedented in size, scope and reach. Like other political parties, it has a platform, donors and constituents, electoral and advertising strategies, voter data, and—after the 2014 midterms—members of Congress ready to shepherd its pro-corporate, anti-regulatory agenda.

But unlike the Democrats and Republicans, the Koch Party is not public. It doesn’t have national political conventions attended by the media and delegates. Instead it has secretive getaways for mega-millionaires and billionaires in posh gated resorts where the public and press are neither invited nor allowed.

If you want to see how super-wealthy citizens and private corporations are using private money and secretive tactics to gain and consolidate their power and influence, pushing agendas that often prey on middle- and working-class Americans—look no further. Here are nine hallmarks of the Koch Party.

1. America’s third-biggest political operation: Last June, the Washington Post compared the number of employees at Americans for Prosperity, the best-known Koch-funded group, to the Democratic and Republican Parties. The Post noted that AFP had 240 employees in 32 states, compared to 250 field staffers for Republicans (and another 150 at the GOP’s national headquarters), while the Democrats said they would have 4,000 campaign staffers nationwide. It turns out that the Post vastly underestimated AFP’s size; Politico.com recently reported that AFO had 550 paid staff and spent $130 million in 2014.

There are other big-picture metrics. The Sunlight Foundation, which tracks spending on political ads by reviewing advertising buy records at every major market television station,found that in the 2012 presidential election, the Koch Party bought 18 percent of all political TV ads in eastern Iowa, the state’s top media market. In Charlotte, North Carolina, it bought 11 percent of the ads in the same period. This shows that the operation is not merely a libertarian lobby, but a national political party.

2. Better voter data than the GOP: One of the most significant political developments in recent years has been the way political parties have created vast files about voters, rivaling what private-sector giants like Google and Facebook offer their advertisers. But on the political right, there has been a data-gathering war between the Koch Party and Karl Rove’s Republican National Committee.

The Koch Party “has developed in-house expertise in polling, message-testing, fact-checking, advertising, media buying, dial groups and donor maintenance,” Politico recently reported. “Add mastery of election law, a corporate-minded aggressiveness and years of patient experimentation — plus seemingly limitless cash — and the Koch operation actually exceeds the RNC’s data operation in many important respects.”

The Koch Party has bankrolled a voter data firm called i-360.com. Politico said the firm helped to identify nearly 300,000 Colorado voters who were inclined to skip the recent midterms—until they were bombarded with messaging on why they should elect Republican Cory Gardner as their next U.S. senator. Gardner won, and he was one of a handful of incoming freshman senators who were secretly taped thanking Koch Party donors during a private gathering at a California resort months before Election Day.

3. Lesser-known but sizeable party operations: Americans for Prosperity gets most of the press, but the rest of the operation is massive, starting with its political money-laundering non-profit Freedom Partners, which was created in 2012. Because it is a non-profit, as opposed to a political action committee, Freedom Partners does not have to reveal donors and evades campaign contribution limits. In the 2012 cycle, it “raised and spent roughly $250 million,” Politico reported, drawing on its tax returns.

Some of Freedom Partners’ money, as investigative reporters have documented, has gone to a who’s who of front groups intended to appeal to specific constituencies. There is the Koch-funded LIBRE Initiative, based in Arlington, Virginia, with a national staff of 80, aimed at Hispanics. There is Generation Opportunity, a grassroots effort with 30 full-time staffers in 10 states, trying to organize 18- to 34-year-olds. Another group, Concerned Veterans of America, has 60 staffers in 14 states, and is dedicated to attacking the Obama administration’s foreign policies and treatment of veterans.

4. A private political party’s profit-centered platform: Like all political parties, Koch has its own platform, or agenda, that begins with an ideology and ends with a to-do list. Put broadly, most people know that the Koch brothers are longtime libertarian industrialists who made billions in oil and gas. But their profit-centered agenda goes far beyond attacking environmental regulations, casting doubt on the scientific consensus on carbon-causing climate change, and attacking oil-and-gas competitors like wind energy.

The Koch Party is viciously anti-union. Its minions, from a right-wing governor to AFP to the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC), are behind a new and expanded union-busting effort in Wisconsin. Panelists at private Koch donor summits have said that raising the minimum wage will cause domestic terrorism. Leaders at AFP have called for cutting social safety net programs such as Medicare, Social Security and Obamacare. And their school reform efforts have included changing textbooks to promote unfettered and unregulated capitalism, as well as cut funds for public schools.

5. Koch candidates and junket-taking judges in office: A successful party elects officeholders across the various branches of government. Three of the newest Republican senators credited the Koch Party for giving their campaigns the needed early boost that resulted in wins last month. Incoming senators Joni Ernst of Iowa, Tom Cotton of Arkansas and Cory Gardner of Colorado, were secretly taped last summer at a Koch donor retreat gushing over the network’s crucial backing.