Topics: 2014 elections, aca, Brent Bozell, Congress, Editor's Picks, Erick Erickson, GOP, Mitch McConnell, Obamacare, Senate, The Right, Politics News

Last week we made the STARTLING prediction that would-be Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s life would be terrible come January. We were wrong. It already is terrible!

If McConnell can fend off Alison Lundergan Grimes in his reelection race tomorrow, and if Republicans win enough seats to take control of the Senate, Majority Leader McConnell is going to face some pressure to perform legislative feats that will not be mathematically possible. There will be pressure to repeal Obamacare. It took conservatives years, climaxing in a government shutdown, to realize that they would not be able to repeal the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act with control of only one chamber of Congress. How long will it take them to realize that they won’t be able to repeal it with both chambers either, as long as Barack Obama or another Democrat is president?

McConnell tried to manage these expectations on a recent Fox News appearance, urging conservatives to “remember who’s in the White House for two more years.” He continued: “It would take 60 votes in the Senate. No one thinks we’re going to have 60 Republicans, and it would take a presidential signature.”

This prematurely launched the heckling from conservatives that we’ll hear plenty of if and when Republicans take control of the Senate: McConnell doesn’t have the spine to either trigger the “nuclear option” on legislation or work a full Obamacare repeal through the budget reconciliation process, two procedural moves that would allow the GOP Senate to pursue repeal with a 51-vote majority.

After receiving its first taste of conservative fury, McConnell’s office told the Washington Examiner that, sure, whatever, maybe he’ll try reconciliation after all.

“Leader McConnell is and has always been committed to the full repeal of Obamacare, and he’ll continue to lead efforts to repeal and replace it with patient-centered reforms that enable greater choice at lower costs. He knows it won’t be easy, but he also believes that if Republicans are fortunate enough to take back the majority we’ll owe it to the American people to try through votes on full repeal, the bill’s most onerous provisions, and reconciliation,” McConnell spokesman Brian McGuire wrote in an emailed statement.