Tuesday was kind of an insane day. This week has been an insane week. It was the anniversary of 9/11 yesterday! We may or may not bomb Syria, and for answers on that, don’t ask the White House! The House Republicans balked on delaying Obamacare! Drake is coming to the NYU Skirball Center!

During any other week, Tuesday night’s Democratic and Republican primaries for virtually every elected office in the City might have registered more, but this week they just kind of slipped by. I want to make the case to you, though, that these elections were particularly important to everyone who lives in New York City – in a way that matters beyond which specific people won or lost.

To learn why, we need to hit the precinct-level data. Don’t be scared. If you want to go straight to the source, the New York Times has particularly pretty data visualization.

Over on the Republican side, Cats lost. Cats losing made me sad, because Cats is my favorite. Cats is John Catsimatidis, the Gristedes gazillionaire who’s given gobs (I think that’s the technical term) of money to NYU and whose campaign was the absolute best thing that has ever happened. Instead, the nominee will be Joe Lhota, who will have the unenviable task of explaining to New Yorkers why they should vote for someone whose last five years were spent running the MTA.

Next, we’ll break down the final results in the Democratic primary for Mayor. Bill De Blasio – a Red Sox fan – came in with 40.3%, Bill Thompson followed with 26.2%, Christine Quinn with ended the night 15.5%, John Liu wrapped up with 7%, and finally Anthony Weiner rounded out the race with 4.9%. Weiner also finished his night by being chased through a McDonalds by Sydney Leathers and flipping off reporters. Seriously.

What does this means? By sometime next week, when a recount is finished (hooray for good old paper ballots), we’ll know whether there needs to be a primary runoff between the Bills, or whether Bill de Blasio is the official real-deal Democratic nominee.

City Council Speaker Christine Quinn was the prohibitive favorite until only recently. Sadly for her, she spent August behaving a lot like de Blasio’s (and my) beloved Red Sox: fading so sharply that not many were surprised at her early concession speech. Her strategy was to run close to Bloomberg, prepare for a runoff, and hold her policy cards close. The depth of her defeat is visible from a quick look at the election results: she lost her own Council district to de Blasio, she lost LGBTQ voters to de Blasio, she lost women to de Blasio. The only demographic group she won citywide, according to precinct-level results, were areas with at least $172,302 in average income. NYU areas she won: the slice of Lafayette Street right near the Broome Street dorm, Mercer St. between 8th and 3rd Streets, and 12th street between 5th and 6th avenues.

Bill Thompson, our second-place finisher, will either have a lot to be happy about or find himself out of luck. He did best geographically in the Bronx, East New York, and Yorkville – where his opposition to a planned garbage dump won him lots of votes. He pursued a lower-profile union-based strategy, winning the support of the city’s teachers and firefighters. It was good for a strong second. Next week, we’ll see if it was good enough to support a runoff. If it was, all bets are off.

Which brings us to de Blasio, who beat Black, female, and LGBTQ candidates among those constituencies – and snapping up most of the Village, including NYU professors’ housing, in the process. How did he do it? First, he ran to the left of everyone, reading the electorate well. After that, there are two interpretations. The first is that he used his family – his wife, a woman of color who formerly identified as lesbian, and his biracial children – as proxies in a fairly standard identity politics campaign. The second, more far-reaching idea is that the de Blasio campaign is a reflection of a new identity politics for a more diverse and accepting age . His family diversity is in itself a powerful political tool, rather than simply a set of constituent identity-appealing parts.

Either way, it’s been a long week. Here’s to making sense of it.

[Image Via]