When Senator Elizabeth Warren went to college, it cost $50 a semester. “That opened about a million doors for a kid like me,” she told the audience Thursday night at the City University of New York, where she and New York Times columnist Paul Krugman joined professor of political science Janet Gornick in conversation. “I want every kid to have that same kind of fighting chance to build a future.”

“This is personal for me,” she said of her advocacy for the middle class. And she shared a few stories to illustrate how the barriers to entering and staying in that class have changed in her lifetime. She told the audience that she got married at 19 and dropped out of college soon after. (“Boy are you smart when you’re 19!” she said.) She had the opportunity to return a few years later, and, thanks in part to affordable tuition, was able to graduate. Senator Warren went on to express her concern about the high cost of education today and what mounting student debt is doing to Americans struggling to build lives and careers.

Over the course of ninety minutes, Senator Warren laid out some legislative initiatives that, as she put it, would “put money back in the pockets of people who are trying to make their lives work.”

These initiatives included the following:

1. Improving transparency in financial industries

Senator Warren offered an overview of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, a government agency that she helped create four years ago. The Bureau writes and enforces rules for financial institutions as well as collecting and tracking consumer complaints. Since it began operating in 2011, the Bureau has focused on mortgages, credit cards and student loans. In response to criticism from the right that the Bureau’s regulation hinders the market, Senator Warren says, “What gives people freedom is to give them something that’s transparent.”

2. Lightening the burden of debt

Student debt is a big concern for Senator Warren, who sees college as “an entry ticket to the middle class.” Federal student loan rates bring in billions of dollars in profits to the U.S. government. Senator Warren discussed a bill that seeks to allow individuals with outstanding student loans to refinance those loans to 3.86%. (This is the rate for new student loans that Republicans and Democrats agreed to last year.) The hope, said Senator Warren, is to reduce “how much the government is making profits off the backs of students.” This reduction will allow the government to continue to make a profit but will reduce the profit margin.

3. Protecting access to contraception

Senator Warren said she was “genuinely appalled” by the Supreme Court’s decision on the Hobby Lobby case in June. From her point of view, it is not any company’s business what birth control an employee uses. She mentioned a bill, introduced by Senator Mark Udall of Colorado and Senator Patty Murray of Washington, called the Not My Boss’s Business Act that seeks to make a legislative fix in the wake of the Hobby Lobby decision. The bill would prevent for-profit businesses from dropping birth control coverage by clarifying that no federal law allows companies to refuse to follow the contraception mandate in the Affordable Care Act. Although the bill was defeated in a procedural vote in July, both parties are concerned about appealing to women voters and the bill will likely be brought up again before year’s end.

4. Reforming scheduling

The unpredictability of part-time workers’ schedules is another issue Senator Warren has sought to address. As it stands, shift workers have no control over their work schedules and can be fired if they complain about scheduling. Senator Warren pointed out that women make up two-thirds of the part-time work force and that unpredictable work schedules can exacerbate the burden of finding child care. Senator Warren introduced a bill in the Senate called The Schedules That Work Act to help provide protection for part-time workers. (Representatives George Miller and Rosa L. DeLauro first introduced the bill in the House in July.) The bill seeks to provide employees with the right to request a flexible, stable and predictable schedule; to ensure that workers who are called in for a shift last minute are paid for four hours of work even if they are dismissed before four hours elapse; and to ensure that employers post work schedules two weeks before they go into effect.

Senator Warren and Mr. Krugman went on to discuss the minimum wage, labor unions, campaign finance and accusations from the right that their policies are “socialist.” Both sought to end the evening on a positive note. Mr. Krugman remarked that “there has been a lot of doom-saying” and criticism of President Obama’s presidency, but in fact this administration passed health-care reform, something that progressive politicians have sought for more than 40 years. Both speakers agreed that hard work can bring change. “We’ve seen that good things can happen,” said Mr. Krugman.