Topics: 1924: The Year that Made Hitler, Adolf Hitler, Books, Editor's Picks, World War II, Entertainment News

For the first time since the close of World War II, Adolf Hitler’s “Mein Kampf” is available in the German language in German bookstores. Hitler wrote that notorious story of his struggle during 13 months in prison, where he was sent for his role in the infamous beer-hall putsch of 1923. It’s a period the journalist Peter Ross Range digs into in a new book, “1924: The Year that Made Hitler.”

The compressed time frame gives the book an enormous amount of scene-setting detail and an oddly intimate look at Hitler’s experience of the world.

Salon spoke to the author from his home in Washington, D.C.; the interview has been lightly edited for clarity.

Your premise is counter-intuitive: that the year Hitler spent in prison ended up as a great boon to him. Not just productive, but a turning point. Is that fair to say?

Exactly. Without that year, removed from the hurly-burly of politics, he might never have made the transition from impetuous revolutionary to patient political player for the long haul. And the long haul was what it took for him to come to power.

He became almost a celebrity when he was in prison, and his treason trial made him a hero to people on the fringe. How famous did he become?

He wasn’t a big national hero, but he became nationally known. He became a hero to his following – it was an impassioned crowd to begin with. On the right, he was quickly seen as the standout figure among dozens of other competitors. What it did for him nationally was to put the brand out there through the German press. There were almost 60 reporters in the courtroom every day, so the story was all over Germany all the time, and it put his name out there and it did win converts – most notably a man in northwest Germany named Joseph Goebbels.

What was his daily life in prison like? It’s creepy to read that he was doing things like refereeing soccer games.

That’s right – he was in prison with 40 other guys from the putsch – two or three of them were at his level but most of them were foot soldiers. And they needed exercise – they had the run of the garden of the prison for about four hours a day and were always looking for ways to get recreation and exercise. Soccer was one way; a boxing match was another.

Hitler refused to participate in any games because he was totally unathletic: His only sport was walking in the mountains. But partly because he stated flatly to one of his pals: “It won’t do for a leader to seem to get beaten.”

So he was already thinking of himself as someone who would rule the country.

He was already, before the putsch, comparing himself to people like Napoleon, and had this grand vision of himself as a messiah, the savior of Germany. The fantasies crystalized in prison and he came up with this theory that once in centuries you find a leader in whom is embodied the two qualities – one, the visionary and two, the practical politician…. He wrote that in “Mein Kampf.”

You’ve written that “Mein Kampf” was the equivalent of a campaign biography – how does it resemble what politicians turn out now?

He was building his legend. We think of campaign biographies as a fairly new phenomenon, designed to paint the would-be political leader in glowing terms, to make the life story look like either a conversion story — like Ben Carson in his book — or a hard-knocks, hard-up, up-from-the-bootstraps story like Abe Lincoln’s.