Q I am looking for an illuminating finishing powder, the sort you can dust all over your face not just a highlighter.

A We know exactly what you’re looking for. These products are wonderful for perking up your complexion as well as setting make up. These days, the technology means they give you a gorgeous subtle glow rather than making you glitter like a Christmas tree fairy.

You say you want something you can dust over your face – and of course a drift of stardust looks gorgeous on neck, décolleté, shoulders, pretty well anywhere bare. And, to us, ‘dusting’ means you are looking for a loose powder, which you would apply with a lovely big brush (more on that below).

But you can use a compact powder in the same way, then pop it in your evening bag, which is very useful. So pop into a department store and try these:

Guerlain Météorites 2, £40 from www.selfridges.com: from this iconic range comes a magic combo of light revealing pearls of powder with Stardust technology to illuminate and correct. (They come in a gorgeous silver tin then you can take the Météorites compact with you.)

Guerlain Météorites 2, £40 from www.selfridges.com: from this iconic range comes a magic combo of light revealing pearls of powder with Stardust technology to illuminate and correct (right). Bobbi Brown Brightening Finishing Powder in Porcelain Pearl. £42, bobbibrown.co.uk : perfect for pale and very pale skin, one fan votes it ‘very very clever and refined’. It evens out redness too

bareMinerals Illuminating Mineral Veil, £21: translucent mineral powder with light-refracting pearls, which gives your skin a soft, glowing, airbrushed look and locks in make-up. This absorbs oil and minimises pores and fine lines.

Bobbi Brown Brightening Finishing Powder in Porcelain Pearl. £42, bobbibrown.co.uk: perfect for pale and very pale skin, one fan votes it ‘very very clever and refined’. It evens out redness too.

Tom Ford Illuminating Powder, £56: in the most elegant black and gold compact, this boasts ‘an ultra-gliding texture that blends like a fluid on the skin’ (we couldn't put it better ourselves…).

Finally, a word about brushes. The wonderful beauty industry charity Look Good Feel Better (www.lookgoodfeelbetter.org), which supports women going through cancer treatment with make-up master classes and lots more, is the beneficiary of a range of 12 professional quality make-up brushes, created by Bespoke Europe. Each brush is handmade using super soft taklon bristles, so they are allergy- and cruelty-free, and wont irritate the most sensitive skin. Find the whole range at www.boots.com. A Mini Masterclass set with a lovely fluffy powder brush plus a foundation and blender brush is a very reasonable £19.99.

Beauty Bible loves… Dr Organic Hemp Oil range, £4.49 for 10 ml Hemp Oil Lip Serum to £14.99 for Hemp Oil Restoring Hair & Scalp Treatment. The Dr Organic range in Holland & Barrett has gone down sooooo well with our Beauty Bible testers over the years and months - and we look forward to setting them loose on this lot: a massive new collection within what is a brilliantly-formulated and seriously affordable range. (Which happens to be free from parabens, sodium lauryl sulphate (SLS), synthetic colours and petrolatum.)

Each collection is based, then, around good, natural stuff - and this time, it's hemp oil, famously rich in Essential Fatty acids, vitamins and minerals, helping to hydrate skin as well as defy ageing.

There are literally too many products to list in full, but edited highlights include...

• Dr Organic Hemp Oil 24hr Rescue Cream - additionally with borage oil, horsetail, hops, hibiscus, beeswax and other nourishers, this is a fantastically rich, protective cream that's perfect for the wind-whipped conditions of winter.

• Dr. Organic Hemp Oil Skin Lotion - similar botanical 'extras' to the Rescue Cream, above, but in a lighter-weight formula for generous body slathering, leaving skin very soft.

• Dr Organic Hemp Oil Restoring Hair & Scalp Treatment - a leave-in treatment mousse which is said to stimulate hair growth and reduce loss. We'd need to put that to the test (and we will, we will!) - but meanwhile, it definitely leaves hair feeling thicker and full of life, with great volume. (The whole haircare collection is worth checking out.)