Putting to rest a controversial $132 million information technology contract, the Orange County Board of Supervisors voted Tuesday to approve a five-year deal with Xerox.

The vote was 4 to 1. Supervisor Shawn Nelson voted no.

Xerox State and Local Solutions will overhaul the county’s phone and computer networks, which serve 17,000 employees. The contracting process sparked intense years-long lobbying from industry and labor, and pricing disputes made for the latest in a string of IT controversies.

Ultimately, the supervisors swallowed a disputed $26 million price increase since the company’s final bid in November, though that figure was about $1 million lower than a July proposal.

For the most part, supervisors Tuesday didn’t address concerns about the Xerox price hike. Nelson chided company executives for the increase at the July 30 board meeting, but he did not elaborate Tuesday. In a staff report, the county attributed $11 million of the jump to Xerox and $15 million to the IT department’s own demands.

“I have before you a contract that is clear in terms of what it provides, clear in terms of cost, and clear in terms of who is responsible for what,” Chief Information Officer Mahesh Patel told the supervisors.

Xerox plans to merge phone and computer networks, and will install “voice over Internet protocol,” a system that runs phone service on the Internet. The county estimates the new contract will save $33.4 million over the five years.

Representatives from the Orange County Employees Association disputed some of the cost assumptions and contract terms. OCEA General Manager Nick Berardino also criticized supervisors’ campaign contributions from Xerox lobbyists and their political action committees.

“If you get money from people, they’re going to influence you,” said Berardino, who acknowledged his union also contributes.

As many as 20 county employees could be displaced by the outsourcing, Patel said, although he will try to move them to another department. Failing that, Xerox agreed to interview workers for positions at the company.

In other matters, the board unanimously approved the hiring of 90 eligibility workers at the Social Services Agency, for Affordable Care Act implementation. Also, supervisors approved unanimously a contract with Corrective Solutions for the Probation Department’s GPS device monitoring. In August, the county fired its last GPS contractor after reports some offenders were left unsupervised.

Contact the writer: 714-796-2254