For Venezuela, hope always springs eternal. And it is always disappointed. This happened most recently with President Nicolás Maduro’s Sept. cabinet reshuffle, which removed one of the few remaining economic moderates, Rafael Ramírez, and replaced him with more ideological party loyalists with scant practical economic experience.

Before the September changes, the whispered hope was that under the sway of the pragmatic Ramírez – who had consolidated his power with three key policy-making positions: head of the state oil company Petróleos de Venezuela S.A. (Petroleum of Venezuela), oil minister and vice president of the economy – the government would rein in public sector spending, devalue its wildly overvalued currency (the bolivar) and cut gasoline subsidies.

With the cabinet changes, however, a much-needed, economic course correction looks increasingly unlikely.

In the all-important post of energy minister, Maduro – the late President Hugo Chávez’s protégé – appointed the former president’s cousin Asdrúbal Chávez. Moreover, Maduro expanded the power of his vice president of finance (or finance minister) Rodolfo Torres by also appointing him vice president of the economy, replacing Ramírez.

[GALLERY: Cartoons on Energy Policy]

As a result, the economy, which today is experiencing annual inflation of more than 60 percent and its second year of negative or zero growth, is unlikely to pull out of its rapid downward spiral. On currency black markets, the bolivar has slid to 90 to the dollar, more than 14 times its value under the country’s complicated multi-tiered exchange rate. Rumors have increased that the country may default on its foreign debt, as foreign reserves reach record lows. At the same time, the expropriation of enterprises from soda to dairy farms, price controls and the bizarre exchange rate system have led to shortages in which close to 30 percent of basic consumer goods, including toilet paper, are in short supply.

Optimism that the Venezuelan government will change course and rejoin the ranks of more stable, human-rights respecting countries has existed since Chávez’s 1998 election. Before his inauguration in 1999, observers and business leaders quietly expressed their hope that he would shed his populist rhetoric from the campaign trail and once in office would tack to the center and become more democratic and inclusive. (Indeed, the greatest tragedy of this era is the squandered opportunity to translate deep-seated popular frustration into a much-needed democratic shake-up of the ossified, two-party system that had dominated – and corrupted – Venezuela since 1961.)

Those hopes were dashed soon after Chávez, the former lieutenant colonel who had attempted a coup d’etat in 1992, reached office. The fiery populist continued to vilify opponents and, in short order, set out to consolidate his Bolivarian movement (named after his hero, Venezuelan independence leader Simón Bolívar), remake the country’s constitution and then gut, politicize and corrupt the very institutions his constitution had created. These included the judiciary, electoral institutions, local governments and once professional armed forces. Chávez and his cronies also counted the media among their enemies. Through intimidation, selective regulation and subtle buy-outs, they managed to close down or drown out nearly every single independent television and radio station or newspaper.

[READ: Venezuela quietly secures Latin America's backing in bid to win seat on UN Security Council]

Nevertheless, hope has persisted. After Chávez won a negotiated recall referendum in 2004, lost a December 2007 referendum to allow him to amend the constitution to end presidential term limits and when his handpicked successor Maduro narrowly won a contested election in April 2013 after Chávez's death, there was always an expectation that the government would finally tone down the rhetoric by ceasing to call political and civic opponents fascists or oligarchs and seek a more balanced, inclusive government and economic policy.

It never happened. In fact, it only got worse with more denunciations, more accusations and more blame-shifting for the government’s economic failures as the charismatically challenged Maduro struggled to maintain the authority of his benefactor.

Then there was the hope inspired by the offer of the Union of South American Nations in March to mediate an end to a standoff between the government and citizens. The wave of violence and demonstrations started in February 2014 after students in Táchira state took to the streets to protest the rape of a student by security agents. The protests swept the nation and erupted into bloodshed when the government sent private militias and the National Guard to the streets to contain them. In the ensuing conflict and deadlock, more than 3,000 protesters were detained, 40 were killed and three opposition political leaders arrested, including former Chacao Mayor Leopoldo López, who remains in prison. In a report issued in May 2014, Human Rights Watch concluded that state officials had engaged in a campaign of targeted, coordinated repression, torture, and denial of due process against peaceful protestors.

[READ: Venezuela's New Exchange Rate System Is Paying Off]

The efforts at mediation by the foreign ministers of Ecuador, Colombia and Brazil did little to hold the government accountable and came to nothing in terms of a consensus. In fact, if Maduro’s efforts to excoriate the opposition, often referring to them as “nazis,” “facists” and “heirs of Hitler”, and continue on the country’s disastrous economic course is any indication, the government is only doubling down on what it’s always done best: Govern by victimization and blame.

So today, one of the few hopes left is that, despite the failed mediation efforts of South American countries, Venezuela’s neighbors will hold the country to the international norms and standards that they have all signed up to. Numerous independent human rights groups have documented the multiple ways in which the Venezuelan government has violated them.

Last week even that hope evaporated. A report by the Associated Press revealed that on July 23, the bloc of Latin American and Caribbean nations agreed to vote in favor of Venezuela gaining the rotating seat on the United Nations Security Council. Unfortunately, aside from the refusal of Venezuela to accept a request by U.N. rapporteurs to visit the country to investigate the human rights situation, the Maduro government has failed to meet the most basic conditions for membership including the institutional and political capacity to establish the essential national consensus to pursue security council decisions, the economic capacity to pursue and support council commitments and the political will and capacity to implement its decisions, which presumably include the protection of human rights.

These are important standards that speak to a commitment to international norms and the rule of law. Are Latin American and Caribbean states willing to testify that Venezuela meets them before they vote in this month’s U.N. General Assembly? If they can’t, what is the opposite of hope springing eternal?