Adrian and Erin Selmon spend their Wednesday nights surrounded by games and laughter at their church. The couple volunteers every week at the children's club. Their routine is good practice since they will soon be caring for their own child.

“Adding baby is going to be a different challenge,” Adrian said.

One challenge as they prepare to become parents is figuring out their healthcare situation because their jobs don’t offer coverage.

“As a substitute teacher, I haven’t been able to land steady position,” Adrian said. “Subbing allows me to do what I love but at a cost of not having insurance.”

They are currently getting some help through the state for Erin’s pre-natal needs.

“I qualify and the baby qualifies,” Erin said. But, their current coverage leaves Adrian uninsured.

The Selmons thought they would be able to find out their options in the insurance exchange weeks ago. Attempt after attempt to enroll on the healthcare.gov website left them frustrated.

“Each time the results weren't favorable,” Adrian said. “After I signed on, it said sorry website was not available.”

The uncertainty is a heavy burden for this family because every time they get sick – it’s a big question mark.

“I have to say how much am I going to have to pay?” Adrian said. “For people who don't have coverage, they ask those questions. Medication or do I want dinner tonight?”

Adrian said they are anxiously awaiting for the healthcare website to be fixed in order to learn how much they will have to pay for coverage.

“We are still going to have to see if we can afford that,” he said.

A family making $15,000 per year would make too much to qualify for Medicaid in Indiana and too little to be eligible for tax subsidies in the federal health insurance exchange.

The Affordable Care Act was passed with the assumption that all states would expand their Medicaid coverage. The federal insurance exchange only offers subsidies to those with incomes between 100-400 percent of the federal poverty level. The federal law would have anyone making below that percentage covered though Medicaid.

But, the Supreme Court ruled that states could not be required to make this move.

States like Indiana decided not to expand Medicaid. The Hoosier state offers its own alternative called the “Healthy Indiana Plan.” In this program, the state contributes but so do those who enroll.

The HIP program will be limited to 45,000 people for next year and there is a waiting list.

A spokesperson for the Indiana Family and Social Services office tells me a family like the Selmons would likely qualify for HIP.

For now, the Selmons continue with their routine. They are holding on to the hope that they will be insured by the time their baby is born.

There is a website for Hoosiers to determine what group they fall into for healthcare coverage and what they need to do to apply. Just visit Indiana.gov/healthcarereform for more information.