A Frosty Welcome Back to Washington Alex Brandon/File/AP What Happened:



The Senate stayed on vacation for one more week, but the House was back as the first real frigid temperatures of the season hit the capital region.



After a temperate autumn with warm (for Congress) relations between the two parties that resulted in a spate of bipartisan accomplishments, January brought a return to the icier partisan atmosphere as lawmakers begin preparing for the 2016 elections in earnest.



Plenty of ambitious legislation is on tap for the coming months, including a reauthorization of the Higher Education bill, criminal justice reform and the approval of a major free trade agreement, and last year’s budget agreement helped to take the pressure off to fund the government again this year.



But with the presidential nominating conventions slated for this summer, Congress’ in-session calendar is even more sparse than usual, leaving little time to cross off all the items on their to-do list before completely turning to election politics.



Why It Matters:



The return to partisanship may mean that even less gets accomplished by Congress this year than last. .



“I’m sure they’ve got one P.R. thing after another to try to help the campaign for president,” retiring Rep. Jim McDermott, D-Wash., says of the Republican leadership, referring to votes teed up to challenge President Barack Obama legacy in his final year in office.



Meanwhile, tea-party conservatives warned former House Speaker John Boehner's successor that their patience is already wearing thin



"I think it is fundamentally unfair to try and judge the speakership of Paul Ryan over the last month or so. But, as I have also said, the honeymoon is over," said Rep. Raul Labrador, R-Idaho, a co-chair of the House Freedom Caucus. "I think he needs to start putting up real conservative reform in the House and doing the things that are necessary to show the voters that he is a different speaker than John Boehner because frankly, everything he has done so far is no different than what John Boehner would have done."

Obama Re-Opens the Gun Debate

Obama Re-Opens the Gun Debate Carolyn Kaster/AP What Happened:



Obama kicked off 2016 by announcing new executive actions meant to reduce gun violence. On Tuesday, the president announced an executive action to



clarify existing rules on who must be licensed as a gun seller – an attempt to more deftly delineate people who sell or gift firearms to friends or family from those who sell hundreds a weapons a year online and at gun shows.



He also called for the hiring of 230 more FBI staffers to handle the increase in background checks, tightened a reporting requirement for manufacturers and retailers in the event a gun is lost or stolen in transit, and removed barriers preventing states from reporting information that would prohibit a potential buyer from purchasing a weapon for mental health reasons.



Why It Matters:



The changes are fairly limited – Obama admitted they likely would not have prevented many of the high-profile mass shootings in recent years – but his announcement had gun rights advocates sounding warnings that the move was the latest step in his efforts to eliminate Americans’ gun rights.



Republican lawmakers roundly criticized the actions as executive overreach, and the GOP presidential candidates vowed to roll them back immediately upon taking office.



Indeed, the biggest impact of the actions may be to recenter the national debate ahead of November’s elections. A CNN poll taken this week found 67 percent of Americans in favor of the changes – and surveys consistently find nearly 9 in 10 support closing the so-called gun show loophole, including 8 of 10 Republicans – but GOP lawmakers tend to be almost unanimously opposed to any increase in gun control.

Symbolic Repeal of Obamacare Passes, Gets Vetoed

Symbolic Repeal of Obamacare Passes, Gets Vetoed Mark Wilson/Getty Images What Happened:



It took until December for the Senate to follow through on promises Republicans made at the beginning of 2015 to pass legislation repealing the Affordable Care Act using a special budgetary procedure known as reconciliation to keep Democrats from filibustering.



On Dec. 3, the Senate approved legislation that would unravel the health care law’s provisions authorizing the federal government to operate insurance exchanges, eliminate subsidies helping people pay for coverage, roll back the penalties enforcing the individual and employer mandates requiring the purchase of coverage, and undo the expansion of Medicaid eligibility to 138 percent of the federal poverty level.



The bill also would block federal funding for Planned Parenthood.



As its first order of business upon returning to Washington, the House passed the reconciliation bill, sending it to Obama, who waited less than 24 hours before vetoing it.



Why It Matters:



The House has voted dozens of times in past five years to pass legislation repealing all or part of Obamacare, but Thursday’s vote was the first time they were able to get that bill as far as the president’s desk.



Despite the certain veto – and will full knowledge they lack the votes to override it – Republicans immediately declared victory. The vote allowed GOP lawmakers to claim they had to kept a campaign promise to take all possible action to trash the law, while demonstrating that doing so is within reach, should a Republican win the White House in November.



A vote to override the veto, which will fall short of the necessary two thirds of each chamber, is scheduled for Jan. 26. Iran Missile Tests Aggravate Region as Sanctions Near End

Iran Missile Tests Aggravate Region as Sanctions Near End Craig Ruttle/File/AP What Happened:



Secretary of State John Kerry announced Thursday that Iran may be within days of meeting the requirements laid out in this summer’s nuclear agreement that would instigate the suspension of sanctions.



But at the same time, Congress began preparing legislation to impose new sanctions against Iran for conducting missile tests in the fall.



The House Foreign Affairs Committee also moved forward on legislation to stop the Obama administration from lifting the sanctions as part of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, the agreement reached between Iran, the U.S., the U.K., Russia, China, Germany and France unless the administration were able to verify that the Iranian financial institutions set to benefit from the lifted sanctions had not knowingly funded foreign terrorism operations or several entities.



Why It Matters:



While Iran’s ramping up of missile activity does not violate the terms of the nuclear deal, it may defy the U.N. Security Council resolution that prohibits Iran from action “related to ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons.”



Congress failed to muster the two thirds opposition that would have prevented the U.S. from entering into the nuclear deal, but Iran’s increasing aggression and deteriorating relations with its neighbors has U.S. lawmakers, including those who supported the nuclear deal, suggesting more sanctions be imposed.



The Obama administration has so far resisted their calls, but both options have potential pitfalls: Reasserting sanctions could push Iran to break from the deal and restart its nuclear program, while allowing it to proceed with its missile tests would further exacerbate regional tensions.

North Korea Tests a Nuclear Weapon