Last updated at 3:30 p.m.: Revised to include closures and an updated forecast.]

Related With more rain to come, it's official: 2015 is Dallas-Fort Worth's wettest ever

Parts of North Texas have gotten a break from rain today, but forecasters say more is on the way this evening.

This year was already the wettest on record in North Texas, thanks to heavy rain a few days ago.

Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport had gotten a total of 57.6 inches as of 3 p.m., about four inches more than the record previously held by 1991, said National Weather Service meteorologist Matt Bishop.

“We just continue to break the record by even more as we move on,” he said.

Updated (and still eye-popping) precip numbers for DFW. #dfwwx pic.twitter.com/PsJj6paQDp — Brian James (@BrianJamesNBC5) November 28, 2015

McKinney had gotten more than 10 inches of rain since Thanksgiving Day as of 3 p.m. Saturday, according to the National Weather Service. Krum in Denton County had gotten 12.8 inches, Bishop said.

The National Weather Service in Fort Worth is forecasting another inch of rain between Saturday and Sunday afternoon.

Sunday will be a wet day overall, though the rain is expected to taper off by 5 p.m., Bishop said.

But until then, expect flash flood watches across North Texas until Sunday evening. Authorities are keeping a close eye on flooding near creeks and the Trinity River, which was in major flood stage at 41 feet at 1 p.m.

Boat ramps at Eagle Mountain Lake and Lake Worth, and parks across North Texas were closed Saturday because of flooding. The Prairie Lights holiday display in Grand Prairie will be closed Saturday and Sunday, organizers said.

Authorities are yet again cautioning people to “turn around, don’t drown” if they encounter high water on roads.

Dallas police responded to 63 major accidents and four rescue calls between midnight and 9 a.m. Saturday, a police spokesman said. One of those calls included a driver trapped in a vehicle.

No deaths have been reported so far in Dallas, the police spokesman said.

Meanwhile, the search in Tarrant County continues for a 70-year-old woman whose vehicle became submerged in water in Burleson Friday.