Doctor Vivek Murthy stands among other bystanders during the first day of legal arguments over the Affordable Care Act outside the Supreme Court in Washington March 26, 2012. U.S. President Barack Obama's sweeping healthcare overhaul on Monday went before the U.S. Supreme Court where the nine justices began hearing arguments in a historic test of the law's validity under the U.S. Constitution. REUTERS/Jason Reed (UNITED STATES - Tags: POLITICS HEALTH CIVIL UNREST) - RTR2ZWK8

4414050

On Dec 15 the U.S. Senate took action largely along party lines to confirm Dr. Vivek Murthy as the next U.S. Surgeon General. This nomination has languished for a year due to insufficient Senate support for Dr. Murthy.

But, as the lame duck session entered its 11th hour, Senator Reid again invoked the nuclear option to clear the way for Dr. Murthy’s confirmation.

Dr. Murthy barely received enough votes to be confirmed – culling together the support of just 51 Senators primarily along party lines. This is indeed unfortunate since the doctor of the nation needs bipartisan support to be successful. For disease and the public’s health knows no party affiliation.

Dr Murthy is a gifted young physician very early in his career. He has some early significant accomplishments behind him but no formal public health training and little management or senior leadership experience. His nomination became controversial due to his inexperience and his political advocacy and perceived bias and on several issues.

That being said it is important to recognize that the problem is in the politicization of the Surgeon General nomination process and Dr. Murthy’s nomination and confirmation simply reflect that dysfunction.

The Surgeon General is the leader of the U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps, one of the seven uniformed services of the United States. The position carries with it the rank of Vice Admiral. This is a three star rank equivalent to the Surgeons General of the Army, Navy and Air Force. The difference is that the Army, Navy and Air Force Surgeons General earn their rank and title after decades of selfless service, as did the U.S. Surgeon General before politicians began to circumvent the uniformed service merit system for their own benefit.

This blatant act of political self-interest does not benefit the public but does undermine the credibility of the office of the Surgeon General and serves to demoralize and demean the career uniformed service of our men and women who are now marginalized and prevented form meritoriously being considered for Surgeon General as they once were.

Partisan politicians acting in self-interest is nothing new. However, we should recognize that by politically conferring the rank of vice admiral and the title of Surgeon General on any person who has not earned that right you are actually disadvantaging that person from the start. In the beltway where the Surgeon General resides and works his peers are real admirals, generals and senior health professionals who have earned their respective positions.