By Jonathan Oosting and Fritz Klug

LANSING, MI -- Their names are Mark McFarlin, Terry Whitney, Matthew Wiedenhoeft and Chris Wahmhoff. One is a private investigator, another an IT consultant, one a former minor league hockey player and another a skateboard pipeline protester.

They may not be as well known as Gov. Rick Snyder or former Congressman Mark Schauer, U.S. Rep. Gary Peters or former Secretary of State Terri Lynn Land. But they are running for some of the highest-profile political offices in Michigan.

There's a good chance you've never heard of any of them -- a strong likelihood you don't know all of them -- but they want to be Michigan's next governor or U.S. senator.

Going for governor, picking a party and legalizing pot

McFarlin, a 49-year-old who runs a private investigation firm and has lost three bids for Bay County executive, filed paperwork in May to run for governor as a Democrat. Last week, he changed his affiliation to Republican, saying the Democratic Party had become too liberal and left him behind.

He hasn't been embraced by leadership of either party, but he said some tea party activists have praised parts of his platform. On most issues, McFarlin leans conservative, but he also wants to put an end to Michigan wolf hunting and repeal the state's right-to-work law.

In a policy statement published on his website this week, McFarlin also explained that he wants to legalize, regulate and tax marijuana, modeling his proposal after new laws in Colorado and Washington State.

"Taxation would add millions of dollars to state coffers," said the statement, "taxes that are now lost to illegal drug traffickers who do not claim their illegal income."

Media coverage is tough to come by for fringe candidates, but McFarlin made headlines in November when he questioned the legitimacy of President Barack Obama's birth certificate. If Obama isn't a citizen, he argues, the Affordable Care Act should not exist and Michigan residents should not be struggling with the health care program's website.

McFarlin doesn't like the term "birther" -- a liberal media creation, he argues -- and considers himself "an eligibility activist" rather than a conspiracy theorist. He is offering to show his own original birth certificate to anyone who wants to see it.

Mounting a serious run against Schauer in the Democratic primary would have been tough sledding. A Republican primary victory over Snyder would be an unprecedented upset of monumental proportions. But first, McFarlin would have to get his name on the ballot. To do so, he'll have to turn in 15,000 valid voter signatures by April 22.

More on the candidates Learn more about the candidates on their website Mark McFarlin

Terry Whitney

Matthew M. Wiedenhoeft

"That's a tall order, and certainly a challenge we face," McFarlin acknowledged. "We'll most likely pay a company to do it, but we'll gather some ourselves. By switching parties, we have to scrap the signatures we've already gathered. That's fine. We're starting new.

"It's fair to the voters that with our agenda we're on the proper party. We're pro-life and pro-traditional family. All of these issues don't match too well with the Democratic Party."

Sights on Senate

When Carl Levin announced last March that he would not run for re-election, there was immediate speculation over who would run to replace him. Peters has become the presumptive nominee for Democrats and Land for Republicans.

However, there are several other candidates seeking to be Michigan's next U.S. senator -- including a "Ron Paul Democrat," a Republican and an independent who is facing charges over a pipeline protest.

While each wants to run in the primary, it will take a lot to even get on the ballot.

Terry Whitney announced his candidacy in September. Whitney said he is against free trade and opposes the Affordable Care Act because, he said, it's a "job killer."

Whitney, referencing Ron Paul, describes himself as a Libertarian who doesn't believe in "Anarcho Capitalism" and thinks the middle class deserves a chance. He said he's running as a Democrat because he identifies with the party and has voted for its candidates.

"I'm not looking to be re-elected," said Whitney, 37, who lives in Waterford and is a technology officer. "I'm running because I'm fed up with the current political system...and anybody who's interested, I'd support them in running."

Matthew M. Wiedenhoeft is a Republican who played and coached minor league hockey. He said his campaign was prompted by Levin retiring.

The most critical issue facing Michigan, Wiedenhoeft said, is growth. He said there isn't a clear direction where the country or Michigan is going. If elected, he said he wants to work with both federal and state governments to make growth happen in Michigan.

"It's the time for someone like myself that I'm going to do this for everyone, not for myself," Wiedenhoeft said.

While he wouldn't say he is a Tea Party candidate, Wiedenhoeft said that Republicans and Democrats are more like one, unified party. "It's hard to tell who's who any more," he said.



Wiedenhoeft, 32, lives in Spring Lake, just south of Muskegon, owns his own consulting company and teaches at Davenport University and Baker College.





Chris Wahmhoff originally was going to announce his candidacy this week after a hearing for charges related to his protest against Enbridge Energy Inc., but he had to reschedule because of the weather.

Wahmhoff, 35, said he will run as an independent.

"I want to start pushing for the Senate, Congress and elected positions to work on the minimum wages of their constituents and start removing some of the steps put in place to allow manipulation of Super PACs," Wahmhoff told MLive and the Kalamazoo Gazette.

The Kalamazoo man was arrested last summer for a protest he held from inside an Enbridge Inc. pipelne. He opposed Enbridge's expansion of the pipeline and traveled on a skateboard deep inside the pipe. He is facing charges of resisting and obstructing a police officer and trespassing.

It will be uphill battle for all of the Senate candidates to get on the ballot. Party-affiliated hopefuls must submit 15,000 valid signatures by April 22. Wahmhoff, an independent candidate, would have to submit 30,000 valid signatures by July 17. Whitney and Wiedenhoeft both said they have more than 1,000 signatures so far.

Read more about the filing deadlines from the Secretary of State's office.

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Google+ or follow him on Twitter.

Fritz Klug is a news buzz reporter for MLive. Contact him at fklug@mlive.com or 269-370-0584. Follow him on Twitter, Facebook, Google+ or App.net.