State wants more time for hospital tax decision





Photo: Carol Kaliff / Carol Kaliff Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Buy photo Danbury Hospital emergency entrance on Thursday, Nov. 13, 2014. Danbury Hospital emergency entrance on Thursday, Nov. 13, 2014. Photo: Carol Kaliff / Carol Kaliff Buy this photo Image 2 of 2 John M. Murphy, MD, President and CEO of Western Connecticut Health Network talks with reporters during a press conference, at Danbury Hospital, Danbury, Conn, on Monday, January 20, 2014. John M. Murphy, MD, President and CEO of Western Connecticut Health Network talks with reporters during a press conference, at Danbury Hospital, Danbury, Conn, on Monday, January 20, 2014. Photo: H John Voorhees III / H John Voorhees III State wants more time for hospital tax decision 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

The state has answered a challenge to its controversial hospital tax by saying it will rule on the constitutionality and legality of the tax as early as the end of May — or as late as November.

The Connecticut Hospital Association and 24 hospitals, including Danbury, Bridgeport, Norwalk, Stamford and Greenwich, filed documents with the state last fall claiming the hospital tax violates state and federal laws as well as the state and federal constitutions.

The filings requested that the state departments of revenue and social services issue declaratory rulings that the tax is invalid and unenforceable, a key step toward a possible legal battle with the state.

The state had 60 days to respond — making the deadline Friday — and did so by issuing a five-page letter signed by the commissioners of both departments.

The state’s response asks for more time to collect and review evidence from the hospitals. If the hospitals agree to the extension, the state would promise to rule by Nov. 30. If the hospitals decline, the state says it will rule by May 28, according to the commissioners’ letter.

Hospital association officials confirmed receipt of the response Friday afternoon.

“We received the response from DSS/DRS and are reviewing it with counsel," said Michele Sharp, vice president of communications for the CHA.

Friday’s state response comes after months of intense feuding over the hospital tax.

The state began collecting the tax in 2012, intending to redistribute the proceeds to the hospitals as a way of drawing down matching federal grants. That year the hospitals paid about $350 million in taxes and received about $400 million in state and federal funds.

But when the state began experiencing severe budget pressures, it started returning less and less to the hospitals. This year, hospitals are projected to owe $556.1 million in taxes but are slated to receive only $164.3 million.

The payout could have been even less. In September, Gov. Dannel P. Malloy slashed the state budget, cutting the amount going to $64 million. In response, the Connecticut Hospital Association started an aggressive PR campaign to reverse the cuts.

The governor countered by shaming health care executives over their multi-million-dollar salaries and the hospitals’ supposedly high profit margins.

A December budget deal arrived at the $164.3 million figure.

Hospital and CHA officials have said they hope to keep this dispute out of the courts. But if they do so, they won’t be the first in the region; their counterparts in New Hampshire fought a similar fight and were able to force a settlement that restored the flow of revenue to the hospitals.

Connecticut hospital officials and advocates have repeatedly said the hospital tax is costing them millions of dollars and forcing hospitals to cut services and staff.

“Our goal is fairly simple,” Stephen Frayne, the CHA’s senior vice president of health policy, said earlier this month. “We’d prefer to be taking care of patients rather than have to fight this out in the court system, but we are left with no choice because we’re being taxed into oblivion.”

In response to the original filing, Department of Social Services spokesman David Dearborn cited figures suggesting that state hospitals had more than $900 million in profits last year — although the CHA disputes those figures as grossly misleading.

Dearborn also contended that Medicaid payments to hospitals have increased over the last decade, and that hospitals are seeing fewer patients without coverage because of Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act.

“Even in an industry that made $916 million last year alone - and one in which there is exorbitant CEO pay - the hospital association is asking Connecticut taxpayers to foot more of the bill,” said Dearborn in a statement earlier in January.