Pakistan's cricket coach Dav Whatmore. Photo: AFP

Pakistan coach Dav Whatmore is drawing on bitter personal experience to warn his players that world number one Test team South Africa can bounce back in the second Test.

Pakistan won the first Test in Abu Dhabi by seven wickets on Thursday, but Whatmore has recalled his previous experience of South Africa's resilience when he was the coach of Sri Lanka in 2000-01.

"I've had first-hand experience in Sri Lanka where they lost by an innings in Galle and came back to win in Kandy," said Whatmore of the series in Sri Lanka.

"I think there was a drawn game in Colombo so it was 1-1 in the series, so you leave them off at your peril."

Advertisement

South Africa's unbeaten series run away from home since losing to Sri Lanka in 2006 is also under threat and Whatmore, who was born in Sri Lanka but emigrated with his family at the age of eight, said Pakistan would do its best to win.

"Well, 1-0 is just as good as I think because a hard-fought draw is also very important for any team, having been 1-0 up in the series, but we enter the game to win," Whatmore said.

Pakistan has an incentive to do well - it will jump from sixth to fourth in the Test rankings if it wins or squares the series.

Whatmore, who played seven Tests and one limited overs international for Australia, refused to agree that Pakistan's win was an upset.

"I wasn't surprised we did well, people leading up to this series in Pakistan were alluding to the fact that we lost against Zimbabwe and here you are going to play the No. 1 team in the world, no chance.

"But that was never the case, in my mind I knew that we can be competitive."

South African coach Russell Domingo blamed his team's poor batting in the first innings.

"That's why we lost the Test, we couldn't stretch our first innings because if you look at the stats in Dubai and Abu Dhabi the first innings sets the game, so a lot of questions can be asked of the bowlers but it was ultimately the batters who let us down," said Domingo, who took over from Gary Kirsten in June this year.

The next Test starts here on Wednesday.

The teams will play five one-day matches and two Twenty20 internationals after the Tests.

AFP