After a long two-year wait, Young Americans for Liberty was granted tax-deductible status from the Internal Revenue Service after joining a legion of conservative organizations targeted by the agency.

The organization, which spurned from former Rep. Ron Paul’s (R-Texas) 2008 presidential campaign and seeks to preserve and promote liberty, waited approximately 28 months to receive tax-deductible status from the IRS. And because the group used words like “Constitution” and “liberty” in their application, YAL President Jeff Frazee believes they were targeting by the agency.

“I’m sure you have seen the news about Obama’s IRS scandal. Well, we were part of it,” Frazee said in a press release.

YAL’s initial application to be recognized as a 501(c)3 was processed by the IRS more than a year ago, Frazee told Red Alert Politics in an email. The group waited for an extensive period of time without receiving any word from the tax agency, and, after contacting their assigned IRS agent, was told their application was pending.

Frazee sought legal assistance to get more answers about their long-pending application, and decided to approach the Tax Advocate Service, an independent organization within the IRS. With the help of the organization, YAL received a determination letter in the mail announcing their application had been approved.

While the process continued, Frazee was told to remain mum. YAL’s attorneys, though, believe the group was targeted by the IRS.

“This process has only increased my belief that we should abolish the IRS,” Frazee said.

Rep. Darrell Issa (R-Calif.), chairman of the House Oversight Committee, received a list of conservative groups targeted by the agency, and Frazee believes YAL was on it.

Since a Department of the Treasury inspector general’s report found the IRS had specifically targeted conservative groups, Issa has worked to expose further information about the agency’s malpractice. However, the House Oversight head has been met with resistance from the IRS and committee Democrats.

In a hearing earlier this month, former head of the IRS’ tax-exempt organizations division Lois Lerner refused to testify for a second time, invoking her Fifth Amendment rights.

Issa adjourned the hearing abruptly, prompting a spat with Rep. Elijah Cummings (D-Md.).

Since Congress began investigating the IRS’ targeting scandal last May, several groups have received tax-exempt status after years of waiting.