JERSEY CITY — A controversial, union-backed measure that would require some employers provide a minimum of 30-hour workweeks won't be voted on as scheduled tomorrow night.

The ordinance would require employers in buildings larger than 150,000 square feet to provide minimum 30-hour workweeks to property service workers like janitors, security guards and commercial cleaners. The law would also apply to residential buildings with more than 50 units.

City Council President Rolando Lavarro, who has championed the measure, has said it would lead to better jobs for the workers and would qualify them for health care. The federal Affordable Care Act requires large employers provide health insurance to employees working 30 hours or more a week, or else the companies could be hit with financial penalties.

Some of Lavarro's council colleagues say the proposal has led to a deluge of complaints from business groups and developers who want them to kill the measure. Councilman Rich Boggiano, who is opposed to it, agrees with them.

"The government should stay the hell out of business," he told The Jersey Journal this afternoon.

The measure would likely fail if called for a vote at tomorrow night's council meeting. Two councilmen will be absent — Khemraj "Chico" Ramchal is on a vacation until later this month and Daniel Rivera will be attending his daughter's college graduation — while five of the remaining members have expressed misgivings about the ordinance or outright opposition. The measure needs five affirmative votes for adoption.

David Brogan, executive director of the New Jersey Apartment Association, applauded Lavarro for postponing a vote. Brogan said his members — owners, managers, developers and vendors in the state's multi-family housing industry — oppose the measure and a companion ordinance that would require the same employers give property service workers 90 days' notice if they plan to cancel their contract. A final vote on that bill will also be postponed.

The owner of a large residential building needs the "flexibility" to hire part-time workers in addition to their full-time staffs, Brogan said. Some of those part-timers, he added, need to work fewer than 30 hours a week to free up time to pursue education or provide child care for their families.

The 30-hour workweek measure, he said, "doesn't seem to envision those circumstances."

Kevin Brown, state director for labor union 32BJ, which backs the measure, called Brogan's complaints a "red herring." Business groups are only opposed to the ordinance because if it passes, employers would have to provide more workers with health care.

"The only economic impact this has is it then requires people to provide health care," said Brown, whose union represents the workers who stand to benefit from the ordinance. "It's just a very small sliver of workers ... it doesn't affect most industries."

The council meets tomorrow at 6 p.m. at City Hall, 280 Grove St.

Terrence T. McDonald may be reached at tmcdonald@jjournal.com. Follow him on Twitter @terrencemcd. Find The Jersey Journal on Facebook.