Neil Patrick Harris with his box of Oscar predictions. Associated Press

Last night’s telecast served as confirmation that the social media rebuke of the Academy Awards as “#OscarSoWhite” was not only deserved — it was inadequate.

The back-breaking straw wasn’t the snubbing of Ava DuVernay’s critically lauded and historically important “Selma,” shut out from all categories except Best Picture and Best Song (it won the latter, but seriously, its makers’ eyes were never focused on the mere prize of victory for Common and John Legend’s anthemic “Glory”).

Nor was it the fact that for the first time in 17 years, exclusively white performers were nominated in the Awards’ four acting categories.

No, it was the awards show production itself, whose writers and directors somehow managed to engineer the most deeply awkward demonstration possible of the widening fault lines between Old Hollywood (white, aging, provincial) and New (nonwhite, young, borderless) — beginning with the choice of Neil Patrick Harris as emcee.

Though the actor now known as NPH is effortlessly dapper and a deft hand at self-referential snark, his selection was the very opposite of risky. Unlike, say, 2005 host Chris Rock, a teller of prickly, unkind truths, Harris’s forte is the kind of staged patter and show-choir spectacle that evokes a simpler and more innocent Hollywood era.

His selection represented the Academy’s quest for an awards presenter with a sharp enough edge to win Millennial approval, but not so much that Hollywood’s deep-seated hypocrisies are slashed open and laid bare. (It also likely indicated that neither Justin Timberlake nor Jimmy Fallon was available.)

This tug of war between the desire to engage the biggest and most diverse generation in American history and to preserve the hidebound establishment was obvious throughout the evening, beginning with the opening monologue, an intensely choreographed musical ode to the movie industry’s “best and brightest” — or, per Harris’s faux Freudian slip, its “best and whitest.”

The Oscars continued to explicitly acknowledge its lack of diversity all night, trotting out an amazing series of actors of color as presenters — Lupita N’yongo! Viola Davis! Chiwetel Ejiofor! Idris Elba! Eddie Murphy! Jennifer Lopez, Zoe Saldana and The Rock! — while regularly sending Harris into the audience to interact with black members of the audience like Oprah Winfrey, David Oyelowo and Octavia Spencer (also presenters).

Harris’s improvised banter was highly uncomfortable: He compared Winfrey to “American Sniper,” because both have made lots of money. He forced British-born Oyelowo to read a joke at the expense of the recent remake of the movie musical “Annie,” whose nontraditional recasting with black leads triggered an unpleasant controversy — the gag being that Oyelowo’s sleek English-accented delivery (and, um, blackness) would save the bit from being offensive. And he designated Spencer as unofficial security guard for a locked case that purportedly contained Harris’s highly touted Oscar picks. He returned regularly to ensure she was keeping an eye on the vault, and each return of the camera seemingly prompted more anxiety and dismay in her expression.

(Midway through the show, Daily Show correspondent Samantha Bee finally tweeted out to Harris what all of us were thinking: “OCTAVIA SPENCER DOES NOT WANT TO WATCH YOUR BOX.”)

The upshot was that the show felt like the Academy bragging to the world that some of its best friends are black (and Hispanic, and Asian) — doing their best to put people of color everywhere except, you know, on the awards podium.

In the process, it put the spotlight on exactly what the Academy hoped the show wouldn’t: The disruptive forces of change that are shaking each and every one of Hollywood’s traditional pillars, from financing, as more and more money comes from China, hat-tipped with a throwaway joke in Harris’s musical opening monologue, to creativity, as its most exceptional new talents arrive on the scene from historically un- and underrepresented communities, to the business model of the movies itself, which is increasingly shaped by new technological platforms, global distribution and America’s demographic revolution.

The last of these was capped by an exchange at the bitter end of the telecast, seen by those who managed to make the four-hour slog to the Awards’ climax. The final presenter was two-time Oscar honoree Sean Penn; in unveiling the winner of the Best Picture category, “Birdman,” he improvised a joke about its director Alejandro Gonzalez Iñárritu’s immigration status: “Who gave this son of a bitch his green card?”

After the show, Iñárritu said he found the gag hilarious, and called Penn a close friend whose “brutal relationship” with him allowed such questionable gibes. But it was what he said at the podium, in accepting his film’s third award of the night, including Best Director and Original Screenplay, that underscored the stinging subtext of the quip. Referring to the fact that 2014’s winner of the Best Director award was Alfonso Cuarón, he made a sly prediction: “Maybe next year, the government will inflict some immigration rules [on] the Academy. Two Mexicans in a row — that’s suspicious, I guess.”

No, it’s the new Hollywood reality. And the Academy needs to reflect on it — and reflect it — fast.