Republicans and Democrats may not be on the same page as to how best to deal with a growing national debt, but they are at least reading from the same book.

The release of the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office’s annual budget outlook this week brought mixed tidings as the deficit projected for 2015 will be the smallest since 2007, but the overall debt has continued to rise, doubling over the same period.

While reactions fell along predictable partly lines, the two sides have come to a similar conclusion: the current trajectory cannot continue.

Predicted to hit $7.6 trillion by 2025, the cost of financing that debt will rise accordingly. As interest rates rebound from their current lows, the CBO said, interest payments could rise to 3 percent of the gross national product, totaling some $5.6 trillion over the next decade.

Senate Budget Committee Chairman Mike Enzi, R-Wyo., said he has made reducing the debt his mission.

[READ: Republicans Open to Giving Obama 'Fast-Track' Trade Authority]

“I wake up in the middle of the night concerned about its effects,” he said at his first hearing as chair of the committee Wednesday. “Every dollar spent on interest is a dollar not spent on an individual need. It is a danger to the country and my grandkids’ future.”

CBO Director Douglas Elmendorf testified that, while deficit spending does have a stimulating effect in time of recession, as the economy returns to normal, the debt will drag down wages and incomes and weaken the nation’s ability to respond in the event of a financial crisis.

Democrats, agreeing that growing annual deficits are untenable, chided Republicans for focusing on discretionary spending – only about a third of annual outlays with the remainder going to entitlements– and attempting to cut programs such as Head Start or food stamps.

Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse, D-R.I., said Republicans interested in making a dent in the debt ought to first look to the $1.5 trillion in tax expenditures this year, which include credits, corporate loopholes and deductions.

“We actually spend more out the back door of the tax code than we do through appropriations,” Whitehouse said. “When it is a greater priority to protect the folks who make millions of dollars a year, and who in recent years have paid lower tax rates than truck drivers and hospital orderlies and brick masons, it’s hard to take seriously the sincerity of” their complaints.

[ALSO: Stocks, Republicans Unmoved by Obama's Economic Plans]

Most of the spending decreases that have lead to the smaller 2015 deficit, $468 billion compared to last year’s $483 billion, have come from cuts to discretionary spending, which includes annual appropriations for defense, transportation and foreign aid, and is at an all-time low as a percentage of GDP.

The other two-thirds of the budget is mandatory spending on Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid and subsidies through the Affordable Care Act, and is rising $160 billion this year to $2.3 trillion.

Although the CBO lowered its projection of the costs of the ACA by 20 percent, the U.S. still spends about twice as much per capita on health care than other developed nations, at 13.6 percent of GDP in 2014, according to the World Health Organization.

The ACA has been vulnerable to complaints it did not do enough to address the structural issues behind this high cost of care, especially as it does little to correlate to better quality. But the Obama administration also announced this week that it would overhaul Medicare payments to reflect the quality rather than the quantity of services provided, in the hopes it would spark a change throughout the industry.

Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wis., said incremental changes would not be enough. He estimated over the next 30 years, payouts to Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security, along with what the country owes its creditors in interest, would exceed revenue by $127 trillion, more than the entire net asset worth of individuals in the U.S. today.

[MORE: Fed Says Low Oil Prices Are Mixed Blessing]

“When we are cutting Head Start or the defense budget, in order to try and solve this debt and deficit problem, it’s like attacking Brazil after Pearl Harbor,” agreed Sen. Angus King, I-Maine. “It’s a vigorous reaction, but it’s the wrong target.”

Defense spending was capped at $500 billion annually under the 2011 sequestration agreement, a limit the Pentagon argues has significantly set back military preparedness. The Bipartisan Budget Act of 2013 helped alleviate the strain, they said, but further relief is still required.

“We have heard all of this from our top military commanders before, yet there are still those that say, ‘Never fear. The sky didn’t fall under sequestration,’” said Armed Services Committee Chair John McCain, R-Ariz., Wednesday. “What a tragically low standard for evaluating the wisdom of government policy."

The Obama administration apparently agrees. In leaked documents obtained by Defense One, the administration will send over a budget Monday that includes a $585 billion request for the Pentagon, including a $38 billion increase to $534 billion on the base budget.

The CBO says all this spending will bring the federal debt to an equal 79 percent of GDP by 2025, a level Elmendorf says is far beyond anything in the country’s history – and economist’s knowledge.

“The United States has rarely had a federal debt as large relative to the economy as it is now, and is projected to be over the coming decades,” Elmendorf said. “Thus, we are in mostly uncharted territories. Economists just don’t have much to offer about what might happen.”

Clarified on Jan. 29, 2015: A description of the difference between anticipated U.S. debt levels and revenue has been clarified.