Indiana Governor Mike Pence Endorses Ted Cruz

Indiana Governor Mike Pence endorsed Ted Cruz Friday ahead of the state's primary, which is seen as a must-win for the Texas senator in his quest to wrangle enough delegates to force a contested convention in July.

Pence told WIBC radio host Greg Garrison that he would indeed be voting for Ted Cruz in the upcoming primary, although he likes and respects all three candidates in the field.

"This is a very exciting time for Indiana," Pence told Garrison. "This is a time for choosing." He complimented Donald Trump for being an important voice in the national debate and insisted that he was not against anybody. "But I will be voting for Ted Cruz in the upcoming primary," the governor announced.

Pence explained that as a Reagan conservative, he was looking for a candidate who would stand for Reagan's principles of "less government, less taxes, traditional family values and a strong military."

"I see Ted Cruz as a principled conservative who has dedicated his career to advocating the Reagan agenda," Pence said. "I'm pleased to support him."

"I really admire the way Ted Cruz has been willing to stand up for the taxpayers and oppose runaway spending, deficits and debt, calling for and leading on repealing Obamacare," Pence said.

He also stated that he is impressed with Cruz's "devotion and knowledge of the Constitution" and "his strong, unwavering stand for the sanctity of life." Pence went on to say that doing the right thing isn't always the popular thing to do in Washington, D.C., but that Cruz has shown "the courage of his convictions."

The governor made clear that he respects the right of every Hoosier to make up their own minds, but he just wanted to make his own decision known. He noted that "whoever wins the nomination of president of the United States, I am going to work my heart out to get elected this fall."

Pence added, "I'm for anybody but Hillary and Bernie Sanders," because everything that was wrong with the Obama administration would be magnified by either one of them.