Try putting yourself in a police officer’s shoes

Re “Long Beach pays for bad police decisions” (Editorial, Jan. 23):

I won’t downplay the seriousness of the charges against our officers, nor do I give law enforcement carte blanche. But before you pass judgment on our men and women in blue, I must ask, have you taken the time to live in their shoes? Have you had a ride-along? Have you experienced an advanced shooting simulation course? Have you ever attended the funeral of a slain officer whose hesitation to use force may have gotten him or her killed?

Having known officers who had to fire their weapons, I’ve seen the emotional trauma they experience, including the fear their families live with each day. We as a city require they bear a heavy responsibility, make split-second, life-altering decisions, and accept being spat upon, kicked and shot at in the line of duty. The least we can do is not second guess them from the comfort of our keyboards, enjoying the safety they provide.

— Jim Lewis, Long Beach

Republicans must stop Obamacare bailout

Re “Stop the bailout of insurance companies before it begins” (Charles Krauthammer, Jan. 2):

The Obama administration will stop at nothing to save Obamacare. The administration is promising new subsidies to cover the losses private insurance companies are facing — the same companies that lobbied for Obamacare.

Obamacare is falling apart at the seams, and taxpayers shouldn’t be on the hook for a costly bailout. Stopping the bailout could stop Obamacare permanently. Republicans should do everything they can to stop Obamacare.

— Douglas Kasai, Lakewood

Link between climate change and drought?

Re “‘Megadrought’ could have catastrophic effects on California” (Jan. 25):

Great article putting our drought into historical perspective, but a lot more needs to be said about how climate change will play out. The bottom line is we don’t know, but all the climate predictions point in the same direction — more frequent and severe droughts.

Graham Kent, a University of Nevada geophysicist who has studied submerged ancient trees in Fallen Leaf Lake near Lake Tahoe, calls our current situation “an experiment,” and that is exactly what it is. Humankind is the guinea pig in this experiment. We don’t know how bad things will get if we continue to rely on fossil fuel, but former Energy Secretary Steven Chu said he can’t imagine California agriculture in 2100. It’s hard even to imagine California, if we don’t get serious about climate change.

Advertisement

The good news is there is a growing consensus among politicians and big business that a revenue-neutral carbon tax is the foundational first step needed if we want to put an end to the experiment.

— Mark Tabbert, Newport Beach

Fireworks shows wreak havoc on neighborhoods

Re “Lift the ban, fireworks part of July Fourth” (Letters, Jan. 27):

Letter writer Mike Gallo must not live in Lakewood or he would know there is no such thing as a five- or 10-minute fireworks show. The streets are blocked, the ladders are set up and it is like a war zone. Try driving down the street to get home and needing to protect your car because people won’t get out of the way. And then there is the morning after when you get to enjoy all the trash left behind.

— Mary Pearson, Lakewood