I have to give Norah O’Donnell some credit. Unlike some other 60 Minutes profiles of Obama Administration members (i.e. Lesley Stahl’s embarrassing December 2013 puff piece of National Security Adviser Susan Rice) O’Donnell at least made an effort to challenge the spin of top Obama adviser Valerie Jarrett with regard to her assertion that Republicans are solely responsible for not getting things done.

However, I wish O’Donnell would have challenged Jarrett when she made this statement:

The hope and change comes from the American people. And the president’s still extraordinarily optimistic about the future of our country. I mean, just look at what’s happened in the last seven years. Our unemployment rate going from 10 percent down to five percent. Our automobile industry back. Ending two wars. 20 million people with health care, many for the first time. We have a great deal to be proud of– in terms of our accomplishments.

If Obama ended two wars then someone sure forgot to tell ISIS. Last I checked, we have American troops back on the ground in Iraq, not to mention Syria where Obama refused to enforce his own red line. What Jarrett also neglects to tell us is that many of those 20 million who have Obamacare had to first lose their health insurance only to end up on Medicaid. If I was O’Donnell, I would ask Jarrett, “If American are so full of hope and change then how do you explain the rise of Donald Trump?” I would also ask, “If Americans are so full of hope and change then how come Bernie Sanders can attract crowds of 30,000 people to hear that our economy is rigged and to promise universal healthcare?” These two questions would have made for a more compelling interview.

I must admit, however, that I was not aware that Jarrett was born in Iran. Of course, she was born during the early years of The Shah and her family left the country when she was five. However, I wonder if her family’s time in Iran influenced her thinking about Iran’s current regime and how much that thinking influenced President Obama’s disastrous policy of engagement with the regime.