Confession Day in the Church of Bike

I have a confession to make, and you, dear reader, are my confessor. I hope you have it in your heart to forgive me. I have not been walking my own bike talk. For even as I write these stories meant to inspire and inform thousands of others in their year-round bike riding, I have been driving around town in my Subaru.

Originally, it was a matter of logistics. Until last Spring I’d been living 20 miles west of my office on NE Portland. Let me tell you, that commute on a good day is no joke. 25 miles door to door with 1,200 feet of climbing, in each direction.

During summer months, it was fine. I rode my sleek, fast, old race bike because I wanted to get from A to B as quickly and efficiently as possible. But during wet weather there was no way I was riding in the dark, over the hill and through the zoo. The roads over the NW Hills are slimy in winter, with low traction and terrible visibility. Commuting became a seasonal thing.

Last June, I moved back into Portland city limits. Summers in Portland being about as perfect as summers can be, I rode around during the week some, but still wasn’t commuting the way I used to in years past. The main holdup was not having a dedicated city bike. Riding my old Cannondale was becoming problematic.

Because I needed to carry my “office” with me, my laptop, charger, mouse, noise-cancelling headphones, notebooks and any spare clothing had to be carried in a backpack. I’d stuff my waterproof, indestructible, well-loved Ortleib backpack and strap it on…and start to have neck problems from carrying an extra 15 pounds on my shoulders.

Then there was the fact that even though my race bike was 7 years old, it’s still a really nice bike that would cost thousands to replace if stolen. I needed a dedicated commuter.

I already had four bikes (down from nine). And while sometimes I feel like that’s excessive, most of the time, I could definitely add a fat bike, a 27.5" all mountain full-suspension bike, and a gravel bike for backcountry touring to round out my quiver. N+1 is my argument for how many bikes is the right amount. But I was hard hit by the reception, and I didn't want to get some $200 piece of crap junker from craigslist that would be thrown in the scrap heap in six months.

Finally, this year, I was able to invest in a new city bike. She’s a plain steel Virtue road frame—nothing fancy—but the boys at Cat Six Cycles (one of Portland's newest bike shops, in NE Portland) built her up with style. VeloOrange full-wrap hammered fenders keep the rain off my feet, legs, and face. PDW's Whiskey Grips provide both comfort and style in the cockpit. A heavy duty porteur rack now carries my heavy loads instead of my body. And Shimano hubs laced to SunRingle rims provide durable, reasonably-priced wheels made to take a beating.

I named her Emma Peel, after the heroine of the ’60s Avengers series. Like her namesake, she’s classy, stylish, and packs a few surprises under her cool exterior. For one thing, the upright riding position is astonishingly comfortable. It’s prim, proper and I'm able to look around more. It's better not just for safety’s sake, but also because it allows me to take in the fabulous Portland neighborhoods as I amble through them, my shiny new wheels throwing slices of reflected sunbeams, like a spy woman’s throwing knives.

The front load cargo handling is the biggest surprise. I expected as much, but it definitely requires an adjustment in handling skills. There’s a wonkiness that I enjoy that lightweight high-performance bikes don't offer. It’s completely the opposite of nearly every other bike I’ve owned over the past 15 years.

I still love my snappy road racer. I still love speed. And although I don’t race much anymore beyond the odd mountain bike short track, Enduro, or Super D, there’s something quite thrilling about pushing my limits. I imagine there will be days I have to hustle across town and won’t have the luxury of time to ride my city bike casually. But for now, I simply allow extra time to get to my destination. I arrive warm, not overheated, wearing a healthy glow and a rosy attitude.

So forgive me, dear reader, for I have sinned. I have already paid my penance in the form of the 10 extra pounds I’m wearing since last fall. As I climb the hill to my new residence on my new bike, I am reminded of the error of my ways with every pedal stroke.

But, my brothers and sisters—you, the choir—you already know; the Church of Bike is a forgiving institution. Redemption is found not on our knees, but every time we start spinning our wheels, no matter how far astray or how long away we’ve been.

Can I get an amen?

life in the saddle and outdoor adventure, she is also the author of Bike Yoga, a flexibility and recovery program for cyclists. When not writing, she can be found riding and racing her mountain bike throughout the Pacific Northwest. If you have cycling-related news to share, events to promote, or deep thoughts about this or any other cycling related matters, shoot her a nice email.

Related Slideshow: 14 Biggest Blunders of 2014

Enjoy this post? Share it with others.