Christopher Lambert at the Venice Film Festival in 2009. Getty Images

Christopher Lambert doesn’t really like movie awards. He is, though, on a judging panel this week at the 38th Hong Kong International Film Festival.

“Everybody’s going to have a different point of view about movies — so is it fair to give a prize to this one, that one or the other one? The only thing that matters to me is what it projects as a pure entity,” the 57-year-old Frenchman said.

Mr. Lambert, who is most famous for playing Connor MacLeod in the “Highlander” movies, is judging the Young Cinema Competition at the HKIFF, along with South Korean screenwriter-director Bong Joon-ho, film historian David Bordwell of the U.S., and Hong Kong actress Karena Lam.

The competition features eight movies by filmmakers from around the world. The winner will be announced on Saturday after the jury meets for deliberation. Mr. Lambert had seen six of the movies by the time we met on the 18th floor of the Sheraton in Kowloon on Thursday. He ordered a diet Coke. I had water. In hindsight, we didn’t make the most of that wine lounge.

“I’ve seen some really interesting stuff on a sensitive level, something that can touch and really move you. … They all have something to say,” Mr. Lambert said, adding that an Austrian-Slovakian coproduction was particularly powerful. “It will be interesting to see what everybody else in the jury has to say. Eight movies will take a few hours to discuss.”

Fans wait for actors at the Hong Kong Film Festival, March 25. Getty Images

Mr. Lambert has a broad taste in cinema, praising movies such as “The Texas Chainsaw Massacre,” “Midnight Cowboy” and “A Separation.” It doesn’t matter what the genre is, he said: “It could be action, it could be anything — the power of the movie business is to draw emotion from the audience, that’s all that matters.”

He said three directors — John Woo, Wong Kar-wai and Johnnie To — helped him discover Chinese-language cinema in a very powerful way. “I’ve been a great fan of John Woo for a long time; he does exactly my type of movie — a combination of action and feelings. Johnnie To is a master also, such a range. He can do extreme violence and then move to something totally different. Wong Kar-wai, too, in a different vision.”

Mr. Lambert spends his time between Los Angeles, Switzerland and Paris. There is a movie festival around 250 miles southeast of the French capital that seems to suit Mr. Lambert’s taste. “There is a festival in Lyon where it’s just a feast. Actors, producers and directors are mixed within the audience. There’s no judgment, there’s no prize — it’s only happiness, about enjoying watching the movies.”

He has his hands full with work. On the acting side, Mr. Lambert will next be seen in the movie “Electric Slide,” which will have its world premiere at this month’s Tribeca Film Festival. Chloë Sevigny, Jim Sturgess and Patricia Arquette also star in the film, which is directed by Tristan Patterson, the man behind 2011 documentary “Dragonslayer.”

Christopher Lambert and Sophie Marceau at Paris Fashion Week on Jan. 21. Getty Images

Mr. Lambert last year appeared in the French television series “La Source” as well as several episodes of “NCIS: Los Angeles.” He is impressed by high-powered TV drama series like “House of Cards,” with Kevin Spacey. “It is very, very clever — a constant manipulation of the audience.”

He says he is producing a couple of French films and directing an American movie — a love story called “All We Have Is Now.”

Good, imaginative scripts are more important now than ever, he said. “In France, we’ve been doing over and over the same romantic comedies. Very few of them work because people have seen them for the past five, six, seven, 10 years. It’s like in music, you only have seven notes, so it is difficult to suddenly come up with the greatest tune of the year or of the decade.”

I ask what his favorite movie was from last year. After a pause, he said, “Dallas Buyers Club,” for which Matthew McConaughey won the best-actor Oscar. But, he said, Leonardo DiCaprio should have won for his performance in “The Wolf of Wall Street.”

“Martin Scorsese is one of my favorite directors, but the guy who is holding up that movie is Leonardo DiCaprio. … He’s an amazing actor. He should have won, in my point of view, because the performance is so incredible.”

“I’m not saying the other guy, Matthew McConaughey, shouldn’t have won. That’s where it becomes difficult, McConaughey should’ve won as much as DiCaprio. … Maybe they should’ve shared it. But you can’t do that,” he added, laughing.

Oh this judging business.

Follow WSJ Asia on Twitter @WSJAsia.