BIRMINGHAM, Alabama – There are too many unanswered questions about the spending of federal grants, a judge ruled in allowing the civil lawsuit brought by a Tuskegee community health center against Birmingham Health Care to continue to trial.

"Numerous transactions did not have documentation to support them so that the propriety of the transactions could be established as required by federal grant programs," wrote Jefferson County Circuit Judge Tom King.

Trial is set for July 28.

Birmingham Health Care and Central Alabama Comprehensive Health in Tuskegee are among 1,200 community health centers nationwide that have been called the "backbone" of the Affordable Care Act's strategy to treat the uninsured.

They are receiving collectively about $11 billion under the ACA to grow and expand.

In his ruling, King cited audit reports pointing to multiple problems with Birmingham Health Care's management of Central Alabama Comprehensive Health (CACH) in Tuskegee.

The judge filed his denial of BHC's motion for summary judgment on June 18.

CACH sued BHC on Feb. 6, 2012, initially for conversion and breach of contract in a case dating back to 2011 when CACH ended a $225,000 per year management contract with BHC. CACH claimed BHC withheld records CACH says are essential to its financial viability and its ability to comply with federal regulations.

At that time, the CACH board of directors called for the immediate return of records from BHC and companies owned by former CEO Jonathan Dunning.

BHC has returned 26 boxes of documents to CACH, according to King's latest order.

Recently HRSA officials have confirmed to AL.com an investigation by the FBI and the HHS Inspector General of BHC and CACH, apparently centering ,at least in part, on this time raised by the civil suit.

In King's ruling, he cites the audits as showing there is evidence to indicate:

BHC did not maintain proper accounting records and prepare financial statements of CACH in a timely manner.

BHC did not require or maintain documentation to adequately support financial transactions, including cash disbursements.

Significant grant costs have been questioned because they cannot be sufficiently supported by documents BHC should have maintained.

BHC failed to implement monitoring procedures to preven one BHC employee from both processing accounts payable transactions and reconciling the cash accounts.

BHC failed to adequately reconcile bank accounts on a monthly basis, resulting in the diversion of significant funds from CACH's banks that went undetected by BHC for an extended period of time.

"The evidence also indicates that BHC personnel misused federal grant funds for personal gain to make payments to merchants and businesses that have nothing to do with CACH and its business," the judge wrote in the order.

Records obtained by AL.com and The Birmingham News through the Freedom of Information Act document the acting chief financial officer using federal funds to purchase her son a "fish finder for a bass boat" and a set of four truck tires.

AL.com and the Birmingham News first wrote about problems at the two community health centers in 2012.

CACH was de-funded by HRSA last year, and its coverage area has been taken over by Quality of Life Health based in Gadsden.