Back in 2012, writing in the longtime white-supremacist journal National Review, Senator Jefferson Beauregard Sessions III demanded that Supreme Court Justice Elena Kagan recuse herself from sitting in judgment in cases involving the Affordable Care Act due to the fact that she previously had been Solicitor General in this administration when the law was being drafted. This request was not made solely by cartoon roosters from Alabama, either. Today, if the invaluable SCOTUSBlog's account is correct, during the oral arguments in King v. Burwell, the CEI fundraising letter is pretending to be a lawsuit. As it came before the Supreme Court today, it's easy to see why ol' Jeff had his jodhpurs in a twist. Madame Justice Kagan was pretty clearly on the case.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

At issue, as we all know, is the laughable idea that the Congress passed a law designed not to do what it was clearly designed to do, that the word "state" refers only to 46 specific geographical entities that make up the country. (And, presumably, to the four Commonwealths as well, god save them.) As this featherlight bit of business has remained stubbornly aloft, we have learned that the named plaintiffs seem to have been plucked out of the phone book at random. Once she finally got a hold of them, Kagan apparently rendered these preposterous arguments into a large order of Wingnut McNuggets.

Petitioners in King focus very heavily on the text, which they say only provides subsidies to states that set up their own exchanges under the literal terms... much of the early questioning was dominated by a real-life hypothetical from Justice Kagan, suggesting that petitioner's reading does not accord with everyday usage. She offered (something like) the following example: Imagine I tell law clerk A to write a memo, and law clerk B to edit law clerk A's memo, and then I tell law clerk C to write such memo if law clerk A is too busy. And imagine that happens - law clerk A is too busy, so law clerk C writes it. Should law clerk B edit it? The answer seemed obvious: of course, and Justice Kagan all but told petitioner's counsel (and her clerks) that they would be fired if they didn't do their job under those circumstances. In response, petitioner's counsel said that the context mattered, and it would depend on whether the Justice was indifferent between law clerk A and law clerk C writing the memo in the first instance. But that seemed to play into Justice Kagan's hand, who made clear that this was her point - that in understanding this text, the context obviously mattered.

Most Popular

Deep, and probably not playable.

I was concerned that the basic silliness of the plaintiff's entire action would be overlooked by earnest arguments regarding merit, and standing, all of which would constitute the legal equivalent of fitting a warthog for a bowtie. I thought, maybe, there would be an institutional assumption that any case the Court takes must needs be serious, and that the sheer ridiculousness of this lawsuit would be overlooked as the Nine Wise Souls protected the shreds of their dignity. Instead, Kagan's hypothetical threw that ridiculousness right out there before the bench, where it could gasp and wheeze and otherwise entertain the spectators.

Of course, it's not Kagan's vote that will be crucial in animating this dead parrot, any more than it will be Clarence Thomas. But Justice Anthony (Weathervane) Kennedy's seemingly inexhaustible capacity to overthink everything that comes before him may well be on the side of the angels this time around. According to SCOTUSblog's reporting, Kennedy was most concerned about the consequences of what would happen if the plaintiffs were to prevail, but not necessarily the consequences that would land on thousands of Americans who now are covered because of the ACA. Rather, Kennedy found his own roundabout way to consequences that, frankly, never occurred to me.

He seemed to realize that state legislators would be in an impossible position under that reading - more or less forced to "adopt" or "endorse" the ACA system in order to avoid unmanageable consequences in their states. His plausible conclusion was that Congress either did not intend to put them to that choice, or that the statute shouldn't be read to have done so, because that's not typically how our constitutional system works. Instead, the federal government makes and administers federal laws without forcing the states to do some of the work for them. Kennedy seemed to be thinking that this provision should be read more like the typical case, and rather unlike the kind of unusual provision the petitioners suggested.

I am not a lawyer, and I don't play one often in this blog, but the way I read this is that, in his own inimitable way, in the tangles of his mind, Kennedy somehow has found his way to a states rights argument in favor of the position advanced here by the federal government -- namely that, if the plaintiffs prevail, it will mean that the federal government placed on the states a burden they could not bear. Any port in a storm, I guess. However, should the government win its case, as now seems likely, the people who concocted this farce should be made to leave the courtroom in rubber noses and floppy shoes.