The number of referrals to law enforcement doesn’t mean children are being dragged out of school in handcuffs; it just means incident reports have been passed on to police, usually the school resource officer, according to Marianne Turner, Lynchburg director of student services. The Virginia Department of Education requires that certain types of offenses automatically be reported to police, whether or not further action is taken.

There seems to be confusion among Central Virginia school divisions about how to meet Office of Civil Rights reporting requirements. Lynchburg reported zero school-related arrests in 2011-12; but data requested from the Lynchburg Police Department show 31 arrests of people under age 21 on school grounds for fiscal year 2011, and 30 for fiscal year 2012.

The OCR’s definition of “school-related arrest” is “an arrest of a student for any activity conducted on school grounds, during off-campus school activities (including while taking school transportation), or due to a referral by any school official,” according to its website, ocrdata.ed.gov. The LPD data did not specify whether arrests were of students.

Each district is required to certify the accuracy of its submission, according to Jim Bradshaw, a spokesman for the Office of Civil Rights.“Only a district superintendent, or the superintendent’s designee, may certify the CRDC submission. … Ultimately, the quality of the CRDC data depends on accurate collection and reporting by the participating districts,” Bradshaw said in an email.

Lynchburg school and police officials said they could not immediately explain the apparent discrepancy, but it may be related to a lack of understanding of what agency, the schools or the police, is responsible for tracking school-related arrests under the OCR definition.

Lynchburg is not the only division in the area with this problem, as most other Central Virginia divisions reported zero or very few school-related arrests for the OCR survey.

Appomattox County Public Schools reported two school-related arrests to the OCR – but zero referrals to law enforcement, despite the fact that the state Discipline, Crime and Violence report for that year shows the division did have some referrals of the type required to be reported to law enforcement, such as bullying.

Appomattox Superintendent Dorinda Grasty said via email, “ACPS reports all matters as required by law. We do not know how other governmental agencies account for reports or compile data in this regard.”

-Katrina Dix