Topics: Canada, GlobalPost, marijuana, Uruguay, weed, Sustainability News, Working Ahead News, Business News, Life News, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

In about a month, Uruguay’s revolutionary new cannabis law will go into effect. In addition to allowing citizens to grow, buy and sell weed, the government will also set forth on its mission to grow its own fields of marijuana, which will then be harvested, taxed and sold in neighborhood pharmacies.

At least, that’s the theory.

But growing weed takes a while. Cultivating fields of it, figuring out how to keep the fields safe from poachers, harvesting vast amounts of cannabis, packaging it, taxing it, distributing it and selling it take even longer.

Long story short: Uruguay’s government is not going to be producing much of its own cannabis any time soon. So, where is the official stash going to come from in the meantime?

Maybe Canada.

According to senior-ranking officials in the ruling Broad Front Party, including Sen. Lucia Topolansky, who’s also Uruguay’s first lady, Canadian medical marijuana producers could provide this tiny Latin American nation with a stopgap until it figures out how to grow and harvest its own crop.

“To start with, we will have to buy cannabis,” Topolansky said in an interview last week. “I think that we’re going to buy it from Canada, because that’s where the best quality is.”

To be clear: This is still just an idea. Neither country has announced a deal to ship pot from Vancouver to Montevideo. A spokeswoman for Health Canada wrote by email, “There are currently no plans to encourage the export of cannabis to Uruguay or any other country.”

But could it happen?

Well, it’s complicated. Let’s take a look at four key questions.

1. Does Canada have weed to sell?

In short: Yes, but not a whole lot — yet.

Under Canada’s latest medical marijuana laws, there are about 10 companies currently licensed to grow pot. Marc Wayne, president of Toronto-based Bedrocan Canada Inc., one of the biggest suppliers, said the companies are struggling to meet demand inside Canada.

The Canadian law governing medical marijuana has a provision that allows the government to issue export licenses to growers. However, the authorities will not start issuing export licenses until they’re satisfied Canadians have access to all the pot they need.

“There won’t be any export to Uruguay, or anyone else, any time soon,” Wayne said.

2. Is marijuana import and export economically feasible?

In short: Probably not, at least not from Canada to Uruguay.

The Uruguayan government has announced a lofty goal to sell cannabis at $1 a gram. That’s the price point at which it will be competitive against the black market, national drug czar Julio Calzada has said.

On the streets of Montevideo, poor quality pot, most of it from Paraguay or Brazil, currently sells at about $100 for 25 grams, or about $4 a gram, according to research by Insight Crime.

In Canada, weed is much more expensive than that. Currently, a gram of medical pot sells for a minimum of about 7.60 Canadian dollars a gram (about $6.80), said Steve Thomas, general manager of the Whistler Medical Marijuana Co. His company’s cannabis, which is grown organically, sells for about CA$10 a gram (about $8.95).

Once the cost of shipping and jumping through regulatory hurdles is taken into account, it probably wouldn’t make sense to export to a country like Uruguay, where disposable income is low compared with more developed countries, Thomas said.

He said his company is certainly eyeing the export market, but he’s looking at countries with higher incomes, such as the Czech Republic or Israel, as possible targets for growth.