NEW YORK (ChurchMilitant.com) - The CEO of Planned Parenthood is claiming access to abortion is "essential" to America's success.

In an op-ed published Friday by fashion magazine Elle, Cecile Richards described the murder of unborn children as a "fundamental issue of economic security and opportunity" and praised the practice for opening "new doors for women."

"When you work to limit access to contraception and sex education, wipe out access to abortion, and refuse to support paid leave or affordable childcare, you're not just holding back women," Richards asserted. "You're holding back America."

"Helping women reach their full potential isn't just the right thing to do," she continued, "it's the smart thing to do." Citing Democrat presidential frontrunner Hillary Clinton, Richards said that so-called reproductive health care "goes to the heart of who we are as women: our rights, our autonomy, our ability to make our own decisions."

Relating an encounter at an Iowa college in which a young lady attributed "scholarships and birth control" to her being the first in her family to graduate from college, the CEO credited the rise in the number of women finishing four or more years of college to "effective birth control and access to safe, legal abortions."

Richards, who has led the abortion giant for a decade, went on to claim women are now the breadwinners in two thirds of American households with children, are more likely to save more than men, and when they do spend money tend to "invest in their families and communities." For this reason, she maintains, "empowering women" via access to so-called reproductive health care "empowers families, communities and our entire country."

Highlighting a Donald Trump quote from earlier this month in which the Republican presidential hopeful said "women get it better" than men, Richards, who makes nearly $600,000 a year, emphasized a perceived need to "level the playing field for women" in America. "You can't grow the economy and shrink women's reproductive health options at the same time," she claimed. "If our country is going to compete and win in the global economy, it's going to take 21st-century ideas — not Stone-Age attitudes."

She added, "We need a president who will stand up to the attacks on reproductive rights across the country, continue the progress we've made under President Obama from bringing teen birth rates to a record low to passing the Affordable Care Act, the biggest advance for women's health in a generation — and keep going."

For the remainder of her opinion piece, Richards promoted the Clinton presidential platform, as, in her opinion, Clinton is the only "person up to the job."

"Hillary is traveling the country talking about what we need to do to support women and families — because our country can only live up to its potential when women live up to theirs," Richards said. "[Clinton] will work like she has her entire life — to make sure every woman can make her own decisions about her health and future."

"That's my kind of revolution," the CEO concluded.

Over 3.2 million children have been murdered by Planned Parenthood since Richards assumed the position of president in 2006.

Richards has also been at the forefront of a congressional investigation into the sale of aborted baby parts for profit perpetrated by Planned Parenthood and caught on film by investigative journalist David Daleiden. Documents released by the investigative panel in April show Planned Parenthood's traffic in aborted baby parts results in "pure profit" for the abortion giant, contrary to Planned Parenthood's claims.