Photo

To the Editor:

“In Health Law, a Boon for Diet Clinics” (front page, July 5) and “Popular Diet Drug Is Cheap and Easy to Get” (news article, July 5) do not convey the importance of effective medical management for our obesity problem. They describe two patients who were 20 pounds overweight, not the usual target population.

Medical weight-loss centers generally treat patients who are obese, with a body mass index over 30 and often overweight by 50 pounds or more. Many of these patients have such dangerous obesity that their health is threatened and their life expectancy diminished.

Obesity greatly increases the risk of Type 2 diabetes, heart disease, fatty liver disease, dementia and certain cancers. These are indisputable scientific facts.

Lifestyle therapy (diet, exercise, behavior modification), pharmaceuticals approved by the Food and Drug Administration and weight-loss surgery are proven medical approaches. Implying that they are ineffective or being used solely for the doctor’s financial gain reinforces an unfortunate stereotype and obscures their value.

Despite the obvious importance of obesity management to our health system, health care economy and the individual patient’s suffering, insurance plans have remained resistant to its coverage. Articles like yours lend support to this shortsighted approach and hobble our efforts to attack a major epidemic.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

MICHAEL M. ROTHKOPF

Morristown, N.J.

The writer is president-elect of the National Board of Physician Nutrition Specialists.

To the Editor:

I write to object to the implication in this article that diet-clinic doctors are somehow all snake-oil salesmen who just want to make a buck.

I was obese for nearly 50 years until I started seeing a colleague of Dr. Michael Kaplan, who was featured in your article. With this doctor’s help, I have not only gotten to a healthy weight for the first time ever, but I’ve stayed there for more than three years and counting.

The key for me has been having a medical doctor who specializes in weight loss oversee my treatment, a doctor who has the clinical knowledge to treat obesity like a long-term illness.

If anything, the government should require all health plans to continue to pay benefits for all medical weight-loss services, even if a patient’s body mass index falls below 30, the threshold for obesity. That’s because for those of us with long-term weight issues, the risk doesn’t go away tomorrow just because we are succeeding with weight management today.

The costs of medical weight loss are far less than the long-term costs of the illnesses associated with obesity, so paying for them is simply good public policy.

BETH KNOBEL

Whitestone, Queens

To the Editor:

It is possible that insurance reimbursements for weight-loss programs will benefit some. But as a pediatrician, I worry that the revenue needed for reimbursement, the overuse of the Affordable Care Act, and the entrepreneurial nature of its implementation will not be beneficial for patients and our country’s medical care.

If pediatricians invited parents to return more often for a one-hour visit and did a better job listening, we would be more successful.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Medical professionals should focus not just on obesity but also on the whole family, including problems like addiction, depression and family dysfunction. Our crucial task should be nurturing trust in the doctor-patient relationship as well as increased self-awareness by physicians.

HOWARD S. KING

Waban, Mass.

To the Editor:

Based on several decades of clinical practice and research on insulin, the gatekeeper of metabolism, I believe that 90 percent of Americans who struggle with weight gain have genetic disorders of their metabolism. Therefore, blaming a person who is struggling with excess weight is as irrational as faulting her or him for needing reading glasses.

We as a society urgently need new approaches to a problem where our civilization has taken a huge leap backward. The cost of obesity in the United States was said to be $315 billion in 2010.

In my experience, strict diet and exercise regimens without correcting underlying metabolic imbalances will invariably lead to increases in weight and a lifetime of frustration. We see so many patients who suffer from the ill effects of diet pills and supplements.

As a medical practitioner, I am deeply troubled that our generation of overweight children will have a shorter life span than their parents.

NOEL K. MACLAREN

New York

The writer is an endocrinologist.

To the Editor:

Is obesity treatment about making money or about really helping and supporting the patient with long-term weight management success?

Obese people need to be wary of quick-fix promises. When will they learn? How long did it take to gain the weight? How can six weeks or even six months support the necessary lifestyle changes to make them ingrained in behavior?

Obese people who continue with nutrition therapy beyond one year have a better chance to learn and change their relationship and behavior toward food. They develop an understanding about how they inappropriately use and eat food.

Obese or overweight people should check their insurance policies, as a visit to a registered dietitian/nutritionist, especially one trained in weight management, may be covered.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

ANN M. SILVER

East Hampton, N.Y.

The writer is a registered dietitian and nutritionist.