Rove's 2015 predictions? A productive Congress and Hillary running

Karl Rove is predicting that 2015 will be the “most productive period” in Congress.

“We’re going to see the most productive period of sustained bipartisan legislation that we’ve seen in a long while,” Rove said Thursday on Fox News.

Story Continued Below

The conservative, who annually offers his political predictions for the year, said the “most interesting” developments in the Capitol will come out of the newly Republican-controlled legislative branch.

“I think the Republicans are going to send the president a steady stream of bills throughout the year that have bipartisan support,” Rove said.

But while Republicans may steadily pump out bills in the 114th Congress, he questions what will happen once they reach the president’s desk.

“The question is whether or not the president is going to sign those bills,” Rove said. “If he vetoes a lot of them, after a while, it’s going to work against the Democrats.”

When focusing his sights on the White House, Rove predicts that, much like the bills coming out of Congress, a stream of Republican presidential contenders may surface this year, but many may not come to fruition.

“We are going to find out a lot of Republican presidential candidates either don’t get into the race or get into the race and don’t go very far because of the challenge of raising money,” Rove said, pointing out the $88 million price tag on former Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney’s race.

On the Democratic side: “Hillary Clinton is going to run, Elizabeth Warren will not. After flirting with it, I don’t think Joe Biden is going to run, although we certainly will hear a lot from him in the way of continuing gaffes.”

Rove looked back on his 2014 predictions in a Wall Street Journal article published Wednesday. Thirteen were correct, but he was wrong on six, including his prediction that Republicans would lose governorships and that Kathleen Sebelius would stay in her post as secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services.