Spearfish, SD

A freshman at Spearfish High School had his dream to meet Denver Bronco's quarterback Peyton Manning come true earlier this month. The meeting gave Nick Bindert a big boost in his recovery from brain cancer.

Now, if you're lucky, Nick might let you touch the hand -- the one that touched Peyton Manning.

Or maybe not. It's a pretty special hand, after all. It shook the hand of a future Hall-of-Fame quarterback.

"So you can look but can't touch," Bindert joked recently in his family's home in Spearfish. "See, sir, you can't touch this hand. Na-na-na, you can't touch it."

Nick Bindert likes to tease. His sense of humor, and a powerful will to live have helped him survive life-threatening, life-changing brain cancer.

Nick is cancer free today and far ahead of schedule in his recovery from chemotherapy, brain surgery and two dozen other surgical procedures. His mother predicts that by next football season, Nick's disabilities will be barely noticeable.

His family was and is essential to his recovery, of course. And that visit with Peyton Manning out in Colorado, arranged through the Make-A-Wish Foundation? That didn't hurt a bit.

"He was on cloud nine," said his mother, Rhonda. "he said, 'Mom, he's a great guy.' And he said, 'I'll never wash this hand again.'"

Nick eventually washed the hand. But it didn't wash away the magic of a visit to Sports Authority Field, a personal meeting with Manning and seats for the Oct. 5 game against the Arizona Cardinals -- a game in which Manning threw his 500th touchdown pass.

A huge fan of the Broncos and of Manning, Nick walked away with an autographed ball, an autographed No. 18 Jersey and a used Broncos practice jersey. He took away something else, too.

As he continues his amazing recovery, Nick Bindert will look back on his meeting with Peyton Manning as a source of enduring inspiration."

'It really lifted his spirits," his mother said. "It made him, you know, kind of know that his that his fight is worth it."

It also left him with a hand that he might or might not left you shake.