Topics: addiction, born to be blue, chet baker, Editor's Picks, ethan hawke, Film, Jazz, Movies, Music, Entertainment News

Back in the ’90s, Ethan Hawke and Richard Linklater developed a movie about Chet Baker in his 20s. It never materialized. Two decades later, Hawke has fulfilled his destiny and picked up the trumpet in “Born to Be Blue.” This time around, he’s working with director Robert Budreau to paint an impressionistic picture of the legendary jazz trumpeter’s 40s, imagining Baker as he tries to clean up his act.

We sat down with Hawke at South by Southwest in Austin to discuss the role of drugs in creativity, the idea of disappearing into a character, and honoring the essence of Baker’s music.

Talking about Chet Baker, you said something along the lines of, “The drugs don’t help. They just help you deal with the anxiety.”

Yeah, there’s no talent inside the drugs. The talent is inside you. You know, sometimes people love to apply a lot of judgment to it, and I’ve lost several friends to drugs and alcohol. So I certainly don’t look at it with a tremendous amount of sympathy, but you also have to understand that a lot of people are in a lot of pain. How they manage their pain and their confusion and their depression and their loneliness and their insecurities — those things are painkillers. When you’re hurting, it’s very human to want to stop hurting.

Part and parcel of that is, when you’re an artist, you’re sort of front and center with all of those things people use television or movies to ignore. When you’re an artist, you maybe can’t hide from it, because it’s your work. It’s your entire life.

Your whole being goes into what you do. I think for a guy like… I don’t even know Chet Baker. I don’t want to talk about him specifically as a man. The two great actor-artists of my generation that influenced me are River Phoenix and Philip Seymour Hoffman, who both died of heroin overdoses. It’s just kind of brutal. You see there was a ferocity of honesty in both of those guys. They just despised lying. The world is full of a lot of little lies you have to tell to get through the day. For a certain amount of people who are extremely sensitive, it’s really hard. If you don’t have the proper tools inside yourself to navigate those waters, they can be pretty treacherous waters.

And you add into the mix the immense success and failure, because the higher you go, the higher you fall. We all know that everybody’s equal in our hearts, so there’s a certain sense of fraudulence you have when you’re being celebrated too much. I think there’s some kind of base note that… we don’t know why we’re born, we don’t know where we come from, we don’t know what kind of magic is running the world. So to take responsibility for it like you’re somebody fabulous or God’s working through you — you know there’s a lie manifest in there. That creates an immense amount of insecurity, the more success you get. Then failure is even more dangerous.

I know that’s something present for everyone in the arts. How does that play out for you personally?

With much difficulty. Sometimes I feel that my whole life has been a war with my nervous system. The person you want to be with the person you actually are is sometimes so disappointing that it creates… you find yourself tripping on yourself. I find that when I was younger, I had a lot more hubris. To put it nicely, I just loved acting and I loved the arts! I just wanted to be a part of it, and I couldn’t imagine any downside. So I just did it. I remember making my Broadway debut. I remember walking out onstage and thinking, “Wow, I’m making my Broadway debut! Not nervous at all. This is awesome!” Just had that kind of attitude.

As you get older and you start to care more, you realize how rare the opportunities to contribute are, how much you value the arts, and how much responsibility comes with any success. There’s this voice inside you. Publishing something, you go to the bookstore and see all the great novels nobody’s read. The records … you go on iTunes and go, “What?!? Why would I bother making a movie; there are so many great movies nobody’s ever seen!” That voice can become kind of crippling to me. “Who are you? What are you pretending to do?” But you have to fight through it. Each generation has to keep talking to each other. That’s how I solve it with myself. If anybody acting is worthwhile, then it’s worthwhile for any of us to try. If none of us try, none of it will ever happen.

It’s up to the culture to decide what’s really of value, and God knows that changes. We’re rewriting the past all the time. Chet Baker is an interesting example. He loved to sing and wanted to do it, but he was wildly made fun of for doing it at the time. Now those records are still selling. The people making fun of him, that’s gone. I’m really glad that he believed in himself to do it.

That’s one of the interesting things about especially music. Because of what happened to him, his music was at times incredibly personal. Sometimes when you’re really personal, people don’t always understand it. Especially initially.

Especially if you’re really sincere. People are thrown by it. If you’re ironic or glib or cool, people can kind of understand it. If you come out and go, “Hey, this is my heart here. Hold it in your hands”… people are like, “Uhhhh, I don’t want to hold your heart.” But it’s powerful and it’s moving. Over time, they can start to handle it.