The Micah Project on Tuesday (Jan. 19) hailed Louisiana Gov. John Bel Edwards' move to expand Medicaid, after his predecessor would not, as a testament to the rising power of faith-based organizing and its effect on health equity and racial justice. Edwards was inaugurated Jan. 11 and the next day signed the executive order that will make more than 300,000 people eligible for the federal health care program.

A New Orleans religious social justice group, The Micah Project said its leaders spearheaded a drive to get people of faith to the polls last fall and held a gubernatorial candidate forum to address faith and Medicaid expansion. It said its organizing power had a direct effect on Edwards' victory and consequently, the future of Louisiana's health.

"The immediate results of this election show the power that people of faith can have when they stand up for their family, neighbors and coworkers, and signal a growing moral tide in American politics that can't be stopped," said Lue Russell, faith leader with The Micah Project and founder of Hearts of Fire Ministries Inc. in Baton Rouge.

"We took our civic engagement to a new level, trained and informed our leaders who had numerous phone banks, knocked on hundreds of doors and boosted early voting ... ." Russell said. "Our efforts demonstrate that religious institutions that preach justice and redemption also have the ability to use sophisticated tools and targeting to move large numbers of people to the polls who might not otherwise vote."

Louisiana became the 31st state -- and the first in the Deep South -- to expand Medicaid after Edwards signed the executive order Jan. 12. Edwards' move marked a departure from policies of former Gov. Bobby Jindal, who declined to accept the expansion due to his opposition to the Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama's signature domestic legislative achievement.

Medicaid expansion is funded at 100 percent by the federal government until next year. Beginning in 2017, Louisiana must pay 5 percent of the cost of Medicaid expansion, rising to a 10 percent share by 2020.

Expansion opponents have said adding hundreds of thousands of people to the Medicaid rolls as the federal government reduces its financial contributions to the project will add to the state's financial woes in years to come.