The Eye

Madonna's Diss Track Not Aimed At Lady Gaga, According To 'Vogue' Singer's Manager

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images/Dimitrios Kambouris) After pushing sexual boundaries for over thirty years, Madonna candidly revealed that she doesn't understand the hype over E.L. James erotic novel, "Fifty Shades of Grey." The music legend calls the popular book "not sexy."

After the leak of two dozen of Madonna's demos over the previous few weeks, there were assumptions that the song "Two Steps Behind" was a diss track aimed at Lady Gaga. The "Vogue" singer's manager Guy Oseary shot down those rumors on Twitter.



"That song is NOT about Gaga or anyone in particular," Oseary wrote in response to a fan." The song is an unfinished demo she had no intention of finishing or releasing along with many others. She has NO ill will towards Gaga. It's nonsense. She was listening to (Gaga's) Tony Bennett duet album last week and appreciating it."



"Two Steps Behind" includes these lyrics:



You're a copycat, Where is my royalty?



You're a pretty girl, I'll give you that



But stealing my recipe, It's an ugly look



Did you study me hard enough?









Madonna's upcoming album, "Rebel Heart," is set for release on March 10, 2015 through Interscope Records. Its first single will be "Living For Love."



On her Instagram account, Madonna described the leak as "artistic rape" and called it to a form of terrorism.



This is artistic rape!! These are early leaked demo's half of which wont even make it on my album the other half have changed and evolved.



This is a form of terrorism. Wtf!!!! Why do people want to destroy artistic process??? Why steal? Why not give me the opportunity to finish and give you my very best?"









The 56-year-old superstar released six songs in response to the leak, including the tracks "Devil Pray," "Illuminati" and "B---- I'm Madonna," featuring Nicki Minaj.



Madonna worked with Diplo on some of her upcoming tracks. In July, the producer told Rolling Stone about the music-making process with the Queen of Pop:



"The last night we were just having fun, and she was like, 'Yo, give me some of the craziest s--- you've got right now,' and we literally wrote a song that night on the craziest record I had. And it worked. All of the best songs happen on a whim."



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.