A long-simmering notion about hospital regulation, and a shorter-simmering resentment of Gov. Terry McAuliffe's aggressive push to convince the General Assembly to expand Medicaid with Obamacare dollars, will come to a boil this year.

At the same time an unprecedented offer by state hospitals to kick in some of their money to a new health fund should keep the debate about health care for the uninsured front and center.

In the background is McAuliffe's bruising, two-year battle to expand Medicare and tap federal Affordable Care Funds to cover more than 350,000 uninsured, low-income Virginians — an effort adamantly opposed by the House of Delegates Republican leadership and almost all Senate Republicans.

Two measures seen as a financial hit on hospitals – ending the state's Certificate of Public Necessity (COPN) program that free-market advocates say protects medical monopolies, and a new assessment the hospitals themselves proposed as a way to to draw down more federal Medicaid dollars – could be the basis of a health care deal. Or they could simply clear the way for more political posturing.

"We're getting set for another year of gridlock with even more fireworks," said Stephen Farnsworth, a political scientist at the University of Mary Washington.

The reason, he said, is that House Republicans see the new assessment that hospitals proposed as part of "McAuliffe's relentless push for Medicaid expansion," a push the hospitals have backed aggressively.

2016 General Assembly Joe Fudge / Daily Press Outside view of the State Capital Building with George Washington on his horse to the right. Outside view of the State Capital Building with George Washington on his horse to the right. (Joe Fudge / Daily Press) (Joe Fudge / Daily Press)

"In politics, there's a saying that the friend of my enemy is my enemy," Farnsworth said.

McAuliffe has factored the hospital offer into his budget, as an amount of no more than 3 percent of hospital's revenue from patient payments, and estimated it could save the state nearly $157 million over the next two years. The idea is that using that money for some health care costs would mean a dollar for dollar match from the federal government – and a $9 for $1 match if the state expanded Medicaid.

"I do tilt at windmills, but I don't think I am going to this session," said Senate Finance Committee Chairman Emmett Hanger,R. Mount Solon, who was one of three Senate Republicans who tried, unsuccessfully, to find a compromise alternative to Medicaid expansion that would still let the state tap Obamacare funds last year.

General Assembly Joe Fudge / Daily Press Outside view of the State Capital Building. This is the Senate side of the building. Outside view of the State Capital Building. This is the Senate side of the building. (Joe Fudge / Daily Press) (Joe Fudge / Daily Press)

If the hospitals' proposed assessment isn't be going anywhere, ending the certificate of public necessity program may not either, Hanger believes. Many legislators, including him, have reservations about doing away with the program, he said.

"We have COPN for a reason," Hanger said. "I know many here share my belief in free markets, but health care is not a free market. It's not: 'If you can pay you get care, and if you can't, you die.' We don't do that."

Even if a bill ending the COPN program were to pass both House and Senate, Farnsworth says, McAuliffe is likely to veto it.

But Olusoji Akomolafe, head of the political science department at Norfolk State University, isn't so sure either idea is a non-starter.

"It is not unreasonable to assume that a compromise might be in the offing whereby the expansion is rejected as usual but in its stead, Republicans would most likely make provision to increase in some fashion or another the health care budget," Akomolafe said

"Should that be the case the Republicans' strategy to gut COPN may turn out to be a smart political move," he said.

The certificate of public necessity program is based on an obscure state law that says the health commissioner must approve before anyone builds or expands hospitals, outpatient surgery clinics, rehab and nursing facilities or diagnostic imaging services, such as MRIs.

Deep down, the fight over the program is a battle over money.

On one hand, as the House of Delegates' Republican leadership argues, letting people freely compete for customers – patients, in this case – brings prices down.

On the other, the hospital association says, certificates of necessity keep businesses – including competing hospitals — from cherry-picking the profitable businesses that hospitals rely on to make up for losses on key services such as psychiatric care, obstetrics and charity care. Hospitals say they're forced to lose money because of federal requirements to provide emergency care and the tendency of Medicare and Medicaid to pay less than the real cost of care.

The COPN issue came to a head last year over a bid by the giant Hospital Corp. of America to build a freestanding emergency care center in New Kent County. To make the idea work, and provide the only such care in the county, HCA argued it needed MRI and CT imaging equipment.

State health department staff said there was no need, since the 36 scanners in health planning district 15 – an 80-mile-long swath of central Virginia stretching from Goochland to New Kent Counties -- weren't busy enough.

The state health commissioner later gave a green light to the project – but the whole process bugged Del. Chris Peace, R-Hanover, who represents the county.

"Far too often, local communities are denied increased access to basic services such as outpatient emergency rooms, CT scanners or MRIs by healthcare regulators based on decisions made by unelected bureaucrats," he said.

Virginia is one of 36 states that have some form of a certificate of need requirement.

The idea is to prevent hospitals and clinics from building more facilities than are needed, on the theory that the cost of unused beds and equipment would have to be covered by increasing charges actual patients must pay.

But the effect is to reduce competition, argues Del. John O'Bannon, R-Henrico, the House GOP's point man on health policy.