Jeffersonville High School seniors Kaylee Ferguson, left, and Kealey Vance think they may have found their dresses at Prom Aid in Charlestown on Saturday. (By Jenna Esarey, special to The Courier-Journal) March 21, 2015

Spring is here, and with it comes high school proms. But the expense of a prom dress can put prom out of reach for some students.

To combat that issue, the Clark County 4-H Junior Leaders are hosting their eighth annual Prom Aid event at the 4-H Fairgrounds in Charlestown.

The group collects prom dresses each year, has them cleaned, and offers them at no charge to any student in southern Indiana during the two-day event.

"We even get some people from Louisville each year," said Junior Leader member Karie Dockter, 17. "We don't turn anyone away."

Scores of teenagers scoured the racks of dresses Saturday, looking for that perfect dress in the fairground's community building. Many hunted in packs, towing along best friends, mothers, siblings, and the occasional father or prom date.

Friends Kealey Vance and Kaylee Ferguson, both seniors at Jeffersonville High School shopped together on Saturday.

"I've been to some stores and looked around," Kealey said. "I thought maybe I'd luck out with this."

"Prom's expensive enough as it is, without paying for the dress," said Kaylee.

Kayla McComb, a senior at Charlestown High School browsed the racks of dresses with her friends Iris Saldana and Megan Middleton, also seniors at the school. "I have to support myself and live by myself," she said. "It's kind of hard to afford a prom dress."

The restrooms are converted to temporary dressing rooms, with an area nearby decked out with a plethora of full-length mirrors propped against the walls or placed on chairs to give the girls a 360-degree view.

A small collection of menswear is available as well as some women's dress shoes. Nu Yale Cleaners donates their services each year to make sure the dresses are in top shape before the event.

"We get over 500 dresses each year," said Karie. "We send some of them to consignment shops or donate them if they're out of date."

"I like seeing all the girls who come out and their faces when they find 'The Dress'," she said. "It's a really nice way for us to give back to the community."

Paula York, mother of twins Mariah and Willa, both juniors at New Washington High School appreciated Prom Aid "because I have twins and it's expensive!" Both girls found dresses.

"It wasn't what I came in looking for," said Willa. "I really didn't think I'd find anything, honestly. But, it fits perfectly and I definitely look forward to wearing it."

IF YOU GO

What: Prom Aid

Where: Clark County 4-H Fairgrounds, 9608 Highway 62, Charlestown, Indiana

When: Sunday from 1 p.m. until 4 p.m.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1HgEcnn