Topics: Barack Obama, CIA, CIA torture report, the daily dot, White House, Media News, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on The Daily Dot

If the public learns the right lesson from the Senate’s release of the torture report, it is that it should never look at the presidency in the same way again. Not because it makes our presidents look like monsters, mind you— although it certainly does that—but because it makes them look powerless and pointless, almost pathetically so.

If Internet punditry is to be believed, George W. Bush was a tyrant who could be understood with “the language used to describe [King] George III,” a “defiant warmonger to the last,” as a piece in U.K.’s the Telegraph describes him, one “on the rampage” to legalize torture. Meanwhile, Barack Obama is also a tyrant “just like the Founders warned us against,” a president who “fiercely defends the military-industrial complex,” and “the media’s favorite autocrat.”

The Internet likes to view these men in an authoritarian, all-seeing role, but the CIA report proves that’s anything but true. Here are seven facts that go against those preconceptions.

More from The Daily Dot: “Stephen Colbert interviewed Smaug and it was glorious”

1) The CIA didn’t inform President Bush of the full extent of its methods until more than five years into his presidency.

Despite his vaunted reputation as the “decider,” Bush was not briefed on specific interrogation techniques until April 2006, 63 months after he first took office, and more than four and a half years after the September 11 terrorist attacks.

Indeed, the report goes into detail as it describes how the president “expressed discomfort with the image of a detainee, chained to the ceiling, clothed in a diaper, and forced to go to the bathroom on himself.” This contradicts Bush’s later claim to have “personally approved the techniques” in conversations with CIA Director George Tenet.

2) The CIA tricked President Bush into lying to the American people about preventing a strike against a Marine base.

In a speech he delivered on September 6, 2006, Bush defended the use of “enhanced interrogation” by insisting that it wasn’t torture and arguing that it yielded “intelligence that cannot be found any other place.” Bush said, “Our security depends on getting this kind of information.”

Not only does the report reveal that these methods often yielded either bad information (suspects would frequently make up anything to make the interrogation stop) or material that the military had already known, but it also discusses the use of “forced rectal feedings,” waterboarding until victims were “near drowning,” and frequently violated the law and Constitution by ignoring Justice Department guidelines (and then lying to the necessary officials about it).

3) The torture report has made high-ranking members of the Bush administration look ridiculous, either by being easily misled while in office or unconvincingly lying to save face afterward.

Despite promising to be completely forthright with the president’s foreign policy advisers, the report reveals that a great deal of information was kept from Secretary of State Colin Powell out of concern that he would—as a 2003 NSA memo put it—“blow his stack” if he found out torture was being used.

More from The Daily Dot: “Daredevil with a jetpack races an airplane”

More recently, in an interview with The New York Times, former Vice President Dick Cheney reiterated his claim that “the [torture] program was authorized.” Cheney said, “The agency did not want to proceed without authorization, and it was also reviewed legally by the Justice Department before they undertook the program.” As a summary of the congressional review in Politico explains, however, “the CIA’s actual tactics often went far beyond the terms laid out in Justice Department legal opinions,” with agents often going out of their way to mislead and dupe their superiors.