New York State will announce today that it will have a Spanish version of its health exchange website ready for the start of the 2015 enrollment period, one of a series of changes the state is implementing to make it easier for people who speak languages other than English to enroll.

NY State of Health, which was created by the Affordable Care Act, is also in the process of translating notices into Spanish and six other languages, including Russian and Chinese.

During the 2014 enrollment period, which lasted from Oct. 1, through mid-April, several civil rights and advocacy groups voiced concerns non-English speakers would have trouble enrolling via the online marketplace. There were materials in other languages online, but navigating to them required finding the right option on an English website.

“It's critically important to get people enrolled,” said Shena Elrington, director of the Health Justice Program at New York Lawyers for the Public Interest. She linked this to a civil rights issue, arguing language should not be a barrier for people who want health insurance coverage, which can now be subsidized by the federal government. Elrington also pointed out that immigrants are typically younger and healthier so enrolling them could help lower rates for everyone because it would provide insurers with a healthier population.

Donna Frescatore, executive director of New York's exchange, said the website could have done a better job this past year when it came to ease of use for non-english speakers.

The priority, she said, was a functioning website and to avoid the horrors that plagued healthcare.gov, the federal health exchange.

In year two, the state is working to improve the accessibility, she said.

In addition to translated material on the website, the state will also offer a translated paper version of the applications.

The state is also offering several training sessions to explain the different eligibility requirements for immigrants to the nearly 9,000 customer assistants who staff the Help Line run by the state.

The Urban Institute, a non-profit research group, predicted that by the end of 2016's enrollment period more than one-third of New Yorkers on the exchange would speak a language other than English.

In 2014, the first year, 15 percent of enrollees said they preferred a language other than English.

“I think those numbers speak to a gap in outreach, and the sate is committed to continuing to reach out to immigrant communities,” Elrington said.

Enrollment for 2015 begins Nov. 15.