Just a few days after telling The Lars Larson Show that “treasonous” Obama wants Iran to have a nuclear bomb (because obviously if you’re not destroying Iran you’re helping them), Michele Bachmann (R-MN) – who has clearly never read the document – says that President Obama has rewritten the Constitution for himself, that he has shirked his responsibilities and that he is not a king or a dictator but acts like one. Members of Congress are “appalled” says Bachmann.

This is what Bachmann, whose history of histrionic utterances shows that she hates all things Obama (to say the least), told Fox News’ Martha MacCallum on Tuesday:

“You’re not a king, you’re not a dictator, you can’t do whatever you want. Our Constitution limits the president’s power, even though President Obama doesn’t act that way.” “He has rewritten the Constitution for himself as a part of his effort to fundamentally transform the United States of America. But we are a constitutional republic and members like myself are going to fight to keep that, for the people, a constitutional republic.”

She went on to say that, “The Constitution says no man is above the law, including the president of the United States. And we, as members of Congress, are making sure we’re going to remind our president, even if we have to do it through a lawsuit, he too, must obey the law.”

This comes from a woman who is herself under investigating for not obeying the law. Just sayin’. And never mind that the Supreme Court says Obamacare is constitutional. Never mind that it is not a bill under consideration but the law of the land.

The truth is, there is scant evidence that any Republican, least of all a tea party Republican, actually appreciates the U.S. Constitution, let alone supports and upholds it. The Constitution, after all, consists of more than the Second and Tenth Amendments and the First Amendment applies to everyone equally, not only right-wing extremists.

Okay. The president’s power is limited. We get that. President Obama gets that. But Bachmann cannot cite an instance in which the president has overstepped his constitutional authority. He might have violated her imaginary Constitution, that is, the Constitution according to David Barton, but that’s like wanting to impeach the president for not believing in the tooth fairy.

This is not the first time Bachmann has sounded like a deranged harpy with a toothache. She earlier claimed Obama “committed impeachable offenses” and that he is acting like a dictator. “We see thuggery going on in the White House, we’re not going to take it, we’ve drawn a line in the sand,” she said during a conference call in October.

The media, she said, for failing to indulge in voices only Republicans can hear, “could rightly be called ‘Treason Media.'”

Remember when Meghan McCain called Michele Bachmann “a poor man’s Sarah Palin”, a “rogue woman” and somebody you cannot take seriously?

Just keep in mind that what Meghan McCain said about Bachmann seems to apply to pretty much the entire Republican House of Representatives. They’ve gone rogue, and having gone rogue, they want to take down our constitutionally-elected president on the sole grounds that they don’t like that he got elected in the first place, and then elected again in the second.

I would suggest that the Minnesota Republican devote more of her time to her own defense for violating election laws and to perhaps spend some time with her conflicted gay husband while she can, but what do I know? Haters gonna hate.