Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Nashville Mayor Megan Barry speaks during a press conference about affordable housing at the Midtown Hills Police Precinct, Monday, April 11, 2016, in Nashville, Tenn. Andrew Nelles / The Tennessean

Buy Photo Nashville Mayor Megan Barry speaks during a press conference about affordable housing at the Midtown Hills Police Precinct, Monday, April 11, 2016, in Nashville, Tenn. (Photo: Andrew Nelles / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights This is a complex issue that requires innovation, experimentation and multiple tactics, not just one.

Mayor Megan Barry should be commended for her approach in addressing the challenge.

An incentives-based approach is superior to mandates, but advocates should keep pushing for more.

Solving Nashville and Middle Tennessee’s growing affordable housing scarcity is going to be as complicated as enacting comprehensive immigration reform.

It's complex, messy, nuanced and political.

There are many moving parts and many stakeholders involved in trying to come up with a solution, including home seekers, developers, tenants and homeless advocates.

However, in a city with a booming real estate market and growing demand to live in the urban core, a solution that seriously and swiftly tackles the various parts of the problem is preferable to trying to solve it all in one bite.

No magic wand will fix everyone’s affordable housing needs the same way, but every resident deserves a seat at the table to find a way to have his or her needs met.

Mayor Megan Barry should be commended for her multifaceted approach.

On Monday she announced the city would dedicate $10 million to the Barnes Affordable Housing Trust Fund, which provides incentives to developers who build affordable and workforce housing.

“We know government can’t do it alone. It’s going to take partnerships and collaboration,” she said.

Housing is affordable if the owner or tenant is spending no more than 30 percent of his or her income on housing, according to the U.S. Housing and Urban Development department definition.

Barry's approach is logical, especially as cities have faced resistance from state lawmakers while seeking to pursue innovative solutions.

In March Tennessee legislators passed Senate Bill 1636/House Bill 1632, which bans municipalities from enacting mandatory inclusionary zoning, which would require developers to set aside a percentage of their units for affordable or workforce housing.

On Wednesday the bill, sponsored by Sen. Ferrell Haile, R-Gallatin, and Rep. Glen Casada, R-Franklin, was sent to Gov. Bill Haslam’s desk.

Inclusionary zoning is a tool being explored by the Metro Council.

A Metro Council proposal that would have considered voluntary inclusionary zoning was postponed from an original April 5 vote to May.

Pro-development groups, including the Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce, had urged the Council to slow the process down, and passage of the state bill could have voided the Council's efforts.

However, the problem with the Tennessee General Assembly bill is that it seeks to stop something that does not exist anywhere in Tennessee, and it removes a tool from cities.

That said, inclusionary zoning is not a silver bullet.

That is why it is significant that the state bill also encourages an incentives-based approach to affordable housing.

An approach in which developers create more options through inducements, as opposed to mandates, is preferable. After all, the city does not operate as a planned economy.

A developer may prefer not to build at all instead of being required to set aside profits without any incentive.

Yet affordable housing is a critical problem for Nashville, and a holistic approach is essential.

Legislation passed in 2015 did provide some key tools for cities:

Senate Bill 1123/House Bill 1174 sponsored by Sen. Jeff Yarbro, D-Nashville, and Rep. John Ray Clemmons, D-Nashville, allows Metro governments that buy property at delinquent tax sales to donate the land to nonprofits so they can build affordable or workforce housing. In February Metro officials announced they were donating 13 properties for that purpose to three nonprofits: Affordable Housing Resources, New Level CDC and Woodbine Community Organization

Senate Bill 1392/House Bill 1351, also sponsored by Yarbro and Clemmons, allows county governments to authorize money for affordable or workforce housing.

The actions could not come soon enough.

The median home sales price continues to rise in Middle Tennessee.

In Davidson County, that price rose 20 percent year over year to $249,000 in the first quarter of 2016.

Rents have doubled in some cases.

Landlords are opting not to accept subsidized-housing vouchers because they can earn more from full-paying tenants.

Gentrification is in full gear in very popular neighborhoods such as Germantown, 12 South and East Nashville. This has made Nashville out of reach for many people.

If Nashville does not move faster on the issue, it could face the fate of Baltimore, which was forced to enter into a 10-year, $30 million settlement with the federal government to develop a comprehensive affordable housing plan.

Among the reasons were because the city was allowing affordable housing to concentrate in racially segregated or impoverished areas.

That could very well be Nashville’s future without strong action. Surrounding counties, such as Williamson and Sumner, are facing similar issues of growing affordable housing scarcity.

Local officials have enough challenges ahead of them without having the federal government breathing down their necks.

Affordable housing advocates should also be commended for sounding the alarms.

While not all of their solutions — from a land trust to $60 million for the Barnes Fund — may be immediately practical, they should not relent on keeping the mayor and city officials on their toes.

This is not an issue that is going away anytime soon.

Opinion Engagement Editor David Plazas wrote this editorial on behalf of The Tennessean Editorial Board. Call him at 615-259-8063, email him at dplazas@tennessean.com or tweet to him at @davidplazas.

Newsmakers on affordable housing

Several key stakeholders spoke with Opinion Editor David Plazas on addressing the affordable housing issue and reframing the debate. This is a sampling of what they said:

"The way I look at it, it's not an affordable housing debate. It's one of many moving parts that deal with quality of life in Nashville."

— Metro Councilman Fabian Bedne, District 31, chairman, Ad Hoc Affordable Housing Committee

"We need to have a holistic approach — an approach that takes into consideration the ebbs and flows of the city's development. You have to make laws that work for today and could exist five years from now."

— Kristine LaLonde, associate dean, College of Leadership and Public Service, Lipscomb University, former Metro Council member and former chief innovation officer for Metro Government.

"We are interested in a larger conversation. ... We don't have enough housing to meet the needs of Nashvillians."

— Jennifer Carlat, vice president of metropolitan policy, Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce

"Generally, Mayor Barry's position is an incentive-based approach that will encourage more sustainable growth and development."

— Erik Cole, director, Mayor's Office of Economic Opportunity and Empowerment

Recommendations from A VOICE for the Reduction of Poverty (via member Avi Poster)

1. Allocate funds to place a referendum on the upcoming November ballot asking the public for permission to sell up to $60 million in bonds, over time, for the Barnes Affordable Housing Trust Fund exclusively for affordable housing.

2. We encourage passage of a Council resolution calling for the creation of a comprehensive housing plan, developed collaboratively in a reasonable amount of time by the mayor's office and the City Council Ad Hoc Affordable Housing Committee.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Ngnz3l