Now that a plan to expand health insurance coverage to at least 800,000 Floridians has won unanimous, bipartisan approval in a state Senate committee, it's past time for the House's Republican majority to stop stonewalling the initiative.

Only politics can explain the House's intransigence. That's because the federal funds for expanded coverage were authorized under the Affordable Care Act — Obamacare, which is as popular as rabies among most Republicans.

Partisanship is not only denying coverage to 800,000 Floridians who make too much to qualify for Medicaid but too little to receive insurance subsidies under Obamacare. It's continuing to shift the cost of their medical care to families who pay for insurance, and to businesses, which makes them less competitive. It's no wonder business groups, including Associated Industries of Florida, are now leading the charge to expand coverage.

And rejecting the federal dollars is not reducing the tax burden on Floridians. It's just redirecting money they pay to Washington for health coverage in other states.

Your tax dollars at work — in California. Are you good with that?

The case most often made against expanding health coverage with federal funds essentially boils down to three arguments. Each is bogus.

Argument 1: Medicaid is already broken; this is no time to expand it. In fact, the plan that won Senate committee approval this week would use the federal dollars to help Floridians buy private insurance, a free-market approach that differs from conventional Medicaid. Also, if Washington approves, it would require those Floridians to work, train for work or go to school, and pay premiums — other features that would distinguish it from conventional Medicaid.

Argument 2: Florida simply can't afford to expand health coverage. Actually, all of the money for that purpose in 2016 would come from Washington. In later years, the federal share would drop, but not below 90 percent. And the cost for the state in the out years would be offset by savings in other state and local programs that serve the uninsured.

Argument 3: The federal government is too deep in debt to be trusted to keep its funding promises. Under this rationale, Florida would also turn away billions of dollars a year from Washington for other purposes, like highway construction or Everglades restoration. Don't hold your breath. In fact, 38 percent of Florida's budget already comes from the federal government, according to Senate President Andy Gardiner. Besides, the Senate plan calls for the expanded coverage in Florida to end if Washington doesn't honor its funding commitment.

Senate Majority Leader Bill Galvano, a Bradenton Republican, was spot on when he called passage of the plan "a responsible, realistic act."

Here's hoping there's at least a responsible, realistic majority in the House. Politics shouldn't stand in the way of a policy with so many benefits for Floridians.