On a recent Saturday night, diners at a Mexican restaurant in downtown Bend were treated to lively ethnic music: guitar and clarinet played a sultry melody over a rhythmic drum beat.

Eventually, a circle of people formed to twirl in front of the row of musicians, arms draped across neighbors’ shoulders.

In the middle of it all was Miguel Angel Herrada Rodriguez. He switched from violin to guitar between songs, occasionally lending his voice to the mix as well.

On its face, Herrada’s “second life” as a musician looks a lot different from his day job as health equity coordinator for health insurer PacificSource Community Solutions. But the way he sees it, his music is not only related, but an extension of what he does for PacificSource, which administers care for Central Oregon’s Medicaid population, people under the Oregon Health Plan.

“It’s about giving,” he said.

At PacificSource, Herrada makes sure the doctors and other providers who treat minority groups — Latinos, Native Americans, people who are homeless or LGBT individuals — truly understand the cultures of those groups.

It’s kind of like in music: When he’s trying to reach a specific outcome with a melody, he’ll work for hours — even days or months — until he gets it right. Why? To communicate something to other people.

In both cases, “Your actions are building communication with other people instead of damaging other people’s interests,” he said. “The worst thing you can do when you’re a musician is that people will leave the room.”

Building communication

After nearly four years in Bend, Herrada has had a big impact on locals’ access to health care and on how they’re treated once they’re in doctors’ offices.

Before assuming his role at PacificSource two years ago, he worked at the nonprofit Latino Community Association, where he helped Latino individuals and families learn about the health care resources available to them, including enrolling them in health insurance if they were eligible.

Unless people are permanent residents for five years or citizens, they don’t qualify for OHP or tax credits to help buy private health insurance, said Brad Porterfield, executive director of the Latino Community Association.

“Most of our adult immigrant parents don’t qualify,” he said.

Undocumented immigrants are eligible, however, for a program that covers the cost of emergency medical expenses. Their U.S.-born children also likely qualify for the Oregon Health Plan. The problem is, lots of Latino parents are under the misconception that signing up for such programs — and, in so doing, revealing information about themselves — will get them deported. Porterfield said Herrada has made strides in dispelling that myth.

Porterfield said he could tell in Herrada’s time at the Latino Community Association how much seeing immigrants’ struggles affected him.

“He got kind of choked up talking about how much the families suffer here in certain ways, just not being eligible for a lot of things and having their immigration status hanging over their heads,” he said.

Working toward equity

At PacificSource, Herrada’s role is to ensure the specific health care needs of all minority groups are met — and not just ethnic minorities. His work extends to, for example, military veterans and seasonal workers, those who live in other states but come to Oregon temporarily for work.

It’s a role he’s well-suited for, given his inclusive personality and previous work at the Latino Community Association.

“The (Affordable Care Act) has opened many doors for many people,” Herrada said, “but not all communities came to the same place. That’s where the concept of equity makes a difference. Some people need a little more help.”

Lupus, for example, tends to be deadlier for Native American women because it’s diagnosed later, making it more difficult to treat, Herrada said.

“In that case, what we need to decide is appropriate strategies to reach these communities and let them know about the risk of this and try to get them diagnosed earlier,” he said.

Diabetes also tends to strike minority groups at higher rates, a problem Herrada said he’s trying to learn more about and eventually design strategies to solve.

He’s also trying to alleviate a major barrier to health care for Latino patients who don’t speak English: the dearth of medical interpreters in Central Oregon and providers’ lack of understanding about how to use them.

“We’re talking about a serious problem,” he said. “If the patient doesn’t understand the directions or the importance of the diagnosis, then you’re in trouble.”

Herrada works as a medical interpreter at Volunteers in Medicine in Bend, a clinic that provides free care for individuals who don’t have insurance. He also serves as a board member for Mosaic Medical, a federally qualified health center that serves a large proportion of the region’s Oregon Health Plan population.

Scott Johnson, Mosaic’s board chair, said Herrada has provided the board important connections to not only the Latino community, but to other underserved groups in the area.

“We need people on the board who can give us insight and really help us understand, ‘What do we need to do to be able to communicate and receive people in a way that they want to come back and get care?’” Johnson said. “He’s really good at giving us that insight and helping us be more proactive so that there is less barriers to people getting the help that they might need.”

A musical upbringing

Herrada grew up in Puebla, Mexico, a city southeast of Mexico City in a valley surrounded on all sides by mountains and volcanoes.

He comes from an artistic family: piano music and singing were commonplace in his childhood home. Today, his sister works as a painter and sculptor.

The violin was his favorite instrument in high school. He said he’d spend “hours and hours” practicing.

When Herrada was 15, the musician and teacher who would become his mentor took him to several communities across Mexico to learn about local styles of music and speech. They stayed with locals, riding horses and learning about their instruments.

Mexico City’s chamber orchestra awarded him a grant that allowed him to study violin in Mexico City for two years, between 1984 and 1986. He spent the next two years traveling throughout Europe performing with the Mexican band Tierra. The group performed in France, Italy, Germany and Spain. In addition to Spanish, his native language, Herrada is fluent in English and French and speaks some Italian and German.

Herrada earned his bachelor’s degree in music and master’s degree in musicology and ethnomusicology from l’Universite de Montreal. He also earned a master’s degree in art history and Novohispanic Art at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico in 2008.

Before moving to the U.S. in 2010, Herrada worked in a number of social service positions in his hometown in Mexico. From 1998 to 2008, he worked as a music professor and supervised the social service programs at the Universidad de las Americas-Puebla.

That university reminds Herrada of Bend, in a way: an oasis in the middle of a desert.

“You have a very rich university in the high desert mountains,” he said. “It’s green, there’s grass, surrounded by a lot of poverty and communities that are like 500 years ago: no electricity or water.”

The head of the university knew Herrada was concerned about the surrounding areas and directed him to bring his students there to teach people about art, music, theater and sports. Herrada’s team set up facilities with libraries and other activities.

“The results were amazing,” he said.

In one town, they grouped together a team of young kids to play soccer.

“They were very bad,” Herrada said, laughing. “They were really very bad.”

Luckily, though, one of Herrada’s students was a talented player. He coached the students and helped boost their confidence. In the end, the team became state champions.

“Only because they understood they could win,” Herrada said. “We just provided the ball and the connections to make it happen.”

That work wasn’t just for the people living in those communities. He wanted to instill in his students a sense of empathy.

“You don’t want a lawyer or whatever profession to become somebody who is going to prey on society,” he said. “You want someone who is going to serve and you have this only if they can reflect.”

Before beginning his job at the Latino Community Association in 2013, Herrada worked as a flamenco guitarist under the name Miguel de Alonso. Alonso is the name of Herrada’s 17-year-old son. In Mexico, it’s common for musical performers’ stage names to include the names of family members, Herrada said.

Like his father, Alonso, a student at Bend High School, started playing the violin early, at just 4 years old.

Despite all he’s accomplished, Herrada said he can’t take credit on his own. He was merely ready when opportunity appeared, prepared by great mentors.

“I have good friends that have taught me love, understanding and communication,” he said. “I’m just learning. It’s not me.” •