Balancing safety of officers with effort to avoid escalating conflict

An unidentified man taunts police during a disturbance at the Boulder Theater on March 11, 2013 in Boulder. Boulder police responded in force, to keep the fans of the band Tyler the Creator under control. ( Jeremy Papasso / BOULDER DAILY CAMERA )

Boulder County 1033 program Boulder Police Department: Armored vehicle, helmets Boulder County Sheriff's Office: 4 rifles, 2 helmets, 2 binoculars, explosives ordinance robot Erie Police Department: Evidence safe Lafayette Police Department: 40 rifles, 12 pistols Longmont Police Department: Gas mask cannisters

In the weeks since 18-year-old Michael Brown was shot by a police officer in the streets of Ferguson, Missouri, the clash between local law enforcement and protesters has been well documented and has sparked discussion across the country about the "militarization" of local police agencies.

There evolved a perception that the heavy response by police in Missouri at least helped to spark the riots gained traction, but at least one top cop in Boulder County thought that was unfair.

"Every time we just put on a helmet, the newspapers report that we are responding in full riot gear," said Boulder County Sheriff Joe Pelle. "I was watching and some of the officers had helmets and vests on but were wearing blue jeans and T shirts."

But Pelle also said he understands that the line between protecting officers and sparking riots can be a fine one at times. Pelle was the head of Boulder Police Department SWAT in the late 1990s when Boulder saw a series of riots on University Hill that injured 12 officers, including a 26-year-old female officer who had a cinder lock dropped on her head and was forced to retire.

"You can't not protect your officers from injury," said Pelle, who said he himself took a brick to the kidney during the riots. "You can't send them into the situation without protective equipment. But the downside is yeah, it looks antagonistic.

"I get it, that when you see a large group of people with helmets it's scary and antagonizing. But it's also akin to not having construction workers wear helmets and safety glasses. You have to put stuff on to be protected."

Police wearing riot gear walk toward a man with his hands raised, Aug. 11, in Ferguson, Mo. Crowds there looted and burned stores, vandalized vehicles and taunted police after a vigil for Michael Brown, an unarmed man who was killed by police. (Jeff Roberson / AP)

Situations like the one in Ferguson are the last thing any police agency wants to see. But it is one every agency has to have a plan for, even in Boulder.

"You always want to strike a balance between not escalating a situation and yet keeping citizens and officers safe," said Boulder police Chief Greg Testa. "We have an obligation to keep our employees protected and safe, but we want to make sure we are not making the story about the police. We're trying to de-escalate a situation, trying to keep people in the community safe."

1033 program

The Department of Defense Excess Property Program, or the 1033 program, has enabled law enforcement agencies to obtain military surplus equipment since it was established in 1990 through the National Defense Authorization Act.

The recent militarized response in Ferguson has recently put a spotlight on the program and whether it has contributed to the militarization of local police agencies. But while some counties in Colorado have used the program extensively — Fremont County, with a population of under 50,000, has acquired two grenade launchers and two armored vehicles — Boulder has not been one of them.

"There are just a bunch of things in the military that are different from urban policing," Pelle said. "We don't need a tank or a helicopter with guns on it."

Through the program, the Boulder County Sheriff's Office has obtained two TRW M14 rifles, two Colt M16 rifles, two ballistic helmets, two pairs of binoculars and an explosive ordinance robot. Of all that equipment, Pelle said only the robot is still used in the field.

The Boulder Police Department has a 1971 armored Air Force security vehicle called the "Peace Keeper," and a few helmets, while Longmont police got a few gas mask cannisters and Erie police has a large evidence safe through the program.

The University of Colorado, Louisville and Nederland police departments have never used the 1033 program.

One of the reasons local agencies have not taken advantage of the program is that many times the equipment that is sent from the military needs maintenance or repair that ultimately is not worth the time to repair, even if the equipment is free.

"We have not gotten any guns because it is more work to get them back into shape than to just buy them outright," said Longmont police Cmdr. Jeff Satur.

Boulder Police officers try to keeps the situation under control during a disturbance at the Boulder Theater on March 11, 2013, in Boulder. (Jeremy Papasso / BOULDER DAILY CAMERA)

In fact, for that reason, even the department that has received the most weapons through the program, the Lafayette Police Department, said few of the weapons ever see field use.

Lafayette has obtained 40 M16 rifles and 12 1911 pistols, according to Lafayette police Cmdr. Brian Rosipajla. But Rosipajla said the pistols are all used in training, and only a few of the rifles are used in the field while the rest were salvaged for spare parts.

"You don't know what you're going to be sent," Rosipajla said. "Some weapons are not in very good shape and we end up just using parts of the other weapons."

He said the rifles were all converted from fully automatic to semi-automatic weapons. Rosipajla said once that happens they are no different than a rifle purchased at a sporting goods store, except that it was free through the 1033 program.

"We saved the taxpayers some money," Rosipajla said. "It's an avenue to outfit our officers with equipment that is much needed."

'All in how it's used'

But Testa said more important in managing possible riot situations is choosing when and if to have officers on scene with certain weapons or armor.

"I think having equipment is important, but it is all in how it's used," Testa said.

One recent situation Testa brought up was the incident in March 2013 in which several hundred people showed for a free Tyler the Creator Show on University Hill and started what dispatchers initially referred to as a "riot situation."

But police quickly arrived on scene and were able to calm the crowd down with only two arrests. A riot team was not dispatched, and Testa said it was probably the right decision.

"The difference was the focus of the aggression wasn't on police, it was on tickets and getting into the concert," Testa said. "We could have absolutely made some decisions that would have not gone in the best interest of the situation and the focus could have turned on police."

Pelle said negotiating with protesting groups can often avoid violence.

"When we have a staged event, a First Amendment event, you keep the cops with equipment out of sight and try to establish a dialogue with the leadership to establish the rules of behavior," Pelle said. "You can just talk to them about what they want to accomplish. There are all kinds of things that can be done to take the edge off."

Barry Satlow, the chairman of the Boulder chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union, said he think Boulder police gained insights from the riots.

"I think they've learned from it, and they have also learned how to educate people on not rioting," Satlow said.

But Satlow said he would like to see Boulder look into body cameras, as Denver is.

"Body cameras and dash cameras are a great thing for the good cops and a good thing for the public," Satlow said. "I think Boulder should be doing that."

Pelle said that there are times when police sometimes need to have military-style equipment available, and he said it is possible Ferguson was one.

"I wasn't in Ferguson, so I don't know" Pelle said. "But it may have been so volatile from the beginning that the interaction was bound to be violent."

But Testa also added that in a community like Boulder, the odds of a situation like that arising were not as high as in some other places.

"You have to evaluate the likely threats and needs in your community, and get equipment reasonable to address those types of situations," Testa said. "For us, there's just not a need to have a lot of that type of equipment."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Mitch Byars at 303-473-1329 or byarsm@dailycamera.com