Sioux Falls, SD

On Saturday the Sanford Pentagon hosted the first girl's Pentagon Classic. Needless to say, teams from South Dakota, Minnesota, and Nebraska were impressed.

The inaugural Pentagon Classic went off without a hitch. Sixteen teams stepped on to Heritage Court including five not from South Dakota. There are basketball classics all over South Dakota each year, but this one has the potential to be a big deal.

"With out a question this is a big deal. For us to be able to play a quality team like Moorhead, in a facility like this, with more games to be played. It showcases girl’s basketball in South Dakota and I think that is a great thing," O'Gorman Head Coach Kent Kolsrud said.

South Dakota was represented well as they won four of their six games against neighboring states. Two of the games featured in state teams facing each other. These games are used as a measuring stick against the areas top teams that otherwise don't get a chance to square off.

"It is a great representation of the talent and hard work that we put together in the city. It's also a great opportunity to see some of the towns, the size, and athletism from Minnesota, Nebraska, and North Dakota," Lincoln head Coach Matt Daly said.

Paul Seville is the man that deserves the credit for putting together such a successful day of basketball that brought over 1,800 people through the doors. For the players and coaches they are excited to be a part of the first and hopefully many more to come.

"In the coming years this will be a tradition and a great regional event to showcase our talent," Daly said.

"It was a great experience for us; we hope this is something that they continue to do. We really enjoyed playing in this facility and we would love to play here again," Kolsrud said.

The boy's Pentagon Classic will take place December 4th and will feature nine games beginning at nine o'clock in the morning.

2014 Boys’ Pentagon Classic (all games on Heritage Court)

9 a.m. – Avon vs. Irene-Wakonda

10:30 a.m. – Remsen-Union (IA) vs. Tea

Noon – Clark-Willow Lake vs. Madison

1:30 p.m. – Henry Sibley (MN) vs. Sioux Falls Washington

3 p.m. – St. Paul Highland Park (MN) vs. Harrisburg

4:30 p.m. – St. Paul Central (MN) vs. Sioux Falls O’Gorman

6 p.m. – Tartan (MN) vs. Sioux Falls Lincoln

7:30 p.m. – Moorhead (MN) vs. Sioux Falls Roosevelt

9 p.m. – Blake (MN) vs. St. Thomas More

For more information visit The Sanford Pentagon.