What makes your community, neighborhood and home age-friendly is not just about how you manage to get yourself to the doctor's office, or whether your door handles conform to the arthritis-aware codes of universal design.

It's about how your surroundings speak to who you think you are, reinforce that image of yourself, and allow you to go on being you as long as you're alive and kicking.

It's tough for most people to imagine themselves at 84 -- even, remarkably, when they are 84. I can't tell you how many elders I've interviewed who express astonishment at being old.

And then there are those folks who have given a lot of thought to where and who they want to be when they grow up. It doesn't happen exactly according to plan, of course, but they do seem a great deal more serene and comfortable than the astonished ones.

So if you're having a little trouble mulling over your future options as one of the oldest old, there's a helpful new website, "Where You Live Matters," that does a pretty good job of laying them out for you. Granted, it's the work of the American Seniors Housing Association, an industry group that hopes you'll choose one of its members' communities or facilities over your current neighborhood or condo. And you might.

But my favorite part is a page labeled "The Dimensions of Wellness." If you realize your current home isn't helping you thrive on the physical, social, intellectual, occupational, emotional and spiritual dimensions -- well, maybe you should open your mind just a crack, and consider where you'd rather be.

At 61, I'm on the verge of making my own environment more age-friendly -- transitioning with an indispensable buy-in from my husband to a space that might embrace our next couple of decades or so. We're giving up, with no small feelings, our five-acre spread near Myakka River State Park, and fixing up a tiny bungalow downtown.

I knew my next home when I saw it -- not quite the vision in my head, but close enough to be remodeled into a reasonable facsimile. But I didn't realize where that vision came from until I made a return trip this fall to my Louisiana hometown. There it was, the cottage where my grandmother spent her last 15 years -- hazy in my memory but clearly supersharp in the subconscious, down to its cozy porch and the crape myrtles out front.

Sissy's house was always the kind of place where you could feel welcome, where friends and family were in and out all day. Three of them -- Aunt Lucy, Aunt Lorraine and Sister Tieman -- even lived on the same block, so she was never alone for longer than she wanted to be.

Will our new bungalow grow to fit that ideal? Probably not; things don't happen exactly according to plan. But having a plan makes us feel like we might be growing up.

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.