Zachary Carrettin, a violin virtuoso, begins his third season as music director when the Boulder Bach Festival season opens Oct. 16-17. ( Michelle Maloy Dillon Courtesy photo )

Soprano Josefien Stoppelenburg will sing Bach's Cantata 82 on Oct. 16-17, (Devon Cass / Courtesy photo)

If you go What: Boulder Bach Festival's 2015-16 season (excludes collaborative events) Schedule • "Italian Roots": 7:30 p.m. Oct. 16, Stewart Auditorium at the Longmont Museum, 400 Quail Road; 7:30 p.m. Oct. 17, St. John's Episcopal Church, 1419 Pine St., Boulder • "A Musical Offering": 7:30 p.m. Jan. 22, First Congregational Church, 1128 Pine St., Boulder • "Venice on Fire": 7:30 p.m. March 18, Dairy Center Performance Space, 2590 Walnut St., Boulder; 7:30 p.m. March 19, Stewart Auditorium, Longmont Museum • "Romanticism Unveiled:: 5 p.m. May 15, Stewart Auditorium, Longmont Museum • "Reflections": 5 p.m. May 28, Ryssby Church, 9000 N. 63rd St., Longmont Tickets • Boulder concerts cost $35 adults, $30 seniors, $10 students; Ryssby concert costs $50, $45, $35; tickets for both available at The Dairy box office, 303-444-7328 or thedairy.org. • Longmont concerts cost $33 adults, $27 students and seniors; available at the Longmont Museum, 303-651-8374 or longmont museum.org Info: boulderbachfestival.org

"Bach is our compass."

Music director Zachary Carrettin emphasized that point while discussing the expanded 35th season of the Boulder Bach Festival, his third year at the helm and second since taking up full-time residence in Boulder and with the organization.

What was a concentrated event, with two or three concerts and other ancillary events within a week, is now a full-season classical organization. The concept of a "central event" featuring one of the composer's major vocal works has remained, but the "festival week" has essentially disappeared.

This year, that major work will be the St. Matthew Passion: It will be performed April 23 in an unprecedented collaboration with the Boulder Philharmonic Orchestra, University of Colorado Choirs and Central City Opera in what promises to be the marquee classical event of the year.

The organization's own chorus, described by Carrettin as its "heart and soul," also collaborates with the Phil in selections from Handel's "Messiah" on Dec. 20, in addition to taking part in the "Passion."

And Carrettin himself will serve as guest violin soloist with the Boulder Chamber Orchestra Dec. 4-5, a concert being cross-promoted between the groups.

But these collaborations, new and exciting as they are, form only a part of the festival's expanding process, which is also a sort of rebranding process. Five chamber-style programs are planned between October and May. With the demise of the "festival week," the term "festival" itself is being de-emphasized, but not retired. Marketing has begun to refer to simply Boulder Bach.

"We're thinking about what we are and who we are becoming," Carrettin said. "Part of the concept of Bach as a compass means thinking about the music that directly influenced him, and then his reach onward."

Josefien Stoppelenburg created this painting to commemorate the Boulder Bach Festival's 35th season. (Josefien Stoppelenburg / Courtesy image)

The former is on hand for "Italian Roots," the season-opening concert, which will be played Oct. 16 and marks the beginning of a partnership with the Longmont Museum's new Stewart Auditorium, where three concerts will be played.

"Italian Roots" will be repeated Oct. 17 at St. John's Episcopal Church in Boulder.

Carrettin calls it "the most exciting concert I've assembled in Boulder."

The first half includes Italian and German music of the 17th century that would influence Bach in the 18th. Harpsichordist and Bach expert Matthew Dirst plays solo pieces by Johann Jakob Froberger. Michiko Theurer, a Festival 2015-16 Artist-in-Residence, violinist and University of Colorado doctoral student Michiko Theurer. She and Dirst will play a "stunning" sonata by Dario Castello, and Carrettin will join Theurer in Biagio Marini's Sonata "Sopra la Monica" for two violins.

Matthew Dirst will play harpsichord during the BBF's season-opening concerts. (Darren Sabino / Courtesy photo)

Select singers, dubbed the "Boulder Bach Chamber Singers," will open with a 16th century madrigal by Jacob Arcadelt and will close the first half with a four-voice motet by J.S. Bach's older relative Johann Christoph Bach.

"He was revered before the Bach we know, and the piece is extremely powerful," Carrettin said.

The second half includes music by J.S. Bach himself.

Dirst joins BBF string players in the familiar D-minor Harpsichord Concerto. And, finally, soprano Josefien Stoppelenburg, who amazed audiences in February's B-minor Mass, sings the masterful Cantata 82, one of the composer's most beloved vocal works. Like the piece by the older Bach, it has a powerful text on the theme of death and its transcendence. Flutist Ysmael Reyes also plays a large part in the cantata.

The other four concerts are all in 2016. A Boulder-only, all-Bach event will be performed Jan. 22 at First Congregational Church on modern instruments.

Pianist David Korevaar plays three preludes and fugues from the second book of the "Well-Tempered Clavier." Each pair will be followed by a piece for two or three instruments in the same key, including the great Trio Sonata from the late "Musical Offering." Joining Korevaar are flutist Christina Jennings and violinist Harumi Rhodes, along with violist Matthew Dane. Rhodes is a new appointee to the CU faculty.

"Venice on Fire" follows on March 18 at The Dairy Center Performance Space and March 19 at Stewart Auditorium. It is an all-Venetian baroque program played on electric string instruments. Carrettin said the electric instruments "try to capture the acoustic of a stone chapel, an authentic acoustic space." Another thing they can do, he said, is "blow the roof off."

In addition to instrumental works by Merula, Uccellini and Legrenzi, soprano Szilvia Schranz sings two vocal works, including an aria by Barbara Strozzi (one of the great female composers of the age) and a motet by Venice's greatest baroque composer, Antonio Vivaldi. That composer's concerto for two cellos is featured, and the concert concludes with a Sinfonia by his contemporary Tomaso Albinoni.

These Italians influenced Bach, Carrettin said. The other side, Bach's enduring influence, is explored in "Romanticism Unveiled," a program to be played only in the Longmont auditorium on May 15. At the center is the 1895 Erard piano owned and played by Mina Gajic, Carrettin's wife and the BBF's director of education and outreach. The two are joined by hornist Thomas Jostlein in the 1865 Trio for Horn, Violin and Piano by Johannes Brahms. Jostlein specializes in the natural horn without valves and will play an instrument from Brahms's lifetime.

The performance of this tremendous trio on all-authentic 19th century period instruments is rare. It will be preceded by three songs by Brahms, performed by Gajic and soprano Amanda Balestrieri. She also sings an aria from a Bach cantata. Carrettin and Gajic open with a 19th century transcription of Bach's famous "Air for the G String."

The season closes with a special event May 28 at Longmont's historic Ryssby Church, where many memorable Bach Festival concerts of the past took place.

"We are honoring the festival's past and future," Carrettin said.

Featured works are the D-minor Partita for violin, including the famous Chaconne finale, played by Theurer, along with the 4th Suite for Solo Cello, played by Featured Young Artist Robert Erhard, son of bassist and longtime BBF ensemble member Paul Erhard.

At Ryssby, Carrettin has invited Don Jaeger, the festival's founder and first conductor, to speak about his life with Bach and share special memories. Carrettin will in turn speak about the future of the Festival, "looking in all directions, like a compass."