Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

Predicting the outcome of Supreme Court decisions has long been a favorite parlor game for political scientists, attorneys, and legal-system junkies. People have built statistical models, predictive algorithms, and flow charts, and have used machine learning to try to guess what the justices will decide. Some of these models are reliable. Several of them make accurate predictions around 75 percent of the time. Human prognosticators can be even more impressive than that. One man, deemed by the website FiveThirtyEight to be “the best Supreme Court predictor in the world,” won FantasySCOTUS—yep, like fantasy football but for the high court—several years in a row and boasts an 80 percent accuracy rate for guessing what the justices will do. But there’s another realm of Supreme Court activity where computers can tease out information that otherwise stays hidden even after a decision is issued: unsigned opinions. Last term, justices issued eight such decisions—meaning, as The New York Times pointed out, more than 10 percent of court’s docket were unsigned.

“Presumably meant to correct errors so glaring that they did not warrant extended consideration, they nonetheless illuminated a trend in the court’s work,” Adam Liptak wrote for the Times last year. “In most of them, one of two things happened. Prisoners challenging their convictions lost. Or law enforcement officials accused of wrongdoing won.” Unsigned decisions (or, per curiam decisions, as they're known in the legal world) have “arguably been abused by courts, by the Supreme Court, and by lower courts,” says William Li, a 2016 computer-science graduate of M.I.T. who has been tracking the high court’s unsigned decisions for years. “It’s a way of hiding behind a veil of anonymity,” he told me, “a mechanism that kind of removes accountability from them.” So Li and his colleagues—Pablo Azar, David Larochelle, Phil Hill,

James Cox, Robert Berwick, and Andrew Lo—built an algorithm designed to determine which justice wrote unsigned opinions. (Or which justice’s clerks, as is often the case.) Their work began in 2012, amid rumors that John Roberts, the chief justice, had changed his mind at the last minute about the Affordable Care Act—a move that apparently meant he ended up writing most of the majority opinion after having already written much of the dissent. Li and his colleagues wanted to find out if that theory might be true. They used a combination of statistical data mining and machine learning to glean each justice’s individual writing style, based on years of their signed opinions. The bot works by analyzing a backlog of opinions and plucking out the words, phrases, and sentence structures that characterize a justice’s unique style. The system then assigns a higher weight to those terms, so it knows what to look for when scanning a per curiam decision. Roberts, they learned, uses the word “pertinent” a lot. “He seems to tend to start sentences with the word ‘here,’ and end sentences with ‘the first place’—as in, ‘in the first place.’” Li said. “Breyer uses, ‘in respect to.’ For Antonin Scalia, one predictive [word] was ‘utterly,’ and starting the sentence off with ‘of course.’ It does seem like there are these kinds of different writing signatures that exist.”