In two days, the Nuggets get back at it. Training camp for the 2014-15 season opens Tuesday, and it is the Nuggets’ desire for it to be the foundation of a return to the playoffs. They missed the postseason last year for the first time since 2003 in an injury-marred campaign. With good health, they hope to start a new playoffs streak. Denver Post NBA writer Christopher Dempsey looks at five story lines as the curtain is raised on this year’s camp:

How will Gallinari look?

When camp opens it will have been 544 days since Danilo Gallinari last took the basketball court in an NBA capacity. That’s one year, five months and 26 days since he tore his left ACL and sparked a series of events that featured one failed knee surgery, one successful knee surgery, an entire missed season and one heck of a coat of rust to be knocked off when he plays in his first regular season since 2013. Gallinari’s absence in the 2013 playoffs was a huge reason why the Nuggets were bounced out in the first round after earning the conference’s No. 3 seed. His presence with this team will be just as critical. But first things first: getting timing back, regaining a shooting touch, learning the new offensive and defensive systems under coach Brian Shaw, getting chemistry with his new teammates, regaining confidence in his knee and getting back into NBA-caliber physical condition. If it looks like a lot, it’s because it is. Gallinari’s back, yes. But he’s got a long road ahead to being the Gallo we remember. That process starts Tuesday.

How will the rest of the injured guys look?

In addition to Gallinari, the laundry list of players who were missing from the team by the end of the season — J.J. Hickson (knee), Nate Robinson (knee), JaVale McGee (tibia), Ty Lawson (ankle) — are all back. It means the Nuggets will have enough players to pull off a full practice for the first time since, well, since they all started dropping like flies from the rotation in January. But their continued steady progress in returning from some devastating injuries in some cases is paramount to the Nuggets’ success, especially right out of the gate. They’ll be brought along cautiously at the start of camp with the hope that most, if not all of them, will be ready to hit the ground running for the first regular-season game.

Timofey Mozgov vs. JaVale McGee

On a team with limited spots of competition, this is the one true position battle. Timofey Mozgov took full advantage of JaVale McGee’s 77 games missed last season by putting together the best season of his young NBA career. In the process, Mozgov served notice that he is fully capable of being an NBA starter and perhaps even one who grows into a 30-minutes-plus player. Shaw, however, will say at least initially that no matter who starts he envisions splitting the minutes at center right down the middle — 24 apiece. Last season, McGee was the starter to begin the season, but a stress fracture ended his season five games in. This season, he’ll have to fight to prove he should be the starter.

The Afflalo influence

Lawson, McGee, Mozgov, Wilson Chandler, Kenneth Faried and Gallinari were all on the team when Arron Afflalo last played for the Nuggets, which seems like a lot. Only, it feels like so much has changed since then. Certainly Afflalo has. He returns to the Nuggets at the peak of his career, playing his best basketball as a pro, ready to be a leader on and off the court and a reliable scorer on a nightly basis. The Nuggets hope his relentless work ethic rubs off on his teammates. That starts in camp.

Shaw’s second training camp

Last year was get-to-know-you time. Shaw was new. His staff was mostly new. His system was new. His practices were new. Now? He’s a known commodity. Most of his team knows what to expect and can get straight to business.