MISHAWAKA — Memories of hanging out with friends on weekends at the roller skating rink came rushing back to Jonda Jimerson late last week.

Oh, how she loved to skate when she was growing up.

Jimerson would meet up with friends at USA Skate on Main Street in Mishawaka, the same way her daughters met up with friends at a new local rink that opened late last week.

Her girls actually went skating two nights in a row, which Jimerson didn't mind since the new Michiana Roller Skating Rink is just minutes from their south-side home in Reverewood.

The rink is located in the former Regal Lanes bowling center at 1121 W. Eighth St., east of Logan Street.

Already, Jimerson loves the fact that her girls are getting out of the house to exercise in a safe environment, rather than being locked in on electronics.

"This is exciting for Mishawaka residents because they put everything in South Bend — all the community centers, skate parks, the Kroc Center," Jimerson says. "One of my best childhood memories was skating."

Jimerson remembers bowling at Regal Lanes, which opened its doors in 1958 and expanded into a larger recreation center and lounge through the years. Regal added a lounge with live music and dancing, billiards tables, miniature golf and even indoor archery.

Regal primarily catered to bowlers, however, under different ownership groups until the final frame was rolled in March 2013. That's when the building went dark.

Listing agents marketed the building as a perfect place for warehousing.

But South Bend area native Steve Phillips saw something else in the old Regal Lanes and it had nothing to do with strikes or spares.

Rather, it had everything to do with skating.

"Roller skating has enjoyed a return to popularity that some folks never left," says Phillips, who has been working on this project for more than a year.

He completely rehabbed the building, which involved removing the bowling lanes and installing a giant,16,000-square-foot maple hardwood floor. It's complete with laser lights and a traditional disco ball that no skating rink should be without.

A grand opening is planned for Halloween, in conjunction with the opening of a Starlight Pizza Shop that will be operated by Danny Szabo. Until then, Saylor's Pizza is being brought to the rink for skaters to purchase.

Phillips says the South Bend Roller Girls plan to make the rink their derby home.

"Within a 10-mile radius, we found there are 65,000 students in kindergarten through 12th grade," Phillips says about his decision to continue offering entertainment at the site. "Being in the middle of a neighborhood, we wanted to create a clean, safe environment to cater to kids."

He has already booked a few birthday parties and a November wedding reception, and expects church groups to rent space for senior bingo.

Mishawaka officials encourage adaptive reuse of older buildings like the Regal.

"A large building like that with large open areas adjacent to long-standing industrial businesses could have also been logically re-purposed for an industrial or warehousing use," says City Planner Ken Prince.

"But in this case, the owner obviously felt like the market was there to make the investment," Prince says. "What's special about the conversion to roller skating from bowling is that they are both entertainment uses."

Chipotle appears on plans

South Bend south-siders frequently ask whether any new restaurants are planned near their neighborhoods so they can dine out closer to home.

This week, we can say there are possible plans for a new chain location.

Chipotle appears on Mid-America Real Estate's marketing materials for a planned 5,000-square-foot building near the Wal-Mart-anchored Erskine Commons on Ireland Road.

The building will be located between Maxi's restaurant and Aunt Millie's Bakery.

Plans indicate that Chipotle will comprise about 2,400 square feet. The adjacent 2,600-square-foot storefront in the new building does not name a tenant.

"I doubt it will take too long to lease out the balance of the space once ground is broken and the facility starts to take shape," says Andrew Nemeth, a local real estate broker and consultant who was involved in the sale of the site to a private developer.

Chipotle also operates restaurants on North Main Street in Mishawaka and at Eddy Street Commons in South Bend.

Chris Arnold, a spokesman for Chipotle, which is based in Denver, says the company doesn't discuss plans for specific markets or individual locations beyond what is under lease and where construction is scheduled.

"At this time, we don’t have anything in South Bend that meets those criteria," Arnold said via email last week.

Have you heard

A planned new multi-tenant building on Mishawaka's north side may or may not contain two new restaurants. Qdoba Mexican Grill officials say there are no plans to open a location in the South Bend-Mishawaka area. A spokeswoman for Potbelly Sandwich Shop says the restaurant company has not secured a lease for the new Mishawaka location so it's premature to comment on it. Qdoba and Potbelly had been identified as possible tenants of a building that will be constructed on North Main Street, east of Meijer and south of La-Z-Boy Furniture Galleries.

Heidi Prescott's column runs on Wednesdays and Sundays. Contact her at hprescott@sbtinfo.com or 574-235-6070. You also can talk retail at Facebook.com/thebasket and at Twitter.com/marketbasket. Hear her weekday and Sunday reports at 6:52 a.m. and 8:52 a.m. on The WSBT Morning News with JT at WSBT-AM (960) and WSBT-FM (96.1). The Market Basket Minute airs Thursdays on the WSBT-TV "First News at 4."