SILVER SPRING, Md., February 22, 2014 — Every child needs to learn the alphabet. While there are countless books available to help them do that, Sleeping Bear Press has published dozens of alphabet books that range from history to sports, animals to cultural heritage.

G is for Gold Medal: An Olympics Alphabet is part of the Sports Alphabet series. Each page has a different letter that deals with the book’s theme, in this case the Olympics. Each letter is given four lines of text that addresses an aspect of the Olympics, from history in Ancient Greece, through events like high jump, to Olympic stars like Jim Thorpe.

In addition to the main text of the book that is designed to be read together as a story would be, there is additional text on each page. The extra text is a paragraph or two that go into more depth about the subject of each letter. Because of this duel text, this series of books is good for a wide age range. For both age groups, the book is great for building vocabulary. The shorter alphabet text is good for a younger audience that is learning their alphabet, while the extra text makes the books great for older readers by providing more information about each topic.

Author Brad Herzog considers himself a literary jack-of-all-trades. As a former sports reporter, he is well suited to write books for the Sports Alphabet series. Including G is for Gold Medal, Herzog has written 17 children’s books.

Illustrator Doug Bowles has illustrated a dozen children’s books, including several of Sleeping Bear Press’s alphabet books.

G is for Gold Medal has been chosen as part of the Scholastic Gold Medal Book List. The list contains sports themed books designed to target children’s interests spurred by the Winter Olympics in order to promote reading. The complete list contains books for ages ranging from preschool through 8th grade and can be found at http://mediaroom.scholastic.com/home.

G is for Gold Medal: An Olympics Alphabet was published on September 1, 2011 by Sleeping Bear Press. It is available in hardcover or as an ebook.