The Affordable Care Act has added a number of excellent benefits for women when it comes to insurance, from ending gender disparity on insurance plans to mandating every policy cover prenatal care or eliminating the ability to drop a person due to pre-existing medical conditions. But one of the most lauded benefits has been the introduction of no co-pay birth control, which means that women can obtain long lasting (and expensive) reversible contraception like IUDs and implants, or get their tubes tied, without massive out of pocket expenses. It also was supposed to allow those who want or need hormonal birth control to be able to get it without paying a monthly co-pay, which often was $15 to $40 per pack, which would end up costing hundreds of dollars a year.

Unfortunately, not every pharmacy has been following the rules.

According to news reports, CVS pharmacy, one of the country’s biggest pharmacy chains, has continued to collect co-pays despite them being eliminated under the ACA’s new rules. “One of the nation’s largest pharmacy chains has admitted it illegally charged thousands of women a co-pay for their birth control, and a San Diego 6 investigation has uncovered another instance that appears to be improper,” reports the local San Diego news station. “CVS Health acknowledged Monday it charged about 11,000 women for generic contraceptives that should have been provided at no out-of-pocket cost.”

CVS isn’t the only one illegally charging these co-pays, either. San Diego 6 reports “another large grocery store chain” was also doing the same.

The illegal co-pays likely resulted in hundred of thousands of dollars for the pharmacy.

According to Congresswomen Jackie Speier, the California Democrat who investigated complaints against CVS, the company states that the issue was a coding problem, and that it will be resolved and the money reimbursed. But Congresswoman Speier also announced that there are other companies she has received similar reports on, including Target and Walgreens, and that customers need to research if they have been illegally charged, and pharmacists must be retrained to ensure it no longer occurs.

“Congresswoman Speier is also recommending other companies that she received complaints about, such as Walgreens and Target, although they were not the Pharmacy Benefit Manager (PBM) in these cases, provide training to their retail pharmacists to know and apply the basic principles of the Affordable Care Act so that they can help identify and rectify these illegal co-pay charges for customers who frequent their stores,” read a statement from her office.

Unfortunately, it looks as if for now, the onus is on the patient herself to be positive she isn’t being scammed by her own pharmacist. “Women should know that if they are charged a co-pay for their birth control, they need to ask why. And they need to call their insurance company and ask why if the pharmacy doesn’t know,” recommends Judy Waxman of the National Women’s Law Center.

CVS has stated that it will begin reimbursing those who have been overcharged, and that they were already addressing the issue even before Congresswoman Speier began her investigation.

“Refund checks will be [sent] to affected plan members by September 26,” CVS’s head of federal affairs Sol J. Ross wrote in response to the Congresswoman. “In fact, refund checks have already started to go out and all should be received by October 1.” According to Huffington post, CVS said it was already aware of the error and working on reimbursement before Congresswoman Speier’s inquiry.

Refund checks are helpful, of course, but not everyone may be aware that they are coming and, even more so, a number of people may still be confused about whether they should be paying a co-pay at all. The National Women’s Law Center provides sample letters for those who believe they have been paying illegal co-pays, as well as step by step instructions on how to proceed to either address the issue with your pharmacist or plan manager, or go about collecting the funds that should never have been taken from you in the first place.

Photo credit: Thinkstock