Syrian refugees Reem Habashieh, second from right, and her brothers, Mohammed Habashieh, left, and Yaman Habashieh read a local newspaper on a train with their mother, Khawla Kareem, far left, and sister, Raghad Habashieh. The family arrived in Berlin in September, five of the 37,000 who have flooded into Germany this month seeking a new life. (Photo: Markus Schreiber, AP)

The announcement by the White House that the United States will take in 10,000 refugees from the Syrian Civil War has kicked off a furious debate over whether they can be safely admitted without the danger that terrorists lurk among them. It is, however, possible that 10,000 people can be effectively vetted. The assurances of a multi-layered process expressed by White House spokesman Josh Earnest seem plausible. Ten thousand sounds like a manageable number, but what about 800,000? That's the number of Syrians that German Chancellor Angela Merkel has pledged to admit over the next year. Even with their legendary thoroughness, the Germans cannot possibly vet that large a number of people. It is Angela Merkel's problem. But it is also ours.

Once settled in Germany, few will want to go back to Syria, a country whose multi-sided civil war shows no signs of abating. In time, some substantial number will apply for, and receive, German citizenship. That means a German passport, and armed with that document, entry into the United States becomes immeasurably simpler than trying to enter here with a Syrian passport.

The willingness of the Merkel government and of the German people is, in large measure, a gesture of atonement for the past sins of their country. The Germans have shown themselves admirable in their willingness to recognize the moral burden they bear for the crimes of the Nazi regime. One cannot visit Berlin, as I recently did, and not be humbled by the many monuments to the victims of Nazi tyranny. But this willingness to shoulder the burden of guilt has led the German government to pursue a naive and indiscriminate policy of accepting any and all Syrians who show up on their doorstep.

Clearly, this open-door policy is not all about altruism. Germany suffers, like most Western European countries, with an abysmal birth-rate in its native population and has, in the past, needed to resort to a "guest worker" program to alleviate its birth dearth by importing labor from Turkey and the Balkans. Chancellor Merkel no doubt sees her labor-force problems being solved instantly with Syrians fleeing the civil war. Even conscience-smitten Germans are not moved solely by altruism.

Would anyone be willing to lay down a money bet that says that the so-called Islamic State has not leapt at the opportunity to insert some of its lunatic followers in the throngs of refugees now inundating Europe? ISIS has shown itself remarkably adept at beating us at our own game in such things as the use of social media to gain recruits among young Westerners. I defy anyone to rule this out as a possibility or to assure us that some number of terrorists will not soon be comfortably inside Germany.

Once unleashed, the flood of refugees could not be stopped by the weak and impoverished governments of southeastern Europe or the European Union's laughably feeble Frontex border protection agency. That caught everyone by surprise. But Chancellor Merkel is gambling with our chips when she welcomes in almost a million people from a country infested with terrorists who, once established, will almost certainly be showing up on our doorstep. The numbers may not be great but look what fewer than two dozen of them did to us 14 years ago.

Ross K. Baker is the distinguished professor of political science at Rutgers University and a member of USA TODAY's Board of Contributors.

Read or Share this story: http://wrtnews.co/1iPzzLh