AURORA — Of course Cherokee Trail, the 2012 Class 5A state runner-up, noticed last week’s CHSAANow.com media and coaches poll. Specifically, that the Cougars weren’t in it.

True, the Cougars, who began the season ranked No. 2, dropped their season opener, a close one to Chatfield while having more than a half-dozen suspensions. But they followed with a 42-0 blasting of Fort Collins before crushing Gateway 48-0 (the 40-point mercy rule was employed before halftime) Saturday afternoon in nonleague action at Aurora Public Schools Stadium.

No matter. The Cougars are resigned to the fact that it’s simply one of those things they’ll have to deal with while attempting to challenge again in 5A. Plus, more important matters are on the immediate horizon — Cherokee Trail will host undefeated Regis Jesuit next weekend before heading into the always-demanding Centennial League schedule.

Quarterback Aric Johnson, who threw for three touchdowns and ran for one, said the Cougars don’t care where they’re ranked.

“We just want to play fast and play CT football,” he said.

Cougars coach Monte Thelen fretted more about his team’s lack of practice time last week. With only two days outside, the Cougars started slowly Saturday before kicking it in.

“We played well, but got off a little slow,” Thelen said. “We’ve got most of our guys here now, so it gives us a little more continuity. The weather’s really playing havoc with us.”

As for being unranked, Thelen said, “I think most people know … but, first of all, tons of credit to Chatfield. (The Chargers) played great. They won on the last play of the game. But I think a lot of people know that the team that played the last two weeks and the team that played against Chatfield (has) a lot more guys playing.”

“It happens,” he said of players violating team rules. “We love our guys, but sometimes our guys, just like our own children, make choices that they probably regret and you’ve got to discipline them.”

All told, Cherokee Trail rolled to a modest 369 yards of offense. Izaiah Lottie caught two scoring passes and Cameron Currington rushed for one and had a reception for another.

Gateway (2-1), managed to gain only 166 total yards against a Cougars defense has put up eight consecutive scoreless quarters.

“We came out flat,” Olys coach Ashour Peera said. “The whole first half was the difference. For our guys who go both ways, we should have performed better … just (the Cougars’) personnel gave us problems.”