Struck by a lightning bolt which hit him directly in the head, Ryan Cross has survived this Memorial Day Weekend accident. Courtesy of KTVB and YouTube

Take one man, add an all-terrain vehicle, and combine with a hail storm. Sound like a recipe for disaster? This three-ingredient snack did lead to a catastrophe, yet, strangely, it also did not as ABC News reported.

Over Memorial Day Weekend, Ryan Cross and two friends took his four-wheeler out for a spin on their camping trip near Idaho City, Idaho, when an unexpected storm began. Taking shelter beneath a tree, a lightning bolt hit him — directly in the head. Despite how crazy-dangerous this sounds, Cross somehow survived and continues to recover in a hospital bed today.

Ryan Cross Courtesy of Heather Cross

"Ryan got off his four wheeler, went under a tree to protect himself from the hail, leaned up against a tree, was looking at a map on his phone, and that is when it all happened," his wife, Heather Cross, told station KTVB.

Though Heather Cross was not a witness, she explains how lightning hit her 34-year-old husband in the head before exiting his back. One friend who had remained on the all-terrain vehicle heard ringing in his ears. The second friend, who happened to have one leg on the ground and one on a dirt bike, was hit indirectly by the same bolt and knocked unconscious.

The friend revived, flagged down a passing SUV, and they all called for help.

Lightning Safety

Each year in the United States, 1,000 people are struck by lightning. Your personal odds of getting directly hit by a bolt from the blue are about one in 280,000. Houses, well, that's a different story. According to the National Lightning Safety Institute — yeah, who knew — one out of every 200 houses will be struck each year.

While you may not be able to protect your house, you can protect yourself: “If you can see it, flee it; If you can hear it, clear it.” As NLSI advises, if you are outside when a storm begins, move to a safe location, including any large permanent building or metal vehicle. Unsafe places include being near metal or water, under trees, on hills, or near electrical equipment. Though people do survive, getting hit by lightning does cause damage.

Following the lightning strike, Cross and his destroyed clothes were still hot to the touch when rushed to a Boise hospital. There he was placed in intensive care. The bolt to the head caused Cross’ brain to bleed and left a bright red streak from his neck to his waist. Though the doctors dare not speculate what long-term effects Cross might encounter, as of now he is alert, eating, and walking, with his wife and two children gathered by his side.