A rare bipartisan health care bill taking shape in the House poses a real gut check for Senate Democrats as to what they care about most.

Will it be pride of authorship and purity on issues like abortion rights? Or making the most of their reduced power in this Congress to solve problems and help those left behind in the economic recovery?

Story Continued Below

By all measures, the bill represents a major breakthrough both in terms of government policy and House politics. No less than Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) and Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) helped craft the compromise, which incorporates significant changes in Medicare as well as billions in relief for children and the elderly living at the edge of poverty.

But even at this stage, Senate Democrats remain surprisingly cool, almost resentful.

Those on the powerful Senate Finance Committee issued a “unified” statement late last week that did more to recite their reservations than encourage the House effort. The latest complaint is that Pelosi has been too quick to accept restrictions on abortions as part of a two-year extension of $3.6 billion in annual funding for community health centers.

This charge, promoted by Planned Parenthood and women’s rights groups, carries added weight because of an ongoing battle in the Senate over anti-abortion language inserted in an otherwise bipartisan bill to combat human trafficking.

But a closer look shows the two fights are very different from a practical standpoint. And if Senate Democrats can’t see past the trees and make this distinction, critics say it speaks volumes about their politics.

Indeed, the tepid support from Senate Democrats also gives lie to their oft-stated concerns about income inequality. If the package fails in Congress, the very wealthy will escape having to pay more in Medicare premiums. The biggest losers will be low-income seniors and working-class households down the economic ladder.

The abortion issue — described by Democrats as radioactive — comes into play in the funding for the more than 1,200 community health centers around the nation.

Since 2010, these centers have enjoyed a stream of mandatory appropriations first approved under the Affordable Care Act but due to expire at the end of this fiscal year, which falls on Sept. 30.

Without some relief, almost certain cuts will follow, given the caps imposed on discretionary spending in 2016. Equally important, any extra money which the health centers do secure in the coming budget battles will come out of the hides of other education, labor and health programs in 2016.

As a veteran of the House Appropriations Committee, Pelosi understands these stakes very well. So does Sen. Patty Murray (D- Wash.), who will have major influence over how Senate Democrats finally break on the House bill.

Indeed, Murray represents almost her own trifecta here: A former teacher who identifies with the women’s rights movement, a member of her party leadership and the top Democrat on the Senate Appropriations panel, which oversees the annual bill funding the Department of Health and Human Services.

Yet for all that, Murray has been largely mum and noncommittal.

The abortion language itself is not new. Named after its early champion, the late Rep. Henry Hyde (R-Ill), it has been attached to annual funding for HHS for better than three decades.

As such, it already applies to annual appropriations for community health centers. The language bars any use of taxpayer dollars for abortions except in cases of rape and incest or narrowlydefined circumstances when the pregnancy poses a threat to the life of the mother.

The tussle over the Boehner-Pelosi bill stems from a matter of legislative construction. The language makes reference to past appropriations riders affecting public health service programs but is applied here to an extension of health center funding rooted in the Affordable Care Act — not just an annual spending bill.

Since the ACA is a permanent statute, it follows that any amendment to any part of the ACA seeps back into the U.S. Code.

This is a genuine worry for Planned Parenthood and the National Women’s Law Center, which fear that Republicans are waging a concerted campaign to quietly elevate the Hyde restrictions. But the similarities to the human trafficking bill soon end after that.

In the case of the trafficking bill, the reach of the Hyde language is extended so it applies to not just public funding but also private dollars: money collected from increased penalties on those who promote or take advantage of trafficking. This is important since the Crime Victims Trust Fund — established in 1984 and quite similar in its financing — is typically not covered by Hyde.

Second, almost by definition, the victims of human trafficking are often young women and girls who have been subjected to sexual abuse. The idea that Hyde would be applied here to limit medical services available during their recovery is infuriating for women’s rights groups.

The situation for community health center funding is very different. Public money is much more clearly involved. Moreover, the population served by the centers has far broader health care needs than abortion — needs that will go unmet without the House bill.

Senate Budget Committee Chairman Patty Murray will have major influence over how Senate Democrats finally break on the House bill. | Getty

Of the 22 million patients seen each year at the centers, 13 million are women or girls under 18, said Daniel Hawkins, a top policy official with the National Association of Community Health Centers. “If there is a women’s health and children’s health issue here, it will be if Congress doesn’t act,” he said.

The annual $3.6 billion is a mandatory appropriation. As such, Republicans allied with Boehner argue that the deal must include the same Hyde language that regularly applies to discretionary appropriations bills.

Attorneys for women’s rights organizations counter that this is not needed since President Barack Obama already agreed in a 2010 executive order that any such appropriations from ACA would be subject to Hyde-like restrictions.

But given all the Republican anger toward Obama’s executive orders, it seems almost laughable to ask the GOP to accept this concession when it has the power to insist on legislation.

When Democrats ran the Senate in the previous Congress, they cut deals of their own with Boehner. Time and again, then-Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) urged the speaker to defy the Republican right and come more to the center.

The fact that Boehner is now doing precisely that with Pelosi is what makes the politics of the House bill so intriguing. But if the Senate Democratic response is to go into a sulk, the party risks further isolating itself.

The community health center provision is worth $7.2 billion alone over two years. Additional money would go to the National Health Service as well to permanently extend a program to help low-income seniors pay their Medicare Part B premium for physician services. The children of working class families would get a two-year extension of their Children’s Health Insurance Program coverage and thereby insulate the program from what could be nasty fights this summer over Obamacare.

By playing tough, Senate Democrats may hope to get a longer, four-year extension of CHIP. That would be a genuine win. But it’s a stretch to assume that Pelosi hasn’t tried already. And without doubt, some senators are using CHIP to hide their nervousness about structural reforms demanding the wealthy pay more in Medicare premiums.

Activists march in the annual March for Life, Jan. 22, 2015 in Washington, D.C. (M. Scott Mahaskey/Politico)

The Boehner-Pelosi compromise would end the flawed formula now governing Medicare reimbursements for physicians. But to help cover the costs, it asks high-income seniors to pay more beginning in 2018. Little about those affected could be described as middle class. Any couple for whom the higher premiums are a long-term concern would have to continue to enjoy an income of $267,000 or more into retirement.

The very breadth of the package has drawn diverse support.

How often do the conservative editorial pages of The Wall Street Journal and the liberal nonprofit Families USA support the same health care bill? When do the fiercely anti-tax Grover Norquist of Americans for Tax Reform and Robert Greenstein, the founder and president of the progressive Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, agree on most anything at all?

Given all that, if Senate Democrats can’t do more to work with their own fellow Democrats across the Capitol, won’t voters begin to notice?