DALLAS, Feb. 16, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Viverae®, a leader in total population health, announces the expansion of conditions covered under its industry-leading, disease management program for employers. While traditional disease management programs only identify and attempt to manage roughly five chronic conditions, Viverae sets a new industry standard covering 22 conditions, including asthma, obesity, and sleep apnea.

About half of all American adults suffer from at least one chronic disease and roughly 25 percent live with multiple chronic conditions, punctuating the need for wide-ranging disease management. The most common chronic conditions cost the U.S. economy more than $1 trillion annually including treatment cost and employer loss in productivity. Seventy-five percent of U.S. healthcare spending goes toward treating chronic illnesses. Expertly executed disease management programs allow employers to focus on high-risk, high-cost individuals through support from highly skilled clinical staff and registered nurses and dietitians.

As the company analyzed the major contributors to chronic conditions, it incontestably knew that there are initial chronic conditions that people live with for extensive periods before developing more severe chronic conditions—for example, hypertension is a major contributor to congestive heart failure. Viverae's approach to incorporating primary chronic conditions into its own disease management program enables the timely detection and prevention of at-risk members.

"Employers who fail to offer disease or chronic condition management as part of their comprehensive wellness program are missing the biggest opportunity to help employees who need it the most," said Dr. Jeff Brizzolara, chief clinical officer at Viverae. "By identifying employees with primary chronic conditions before they develop a secondary chronic condition, we know we will have a greater impact on reducing the cost of health care expenditures, increasing productivity, and improving the quality of life of our members."

Focusing on prevention and condition management with personalized, evidence-based care plans supports Viverae's approach to keep members engaged with their health through a roadmap that helps close gaps in care and manage their conditions. Members will work with their clinicians to actively manage their conditions.

Viverae is best known for its expertise in workplace wellness with over 350 clients and nearly one million members in a variety of industries across the U.S. Its wellness programs are designed to create a culture of health and well-being within employee populations while managing healthcare costs.

About Viverae

Dallas-based Viverae is a total population health management provider and an industry thought leader. Our comprehensive solutions help employers build healthy cultures and manage healthcare costs. Our configurable programs manage engagement and incentives with our proprietary application, MyViverae®. This secure, simple yet powerful app integrates third-party claims and member health data to personalize wellness programs and create an engaging experience.

Viverae's health management programs are compliant with Affordable Care Act requirements and applicable law, and National Committee for Quality Assurance and national health advocacy group standards.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150901/262843LOGO

SOURCE Viverae, Inc.