WASHINGTON — Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee will appear Thursday at a campaign rally in Fort Smith for Republican Senate candidate Tom Cotton.

The “River Valley Political Rally” will be held at the Fort Smith Museum of History, 320 Rogers Ave., starting at 11:30 a.m., according to the Cotton campaign. U.S. Sen. John Boozman, R-Ark., is also expected to address the crowd.

This will mark the second appearance that Huckabee is making for Cotton’s Senate campaign. He appeared with Cotton in Little Rock in August. Huckabee, now a resident of Florida and national television and radio personality, is considering a run for president in 2016.

“I’m honored to have the support of two great Arkansas leaders like Governor Huckabee and Senator Boozman,” Cotton said in a statement. “Both Governor Huckabee and Senator Boozman have consistently stood up for Arkansas values and supported the right policies for our state.”

The Cotton campaign also announced that it will host a free concert featuring country singer Collin Raye on Oct. 12 at the Arkansas Convention Center in Texarkana.

Cotton, a freshman congressman from Dardanelle, is challenging two-term incumbent Sen. Mark Pryor, D-Ark., in a race that is among the most competitive this mid-term. The outcome also could help determine which party controls the Senate in the next session. Republicans need to gain six seats to secure the majority.

In August, Huckabee cast the race as a referendum on Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev. “It’s very important to America that Harry Reid gets moved to the back of the room,” he said. “Bills go in, but they never come out. … It has been unbelievable, the obstruction that this man has brought to the Senate.”

Cotton has hammered away at a similar message, characterizing Pryor as a loyal Democratic vote for the Obama administration. Pryor, meanwhile, has highlighted his independence from the Democratic majority on issues such as environmental regulations.

Obama acknowledged that the mid-term campaigns have national implications during a speech Thursday at Northwestern University in Illinois.

“Now, I am not on the ballot this fall. Michelle is pretty happy about that,” Obama said. “But make no mistake: These policies are on the ballot — every single one of them.”

Obama then defended his presidency, noting that the deficit has been reduced and Obamacare is “working pretty well” at delivering good, affordable health care. He also criticized Republicans in Congress for opposing efforts to raise the federal minimum wage protecting tax breaks for the wealthy.

“Barack Obama confirmed what we’ve known all along, a vote for Mark Pryor is a vote for the president and his failed liberal agenda,” said Fred Brown, a spokesman for the Republican National Committee in Arkansas.