There is no doubt that trains sounding horns at Northern Colorado traffic intersections can be heard but it remains to be seen whether officials of the Federal Railroad Administration and key congressional committees have heard the complaints on the noise and whether anything meaningful will be done about it.

Colorado senators and congressman as well as local officials from Longmont, Loveland, Windsor, Fort Collins and Greeley are continuing to express their concerns about rules approved in 2005 that require trains to sound their horns for up to 20 seconds when entering intersections if other safety features such as barricades and flashing lights are not present.

Colorado has experienced a number of train-vehicle and train-pedestrian collisions, which usually end with disastrous results for the pedestrians and the occupants of vehicles. It is understandable that government officials would insist on loud warnings when trains travel through intersections. A problem from the railroad perspective is that many drivers listen to the radio or stereo at loud volumes, making it hard for drivers to hear what is happening outside the vehicle.

Advertisement

But the consensus of our federal and local government representatives is that the noise alerts are too loud and too long. In Windsor, which 20,000 residents call home, there are 15 railroad crossings. And 13 of them are located along four miles. These horns can reach up to 100 decibels which has been compared to the noise from a jackhammer. Safety is critical but these blasts can make it very hard to talk, listen, think or sleep depending on what a person is doing at the time. Colorado officials are saying the train noise is deterring tourists from visiting and the economy from percolating.

What can be done?

One suggestion is for the federal government to amend its rules so that the needs of different communities can be taken into account. This is possible and should be considered, but this is complicated when looking at the nation as a whole. The Federal Railroad Commission is going to allow communities to speak about their concerns by the spring of 2014.

There is an exception to the train horn rule and that is the construction of quiet zones with alternative safety equipment. But towns and cities say this approach is too expensive for widespread use. So, like many things in Washington, D.C., it appears that some form of compromise is needed.

Sen. Michael Bennet, D-Colorado, reported in the Coloradoan, offered a memorable comment referring to the train horn blasts, "This is a classic case of a bunch of unintended consequences that are flowing from somebody's well-meaning idea in Washington that, by the time it gets here, it doesn't make sense."