In the years that followed the 2008 economic collapse, the demand for food stamps in Guilford County increased dramatically and continued to rise for years. However, now that the economy is improving and the jobless rate is declining, food stamp cases have finally gone – well, they actually haven’t gone down to any significant extent.

While the demand for food stamps goes up when the economy heads south and unemployment levels rise, the converse apparently doesn’t always hold true – at least not in Guilford County.

County social services administrators say there are a number of reasons demand for food stamps has remained high. For instance, while more people are working, some have been unsuccessful finding new jobs that pay the equivalent of their pre-crash salaries. There’s also an increased awareness among county residents of food stamp benefits due to outreach programs conducted by the county’s social services workers – who attempt to get everyone eligible for food stamps to sign up. Another factor social services administrators cite is that, as people sign up for Obamacare, those applicant’s become familiarized with other government benefits available to them as well. In addition, the E-pass online sign-up system makes it easier than ever to apply for benefits.

Elizabeth White, the economic services division director for Guilford County Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), said that, despite the fact that the economy is getting better in Guilford County, there hasn’t been any significant drop in the food stamp numbers.

“No, we’re not seeing a decline,” she said when asked about a drop-off in food stamp cases.

Before the economic collapse, there were about 28,000 households in the county receiving food stamps – a category of benefits that often is referred to as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SNAP.

White said that, in fiscal 2009-2010, Guilford County had 34,261 households getting the benefits while, in 2013-2014, that number had climbed to 48,454. A report earlier this year showed the count at 48,362, which was roughly the same as the 2013-2014 average, and DHHS administrators agreed that there hasn’t been a significant downturn.

White said one reason the number of cases isn’t dropping is that, while more people may be working, they still aren’t necessarily making enough money to adequately feed their family. She said a lot of people have the misconception that food stamps pay all food costs for families receiving the aid, but she said that isn’t the case.

“It’s a supplemental program; it’s not supposed to be the whole thing,” White said.

She said some jobs are coming back in this area but the nature of the local economy is different now than it was even a decade ago – and job growth in certain job categories doesn’t benefit a lot of the people who are receiving food stamp benefits through Guilford County DHHS.

“The economy is turning around,” White said, “but, if you look at the industry we had in 2006 and 2007, it’s a different skill set.”

She said the local economy that once relied heavily on manufacturing, textiles and tobacco is shifting toward jobs in technology, customer service and other fields that require different skills than many workers in this area possess.

The shift from manufacturing jobs to technology and service jobs is a nationwide trend, but it’s been especially pronounced in Guilford County and the surrounding areas because, for years, the economy in central North Carolina was heavily based on job categories that have been drying up. That trend was in place even before the turn of the current century, but the financial collapse helped finish off many of the “old economy” jobs that were barely hanging on and that are no longer available in Guilford County despite better economic times.

Money for the food stamp program comes from the federal government. However, the county bears much of the cost of administering those benefits, so the heavier the food stamp caseload, the more of a burden it is on the county’s resources. And the state’s NC FAST computer system – now infamously known as “NC SLOW” – has been such a complete and utter fiasco that every additional case the department must handle is much more of a burden than it would be if social services staff had a user-friendly, well-functioning computer system to help. At times, using NC FAST seems to be almost as burdensome as doing everything with a quill pen and parchment paper.

White said that, while Guilford County isn’t seeing a downward trend in cases yet, at least the county isn’t seeing rapid increases like the ones that occurred from 2008 to 2011. She said that, after fiscal 2011-2012, a three-year increase leveled off.

Guilford County Health and Human Services Director Joe Raymond said this week that the trend in Guilford County is something that’s being seen across the country. He said that, from 2008, food stamp use roughly doubled nationwide.

Raymond saw similar increases in food stamp usage from 2008 to 2011 in Forsyth County where he served as the social services director before coming to work for Guilford County about a year ago.

He said that in some other parts of the country food stamp use is declining and that three or four states were starting to see significant drop-offs.

The word Raymond uses to describe Guilford County’s current food stamp situation is “stable.”

Raymond said food stamp usage usually drops only well after any economic recovery is in place and, even after a recovery, those clients are often the people who don’t have the job training to get the best paying jobs.

“They are the first ones to be laid off in a slow economy and the last ones to be back off [food stamps],” he said.

He said the long-term policy question that needs to be asked now is whether those jobs will return, and, if not, what’s should be done about the situation.

Guilford County Social Services Director Heather Skeens said one problem is that new patterns, such as a sustained plateau in food stamp use, are really only evident a year or so in hindsight – so she said she still isn’t ready to say a drop-off is here.

“Even though the economy is improving, it takes years for us to see that in Food and Nutrition Services,” Skeens said.

She also said her department is seeing what social services officials refer to as “the woodworking effect.” Due to current circumstances and practices, many clients who never considered food stamps before are applying and receiving the benefits and they can now apply online for food stamps. Skeens said the E-pass system, which allows filing for food stamp benefits online, makes it easier to apply. Also, these days, information entered for other benefits can be reused for food stamp benefits, so applicants don’t have to start over if they have applied for other benefits. With large numbers of people applying for Obamacare programs, many of those clients realize they’re eligible for food stamps as well.

Also, for years, the county’s social services operations have had it as a goal to see that all families in the county eligible for food stamps receive them.

Skeens said her department is required to reach out to county residents who might be eligible for food stamps but are unaware that benefit is available to them.

Skeens added that the high demand for food stamps does put pressure on staff and resources. She said that, in general, for Medicaid administration, the federal government pays 75 percent of the cost and the county pays 25 percent, but, when it comes to food stamps, generally those administrative costs are split down the middle between the county and the feds.

She said one problem due to NC FAST is that it is now difficult to gather data about food stamp use. She said that current reports her departments can access “are not sufficient and not comparable to” the reports the department used to get several years ago before the change over to NC FAST with all of its inadequacies. Skeens said that hopefully that will change in the future as the state upgrades and fine-tunes the much-maligned system.