PASADENA >> Employees at the Pasadena Health Department might be muttering “thanks Obama” after a proposed budget cut spurred by the Affordable Care Act aims to slash $4 million from the department’s budget by eliminating services and 66 positions, about half of which are already vacant.

Under the proposed budget, the department’s pre-natal and HIV clinics would close permanently, according to Assistant City Manager Steve Mermell.

“We’ve been providing safety net services for people for a number of years,” Mermell said. “In the new marketplace, if you will, we’re not viable. We’re not closing the health department but we are having to step away from some of the programs we were providing when other people weren’t providing them.”

Pasadena is one of only three cities in the state with its own public health department. The department’s clinics serve the under- and uninsured both throughout Pasadena and the region.

Pasadena resident Joyce Spencer in a letter to the editor questioned the cuts and the lack of discussion so far.

“The decimation of this valuable city department seems to be happening very secretively,” she wrote.

She said the cuts and layoffs would “severely” undermine an inexpensive and grant-funded service that addresses community needs.

The public will get a chance to address the proposal on June 1, when it’s expected to be presented to the council.

The proposed cuts largely come in response to the Affordable Care Act, as more people having access to insurance means fewer people who need the department’s services, Mermell said. The expansion of the country’s health care system has also led to the rise of new clinics that can better and more efficiently serve the clients the health department treated previously, he said.

“People are now able to move onto insurance, which we don’t take, so they can go get coverage elsewhere, which is good for them, but it shrinks our market share,” he said. “The services we provided made sense at the time, they don’t make sense anymore.”

The cuts would drop the department’s budget from $16 million to around $11 million, Mermell said. About 37 people could lose their jobs.

Mermell said the city is working to move some of those people to different departments, to other vacant positions in the health department and to clinics that partner with the city.

The health department has already stopped accepting new clients at its pre-natal clinic to avoid having the women switch to a new provider late in their pregnancy. That clinic could close in December to the existing clients.

Advertisement

The city wants to transition its pre-natal clinic to the Community Health Alliance of Pasadena next door, which is expanding its own services in response to the Affordable Care Act. They’re hoping to find a partnership either with CHAP or another agency for the HIV/AIDS clinic as well, Mermell said.

Councilman John Kennedy said residents have expectations of the types of services that the department provides, but that those may need to be refined.

“Those are only proposed cuts and they will have a full hearing and debate at the council level, before anything is actually done,” he stressed. “That will give the residents and the voters of Pasadena an opportunity to provide their testimony, input and recommendations through our deliberative process.”