Photo

If anyone could manage to obtain treatment under the Affordable Care Act, it should have been Liz Jackson.

With a severe nerve condition that forced her out of a job, Ms. Jackson did not just qualify for a government-subsidized plan, but she also knew her way around the new system, having been trained as a volunteer “health care navigator” to help others sign up.

Yet the collapse of her insurer, Health Republic Insurance of New York — the largest of 12 health care co-ops nationwide set to close this year — has left her and more than 200,000 others in a panic over medical coverage after their plan ceases on Nov. 30.

Health Republic lived a short and difficult existence, squeezed by premiums that were low by design and cut off by Republicans in Congress from government subsidies promised along with the federal health care law.

Ms. Jackson, 33, is in a situation more grim than most of those losing coverage. She said she was told by state health care officials this week that she no longer qualified for subsidies promised under the federal law. Without them, she does not know if she will be able to afford insurance after her Health Republic policy ends.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I’m an advocate for the health care law,” said Ms. Jackson, who lives in Harlem. “And if I can’t navigate this, who can?”

Health Republic and the 11 other co-ops set to close this year make up more than half of the total plans established under the Affordable Care Act. The 23 organizations — nonprofit start-ups with consumer-led boards — were set up as alternatives to government-run plans and were intended to create competition with companies like Aetna and Anthem.

The plans took off but soon encountered financial and political difficulties.

Health care has long been considered one of the most challenging markets for new players, dogged by rising treatment costs and dominated by a few big companies. The cooperatives faced pressure to keep premiums low. Congress also made deep cuts to the funds meant to boost struggling co-ops, reducing that budget by 60 percent.

Health Republic has now become a cautionary tale and a warning to other struggling insurers. The company has also become a source of anxiety, from Albany to Long Island, as some New Yorkers try to determine what insurance plan to sign up for next.

Problems arose in September when state regulators said they were closing the co-op and instructed policy holders to seek new insurance plans on the federal exchange. Initially, Health Republic plans were to stay in effect until the end of the year. But last week, the State Department of Financial Services said it had moved the date to Nov. 30.

The state said in a statement last week that a “review of Health Republic’s finances has found that the company’s financial condition is substantially worse than the company previously reported in its filings.” Consumers have until Nov. 15 to select a new plan under the federal health care law to avoid losing coverage in December.

Health Republic said it had operated transparently with regulators and had had an independent financial review in August. The company said in a statement last Wednesday that it was forced to shut down because it received less than 13 percent of the roughly $149 million that the federal government promised it under the health care law.

Sharon Schanzer, a self-employed graphic designer on the Upper West Side in Manhattan, said the experience with Health Republic had her feeling déjà vu.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Ms. Schanzer said she enrolled after having a similar policy with the Freelancers Union, a group that had been offering low-cost plans to independent workers. But in 2014, the Freelancers Union said it would cancel its plans for roughly 25,000 members, because the federal health care law had made it impossible to continue.

Ms. Schanzer said she opted for a $680-per-month plan from Health Republic. She found the plan affordable with her income, but it was more restrictive than the plan with Freelancers Union, which allowed her to see doctors outside the plan’s network. However, she said her opinion of Health Republic changed when she received a letter from the insurer saying it was seeking approval to raise her premium to about $850 per month.

The rate increase never came. Not long later, she received a notice that the company would shut down entirely.

“I had no idea it was a speculative thing at the time,” Ms. Schanzer said, “that this was a chance I was taking and it wasn’t going to last.”

Some officials in the health care industry said that there were early signs that Health Republic was not on good footing. Kathleen Shure, of the Greater New York Hospital Association, a trade group, said she and others were surprised at Health Republic’s low-cost plans because of what it had agreed to pay hospitals and doctors.

“When we saw their premiums announced, we all started scratching our heads,” she said. “They had low premiums and a huge network. We thought it was marketing.”

Ms. Shure said Health Republic had been known for being slow to make payments. Now that it will close, her organization is preparing hospitals for what could be an even longer collection process. On Monday, the group’s president, Kenneth Raske, sent a letter to hospitals asking them to tally what Health Republic owes.

Ms. Shure added: “We know not everybody is going to be paid 100 percent, we just don’t know how bad it’s going to be.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Health Republic’s collapse has left Bonnie Rothman Morris, who runs a public relations company in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., uncertain about how she will receive treatment for acoustic neuroma, a benign tumor that causes hearing loss, and unsteadiness when she moves.

Every year, she goes for an expensive daylong procedure that involves an M.R.I. and visits to two specialists to review the tumor. This year, she said, when she made her appointment, the doctor’s assistant told her there was a chance she would have to pay the bills herself if Health Republic failed to pay.

Ms. Morris canceled her visit, which was scheduled for Monday.

“I am going to wait until I have health insurance that I can trust will pay the bills,” she said.