Members of the Girl Scouts of Central & Southern NJ and Girl Scouts Heart of NJ will be among those Girl Scouts nationwide using a new Digital Cookie platform during their Cookie Program.

Emaya Aponte with Girl Scouts of Central and Southern New Jersey gets ready to sell cookies using the new Digital Cookie program. (Photo: Courtesy of Girl Scouts of the USA) Story Highlights Some local girl scouts will be using a new Digital Cookie platform during their Cookie Program.

The program is part of a nationwide Girl Scouts' initiative.

Customers' orders can be processed, paid for and confirmed at the point of sale.

Online orders also will be accepted.

The traditional Girl Scout Cookie Program is going digital.

For the first time since sales began nearly 100 years ago, Girl Scouts of the USA will allow its young cookie-selling entrepreneurs to sell their wares via a mobile app or personalized websites.

Members of the Girl Scouts of Central and Southern New Jersey and the Girl Scouts Heart of New Jersey will be among the Girl Scouts nationwide who will be using the new Digital Cookie platform during their next Girl Scout Cookie Program.

"Through Digital Cookie, we are bringing the Girl Scout Cookie Program fully into the 21st Century," said Ginny Marino, CEO of Girl Scouts of Central and Southern New Jersey, which has members in nine counties, including Middlesex, and one troop in the Somerset section of Franklin. "The Girl Scout Cookie Program is the largest girl-run enterprise in the world and it's the critical way that girls build their confidence and their financial and business skills. In the 21st Century, commerce has an e-commerce component and it's really important to us that the girls learn how to conduct business using these kinds of tools and technologies. Digital Cookie lets us continue our proud tradition of teaching today's girls the skills of tomorrow, while remaining true to the core principles of the Girl Scout mission and the values taught by our iconic cookie program."

The Digital Cookie program

The Digital Cookie program is intended to enhance, not replace, traditional use of paper spreadsheets, according to Girl Scouts of the USA website.

The new platform will allow local Girl Scouts to take in-person cookie orders from customers and, for the first time, automate cookie shipments through a transaction application designed specifically for Girl Scouts. Customers who buy cookies from girls using the application will be able to have their order processed, paid for and confirmed at point of sale. The program uses a mobile application, which is downloaded, and accessed by the Girl Scouts.

"Girls also can send an email to customers and customers will be able to reply through the email and order cookies electronically," Marino said.

That's advantageous to both the girls and customers, she said.

"The girls will have a new way to market and sell Girl Scout cookies this year," Marino said. "Customers, who may not have had access to Girl Scouts and their cookies, will get the opportunity to order cookies. It will also help some of our volunteers. This over time will make some of the cookie sale process easier for them and give the girls a chance to sell more."

"The girls also will be able to monitor their sales in real time," Natasha Southerland, chief marketing and communications officer, Girl Scouts of Central and Southern New Jersey.

Southerland said nine Girl Scouts and their parents attended a training and showcase session for the new Digital Cookie in New York in early November

"The girls learned how to use the app, how to take orders and track their cookie sales," Southerland said. "The girls showed all of us just how it was to launch their Digital Cookie business. The in-person, app-based Digital Cookie experience upholds the same safety standards as any door-to-door or booth sales activities — adult supervision is required. In addition, parents and girls must sign a Digital Cookie safety pledge to educate themselves about internet safety."

Bria Vainqueur, 13, of Somerset section of Franklin, a member of Girl Scout Troop 86781 with the Girl Scouts of Central and Southern New Jersey, attended the recent training session.

"I think it's a really good experience for Girls Scouts," she said. "I don't think we're going to get rid of the old ways, but I'm really excited to start to use technology. I'll be able to sell cookies to people not nearby me and widen my range of sales. It's very easy to use. I like the fact that it does all the calculations for me. It's like I'm having my own business."

Girl Scouts Bria Vainqueur (left) and Shirell Battle (right) with Girls Scouts of Central and Southern New Jersey practice selling cookies on one of two new digital platforms. It’s the first time Girls Scouts of the USA has allowed sale of cookies using a mobile app and personalized websites. The Digital Cookie program is intended to enhance, not replace, traditional use of paper spreadsheets. (Photo: Courtesy of Girl Scouts of the USA)

Girl Scouts of Central & Southern New Jersey will begin using the platform at the start of its cookie-selling season on Jan. 15. The group sold more than 2 million boxes of cookies last year, Marino said.

The Girl Scouts Heart of New Jersey will also be using the new Digital Cookie platform for the first time next year.

"It's an exciting time for Girl Scout cookie sales because for the first time our entire council will be able to reach out to friends and family from a distance and invite them to participate in the sale," Jennifer Thompson, senior director, marketing and communications, at Girl Scouts Heart of New Jersey, said. "Girls who have aunts, uncles, cousins and grandparents living in other parts of the country are going to be able to engage them in their cookie sales. In addition to the traditional ways the girls are selling this is just another way for them to engage with people, talk about the great things they are doing as Girl Scouts and really expand their sales. The great thing about buying them online is that people will be able to order online and they will be delivered directly to them. It takes away some of the burden from our adult volunteers."

Girl Scouts Heart of New Jersey, with members in Union, Somerset, Hunterdon and parts of Middlesex and Warren counties, ﻿will begin using the platform at the start of its cookie-selling season on Feb. 2. The group typically sells about one million boxes of cookies each year.

Girl Scouts of Northern New Jersey, which services several counties, including northern Warren County, also will be using the Digital Cookie program when its cookie sales begin on Jan. 10.

As with the traditional cookie program, the net revenue earned from the cookie sale will remain with the Girl Scout council that sponsors the sale, according to Girl Scouts USA. Girls decide how to spend their troop cookie money and reinvest it back into their neighborhoods through community-service projects and learning experiences, like travel opportunities. Because 100 percent of the net revenue raised through the Girl Scout Cookie Program stays with the local council and troops, customers who purchase Girl Scout Cookies are not only getting a delightful treat — they are also making an important investment in their communities, Girl Scouts USA said.

Monday's launch

Monday's launch of Digital Cookie represents an initial phase of a program that will progress over time. A majority of the 112 Girl Scout councils nationwide are participating in Digital Cookie in the 2014–2015 cookie season, with additional councils expected to be on board by the end of 2015, using an updated version 2.0.Future versions of Digital Cookie will create better user experiences for girls and customers alike, and a more robust customer interface.

"Girl Scout Cookies have always been about so much more than a delicious treat — they're about helping girls learn important business lessons," Anna Maria Chávez, CEO of Girl Scouts of the USA, said. "This year, when you're buying your Thin Mints and Caramel deLites digitally, you can feel good that you're helping girls learn the 5 Skills the cookie program has always instilled in a 21st Century way, turning today's girls into tomorrow's business and tech leaders."

To see if Digital Cookie is available in your area, visit www.girlscouts.org/digitalcookie. For information about the Girl Scouts of Central and Southern New Jersey visit www.gscsnj.org. For information about the Girl Scouts Heart of New Jersey visit www.gshnj.org.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1ydXGDv