The Turning Stone Casino Resort in Central New York is home to three world-class golf courses, Atunyote, Kaluhyat and Shenendoah, and each of them was awarded one of Golfweek magazine's most prestigious awards.

The courses were listed as part of Golfweek’s Best Casino Courses of 2013, and the Association of Golf Merchandisers (AGM) selected Turning Stone’s Shenendoah Golf Club as one of the nation’s top golf shops.

This is the seventh consecutive year that Turning Stone’s Atunyote, Kaluhyat and Shenendoah were all elected to Golfweek’s exclusive list.

"We are thrilled that our courses and shop have received these recognitions for excellence," said CEO of Oneida Nation Enterprises Ray Halbritter in a press release. "As anyone who has played our courses can tell you, the quality of the golf at Turning Stone is truly second to none and we will continue to make Turning Stone a top destination for golfers from across the country and around the world."

Only 50 courses made the list of the country’s finest golf destinations and Turning Stone has consistently maintained three spots on the esteemed list. In 2012, all three courses were awarded.

The Shenendoah Golf Club received an additional honor, the 2014 AGM Platinum Award. The club was recognized as one of the “best of the best” across the county. AGM honorees are judged on new ideas, creativity, adaptability, and best practices.

Shenendoah and other winners will be recognized and feted on the main stage at the PGA Merchandise Show in Orlando, Florida, on January 22, 2014.

Turning Stone’s courses have held several major, pro-golf events including the PGA Tour’s B.C. Open and Turning Stone Resort Championship, and PGA Professional National Championship, and have hosted some of the sport’s biggest names including Tiger Woods, Dustin Johnson and Rickie Fowler. And each year, the Nation’s Atunyote Golf Club hosts the annual Notah Begay III Foundation Challenge charity event, which Woods won in 2009.

If you’re not a golfer, there’s plenty to enjoy from Turning Stone’s 3,400-acre complex, the first-rate golf course is surrounded by world-class dining, accommodations and entertainment options at the four-season destination resort. Turning Stone recently expanded with a new $25 million, multi-venue entertainment complex called Exit 33.

Last month, the resort’s TS Steakhouse was honored in OpenTable’s top 10 Best Ambiance Restaurants in the New York Area.

Turning Stone’s Skaná Spa was recently named to the Best Casino Hotel Spas and Best Spas for Golf in SpaFinder Wellness Readers’ Choice Awards.

For more information and reservations, call (315) 361-7711 or (800) 771-7711. Visit the web site at TurningStone.com.