Twenty-four hospitals in Michigan were ranked in the bottom 25 percent of the national Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services list for hospital acquired conditions and infections.

Two of those hospitals in northern Michigan on the list are the Clare Mid-Michigan Medical Center and the West Branch Regional Medical Center.

The Economic Alliance for Michigan wanted its more than four-million members to be aware of this.

"In northern Michigan's case, West Branch and the Clare hospital are being cited for not doing as good a job as some other facilities when providing safe environment for patients," Bret Jackson, Economic Alliance for Michigan president, said.

CMS conducts the list as an incentive to bring higher quality services to hospitals. As part of the Affordable Care Act, the lowest ranking one-quarter of hospitals in the country on the list will have its Medicare payments reduced by 1 % in 2016.

"Hospital safety is something that hospitals need to take seriously and it has to be done on a daily basis," Jackson said.

But, Glenn King, the Clare Mid-Michigan Medical Center's Vice President, says its top priority is patient quality and that the data is misleading.

"Right now, this data's from 2012 to 2013," King said. "I'd like to really share with you current data. We just got an award from Joint Commission, which is the main accreditation body of hospitals. We actually were just recognized as a top performer in surgical care."

West Branch Regional Medical Center also says the data is old. They released the following statement:

"West Branch Regional Medical Center takes infection control very seriously. It is our goal to avoid every possible infection. The data used by Medicare for this report is 18-24 months old. WBRMC believes more current data would reflect significant improvement in the number of its Hospital Acquired Conditions thanks to aggressive steps it has taken since 2012 to improve patient quality and safety...West Branch Regional Medical Center consistently scores higher for 'cleanliness of the hospital' than the state average on the Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems survey"

"I would like to speak personally," King said. "I would have any care done here, I would have my family's care done here, I would have my loved one's care done here. It's a great hospital. We have great personnel. We have great surgeons. We provide, as the Joint Commission said, great surgical care."

King also tells us that if patients have any questions or concerns to contact Mid-Michigan Health, put a note for King in the message, and that he'd be more than happy to speak to them.

According to King, the Clare Mid-Michigan Medical Center will see its Medicare payments cut by around $55,000 in 2016.

According to the West Branch Regional Medical Center, the payment will apply to WBRMC's Inpatient payments received, which would be a cut of around $120,000 in 2016



Spectrum Health Big Rapids also was in the bottom quartile of the list.