As my colleague David Leonhardt notes, one of the big policy questions for Hillary Clinton is how eager she is to tax the rich. But this isn’t just a question of the top rate on wages. If she runs for president, it will be very interesting to see whether Mrs. Clinton takes a position substantially to Barack Obama’s right on capital gains taxes, as she did in 2008.

In a debate in April of that year, Mrs. Clinton said she would not raise the capital gains rate above 20 percent “if I raised it at all.” At the time, the top rate was 15 percent, as a result of the Bush tax cuts. Ms. Clinton’s position was in line with the economic policies of Bill Clinton’s administration, which called for much higher tax rates on wage income than capital income for high earners. In 1997, Mr. Clinton signed a law that cut the top capital gains tax rate from 28 percent to 20; in 1993, he had raised the top tax rate on ordinary income from 31 percent to 39.6 percent, and imposed a Medicare tax on high earners that effectively pushed their top tax rates above 40.

Photo

Mr. Obama ran in 2008 as an advocate of a large capital gains tax increase. In a 2007 speech, he said he would “adjust the top dividends and capital gains rate to something closer to — but no greater than — the rates Ronald Reagan set in 1986.” The rate set in 1986 was 28 percent, so this position left the door open to a near-doubling of the top capital gains tax rate.

President Obama has delivered on that promise: The Affordable Care Act created an additional 3.8 percent tax on capital gains for high earners, and the so-called fiscal cliff deal of 2013 added another 5 points to the rate, so the top tax rate on capital gains has gone from 15 percent in 2008 to 23.8 percent today, higher than the red line Mrs. Clinton set. In his most recent budget, Mr. Obama proposed to further increase the rate to 28 percent.

Economists tend to advocate lower taxes on capital on the grounds that investors are more likely to be driven away by high taxes than workers are, and because much capital income is subjected to corporate income tax before the capital gains tax is applied.