Clemson quarterback Deshaun Watson, seen here on the sideline Oct. 11, will undergo season-ending knee surgery Friday, according to sources. (AP Photo/The Greenville News, Bart Boatwright)

After further review, Deshaun Watson's next game can wait 'til next year.

According to two separate sources, Clemson has decided to shut down its precocious freshman quarterback, electing to go ahead with season-ending knee surgery to repair Watson's partially torn ACL in lieu of waiting until after the 18th-ranked Tigers' Russell Athletic Bowl appearance Dec. 29 against Oklahoma.

The surgery is planned for Friday, the sources said.

Head coach Dabo Swinney, who is on the road recruiting this week, said Sunday he was reconsidering whether to let Watson attempt to play a second game with a specialized brace acting as an artificial ACL, primarily to give Watson a three-week headstart on the expected six-to-nine-month rehabilitation period following ACL reconstructive surgery.

Swinney said at the time Sunday the decision would be made "in the next day or two." He did not specify whether further testing after Clemson's 35-17 win over South Carolina Nov. 29 had shown more damage to Watson's knee or if doctors feared he could suffer more significant injury by continuing to practice and play pre-surgery.

Twice during the Gamecocks game, Watson had to exit due to discomfort caused by the brace, and he was noticeably laboring during attempts to cut and plant his left knee. Clemson announced Nov. 17 he had suffered a sprained LCL and bone bruise in a loss at Georgia Tech two days prior.

Watson also broke a bone in his throwing hand vs. Louisville Oct. 11, missing three games in recovery.

Clemson has not officially released information on Watson's status this week.

Provided Watson does have his surgery this week, he completes his true freshmen season with a stellar statline in limited duty: 67.9 completions for 1,466 yards (10.7 per attempt) and 14 touchdowns against two interceptions. Watson also rushed for five scores.

Watson has a quarterback rating of 188.57, which does not qualify among the national leaders as he only played eight games. But it is the highest passer rating among all 99 Division I quarterbacks with at least 12 touchdown passes - a list that includes just 11 freshmen.

In fact, only two others (Oregon's Marcus Mariota, the likely Heisman Trophy winner, and Colorado State's Garrett Grayson) have ratings above 170.

Watson and Mariota also are the only ones among those 99 quarterbacks with at least 10 yards per passing attempt.

Clemson senior Cole Stoudt, who started seven games, will slide back into the starting role. This year, Stoudt has battled injury - a badly sprained left shoulder - and ineffectiveness - six touchdowns against 10 interceptions.

Once Watson goes ahead with his surgery, and Stoudt graduates, the Tigers' quarterbacks for spring practices will include former walk-on Nick Schuessler along with incoming freshmen Kelly Bryant and Tucker Israel, each expected to enroll in courses in January.

Clemson's next season opener is scheduled against Wofford on Sept. 5, 2015, or a week short of nine months after Watson's expected surgery.