One in eight Americans under the age of 65 had health insurance in 2012 but spent a high percentage of their income on out-of-pocket medical expenses, according to a report released Tuesday by the Commonwealth Fund. These "underinsured" Americans risk bankruptcy and are likely to delay or forgo needed medical care, positioning themselves barely ahead of those who have no health insurance at all.

The report, "America's Underinsured: A State-by-State Look at Health Insurance Affordability Prior to the New Coverage Expansions," comes less than than a week before the Obamacare deadline that requires Americans to sign up for health insurance or face a tax penalty. It compares the rate of underinsured people by state, drawing on newly available data from the 2012 and 2013 U.S. Census Bureau's Current Populations Surveys, which tracks health insurance coverage.

Overall, states in the Northeast and Upper Midwest did better than states in the South and West. The underinsured rate ranged from 8 percent in New Hampshire to 16 percent in Mississippi and Tennessee and 17 percent in Idaho and Utah. Massachusetts, Maryland, Minnesota and the District of Columbia each had fewer than 10 percent of underinsured residents.

The report analyzed premium costs, deductibles, insurance status and income by state. People are considered underinsured if they have health insurance but spend 5 percent or more of their annual income on out-of-pocket costs for medical care while earning less than $47,000 a year for a family of four. Middle income households, defined as families of four who earn $47,000 to $95,000 per year, were considered underinsured if they spent 10 percent or more of their income on medical care. Four million out of 32 million underinsured people were from middle-income families. An additional 47 million people had no insurance in 2012, the report states.

At 38 percent, New Mexico and Texas had the highest percentage of uninsured and underinsured residents, while Massachusetts, Minnesota, Connecticut and the District of Columbia — at less than 20 percent — all had low uninsured and underinsured rates. Wyoming and Alaska had the highest rates of middle-income families who were uninsured or underinsured, making up about a third of each state's population.

“[This] is evidence of the shortfalls in our system of health insurance coverage, which the Affordable Care Act was designed to address,” says David Blumenthal, president of the Commonwealth Fund, which supports independent research on health policy reform.

The report did not take into account several key changes that went into effect under the Affordable Care Act. For instance, insurance companies can no longer turn people away because of a preexisting condition, which means that since the law was enacted some people may have shifted to a more robust insurance plan. New enrollees also have not been factored in; the U.S. Department of Health and Human Resources shows that 5 million people have enrolled in insurance since October 2013, thought that is still 2 million below the White House's target and 1 million below projections by the Congressional Budget Office, the agency that makes predictions about the economic impact of policy implementations.

But Obamacare had already made an impact in 2012. "The number of uninsured declined by nearly 2 million from 2010 to 2012 following implementation of early Affordable Care Act reforms, including expansion of coverage to young adults," the report says. Blumenthal says he expects uninsured and underinsured numbers to continue to decrease as the implementation of health care reform continues, and researchers from the Commonwealth Fund say they will continue to track the numbers in coming years. One key factor that will greatly influence those numbers is whether states opt to expand Medicaid, a government-overseen health insurance program for the poor. Today, 10.3 million adults and children are eligible for Medicaid and for the Children's Health Insurance Program, but only half of the states and the District of Columbia have chosen to increase eligibility for the program. In Georgia, lawmakers recently approved a bill that would "bar any state or local governments, agencies or employees from advocating for Medicaid expansion, except under certain circumstances." The people in states like Georgia will have fewer affordable coverage options, says Cathy Schoen, lead author of the report and Commonwealth Fund senior vice president.

Those who are not eligible for Medicaid but are still unable to afford to buy their own coverage can likely qualify for government subsidies to help pay their health insurance premiums. The Commonwealth Fund estimates in its report that if this portion of health care reform, along with full Medicaid expansion in all states, had been in place in 2012, 29 million people would have paid less out-of-pocket for health care.

More from U.S. News: