Socialism cannot be reconciled with the teaching of the Catholic Church because its concept of society is foreign to Christian values.

Pope Pius XI said, “No one can be at the same time a good Catholic and a true socialist.” This raises the question, “Is Obama a Christian?” I think not. He has said America is no longer a Christian nation and is bringing in many non-Christian Muslim families.

Religious liberty in our nation is under attack. Tyrants understand religion must be removed for tyranny to rule. The assault against the Catholic Church and other Christian faiths has taken place, and we must renew the battle so that truth and Christian values may never be extinguished from our country.

The founding fathers in the declaration said, “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights that among these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.” Whereas, the Obama administration says, “We hold these truths to be self-evident that all rights of men are endowed by the government and can be taken away at the discretion of the government.”

Obama and the federal government, through many mandates, are unconstitutionally and rapidly expanding, their authority. With Obama’s executive orders, policies and regulations, everything is falling into a plan to transform America into a third-world country.

From Obamacare, to immigration, to climate change, to banning guns, etc., Obama is controlling the political action in our country. Sadly the Republicans are not doing anything to stop his power grab. We see no way out but to pray God will send someone to make America great again.

Why isn’t there any opposition to Obama? It’s because as a countervailing force the Republicans lawmakers are in collusion with the Democrats and their policies. It’s a shame — as bad as Obama and the Democrats are — something smells in Congress, and today it’s the Republicans who don’t pass the smell test.

I really believe Obama is anti-Christian and anti-Christ, and we must do everything in our power to inform the public of his intentions and the fact that Socialism has failed everywhere in the world, and we should fight against his policies that will bring about the destruction of America.

Carlo Olivero

Dalzell