Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

PARIS (AP) — Two most-talked-about men at this year’s French Open, Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic, finally play their first matches on Tuesday.

Nadal, the champion nine of the past 10 years, takes on Quentin Halys, an 18-year-old wild-card entry from France who is ranked 296th and has never played a match at a major tournament.

Next on Court Philippe Chatrier will be the No. 1-seeded Djokovic, whose bid to complete a career Grand Slam starts off against Jarkko Nieminen, a 33-year-old from Finland ranked 87th. Djokovic has never lost a Slam match to a player that far down in the rankings.

Much of the pre-tournament buzz was about the potential quarterfinal matchup between Nadal and Djokovic, possible because Nadal’s poor-for-him results dropped his ranking to its lowest point in a decade.

If everyone else wants to look ahead, the players who met in two of the past three finals at the French Open do not.

“I still need to win four matches to get there,” Djokovic pointed out, “as much as he does.”

Djokovic carries a 22-match winning streak into Tuesday, while Nadal has won 66 of 67 matches at Roland Garros, including 35 in a row.

“When I say I don’t know what’s going to happen, I really don’t know what’s going to happen. That doesn’t mean that I don’t have confidence (in) myself to try to be ready for it. I have to think that I am ready for it,” Nadal said. “(It) is a tournament that I love.”

Here’s a look at what else is happening at the French Open on Tuesday:

SERENA STARTS

Serena Williams starts her attempt to win a 20th Grand Slam singles title, and third at the French Open, by facing qualifier Andrea Hlavackova of the Czech Republic. Williams is 57-1 in first-round matches at majors, although the only loss came in Paris in 2012. As if her opponent’s resume isn’t daunting enough, Hlavackova might not want to think about this: The only other time she played Williams, at the 2012 U.S. Open, the American won 6-0, 6-0.