The Denver city auditor’s race boils down to a contest between a well-funded councilman with name recognition and an accountant with years of auditing oversight — but perhaps an outsider’s chance of winning.

Councilman Chris Nevitt and former appointed state auditor Timothy O’Brien are competing in Tuesday’s election to succeed three-term auditor Dennis Gallagher.

The term-limited Denver political icon has marshaled his professional auditors to deliver fiery summations of waste or ineffectiveness in a wide range of investigations into local government. Lately, that has included a quest to pin down cost surges in Denver International Airport’s huge Hotel and Transit Center project and an audit questioning the effectiveness of programs to end homelessness.

Nevitt, 53, and O’Brien, 65, say they would continue that independent streak, if in different ways.

“The auditor is an independent position for a reason — to be the advocate for the people of Denver,” Nevitt said. “Dennis and I don’t agree on everything, but I think that he’s right in that if the auditor sees the city’s money moving in a direction that’s not in its best interest, then he needs to stand up and say that’s not right.”

O’Brien, who hasn’t held elected office, said he wouldn’t shirk from using the bully pulpit but would focus on sober oversight.

He served as state auditor for 11 years, through 1995. He now is a self-employed, certified public accountant and board chairman for a family of mutual funds. He sits on the city’s Audit Committee, which receives and reviews reports from Gallagher’s office.

O’Brien wants to expand the office’s mission from performance auditing to also issuing financial audits zeroing in on taxes and areas of city spending. Currently, external auditors review city finances, but O’Brien says they take a wide view without digging in deep.

“There aren’t any (CPAs in the office), which means that the current auditor isn’t doing any financial audits. I think that’s a mistake,” O’Brien said. “People in Denver are concerned about oversight of their hard-earned money and we’re not getting that.”

Nevitt disputes that, noting that many of Gallagher’s audits have had financial components.

The two-term councilman represents south Denver’s District 7. Before winning his seat, Nevitt ran FRESC, or Front Range Economic Strategy Center. He helped found the labor think tank and community organizing group.

In his view, the city needs an auditor who is a savvy and experienced public leader.

Under Gallagher, Denver voters in 2006 approved changes that gave the office strong performance auditing power. He has shaped that influence.

The outgoing auditor is backing Nevitt — as is Mayor Michael Hancock and plenty of Denver’s political establishment. Through Thursday, Nevitt raised nearly $294,000 in contributions, versus about $41,000 for O’Brien. O’Brien also has lent another $40,000 to his campaign.

O’Brien has questioned whether Nevitt can maintain independence.

He also suggests that Nevitt serving as auditor — after making policy on council for so long — would create a conflict of interest, putting him “in the position of grading his own homework.”

Nevitt calls that line of thinking “the weirdest argument of all.”

“Nothing I’ve done on the City Council is making me money,” he said, “and being auditor wouldn’t be me burnishing my own reputation.”

But Nevitt’s ambitions have attracted plenty of speculation. Though the auditor’s job may seem dry politically, it has a storied past, sometimes launching occupants to higher office.

“Bill McNichols was auditor and he went on to become mayor, and Wellington Webb was the auditor and he went on to become mayor as well,” Denver political analyst Eric Sondermann said. “For someone with ambitions, it’s a job that can lead to greater things.”