There’s been a lot of articles and discussion about whether we’re healthcare patients or healthcare customer; and whether we all need to become more intelligent healthcare customers in order to be effective patients capable of achieving meaningful outcomes. In the tweet chats I’ve attended where the differences between being a patient vs. customer are discussed and in the articles I’ve read, some people seem to have a very clear idea of the difference between the two; others not so much. The patient-customer often has a different perspective on this topic than the physician-provider.

There’s the argument that “Customers go to places willingly, while patients go to hospitals mostly out of necessity.” Indeed, who’s going to be looking for an in-network hospital and checking on physician credentials while lying I’m in the back of an ambulance? Physicians argue that they offer a special breed of services and that providing “customer satisfaction” and needing to “encourage brand loyalty” are not part of their responsibility.

While I’m not sure where the majority or “popular opinion” stands on this topic, I can attest for my own situation: Over the past few years, I have been performing many duties and tasks associated with being a customer.

Advertisement

What are these customer duties I’m performing?

Searching for an In-network Provider

Almost every year I have to validate that our various family physicians are still contracted with our health plan. In fact, one of my son’s PCP’s changed practices this year and didn’t tell us. I found out when I started receiving invoices with out of network charges! Sure, I’ll pay $350 for an office visit. Not!

Validating Professional Services for Primary Services Performed at a Facility

Closely related to ensuring coverage by in-network providers, I spent some time this year making sure that radiologists reading various imaging exams performed by a facility that billed separately for their services were also contracted with my health plan. It appears our families various PCP’s will ensure they send an order for imaging to a network facility but then the facility – for whatever reason – has the image read by an out of network radiologist. Seriously?