AUSTIN, Texas--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Tango Health has been selected by Viavi Solutions Inc. to provide Affordable Care Act (ACA) compliance software and services. Viavi is a network and service enablement and optical security and performance products provider. Tango will track the company’s employee data as required under IRS codes 6055 and 6056, supply properly coded 1095-C forms, and provide Viavi with the support needed to ensure compliance with the ACA.

Viavi, formerly known as JDS Uniphase prior to spinning-off Lumentum as a separate public company earlier this year, selected Tango to provide additional resources to compile and track employee data needed for ACA compliance. Viavi selected Tango for its expert guidance to navigate not only ACA requirements but also added complexities in connection with the recent company separation.

Viavi chose Tango as their full-service vendor based on Tango’s extensive subject matter expertise, their ability to gather and evaluate data for accurate reporting, and the in-depth support provided by Tango’s ACA Compliance Concierge staff.

CEO of Tango Health Todd Praisner explains, “ACA tracking and reporting is complicated, and Tango facilitates and manages the tracking and compilation of the data necessary to meet the IRS regulations and requirements. Mergers, acquisitions, and divisions significantly complicate matters when it comes to ACA compliance. Tango has experience with large employers in these complex situations and that experience gives clients confidence in our ACA compliance solution.”

To find out more about the ACA Compliance Suite from Tango, visit: http://www.tangohealth.com/services/aca-compliance.

About Viavi Solutions Inc.

Viavi (NASDAQ: VIAV) software and hardware platforms and instruments deliver end-to-end visibility across physical, virtual and hybrid networks. Precise intelligence and actionable insight from across the network ecosystem optimizes the service experience for increased customer loyalty, greater profitability and quicker transitions to next-generation technologies. Viavi is also a leader in anti-counterfeiting solutions for currency authentication and high-value optical components and instruments for diverse government and commercial applications. Learn more at www.viavisolutions.com and follow us on Viavi Perspectives, LinkedIn, Twitter, YouTube, and Facebook.

About Tango Health

Tango Health Benefits Optimization saves organizations money, makes employees happy, and ensures regulatory compliance with the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Comparison tools help employees choose plans based on their needs, and provide savings for both the employee and the employer. Education keeps employees engaged, and Tango experts simplify and manage regulatory compliance to minimize risk.