Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

Paying under the table might seem like a good deal for everyone, but it’s not—especially for the person working the low-wage job.

It’s tax season, so many Americans are pondering whether to report the wages they’ve paid to nannies, elderly care workers, housekeepers, and the like. If you paid an employee $1,800 or more in wages in 2013, you are legally required to pay employment taxes. Many ignore this rule, playing the odds that they won’t be singled out by the IRS. Recent estimates suggest that fewer than 250,000 U.S. households report household employee wages, even though occupations like child care, which are often based in homes, are growing, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. In a 2012 survey of 2,086 domestic employees in 14 metropolitan areas, less than nine percent worked for employers who paid into Social Security on their behalf. On the surface, paying under the table seems like a pretty good deal for everyone: The nanny keeps more of her earnings and the employer doesn’t have the hassle of filing more paperwork. But this type of arrangement is actually very risky business, and the person who stands to suffer most is not the family paying the additional tax burden, but the woman working the low-wage job.

Imagine being the household employee. Sure, it might be tempting to get paid under the table, especially if you’re barely making ends meet. However, what might seem like a rational decision (for undocumented workers it’s often the only option) actually has short- and long-term negative consequences. If a housekeeper or nanny is paid under the table, she has no access to unemployment insurance, workers’ compensation, disability benefits, Medicare, and perhaps even Social Security. In sum, she will likely lack the long-term resources required to look after herself and her family. To make matters worse, under-the-table workers are also more vulnerable to the vicissitudes of the private economy. Without documented employment history, they lack access to better rental housing, improved terms for home and car loans, and opportunities to build a stronger credit history. In other words, it’s like they’ve never held a job. Try getting a mortgage without any record of employment. I’ve observed these consequences firsthand as a scholar studying low-income women in the labor market. Danielle, a 49-year-old Chicago nanny who worked off-the-books for years, struggled to find a landlord who would accept an employment verification letter, her only proof of income. When she sought a loan, her only option was a payday lender who charged exorbitant rates. The resulting spiral of debt led to the repossession of her car and, without reliable transportation, she couldn’t keep her job. Many household employees don’t realize that they are setting themselves up for severe repercussions in the long-run, so they request or go along with off-the-books payment arrangements. When we perpetuate this underground system, we end up undermining the long-term economic stability of the very people who do the backbreaking work of caring for our families and helping us run busy households. These workers remain in the economic shadows, unable to build much of a financial future. In this age in which access to credit, the ability to document one’s productivity, and the need to plan for and protect oneself from life’s mishaps and inevitabilities are necessities, these workers are highly vulnerable: disproportionately female, non-white, and immigrant—populations that already occupy the bottom rung of the economic ladder.