SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Next Monday, October 27 marks the 50th anniversary of Ronald Reagan’s iconic “Time For Choosing” speech. It was a speech that sparked the modern Conservative Movement, ignited a fire in the hearts of conservatives, and launched Ronald Reagan’s public policy career.

This week, as part of a yearlong “Time for Choosing: The Next Generation” initiative, Young America’s Foundation is releasing a series of videos in conjunction with the anniversary of this significant speech. The third video focuses on limited government.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

It is no secret that government today is far overreaching and intrusive. This past year alone we have seen privacy breaches by the NSA, the targeting of conservative groups by the IRS, and the disastrous consequences of Obamacare on small businesses and families.

Obama has even said, “I can take steps without legislation.” This self-righteous statement underscores that he has no respect for the Constitution–a document meant to protect the rights of all Americans and prevent our government and our leaders from trampling on those rights. Unfortunately, today we have a President and federal officials who are no longer accountable to the American people because they consider themselves to be above the law.

Consider Obamacare, federal legislation mandating that all people purchase health insurance or be penalized with a fine. In addition to being forced upon the American people, Obamacare is a job killer, it has negatively impacted the American economy, and it is crushing our small businesses–the backbone of America. And, after three years of preparation, the federal government couldn’t even get its own Obamacare website to work properly. Nonetheless, Obama demands that all Americans allow the government–which cannot even create a functioning website–to control the most personal aspects of their lives, their health.

Recent polling shows that approval of Congress is at an all-time low, and more than half of the American people are distrusting of the government. This is what can be expected when the government grows too big and encroaches upon the rights of the people.

A half century ago, Ronald Reagan told the American people, “No government ever voluntarily reduces itself in size. A government bureau is the nearest thing to eternal life we will ever see on this earth.” Unfortunately, that statement is even more true today. We are facing the consequences of an expanding government and it is up to us–the American people–to hold our leaders accountable, should we wish to advance freedom for generations to come.

Ashley Pratte is the spokeswoman for Young America’s Foundation