On a recent afternoon, Dr. Evan Lyon of the University of Chicago Hospitals wrapped his stethoscope around his neck, packed a blood pressure cuff and a pulse oxygen meter into his backpack, and set off to see a patient.

Katie White, the patient, was not in a clinical setting but in the bedroom of her small South Side home, about 2 miles from the hospital. The 74-year-old greeted Lyon from a hospital bed that filled the small room — the bed to which she has been confined for a little over a year.

"Glad you could make it," she said with a touch of attitude.

White is participating in a clinical trial designed to test an old-new system of delivering health care: having the same doctor treat patients both in the hospital and elsewhere, including making house calls when necessary. The $6 million study is one of dozens of research projects made possible by the Affordable Care Act.

While the focus of the federal law is to expand access to medical care, it also established the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute to fund comparative effectiveness research. Such studies seek to evaluate the benefits and harms of different treatment options to better inform health care decisions.

"Federal investment in comparative effectiveness research historically has been inadequate," said Dr. Patrick Romano, a professor of medicine at the University of California at Davis, "because most funds have gone into basic research — understanding the mechanisms of disease."

Visiting patient on South Side Terrence Antonio James, Chicago Tribune University of Chicago Dr. Evan Lyon makes a house call to a patient in her South Side home. University of Chicago Dr. Evan Lyon makes a house call to a patient in her South Side home. (Terrence Antonio James, Chicago Tribune)

Manufacturers of drugs and medical devices have funded most clinical research, he added, but they design research in ways that favor their products.

"They often develop a drug and compare it to a placebo, which is fine if you just want to prove that it works," Romano said. "But in clinical practice ... we want to know if the new drug or device is better than what we're already using. (Comparative effectiveness research) comes to help us understand what interventions work for which people under which conditions."

To do that, experts said, researchers must listen to patients and caregivers and learn what's important to them.

Before there was the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute, or PCORI, "there was a disconnect between how health care research was being conducted and what patients actually needed," said Dr. Jerry Krishnan, a researcher at the University of Illinois at Chicago who is leading several PCORI studies.

"In the past, we did not have an opportunity to conduct studies together with patients and other stakeholders. PCORI provides resources to build such teams. It's focused on funding projects that patients care about: How can we support them after they get home from the hospital? How can we support their caregivers? How do we address outcomes like anxiety?"

The institute will receive $3 billion to $3.5 billion through 2019, said Dr. Romana Hasnain-Wynia, a PCORI program director. It has funded 280 research projects to date, including 14 in Illinois.

Cognizant of suspicion that this kind of research (and the health law in general) might eventually be used to justify rationing, the law explicitly prohibits the institute from doing studies on cost effectiveness and says its studies may not be used to deny coverage.

The law also provides $10 billion in funding to the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation through 2019 to conduct similar comparative effectiveness research, but without the constraints.

The innovation center is funding the University of Chicago study that Lyon is part of, led by principal investigator Dr. David Meltzer, chief of hospital medicine. Meltzer is testing whether his Comprehensive Care Physician model can provide better care at lower costs than the current system, in which patients rarely see their primary care doctors if they are hospitalized.

Under that system, which evolved largely for economic reasons, those doctors now see the vast majority of their patients in the office and relatively few in the hospital.

"Primary care physicians found it difficult to scoot away from the clinic to see one or two patients in the hospital," said Dr. Ram Krishnamoorthi, a member of Meltzer's research team. But the researchers think visiting patients in and out of hospitals might be economically viable if they focus on patients at high risk of hospitalization.

Comprehensive care "is not just about prescribing medication and ordering tests," Krishnamoorthi said. "It's about the very practical problems of making sure people can get to their appointments. Do they understand what's happening at the appointment? Do they have behavioral problems or cognitive issues? Are they homebound? Do they have to take three buses in a dangerous community? All these issues affect medical care."

Lyon, who has spent 15 years practicing community health care in Haiti, a Navajo reservation, rural Alabama and Boston, is assigned to patients like White who require home care. White has a history of stroke and was hospitalized last year after a fall that left her immobile.

"Her biggest problems aren't medical," Lyon said. "Her care needs to be coordinated with home health care providers and homemakers to clean and cook. Right now we're trying to get her a lift and a mechanized chair so she can regain some mobility. She's too weak to move on her own.

"My goal is to keep her out of the hospital," Lyon said. "Her goal is to sit on her front porch."

Lyon is pretty sure the comprehensive care model — he calls it "back-to-the-future medicine" — will prove beneficial for patients like White. He is hopeful it may also lower costs, "if it keeps people efficiently cared for and out of the hospital."

At UIC, one of Krishnan's projects is a study called PArTNER, for Patient Navigator to Reduce Readmissions. The project uses focus groups of patients, caregivers, clinicians and others to design a program that will provide social support to recently discharged patients, including community health workers and a patient-led information line.

Later this year, Krishnan and his colleagues will conduct a randomized controlled trial with approximately 1,100 patients to see if it works better than usual care to keep patients from being re-hospitalized.