CHICAGO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The introduction of the Affordable Care Act and a shift toward healthcare consumerism has led to significant disruption of the traditional broker model. As a result, Maestro Health, a leading all-in employee health and benefits company, today announced its continued commitment to the broker community by joining forces with BenefitsPro as one of the first sponsors of the publication’s Broker Innovation Lab. Through the partnership, Maestro Health will equip brokers with the tools and insights needed to achieve an edge and grow their business in today’s marketplace.

Created to unite and educate the broker community, Broker Innovation Lab serves as a forum of fresh ideas and emerging business models for brokers, vendors, and third party administrators (TPAs) to share and adapt as the marketplace evolves. Under the BenefitsPro umbrella, it celebrates broker excellence by providing the community with ongoing editorial coverage, innovator profiles, best practices, insights and contributions from industry leaders seeking to revolutionize the business of benefits.

“Maestro Health and Broker Innovation Lab share the same dedication to equipping brokers with new ideas and emerging business models to stay ahead of market shifts,” said Lauren Metsig, Chief Marketing Officer, Maestro Health. “Brokers have the opportunity to play a vital role in the next generation of employee health and benefits, and we want to enable them to not only survive, but thrive.”

Maestro Health understands that brokers’ clients look to them for the best solutions in this post-ACA world. The company’s all-in platform is fully modular and scalable, with white-label capabilities, enabling brokers to deliver personalized solutions that meet the unique needs of their clients. In partnering with Broker Innovation Lab, Maestro Health looks forward to extending broker support by sharing blog posts, innovation insights and whitepapers on trending topics.

“Finding that competitive edge is so important in benefits consulting, and Broker Innovation Lab serves as a valuable resource for both industry veterans and newcomers to foster their continued learning and spur innovation,” continued Metsig.

To join the community and learn about unconventional strategies, new business models and best practices from the field, visit: http://brokerinnovationlab.benefitspro.com.

To read Maestro Health’s first Champions of Innovation blog post, visit: http://www.benefitspro.com/2016/02/18/the-intersection-of-modern-technology-and-traditio?t=innovation&slreturn=1455820530

About Maestro Health™

Headquartered in Chicago, IL, Maestro Health is an employee health & benefits company committed to making benefits “people-friendly” again for employers, brokers, carriers, and most importantly, employees. The core of what we do is simple: optimize how people shop, enroll and live with their benefits all year round. Our single, comprehensive platform, maestroEDGE, delivers a unified technology and service experience across all of its four key components (available all-in or à la carte)—HR Management (Benefits Administration, On-Boarding), Benefits Marketplace (Online Enrollment, Private Exchange), Benefit Accounts (HSA/FSA) and Self-Funded Insurance (Medical TPA & Care Management). Serving over a million lives from small employers to Fortune 1,000 organizations, Maestro Health offers a depth of personalized and private-labeled solutions in order to meet the unique needs of our clients. Learn more about how Maestro Health is making decisions easier, experiences happier and lives healthier: www.maestrohealth.com.