After yesterday’s detour into electoral politics, let’s turn back to the health care debate. Last week, amid the ongoing coverage of rising premiums and cancelled plans, the health care law’s defenders took a new tack, arguing that the most plausible conservative alternatives to Obamacare would involve even more disruption of existing arrangements — with the implication being, then, that Republican outrage over “rate shock “is either straightforwardly cynical or else a sign that the G.O.P. would never, ever be willing to embrace a reform that disrupts the status quo at all.

This argument has some merit, for the reasons Philip Klein elaborated on here: You can’t have health care reform without some kind of insurance disruption, and a Republican would-be reformer who made an Obama-esque “keep your plan” promise would either be exposed as a liar with similar alacrity or end up never actually undertaking reform at all. (This is yet another reason why a total death-spiraling exchange failure, coupled with a relative successful Medicaid rollout, would not necessarily leave conservative reformers in an ideal political spot.)

But I also think it’s useful to think about the differences between the kind of disruption that would accompany the most plausible conservative alternative to Obamacare and what we’re actually witnessing today, because it helps clarify whether the Affordable Care Act actually represents what Jonathan Chait, speaking for the defense, calls “the least-disruptive, least-painful way” to expand insurance coverage.

The conservative alternative I have in mind is not what you might call “the full McCain” — the conversion of the existing employer tax exclusion for health insurance into a universal credit, which is an elegant idea in conception but which would indeed disrupt existing arrangements more dramatically than the Affordable Care Act, and which (on the evidence of the 2008 campaign) is about as politically sale-able as single payer. Rather, it’s the more modest plan the American Enterprise Institute’s James Capretta has done the most work fleshing out, in which a cap on the employer deduction helps pay for a flat credit available only to those Americans who don’t receive coverage through their workplace.

Liberals object to this plan for a variety of reasons: The credit would fund catastrophic coverage rather than the comprehensive insurance they prefer, and it would require expanding high-risk pools to cover current uninsurables rather than folding them into the existing insurance system. But on the specific question of existing-plan disruption — who bears the burden of reform, and why — I think the Capretta plan has advantages over Obamacare that even liberals should be able to recognize.

That’s because the way our system is set up right now, anyone who buys insurance on the individual market has been persistently disadvantaged, and often dramatically so, relative to anyone who gets insurance through their employer, because employer-provided insurance comes with an effective government subsidy (“worth more than $5,000 on a $13,000 employer-sponsored plan” for an upper middle class family, Capretta points out) while the individual marketplace does not. So a cap on the employer tax exclusion, while disruptive, would make the system fairer in clear, uncomplicated ways: It would curb a tax subsidy that mostly benefits people with higher incomes and only benefits people with expensive insurance plans, and extend that subsidy to people who have had to pay more, often much more, for insurance up until now.

By contrast, the Obamacare approach loads much more of the financial burden of reform on to the individual market, creating a stark, even chasm-like divide between that market’s winners and losers and leaving the latter doubly-shafted: They still don’t get a tax subsidy and their plans are getting a lot more expensive into the bargain.

Some of these losers are well-off, yes. But many of them are middle class, and not necessarily better off than the people who would lose out under an employer-exclusion cap. Moreover, there’s a significant difference between what such a cap would actually do to people with employer-provided insurance and what Obamacare does to people with less-expensive individual market plans. The cap would basically give employers and employees a choice: Keep the expensive plans you currently have with higher premiums and co-pays attached (or with a higher tax bill at the end of the year), or shift down to plans with higher deductibles, network limitations, and so forth. This is not an easy choice by any means, and it would undoubtedly lead to the equivalent of some of the unhappy stories associated with Obamacare’s regulations — people who feel like they can no longer afford coverage they like, people who end up losing access to their doctors and hospitals because their employer stops offering a plan, and so on. But I would submit that it’s actually more humane to expose the already-subsidized to more of the real costs associated with their expensive insurance than it is to tell the persistently-unsubsidized that their most affordable insurance options are being outlawed, and that they are now required by law to pay more for more coverage (or, as often seems to be the case, to pay more for less).

What’s more, as Reihan Salam points out in an exchange with Salon’s Brian Beutler, this isn’t an either-or choice, because Obamacare too includes a kludge-y version of the employer tax deduction cap in the form of the excise (or “Cadillac”) tax on high-cost insurance plans: It’s just set a higher threshold and thus applies to fewer policies than would the conservative alternative. That tax isn’t scheduled to be implemented till 2018 (or year two of the Christie administration, if you prefer), so its effects aren’t being fully felt as yet — but as the date gets closer, that provision will lead to rate increases and policy changes at the more expensive end of the employer market as well. So in comparing the potential disruptive effect of Capretta’s cap-and-credit approach to the Affordable Care Act, you have to look at the complete picture: What we’re seeing from Obamacare right now is only the beginning of the disruptions to existing plans, and today’s individual market losers are only the first wave of people to whom the president’s “keep your plan” promise doesn’t actually apply.

The choice, then, isn’t between gouging a few million people in the individual market or gouging a much larger number in the employer-based market. It’s between a reform (the conservative alternative) that concentrates its disruptive impact the heretofore-oversubsidized portion of the marketplace, while trying to make the individual market more affordable for everyone who buys there, or a reform (Obamacare) that’s disruptive for some people in the employer market but continues to protect most of them from the true price of their insurance, while pushing more of the off-budget cost of reform on to individual market premiums.

There are enough moving parts and unknown unknowns in each alternative that it’s hard to say for sure which would one would ultimately be more disruptive in absolute terms (or even to define what those “absolute terms” would be). But I think there are various metrics — simplicity, equity, the choices left available and the incentives created — on which the conservative option might come out ahead.