Interviews on 401(k) management with Brent Thomas, BAM Advisor, Santa Rosa; Taylor Greenleaf, co-owner, Greenleaf & Burleson wealth management, Petaluma, along with Bryce Brown, an adviser with Greenleaf. How do people who retire before age 70 use 401(k) distributions to bridge, drawing income from the 401(k) prior to their 70th year when they can maximize their Social Security monthly benefits? Brent Thomas: We don’t see that strategy frequently, but we definitely recommend it. If the client has other investment assets, it may be more tax-efficient to pull from those dollars to extend the date they need to pull Social Security from a cash-flow standpoint. Whether it’s a 401(k) or some other asset, we definitely see clients delaying their Social Security. Taylor Greenleaf and Bryce Brown: A 401(k) is a company plan set up for an individual’s retirement. A lot of people who leave a company roll the 401(k) into an IRA. We’re looking at their retirement assets and their taxable assets. Most people use their taxable assets in a financial plan initially — use that up first. Then they dip into retirement assets, an IRA or 401(k). Is the delay of Social Security benefits like a form of annuity with an 8 percent annual guarantee? Thomas: Yes. The way the math works, it’s a fairly attractive delay. The downside is if somebody passes away earlier than they expect, they may not have benefited. In general, correct, it’s kind of like an annuity. You are taking a bet with Social Security that you’re going to live long enough to have benefited from that delay. Greenleaf and Brown: You run the risk of breaking down the initial chunk of change you had. Once you hit 70, you run the risk of not being able to self-insure against unknown variables (such as large medical expenses not covered by insurance.) Sometimes it may be more efficient to use Social Security and complement that with their portfolio to a small degree. When would it be more efficient to take Social Security earlier? Greenleaf and Brown: The unknown is death. If you are going to have longevity, it might make more sense to take it later. If in the genetics of your family, most people tend to die in their mid-70s, or you are unhealthy, you might want to start taking it earlier. It’s hard to determine. If your family averages 95 to 100, it’s going to be very different. How does the required minimum distribution work in a 401(k) or IRA at age 70½? View as one page 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 Next

(page 2 of 6) Thomas: It’s like an actuarial table. The RMD is determined based on your age. The calculator shows the amount you take out every year. It’s the government’s way of insuring that taxes get paid and that the account gets distributed based on the expected date of death. Distributions ramp up over time as you approach the expected date of death. It juices it up percentage-wise. It’s based on the end-of-year value of the account. How do taxable accounts mix with required minimum distributions from 401(k) accounts? Greenleaf and Brown: On your taxable account, capital gains taxes, whether long-term or short-term, are relevant. If you are drawing money out of your taxable account, that’s going to be a whole different realm for taxation purposes. If you have multiple 401(k) accounts, you take them all together? Greenleaf and Brown: That’s correct. You take them all together, the lump sum of all of them (for the calculation). The dollar amount is not pertinent to the calculation in terms of the percentage you have to take. If you wait to age 70 to take Social Security benefits, you are betting against the government? Thomas: In a sense, yes. With Social Security, there are many ways people can file. If people can get a spousal benefit in the meantime, it particularly makes sense to delay Social Security. So a client might not be giving up all their Social Security benefits (waiting to age 70). They just may be getting a reduced benefit. You would start collecting on the lower-earning spouse’s Social Security first? Thomas: Typically, yes. If we have a higher-earning spouse and a middle- to lower-earning spouse, the higher-earning spouse can delay his or her own benefit to age 70. Many times you have a spouse who took years off from work to raise children. The Social Security benefit may be significantly lower — maybe $1,200 a month at full retirement age of 66 or 67. Under the spousal benefit (typically half), you have $600 going to the higher-earning spouse. You are collecting $1,800 a month from Social Security, which helps bridge that gap until you get to age 70. It’s not like they’re taking zero. Then when the higher-earning spouse reaches age 70, they switch, and that person files for full benefits? View as one page Prev 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 Next

(page 3 of 6) Thomas: Yes. When they get to age 70 they might collect $3,000 a month. Then the spouse can file for a benefit on the higher-earner’s income level. It might be higher than $1,200 — say $1,500 (half the higher-earner’s benefit.) That would bump their number up. We see clients getting $4,000 or $5,000 a month from Social Security. Most importantly, once that higher-earning spouse has created that nice benefit — say $3,000 a month — that is going to be true for either spouse if they live. So there’s a huge benefit there? Thomas: It can be a very significant benefit. They are going to collect that higher amount for their lifetime. Most clients reach full retirement age at 66 or a little older. So the delay is about four years. This whole game — there are different ways to do the math to figure out where the crossover point is. In rough numbers, in the early 80s — 80 to 82. If you live that long, you sort of won the game. If you don’t live that long, then Social Security will have paid you less than if you had taken it earlier. These days, living to 82 is not uncommon? Thomas: It’s not, though we have conversations with our clients about their family, their health. You want to look at this like an insurance decision. Who is going to play this game? What are the odds — put them in your favor. I had a client a couple of years ago where we had this whole conversation. We made the decision to take her Social Security benefits earlier based on her health concerns. Sure enough, she only lived into her early 70s. In her case it was a smart move to collect benefits early? Thomas: Yes. Otherwise she would not have collected very long. In general, unless health is compromised, you recommend waiting to age 70 for Social Security? Thomas: We encourage many clients to wait and collect their Social Security later. In a case where a couple takes distributions of $62,000, they would qualify for reduced premiums under Obamacare. If their taxable distributions go up $1,000 to $63,000, they no longer qualify for reduced premiums? View as one page Prev 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 Next

(page 4 of 6) Greenleaf and Brown: That is true. With Obamacare, there are thresholds. If you go over, the qualifications change dramatically for what you pay. We have had multiple clients with whom this has been an issue. Be very careful on the amount of income they are drawing out. It’s a lot of planning to make sure they stay within their limits. Where a client waits to receive Social Security and uses up 401(k) or other retirement accounts, then dies early, the heirs have lost part of their inheritance? Thomas: Correct. I had this conversation with a client six months ago. His primary concern was he wanted to leave assets to his kids. If he spent his dollars and didn’t collect all the Social Security he had access to, he was spending some of their inheritance. Most clients are far more concerned about being a burden to their children later in life if they live longer than their money lasts. That’s a bigger concern than leaving a slightly smaller inheritance. Let’s say a client lives to be 100 years old, and having that larger Social Security benefit allows him to maintain his cash flow and not have to go to his kids for help paying bills, repairing the house. What does that feel like? Versus, instead you delay your Social Security, die younger than expected and your kids receive your house, which in Petaluma is probably $600,000 to $800,000, and maybe only $1 million in your 401(k) instead of $1.2 million. Are you OK with that? The calculation of whether to delay Social Security essentially involves actuarial considerations? Thomas: Yes. It can be looked at that way. If you go to a private insurance company and try to get the same deal you get by delaying Social Security benefits, you’re not going to get it from a private company. The numbers are more favorable. That 8 percent increase every year from full retirement age to 70 is quite good? Thomas: Yes. No question. If you make it to 80 or 82, you either break even or have won. There’s no additional benefit to waiting beyond age 70. If a small-business owner has 401(k) accounts for employees, what should that owner do when s/he sells the business? Thomas: We encourage people to keep the dollars inside some kind of retirement plan. Unfortunately, people realize they can get access to $12,000 or whatever it is, and they take the money. They pay tax on it and penalties (10 percent). They have the cash to be able to go buy a car. It happens all too frequently. View as one page Prev 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 Next

(page 5 of 6) Greenleaf and Brown: Most of the time, if you’re selling a business and you have employees, and there’s going to be no more work, people do a rollover into an IRA. Then you can self-direct your assets with more flexibility, greater choice. In a rollover, where the employer or employee takes a check, there are only 60 days to do the rollover? Greenleaf and Brown: That’s correct, 60 days within which to deposit it into another type of tax-advantaged account, such as an IRA. What about employees who stay with the company and have 401(k) plans? Greenleaf and Brown: A lot of times it will roll right into whatever 401(k) the new owner has. The investment options might change. Or it can be rolled into a self-directed IRA. When larger employers have 401(k) plans, are matching contributions the best way to boost the participation rate? Greenleaf and Brown: Often, yes. But employees won’t necessarily participate, even with matching funds. Sometimes they can’t afford it. A single mom might make just enough to cover her kids. A lot of new 401(k)s are starting to move toward an automatic enrollment structure so the employee doesn’t have to take the initiative. For a lot of people, it’s the last thing on their minds. With automatic enrollment, usually they start it off at 1 percent. The money might go into targeted funds based on the estimated date of retirement, and automatically adjust the risk depending on your age. There will be more risk when they’re younger, and taper that back as they age. The shift is in asset allocation, the equity-bond ratio? Greenleaf and Brown: Exactly. What about companies with pension plans? View as one page Prev 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 Next

(page 6 of 6) Thomas: We are working with a client now who is closing down a pension plan. They’re going to have a 401(k) plan for about 18 employees to use in their retirement in the future. We’re trying to encourage employees who have dollars in the pension plan to leave those dollars in the 401(k), not take the money and run. It’s a struggle. Employees who take early withdrawal pay the penalty? Thomas: If they’re younger than 59 ½, they pay taxes plus a 10 percent penalty. It adds up, federal plus state taxes. If that’s the mentality they have, by the time they get to age 55 or 60, they don’t have a lot of dollars in their plan to help with their own retirement. That’s the bigger concern. If someone has a medical emergency, can money be withdrawn before age 59½ without penalty? Thomas: There can be exceptions to the 10 percent penalty — a hardship withdrawal. They will not avoid paying income tax. The other way to avoid the 10 percent penalty is with equal and periodic payments. There is a whole set of math around that. For example, if someone’s spouse passes away and s/he needs money from the 401(k) to bridge for the next five or 10 years, you can take periodic payments over that entire period and spread it out. If done correctly, you can take that out without the 10 percent penalty. You have to take them at least to age 59 ½. In effect, you annuitize that lump sum? Thomas: That is correct. That’s how the math works, like an annuity. You need to follow the rules. You can do exactly what was done under a previous private-letter ruling by the IRS. (Private letter rulings are not “authority,” according to IRS Section 6110(k)(3), and technically cannot be relied on as such.) You can do the math backward if, say, you need $1,000 extra a month. Once you know what that account size needs to be, you can segregate that out into a separate IRA, and only have equal and periodic payments coming out of just one IRA, not the entire IRA account that would be subject to normal distribution. So you leave the rest of the money in an IRA that you don’t touch? Thomas: Exactly. For a business owner who is selling the business and moving into retirement, what happens to the owner’s 401(k)? Thomas: He’ll have the choice of keeping it in his 401(k) or rolling it into an IRA, just keep it tax-deferred. View as one page Prev 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6

Interviews on 401(k) management with Brent Thomas, BAM Advisor, Santa Rosa; Taylor Greenleaf, co-owner, Greenleaf & Burleson wealth management, Petaluma, along with Bryce Brown, an adviser with Greenleaf. How do people who retire before age 70 use 401(k) distributions to bridge, drawing income from the 401(k) prior to their 70th year when they can maximize their Social Security monthly benefits? Brent Thomas: We don’t see that strategy frequently, but we definitely recommend it. If the client has other investment assets, it may be more tax-efficient to pull from those dollars to extend the date they need to pull Social Security from a cash-flow standpoint. Whether it’s a 401(k) or some other asset, we definitely see clients delaying their Social Security. Taylor Greenleaf and Bryce Brown: A 401(k) is a company plan set up for an individual’s retirement. A lot of people who leave a company roll the 401(k) into an IRA. We’re looking at their retirement assets and their taxable assets. Most people use their taxable assets in a financial plan initially — use that up first. Then they dip into retirement assets, an IRA or 401(k). Is the delay of Social Security benefits like a form of annuity with an 8 percent annual guarantee? Thomas: Yes. The way the math works, it’s a fairly attractive delay. The downside is if somebody passes away earlier than they expect, they may not have benefited. In general, correct, it’s kind of like an annuity. You are taking a bet with Social Security that you’re going to live long enough to have benefited from that delay. Greenleaf and Brown: You run the risk of breaking down the initial chunk of change you had. Once you hit 70, you run the risk of not being able to self-insure against unknown variables (such as large medical expenses not covered by insurance.) Sometimes it may be more efficient to use Social Security and complement that with their portfolio to a small degree. When would it be more efficient to take Social Security earlier? Greenleaf and Brown: The unknown is death. If you are going to have longevity, it might make more sense to take it later. If in the genetics of your family, most people tend to die in their mid-70s, or you are unhealthy, you might want to start taking it earlier. It’s hard to determine. If your family averages 95 to 100, it’s going to be very different. How does the required minimum distribution work in a 401(k) or IRA at age 70½? Thomas: It’s like an actuarial table. The RMD is determined based on your age. The calculator shows the amount you take out every year. It’s the government’s way of insuring that taxes get paid and that the account gets distributed based on the expected date of death. Distributions ramp up over time as you approach the expected date of death. It juices it up percentage-wise. It’s based on the end-of-year value of the account. How do taxable accounts mix with required minimum distributions from 401(k) accounts? Greenleaf and Brown: On your taxable account, capital gains taxes, whether long-term or short-term, are relevant. If you are drawing money out of your taxable account, that’s going to be a whole different realm for taxation purposes. If you have multiple 401(k) accounts, you take them all together? Greenleaf and Brown: That’s correct. You take them all together, the lump sum of all of them (for the calculation). The dollar amount is not pertinent to the calculation in terms of the percentage you have to take. If you wait to age 70 to take Social Security benefits, you are betting against the government? Thomas: In a sense, yes. With Social Security, there are many ways people can file. If people can get a spousal benefit in the meantime, it particularly makes sense to delay Social Security. So a client might not be giving up all their Social Security benefits (waiting to age 70). They just may be getting a reduced benefit. You would start collecting on the lower-earning spouse’s Social Security first? Thomas: Typically, yes. If we have a higher-earning spouse and a middle- to lower-earning spouse, the higher-earning spouse can delay his or her own benefit to age 70. Many times you have a spouse who took years off from work to raise children. The Social Security benefit may be significantly lower — maybe $1,200 a month at full retirement age of 66 or 67. Under the spousal benefit (typically half), you have $600 going to the higher-earning spouse. You are collecting $1,800 a month from Social Security, which helps bridge that gap until you get to age 70. It’s not like they’re taking zero. Then when the higher-earning spouse reaches age 70, they switch, and that person files for full benefits? Thomas: Yes. When they get to age 70 they might collect $3,000 a month. Then the spouse can file for a benefit on the higher-earner’s income level. It might be higher than $1,200 — say $1,500 (half the higher-earner’s benefit.) That would bump their number up. We see clients getting $4,000 or $5,000 a month from Social Security. Most importantly, once that higher-earning spouse has created that nice benefit — say $3,000 a month — that is going to be true for either spouse if they live. So there’s a huge benefit there? Thomas: It can be a very significant benefit. They are going to collect that higher amount for their lifetime. Most clients reach full retirement age at 66 or a little older. So the delay is about four years. This whole game — there are different ways to do the math to figure out where the crossover point is. In rough numbers, in the early 80s — 80 to 82. If you live that long, you sort of won the game. If you don’t live that long, then Social Security will have paid you less than if you had taken it earlier. These days, living to 82 is not uncommon? Thomas: It’s not, though we have conversations with our clients about their family, their health. You want to look at this like an insurance decision. Who is going to play this game? What are the odds — put them in your favor. I had a client a couple of years ago where we had this whole conversation. We made the decision to take her Social Security benefits earlier based on her health concerns. Sure enough, she only lived into her early 70s. In her case it was a smart move to collect benefits early? Thomas: Yes. Otherwise she would not have collected very long. In general, unless health is compromised, you recommend waiting to age 70 for Social Security? Thomas: We encourage many clients to wait and collect their Social Security later. In a case where a couple takes distributions of $62,000, they would qualify for reduced premiums under Obamacare. If their taxable distributions go up $1,000 to $63,000, they no longer qualify for reduced premiums? Greenleaf and Brown: That is true. With Obamacare, there are thresholds. If you go over, the qualifications change dramatically for what you pay. We have had multiple clients with whom this has been an issue. Be very careful on the amount of income they are drawing out. It’s a lot of planning to make sure they stay within their limits. Where a client waits to receive Social Security and uses up 401(k) or other retirement accounts, then dies early, the heirs have lost part of their inheritance? Thomas: Correct. I had this conversation with a client six months ago. His primary concern was he wanted to leave assets to his kids. If he spent his dollars and didn’t collect all the Social Security he had access to, he was spending some of their inheritance. Most clients are far more concerned about being a burden to their children later in life if they live longer than their money lasts. That’s a bigger concern than leaving a slightly smaller inheritance. Let’s say a client lives to be 100 years old, and having that larger Social Security benefit allows him to maintain his cash flow and not have to go to his kids for help paying bills, repairing the house. What does that feel like? Versus, instead you delay your Social Security, die younger than expected and your kids receive your house, which in Petaluma is probably $600,000 to $800,000, and maybe only $1 million in your 401(k) instead of $1.2 million. Are you OK with that? The calculation of whether to delay Social Security essentially involves actuarial considerations? Thomas: Yes. It can be looked at that way. If you go to a private insurance company and try to get the same deal you get by delaying Social Security benefits, you’re not going to get it from a private company. The numbers are more favorable. That 8 percent increase every year from full retirement age to 70 is quite good? Thomas: Yes. No question. If you make it to 80 or 82, you either break even or have won. There’s no additional benefit to waiting beyond age 70. If a small-business owner has 401(k) accounts for employees, what should that owner do when s/he sells the business? Thomas: We encourage people to keep the dollars inside some kind of retirement plan. Unfortunately, people realize they can get access to $12,000 or whatever it is, and they take the money. They pay tax on it and penalties (10 percent). They have the cash to be able to go buy a car. It happens all too frequently. Greenleaf and Brown: Most of the time, if you’re selling a business and you have employees, and there’s going to be no more work, people do a rollover into an IRA. Then you can self-direct your assets with more flexibility, greater choice. In a rollover, where the employer or employee takes a check, there are only 60 days to do the rollover? Greenleaf and Brown: That’s correct, 60 days within which to deposit it into another type of tax-advantaged account, such as an IRA. What about employees who stay with the company and have 401(k) plans? Greenleaf and Brown: A lot of times it will roll right into whatever 401(k) the new owner has. The investment options might change. Or it can be rolled into a self-directed IRA. When larger employers have 401(k) plans, are matching contributions the best way to boost the participation rate? Greenleaf and Brown: Often, yes. But employees won’t necessarily participate, even with matching funds. Sometimes they can’t afford it. A single mom might make just enough to cover her kids. A lot of new 401(k)s are starting to move toward an automatic enrollment structure so the employee doesn’t have to take the initiative. For a lot of people, it’s the last thing on their minds. With automatic enrollment, usually they start it off at 1 percent. The money might go into targeted funds based on the estimated date of retirement, and automatically adjust the risk depending on your age. There will be more risk when they’re younger, and taper that back as they age. The shift is in asset allocation, the equity-bond ratio? Greenleaf and Brown: Exactly. What about companies with pension plans? Thomas: We are working with a client now who is closing down a pension plan. They’re going to have a 401(k) plan for about 18 employees to use in their retirement in the future. We’re trying to encourage employees who have dollars in the pension plan to leave those dollars in the 401(k), not take the money and run. It’s a struggle. Employees who take early withdrawal pay the penalty? Thomas: If they’re younger than 59 ½, they pay taxes plus a 10 percent penalty. It adds up, federal plus state taxes. If that’s the mentality they have, by the time they get to age 55 or 60, they don’t have a lot of dollars in their plan to help with their own retirement. That’s the bigger concern. If someone has a medical emergency, can money be withdrawn before age 59½ without penalty? Thomas: There can be exceptions to the 10 percent penalty — a hardship withdrawal. They will not avoid paying income tax. The other way to avoid the 10 percent penalty is with equal and periodic payments. There is a whole set of math around that. For example, if someone’s spouse passes away and s/he needs money from the 401(k) to bridge for the next five or 10 years, you can take periodic payments over that entire period and spread it out. If done correctly, you can take that out without the 10 percent penalty. You have to take them at least to age 59 ½. In effect, you annuitize that lump sum? Thomas: That is correct. That’s how the math works, like an annuity. You need to follow the rules. You can do exactly what was done under a previous private-letter ruling by the IRS. (Private letter rulings are not “authority,” according to IRS Section 6110(k)(3), and technically cannot be relied on as such.) You can do the math backward if, say, you need $1,000 extra a month. Once you know what that account size needs to be, you can segregate that out into a separate IRA, and only have equal and periodic payments coming out of just one IRA, not the entire IRA account that would be subject to normal distribution. So you leave the rest of the money in an IRA that you don’t touch? Thomas: Exactly. For a business owner who is selling the business and moving into retirement, what happens to the owner’s 401(k)? Thomas: He’ll have the choice of keeping it in his 401(k) or rolling it into an IRA, just keep it tax-deferred. 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus