ROSELAND, N.J., June 20, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- ADP®, a leading global provider of Human Capital Management (HCM) solutions, today announced this year's five Henry Taub Scholars, recipients of the company's college scholarship that recognizes students who have exhibited academic excellence and made significant contributions to their communities. The program was established to honor ADP's late founder, Henry Taub, who believed in the invaluable benefits of higher education.

The Henry Taub Scholarship Award is open to children of ADP associates who are pursuing a college education. Up to $20,000 in annual financial assistance is awarded to each of the five recipients to help pay for tuition and books. The 2014 Taub Scholars are: Derek Nelson (Ramsey, NJ); Rachel Matthews (Long Valley, NJ); Sanjay Velappan (Suwanee, GA); Shohini Rakhit (Johns Creek, GA); and Myra Kohler (Georgetown, Ontario, Canada).

"On behalf of ADP, I would like to extend our congratulations to all of this year's Henry Taub Scholars for their commendable achievements, both in and beyond the classroom," said Carlos Rodriguez, president and CEO of ADP. "ADP is honored to assist these students in their academic endeavors and to enable them to continue to embody the values of our late founder, Henry Taub."

To identify the five Henry Taub Scholar finalists, ADP collaborated with the ADP Foundation and the National Merit Scholarship Corporation (NMSC), an independent non-profit organization, as well as International Scholarship and Tuition Services (ISTS). Of the qualifying applicants, finalists were selected based on a range of criteria, including academic achievements, extracurricular activities and community involvement, leadership roles, and an essay. The Henry Taub Scholarship Award, currently in its third year, is an extension of ADP's broader, ongoing scholarship program sponsored by the ADP Foundation. The program has provided millions of dollars in scholarships to hundreds of children of ADP associates over the last 40 years.

"ADP and the ADP Foundation fully embrace Henry Taub's belief that education is the key to opportunity," said Rita Mitjans, Chief Diversity & Corporate Social Responsibility Officer and head of the ADP Foundation. "We wish all of this year's scholars success in reaching their goals."

About ADP

With more than $11 billion in revenues and more than 60 years of experience, ADP® (NASDAQ: ADP) serves approximately 620,000 clients in more than 125 countries. As one of the world's largest providers of business outsourcing and Human Capital Management solutions, ADP offers a wide range of human resource, payroll, talent management, tax and benefits administration solutions from a single source, and helps clients comply with regulatory and legislative changes, such as the Affordable Care Act (ACA). ADP's easy-to-use solutions for employers provide superior value to companies of all types and sizes. ADP is also a leading provider of integrated computing solutions to auto, truck, motorcycle, marine, recreational vehicle, and heavy equipment dealers throughout the world. For more information about ADP, visit the company's Web site at www.adp.com.

For more information, contact:

Dick Wolfe, ADP

O: 973-974-7034

M: 201-396-5954

Dick.Wolfe@adp.com

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140620/119673

SOURCE ADP