Topics: 2014 elections, Dream City, local politics, New York City, urban planning, Sustainability News, News, Politics News

If there was any solace for the left on a historically dismal election night, it was in progressive victories in local politics.

The Senate’s Environment and Public Works Committee will soon be chaired by climate change denier-supporter James Inhofe, the fourth-term Oklahoma Republican. But no one ever called Congress a laboratory of democracy. Meanwhile, four states that strongly supported Mitt Romney in 2012 — Alaska, Arkansas, Nebraska and South Dakota — passed minimum wage hikes in ballot referenda. Voters in Alaska, Oregon and Washington, D.C., legalized marijuana. The three biggest mayoral elections, in Oakland, California, San Jose, California, and the District of Columbia, were (not surprisingly) won by liberals.

Is this the famed Metropolitan Revolution in action, the progressive fruits of a gradual devolution of authority toward states and cities?

Don’t hold your breath. Despite bright spots of municipal innovation, like San Francisco’s minimum wage hike, cities remain politically weak and subject to rurally dominated state legislatures.

Where the transfer of power to local authority has taken place, it’s voters, rather than their representatives, who are making decisions on taxes, infrastructure and policy. It’s a shift that, while democratic, will have mixed results for urban planning.

* * *

At the state level, a few successful left-wing ballot initiatives ought not obscure the fact that Democrats control only eight of the 50 statehouses. The GOP is now in full control of 29 state legislatures, the largest number since 1928. Thirty-two of the nation’s governors are Republicans.

Generally, that’s bad news for cities’ social programs, pension plans and non-automobile transportation. In Florida, Wisconsin and Ohio, anti-rail Republicans were easily reelected. In Maryland, Gov.-elect Larry Hogan is opposed to an expansion of the Washington, D.C., Metro in Montgomery County, and thinks the funds would be better spent on repairing roads and highways.

In New York, the Democrats’ inability to take the statehouse will pose problems for Bill de Blasio. Though the Brooklynite mayor has become an international spokesman for progressive causes in cities, several items on his agenda — such as regaining control over New York City’s rent regulations — will now be out of reach until 2016 at the earliest.

Still, in some ways, cities and counties are taking control of their own policies with an eye toward improving urban life.

These initiatives aren’t born of federal grants, or at the state capital, but on the ballot. Election Day is changing: It is no longer merely a choosing of candidates but a nationwide referendum on infrastructure.

Seattle and San Francisco voted to increase funding for transit and alternative transportation; Wisconsin and Maryland opted to secure existing transit funding. Clayton County, in metro Atlanta, will raise the sales tax by a full percentage point to generate money for a bus system. Half of the $45 million the measure is expected to raise will fund regular bus service; the other half will be used for a pending, more expensive project, like commuter rail or BRT.

These victories mark the intersection of two trends, the first in politics and the second in transportation finance. The first statewide ballot initiative wasn’t held until 1904, in Oregon, and after a surge in the 1920s, the method fell away in the postwar era to a low point in 1968. But it has since experienced “a tremendous upsurge in usage,” and it’s now common for voters to find a handful of complex subjects posed as yes-or-no questions on the back of their ballots.