If you didn’t have health insurance this year, you could be on the hook for a penalty when you file 2014 taxes. And if you fail to sign up for insurance during the current open enrollment period, you’ll also lock yourself into an even steeper fine for 2015.

But what if you couldn’t afford health insurance, or you have religious reasons for opposing it? The law allows for exemptions, and a lot of people are expected to qualify. In fact, according to a report out earlier this year by the Congressional Budget Office, by 2016, almost 90 percent of the 30 million people still uninsured won’t pay the penalty, primarily because they’ll qualify for one of nearly two dozen exemptions.

Here, experts discuss the five exemptions likely to be most commonly used, as well as how to go about applying for them.

1. You live in a state that didn’t expand Medicaid.

Nationwide, about 4 million low-income people will remain uninsured because they live in one of the 23 states that chose not to expand its Medicaid program in 2014, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation,

“This should be one of the more commonly used exemptions,” says Karen Pollitz, senior fellow with Kaiser Family Foundation.

People with incomes at or below 138 percent of poverty – about $27,000 a year for a family of three – won’t be eligible for Medicaid coverage if they live in a state that didn’t expand the program under the Affordable Care Act. In many cases, these folks also didn’t get subsidies to help buy private insurance through the Marketplace because their income was too low to qualify for premium tax credits. The law doesn’t provide financial assistance to people with incomes below poverty.

Initially, people in this situation were required to apply for Medicaid and be denied, or to get a hardship exemption certificate by applying through the Marketplace.

“The idea was you had to apply to the Marketplace by the end of this year to qualify,” says Timothy Jost, a law professor at Washington and Lee University. But the IRS recently changed course, thanks in part to a blog post Jost co-wrote in the journal Health Affairs urging it to do so.

Now, this hardship exemption can be claimed on your 2014 tax return.

2. Your income is too low to file for taxes.

Millions of Americans don’t file a tax return because their income falls below the threshold that requires them to do so. That’s the case for a single person who earned less than $10,150 in 2014, or a married couple with an income below $20,300.

“If you don’t have to file taxes then you are also exempt from the mandate,” says Linda Blumberg, health economist with the Urban Institute.

Since you aren’t required to file a tax return, no action is required to take advantage of this exemption from the health law. “You don’t have to apply for the exemption,” Blumberg says, because it will be automatically applied.

3. Health insurance is too expensive for you.

Despite subsidies to lower costs, health insurance remains unaffordable for millions of Americans. If coverage is too pricey for you, you’ll qualify for an exemption.

“The rule is you get the affordability exemption if the cheapest cost plan is more than 8 percent [of your income],” Pollitz says.

There are a number of reasons why people might find themselves in this circumstance, she says.

For example, individuals with incomes in 2014 of roughly $29,000 and families of four who earned about $59,000 would qualify for a subsidy to help pay for insurance, but would still be required to pay more than 8 percent of their income – the law’s threshold for insurance being deemed too costly.

Some people can stay under that 8 percent threshold by purchasing a less expensive plan, Pollitz points out, “although when they do so they’re going to pick up a lot more cost-sharing,” she says.

But if you’re older, the law allows insurers to charge you more than a younger person for the same health plan. For many people in their 50s and early 60s, it’s possible even the least expensive bronze-level plan will be too pricey.

That’s also likely to be the case for smokers and people living in an area with high medical costs – two additional factors for which insurers can charge consumers more. If these extra costs tacked onto your health plan premium drive the price of insurance above 8 percent of your household income, you’ll be allowed to file for an exemption.

You can either claim it when you file your federal taxes, or apply for an exemption certificate through the Marketplace.