More Americans than ever before are tapping government benefits. But this time the baby boomers may be responsible for the slight uptick.

Nearly half of Americans, 49.5%, lived in a household where at least one person was receiving some type of government benefit in the fourth quarter of 2012, according to Census Department data. That number ticked up slightly from 49.2% at the end of 2011.

The share of Americans receiving government benefits has risen steadily during the recession and sluggish recovery. The types of benefits run the gamut, from Social Security to unemployment compensation to food stamps.

Over the last few years, the number has mostly risen from more people turning to programs designed to help the poor, such as food stamps, Medicaid (the health-insurance program for the poor and disabled) and the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program, commonly known as welfare.

But from 2011 to 2012, that picture may be shifting. In late 2012, 35.4% of Americans lived in a home that received help from a means-tested, poverty-assistance program. That number didn’t budge from 2011.

In fact, the slight uptick from 2011 appears to be mostly due to the aging population in the U.S. Some 16.8% of Americans resided in a household receiving Social Security benefits at the end of 2012, up from 16.3% a year earlier. And 15.8% of Americans lived in a home tapping Medicare benefits, up from 15.1% a year earlier.

That’s not to say millions of Americans aren’t still turning to the government to ease the sting from the prolonged economic downturn. When this data was collected at the end of 2012, the unemployment rate was still hovering near 8%, well above the 6.2% unemployment rate in July 2014. And even now, some 46 million Americans are still turning to food stamps to feed their families.

If anything, the 2012 data offer an early preview of the budget challenge the federal government will continue to face. Even as the economy improves and fewer Americans need poverty assistance, the aging baby-boom generation is sure to stretch expensive entitlements, including Social Security and Medicare.

Want more information on how U.S. government programs have expanded over the past few decades? Check out this timeline.