A musician whose work crosses genres, including elements of folk, southern boogie, country fiddle and electric rock, and who has been praised by presidents, says while many people see “cover ups,” “partial truths” and even “lying” coming from the government, he’s alarmed because “the Obama administration has elevated it to an art form.”

Charlie Daniels, the star singer, songwriter and performer who recently turned 78, regularly blogs on his band’s website under the title Soap Box.

In a recent commentary about the “truth,” he blasts the Washington establishment for misleading Americans.

He points, for example, to labeling the Fort Hood massacre by a Muslim shouting “Allahu Akbar” as “workplace violence” and ISIS as a “JV team.”

Daniels, whose “The Devil Went Down to Georgia” was a standard-setter in the music industry, was praised by President Jimmy Carter, who said: “In his time he’s played everything from rock to jazz, folk to western swing, and honkytonk to award-winning gospel. In Charlie’s own words, ‘Let there be harmony, let there be fun and 12 notes of music to make us all one.'”

President Gerald Ford said: “Charlie’s love of music is only surpassed by his love of people, especially the American people. He’s traveled this land from coast to coast singing about the things that concern the American people.”

The Encyclopedia of Southern Culture says: “Few individuals have symbolized the South in popular culture as directly and indelibly as Charlie Daniels.”

Among his top titles in a career spanning 50 years are “In America,” “Uneasy Rider,” “The South’s Gonna Do It,” “Still in Saigon” and “The Legend of Wooley Swamp.”

His commentry on Washington’s lies notes, “Nothing breeds distrust like a lie, nothing undermines confidence in a person or a government like being lied to or told half-truths and you get to the point that you don’t really trust anything that person says.

“It seems that cover ups, partial truths and outright lying has become an acceptable way of doing business with the federal government and although it is not new, the Obama administration has elevated it to an art form.”

He cited the statement by the Obama administration that the Benghazi attacks were because of “some obscure film that was an insult to Islam.”

He also cited:

The threat that if Obamacare was not passed, there would be a catastrophe.

That Americans could keep their own doctor and insurance.

That there was not a “smidgen” of corruption at the IRS.

That if Bashar al-Assad crossed a line he would pay the price.

“Lies themselves are problem enough, but one of the most damaging ramifications of lying is the erosion of trust and the uncertainty of not knowing if we are being told the whole truth or some varnished lie that works to the advantage of the administration,” he wrote.

Now, he said, Obama is saying Americans have nothing to fear from Ebola patients flying into the U.S. and that ISIS can be “degraded” with air strikes.

“Do you believe him?” Daniels asked.

“Hats off to Canadian Prime Minister, Stephan Harper, for calling the recent incidents in that country ‘terrorism,” Daniels wrote. “It’s good to know that one leader on the North American Continent knows how to tell the truth.”