A pilot prepares to take off during a fly-in, air show and open house in September 2013 at the Fremont County Airport. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Save the date!

The Fremont County Airport will host its second annual air show from 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. Sept. 27 at the airport, 60298 U.S. 50 in Penrose.

Jim Woolworth, Fremont County Airport Advisory Board member, said the show will feature skydiving demonstrations, helicopter rides, a pancake breakfast and vendors.

The event will feature Don Nelson Air Shows of Denver, with aerobatics from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m.

"He puts on a fantastic performance," Woolworth said. "It's really an eye popper."

The Rocky Mountain Renegades also will fly R.V. air craft in precision formation and aerobatics. Penrose resident and pilot Hans Miesler is part of the Renegades.

"One thing we are considering, also, we'll probably put our amateur-built aircraft on display, probably with some classic cars," Woolworth said.

Pedal planes were a big hit with children last year, and they likely will be available again this year.

"We are going to invite several warbird owners to come and either land to do a static display or a drive by," Woolworth said. Warbirds are military aircraft that have been restored and flown, Woolworth said, and static display is when aircraft fly in and let people take a closer look. Pilots also talk about the history of the planes.

In 2013, about 2,000 people attended the inaugural air show. Attendance depends on the weather, Woolworth said, but aircraft can fly in just about any type of conditions.

Advertisement

"They fly in the weather, and if it's windy, it usually doesn't affect them at all," he said. "They can fly in the rain, but if the ceiling comes down, where the ceiling and visibility are reduced, that will put a hamper on them. But that's a rare occurrence around here."

Through the air show, the advisory board hopes to bring visibility to the airport and what it does for the community.

"There is really a lot that goes on out there," Woolworth said. "It's far removed from the center of town and people don't appreciate some of the things that come from the airport."

Fire protection is stationed there during the fire season, and there a number of businesses housed at the airport.

"There are businesses out there, too, that bring revenue back into the local community," Woolworth said. "There are three skydiving businesses out there, and that's unheard of. I've never seen any air field where three skydiving businesses are operating out of the same location."

There will be no admission fee for September's air show, but donations will be accepted. The breakfast and helicopter rides are for a fee.