ABC News reported that some health insurance plans are in violation of the Affordable Care Act’s requirements for women's health, according to a new report from a women's legal advocacy group.

The National Women's Law Center analyzed plans in 15 states over a period of two years.

The group found that some plans excluded dependents from maternity coverage, prohibited coverage of breast pumps or failed to cover all federally approved birth control methods, among other issues.

The report calls for regulators to do a better job of reviewing the plans and for insurers to comply with the Affordable Care Act.

In addition, it calls for more public access to health plan coverage documents, especially as people comparison shop for coverage.

Gretchen Borchelt of the National Women's Law Center said violations leave women "without the coverage they need."

"The health care law has done so much for women. We now need to make sure it reaches every woman and [that] every woman gets the full range of benefits required by the law," Borchelt said.

Karen Ignagni, CEO of the trade association America's Health Insurance Plans, said the report presented a distorted picture.

"Health plans provide access to care for millions of women each day and receive high marks in customer satisfaction surveys. To use highly selective anecdotes to draw sweeping conclusions about consumers' coverage does nothing to improve the quality, accessibility, or affordability of health care for individuals and families," Ignagni said.

Health and Human Service Department spokeswoman Katie Hill said the Obama administration takes "reports of non-compliance very seriously," will continue to provide guidance to insurers and states and "will explore whether additional measures are necessary."

"Thanks to the [Affordable Care Act], tens of millions of women have gained access to and are using much-needed health care," Hill said.

Under the law, most health insurance plans must cover all Food and Drug Administration-approved contraceptives as preventive care for women, free to the patient.

The intention behind providing contraceptives is to help women determine when they get pregnant and to increase the number of healthy newborns.

The report found that 15 insurance companies in seven states failed to cover all the FDA-approved contraceptives.

For instance, a Wisconsin plan excluded sponges, a barrier method of contraception covered under the Affordable Care Act.



A South Dakota plan would not cover a long-lasting hormonal method involving a small rod implanted under the skin of a woman's upper arm. HealthCare.gov states that both hormonal methods and implanted devices are covered under the Affordable Care Act.

Other plans required financial cost-sharing for some birth control methods but not others, according to the report.

Maternity coverage was also a common problem cited by the report. One Tennessee plan did not include maternity coverage for dependents, which could include spouses or offspring under age 26. Plans in Colorado and South Dakota also restricted the number of ultrasounds a pregnant woman could receive. An Alabama health plan capped the number of prenatal visits at six per year.

According to the report, health plans in Colorado, Ohio and Tennessee excluded breast bumps from coverage in 2014.

The analysis found problems with at least one health plan in every state, including states on both state-run marketplaces and states relying on the federal HealthCare.gov exchange.

The states included in the report are Alabama, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Maine, Maryland, Minnesota, Nevada, Ohio, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee, Washington and Wisconsin.

Most health plans are complying with the law, Borchelt said, so the violations would not affect all of the roughly 6 million women covered on the marketplace.

"We want insurance companies to step up and regulators to do a better job of enforcing the requirements," Borchelt said.