A few centuries ago, Europeans alighted upon these shores, and it was not long before they had imposed their own boundaries, laws and proclivities upon the unsuspecting populations of Turtle Island.

Not least of these is the 49th Parallel, otherwise known as the official boundary between the United States and Canada. It is easy these days for those of us to the south of that arbitrary line to lose track of what is happening north of it. But the fight over the Keystone XL oil pipeline, as well as other issues that render the border all but irrelevant, have highlighted the interconnection we continue to share.

RELATED: Study Finds Industry Underreporting of Oil Sands Pollutants

Large Dams of Mining Waste Leaking Into Athabasca River: Study

That’s where The Tyee comes in. A paragon of independent journalism, The Tyee has explored First Nations education, reported on the significance of land claims and sacred sites versus development initiatives, and brought to light issues related to missing and murdered indigenous women, among many other topics. It is dedicated to that task, and to continue it needs money to support its independent journalism.

“Whether it's major decisions in indigenous rights and title, or this nation's Idle No More movement, The Tyee has covered major issues of importance for First Nations communities across Canada since we launched in 2003,” the site’s editors told ICTMN in an e-mail.

Indian Country Today Media Network can vouch for that, having reprinted several Tyee stories to augment our own Canada coverage.

The Tyee needs financial support to continue its mission of reporting accurately and digging into the issues important for an informed electorate to know about. Such in-depth journalism is more essential than ever given Canada’s impending federal elections this year, as the site’s editors point out.

“As an independent, online magazine based in British Columbia, we're mainly known for our reporting on powerful movements of indigenous resistance against key energy projects,” The Tyee said. “What sets us apart is our joint effort to highlight and uplift leaders of the next generation. We also aim to amplify the voices of indigenous writers, such as Judith Sayers, an aboriginal lawyer from the Hupacasath First Nation whose expert knowledge has helped clarified the stakes of major title decisions, and Jess Housty, a shining young Heiltsuk leader in B.C.”

Only five days are left for The Tyee to raise the $12,000 needed to reach its election-coverage total of $50,000. For more information, or to donate, check out The Tyee’s fund-raising page.

For more Tyee coverage of indigenous issues, check out some of the links below, as well as the fun-raising video.

Heiltsuk Will Fight to Protect Central Coast Herring

Kids Learn Culture and Language at Surrey's Only Indigenous Preschool

Cross-border Indigenous Treaty Takes on Kinder Morgan Pipeline

How the Tsilhqot'in Decision Changes Business in BC

To the Tsilhqot'in, with Gloves

And all of The Tyee’s indigenous coverage can be found here.