Tammy Tedford went to Texas General Hospital when she had trouble breathing in April. A month later her husband, James Balter, visited the Grand Prairie hospital for stomach pain.

The Arlington couple came home with new maladies: medical bills high enough to cause a heart attack.

After a CT scan and basic lab tests, Texas General diagnosed Balter with a urinary tract infection and a slightly enlarged prostate.

Hospital staffers gave Tedford respiratory therapy, tested her blood and did a CT scan before releasing her after five hours with a prescription for an antibiotic.

Together the couple’s bills totaled $165,240.

“I thought they made a typo,” said Balter, a 48-year-old limousine dispatcher with no health insurance. “I thought for sure they had moved a decimal point or something.”

A study published this month in a health policy journal found it’s common practice at Texas General and two other for-profit medical centers in North Texas to charge patients upward of nine times the cost of care.

While insurance companies and federal health care programs arrange lower prices with hospitals, experts said, the uninsured don’t have the same negotiating power and are often left with hefty bills.

“We pride ourselves so much on being an equal society, but we are charging the highest price to the most vulnerable people,” said Ge Bai, co-author of the study and assistant professor of accounting at Washington and Lee University in Virginia.

According to the study in the June edition of Health Affairs, Texas General has the 11th-highest charge-to-cost ratio in the country and the highest in Texas. On average, for every $100 in costs related to patient care, the hospital billed $1,080, the study says.

Dallas Regional Medical Center in Mesquite had the 43rd-highest price markup, and Lake Granbury Medical Center in Granbury ranked No. 50, according to the study.

On average, hospitals across the country charged about three times the cost of care in 2012, according to the report.

The study used data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to compare almost 4,500 hospitals’ patient-care-related costs to the amount of money charged. While the calculated ratios do consider the costs of administrative salaries and services like laundry, they don’t include costs not related to patient care, like running a gift shop or paying interest on a loan.

The ratios also don’t account for discounts the hospitals offered to the uninsured or underinsured, like the one Balter may be eligible for at Texas General.

When he went back to ask whether there had been a typo in his bill, Balter was handed a packet of paperwork and told he could apply for financial aid.

Balter’s itemized bill included charges for a $2,256 blood test and a $27,200 CT scan. Tedford’s blood tests were billed at a total of $4,996. Both bills included a $25,000 fee for use of the facility. With prices like that, the couple said, it would be impossible for them to pay without help.

But Texas General spokesman Jerry Patterson said the prices referenced in the study and represented on patients’ bills have little relevance to what patients and insurance companies actually pay. Last year, he said, the hospital collected less than 7 percent of what it charged insurance companies.

All patients are eligible for Texas General’s financial benefit package based on need. Since opening in 2012, the hospital has treated more than 30,000 patients and provided about $91.7 million in uncompensated care, Patterson said. Last quarter, almost a third of its patients were uninsured.

According to Census Bureau estimates, almost 1 in 4 Texans, or about 5.7 million people, were uninsured in 2013.

For-profit hospitals often give financial aid to uninsured or underinsured patients, said Chip Kahn, president and CEO of the Federation of American Hospitals, a national trade association of investor-owned hospitals. The 50 hospitals listed by the study collectively provided $450 million in uncompensated care in 2012, he said in an emailed statement.

“A critical limitation of this study, acknowledged by the authors, is its omission of discounts attributable to these programs,” Kahn said. “Including these discounts would have had a significant effect on the charge-to-cost ratio reported, and therefore the implications of the study’s results.”

Raji Kumar, CEO of Dallas Regional Medical Center, said the hospital's new owner, Prime Healthcare Services, is working to adjust prices after buying the hospital in March. In the next year, she said, the hospital will work with industry experts to make prices better reflect costs than they did in the year that the study examines, when the hospital was owned by Community Health Systems.

Lake Granbury Medical Center provided $3.2 million in uncompensated care to patients in 2014, hospital spokeswoman Dixie Lee Hedgecock said in an email. The center uses profits to expand and provide better medical care, including building a new intensive care unit and renovating existing facilities.

“Hospital charges do not accurately portray what consumers pay for their health care,” she said. “At our hospital, we provide substantial discounts for those who are uninsured, and we offer charity care for those who qualify.”

But even if uninsured patients are given a large discount, they still end up paying far more than the cost of treatment because of inflated prices, said Bai, the study’s co-author.

For example, if a hospital like Texas General charges $1,000 for a procedure that costs $100 and later offers a 60 percent discount, an uninsured patient is still paying $300 more than the cost of care, she said.

Every hospital sets its own prices for the thousands of procedures, medicines and supplies it provides. Insurance companies and the federal government then negotiate the price they are willing to pay. The amount they pay is often much closer to the cost of care, according to the study.

Uninsured individuals don’t have the same bargaining power, however, Bai said. It is almost impossible for patients to compare prices between hospitals or even get an estimate of cost before choosing to go forward with a treatment, she said. Uninsured patients are left to hope for discounts after the bill is already sent.

Even patients with insurance pay higher prices because of the inflated rates, said Jonathan Skinner, professor of economics at Dartmouth College. Insurance premiums help cover some costs for the uninsured, so when their costs are higher, so are the premiums. The inflated prices also allow hospitals to start cost negotiations with insurance companies at higher prices, Skinner said.

“These prices are made-up numbers, and now they’re just more and more made up,” he said. “Now the charge has been distorted into a bargaining chip for negotiations.”

Texas General’s Patterson said the prices have to be that high so the hospital can stay open.

“If Texas General Hospital arbitrarily decreased its billed charges, commercial payors [insurance companies] would pay even less, and the hospital would be forced to close its doors,” he said in an email.

Legislative change is the one way to protect patients from high charges, Bai and Skinner said.

The Affordable Care Act requires that nonprofit hospitals offer discounts to eligible uninsured patients, though individual hospitals get to create their own eligibility standards. No similar law applies to for-profit health care outside of California and Maryland, according to the report.

Some of the ways to better protect uninsured patients from high bills is through legislation that limits the amount hospitals can mark up procedure prices and demands more transparent pricing, Bai said.

“You have to talk to your representative,” she said. “As patients, we have very little bargaining power.”

Kahn disagreed, saying discount programs are the best way to help patients.

“Absent coverage, the true resolution is having programs in place, like those in our hospitals, which offer discounts so that these patients do not have to prioritize concern about their ability to pay over their own health and well-being,” he said.

While academics and lawmakers argue about the best way to help the uninsured, Balter has refused to pay his bill. He’s considered applying for financial help but thinks his salary will make him ineligible.

Tedford, who is disabled and can’t work, sent her bill to her insurance company and is waiting to hear back.

Neither has heard from the hospital since the first bill arrived, they said. So for now, they wait.

“What they’re doing is basically sticking it to people who don’t have insurance,” Balter said. “I’m just waiting for it to come bite me.”