Does Porreca killing reveal two standards of justice in Albany County?













Photo: SKIP DICKSTEIN Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Image 1 of 4 Buy photo Attorney Gaspar Castillo who represents Michael Chmielewski, 23, speaks to the media after the arraignment of his client in the alleged murder of salon worker Jacquelyn Porreca in Albany County Court Wednesday morning Nov. 18, 2015 in Albany, N.Y. (Skip Dickstein/Times Union) less Attorney Gaspar Castillo who represents Michael Chmielewski, 23, speaks to the media after the arraignment of his client in the alleged murder of salon worker Jacquelyn Porreca in Albany County Court Wednesday ... more Photo: SKIP DICKSTEIN Buy this photo Image 2 of 4 Jacquelyn Porreca with her brother, Gio Falciano. Jacquelyn Porreca with her brother, Gio Falciano. Image 3 of 4 Buy photo Sean Moreland is lead out of Colonie Town Court after being arraigned in the killing of Jacquelyn Porreca on Tuesday Nov. 10, 2015 in Colonie, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Sean Moreland is lead out of Colonie Town Court after being arraigned in the killing of Jacquelyn Porreca on Tuesday Nov. 10, 2015 in Colonie, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Photo: Michael P. Farrell Buy this photo Image 4 of 4 Buy photo Michael Chmielewski is lead out of Colonie Town Court after being arraigned in the killing of Jacquelyn Porreca on Tuesday Nov. 10, 2015 in Colonie, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Michael Chmielewski is lead out of Colonie Town Court after being arraigned in the killing of Jacquelyn Porreca on Tuesday Nov. 10, 2015 in Colonie, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Photo: Michael P. Farrell Buy this photo Does Porreca killing reveal two standards of justice in Albany County? 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

The case of Michael Chmielewski and Sean Moreland, the two men charged with the Aug. 21 robbery and stabbing murder of Jacquelyn Porreca in suburban Colonie, contains an element of secrecy rarely seen in Albany's inner-city murder cases.

Both men allegedly made incriminating statements to police but one cannot view those statements in a public court filing.

That's by judicial order.

This has not been the norm for even the highest profile murder cases in the city of Albany. For example, the media was able to access and report on statements to police filed in the cases of Jermayne Timmons, the teenager later convicted of murdering 10-year-old Kathina Thomas in West Hill 2008; in the triple murder case of Jovan Underdue, who was convicted of shooting three people to death in a 2008 bloodbath on Delaware Avenue; and in the trial of De Von Callicutt, who was found guilty of the 2008 murder of 22-year-old UAlbany student Richard Bailey in Albany.

And there are more.

What's the difference between those cases and the Porreca matter that two different standards apply?

"There's actually no difference," said Gaspar Castillo, the attorney for Chmielewski, when asked. "Perhaps we should, on the defense side, be more proactive about trying to take similar steps in regard to every other case."

The Timmons, Underdue and Callicutt cases all took place in the city of Albany with black defendants. The Porreca killing took place in the suburbs with two white defendants.

So, is race an issue?

"I absolutely see no difference," Castillo said. "I think that a life is a life and I don't care what the person looks like, what their gender is, what their sexual preferences are, what the color of their skin is. It doesn't matter. There's a death, there's a death."

Police allege Chmielewski, 23, of Colonie, stabbed Porreca, 32, in the Recycled Salon at the corner of Sand Creek and Russell roads. Moreland is the alleged getaway driver. Both have been described as heroin addicts.

On Nov. 16, Moreland's attorney, Paul DerOhannesian, filed a request with state Supreme Court Justice Thomas Breslin to impose a protective order to preclude the statements and other discovery material from being filed in court unless it is under seal.

DerOhannesian argued in court papers that pre-trial publicity — and statements by Colonie police attesting to the strength of their evidence — have already hurt his client.

"Vast information and numerous comments have been recklessly injected into the public arena with the potential of permanently prejudicing potential jurors who have been inundated with these comments about the defendants and the quality of the alleged evidence," DerOhannesian stated.

The lawyer noted that sections 240 and 710 of the Criminal Procedure Law allows for protective orders to keep discovery out of a public court file.

Castillo, the attorney for Chmielewski, joined him on the motion.

Breslin approved it (he did not approve a requested gag order on, among others, Colonie police that was part of the motion).

And the media — unlike those other cases — has been unable to report about what information Chmielewski and Moreland gave police,

"I can't speak to other cases," DerOhannesian said, "but in this case it was the right thing to do and necessary."

rgavin@timesunion.com • 518-434-2403 • @RobertGavinTU