Entertainment

Greg Kinnear, Emilia Clarke, Frank Castronovo and Frank Falcinelli were guests on Wednesday's episode of "The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon."



After the show's monologue, Fallon played a skit where President Obama called Vladimir Putin to talk about discuss the situation in Ukraine.







Kinnear was the first guest of the night and talked to Fallon about his character on the show "Rake." The two also conversed about the upcoming NCAA Tournament and their bracket picks.



With the NCAA Tournament kicking off, Kinnear and Fallon competed in a shooting contest where they used random objects.



The next guest was Clarke who talked Fallon about surviving her first earthquake. After that he asked her about her audition for the role of Daenerys Targayen on "Game Of Thrones" which was an interesting story to hear.



Fallon, lastly welcomed chefs Frank Castronovo and Frank Falcinelli from Frankies Spuntino, who brought Italian delicacies to the show.



Watch the full episode below:







Jimmy Fallon brought along Lena Dunham, Hugh Dancy, and Foster the People to Tuesday's episode of "Late Night With Jimmy Fallon."



Fallon's monologue on Tuesday mentioned points about Russia getting hit with sanctions and the increase in enrollment for Obamacare.



After that, Fallon weighed the "Pros and Cons" of going on a spring break trip for college students.



Dunham was Fallon's first guest of the night and the two talked about having the experience of working at a video rental store. Dunham also revealed a few details about the season finlae of "Girls" during the interview.



Fallon later asked Dunham to play a game of Pyramid with him. Dunham teamed up with the second guest Dancy while Fallon teamed up with his bandleader Questlove.







During the second interview of the night, Fallon asked Dancy about shooting the show "Hannibal" in the same town that Rob Ford is the mayor of.



Fallon's musical guest for Tuesday was the band Foster The People who performed their song "Coming of Age."



Check out the full episode below: