MOSES LAKE - Samaritan Healthcare finished 2014 with an operating surplus, but missed its budget target, according to information from Samaritan officials. Hospital chief executive officer Tom Thompson attributed that to a rise in emergency room visits.

The hospital finished the year with a $6.48 million surplus, Thompson said. The 2014 budget projected a surplus of $7.14 million.

Thompson said the hospital recorded 17,593 ER visits in 2014, compared to 15,645 ER visits in 2013. The difference, he said, apparently was due to the expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

People who didn't have insurance delayed medical treatment, Thompson said, but then sought treatment after they qualified for Medicaid. "They kind of came out of the woodwork for utilization," he said.

Many of those new patients didn't look for a primary care physician, opting instead to visit the ER, he said. Emergency room treatment is very expensive, he said, and Medicaid reimbursement is low.

Part of the rationale for the Medicaid expansion was that hospitals would have less bad debt and charity care, he said, and Samaritan's bad debt and charity care have decreased. But he said Medicaid only reimburses about 22 percent of the expenses.

Thompson said one way to cut those expenses is to encourage people to find a primary care doctor. Hospital officials will be working on that as part of a new and ambitious public information campaign, he said.

Hospital officials want to emphasize preventative care, he said, and encourage people to pursue healthier lifestyles. One of the first projects is a joint effort among health care organizations in Moses Lake to promote awareness of childhood obesity, he said.

The goal is to find out what health care services the community needs and will support, Thompson said, and find ways to provide those services locally. The hospital needs partners to do that, he said, and community involvement will be important.

"It (the information campaign) will result in us being much more visible," Thompson said. The Samaritan Healthcare Foundation is being revamped as part of that effort, he said.

Cheryl Schweizer can be reached via email at education@columbiabasinherald.com.