SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

On Breitbart News Sunday, one of the country’s top GOP pollsters warned Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-KY) to be careful in the coming months because Americans, especially Republicans, have a lower opinion of him than outgoing House Speaker John Boehner (R-OH).

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Liz Sheld of Red Revolver Strategies and Pat Caddell Associates conducted a poll (63.5% of those polled were Republicans, 30.2% identified as “independents” or “other,” and 6.4% were Democrats) before Boehner announced his resignation that found that 50% of Americans want a new Senate Majority Leader. Sheld said some aspects of the poll were worse for McConnell than it was for Boehner because McConnell was less popular than the outgoing House Speaker.

“If I were McConnell, I would be careful right now,” Sheld told host and Breitbart News Executive Chairman Stephen K. Bannon on Sirius XM Patriot channel 125.

As Republicans search for a new Speaker in the coming weeks, there may be more pressure put on McConnell from grassroots conservatives who have been fed up with a Republican leadership that too often ignores their concerns. Already, Louisiana Governor and 2016 GOP presidential candidate Bobby Jindal has called on McConnell to resign. So has Roger Villere, the Louisiana GOP Chairman and Republican National Committee’s vice chairman, who said that McConnell is hurting Republicans “tremendously with our elections.”

Sheld said the poll also found that voters believe the Republican leadership is more interested in doing the bidding of the Chamber of Commerce, corporations and lobbyists than standing up for for the rank and file GOP voter. And the poll found that two-thirds of Americans believed that Washington in general is more responsive to to lobbyists, big businesses, and special interests than the average Joe.

She also mentioned that the poll showed that Americans are not buying the litany of excuses the GOP establishment has made since 2010–like not having the presidency–for not fighting for what they promised on the campaign trail.

Sheld pointed out that when Democrats did not control the presidency or Congress, “they managed to make some progress on their front” and fought for their principles. She said Republicans should have at least tried to stand firm against defunding Obama’s executive amnesty and repealing Obamacare instead of not even trying because “Obama will never sign it.” In the poll, 64% of respondents answered, “I am disappointed with the performance of the Republican leadership in Congress, they are not living up to their promises on issues like immigration and Obamacare, upon which they were elected”

Sheld said voters are tired of a GOP leadership that doesn’t bother to put up a fight against Obama’s agenda and she mentioned that though Republicans regained control of Congress by running against Obamacare and Obama’s executive amnesty, the GOP leadership decided the day after wining the 2014 midterm elections that “we can’t do anything because Obama is the President.”