Topics: capital punishment, Criminal Justice, Death Penalty, Editor's Picks, Execution, firing squad, GOP, punishment, Utah, Politics News

When Utah Republican congressman Paul Ray recently announced a proposal to bring back firing squads, it was a response to the infamous “botched” execution of Clayton Lockett in the state of Oklahoma. A few days later, the state of Tennessee approved the reinstatement of the electric chair in case it runs out of drugs for lethal injection (the drugs are made in Europe, where manufacturers refuse to sell them to anyone who would use them for that purpose).

Whether or not these alternatives get traction, they are important indicators of the political state of play in matters of capital punishment. Lockett’s 43-minute ordeal has already prompted the suspension of two other executions, and made lethal injection seem unsustainable.

Let’s backtrack to what might have been a historical turning point.

According to the official timeline, on the day of his execution Clayton Lockett struck a defiant note, refusing to submit to an X-ray until officers shot him with a stun gun (he also declined to see his lawyers, and turned down his last meal).

At 5:22 p.m., Lockett was restrained on the execution gurney. A phlebotomist proceeded to examine his body, searching for a suitable vein in which to inject the three drugs that were to put him to sleep, stop his breath and finally stop his heart. The examination took a long time, until the phlebotomist chose a vein in Lockett’s groin area (doctors I consulted surmise this was actually the femoral artery).

At 6:23, Lockett received a dose of midazolam. After 10 minutes, appearing to be asleep, he was injected with vecuronium bromide and potassium chloride. But he woke up. He started thrashing and clenching his jaw. His mind and body fought death.

At 6:42, the execution team pulled the curtains closed, preventing witnesses from seeing anything else. It was later reported that “the vein had collapsed,” with the result that the drugs had either been absorbed into the tissue, leaked out, or both.

At 6:56, the execution was suspended.

At 7:06, Lockett was dead of a heart attack.

During those last 10 minutes, according to defense attorneys, “It’s unclear if they were trying to revive him or give him more drugs to kill him.”

This “unclear” aspect, in fact, speaks volumes about current attitudes toward the death penalty. The existing protocol is designed as a medical procedure, and requires the participation of medically trained personnel (who must be willing to violate the Hippocratic Oath, and therefore must remain anonymous to avoid professional sanctions). While the stated objective is to kill with minimal pain, this is a highly dubious assumption: No one other than the condemned has experienced this kind of drug cocktail, and this is not the first time that things have gone horribly wrong. The procedure applied to Clayton Lockett is actually considered unfit to kill animals. If reducing pain was the point, then firing squads (or a single bullet to the back of the head) would indeed be more effective, reliable and cheap. But death by shooting would also be bloody and shocking. And that is a problem, because there’s a more important goal than minimizing pain, and that’s minimizing drama — visible body damage, and the visible agency of the executioners inflicting it.

This wasn’t always the case. Executions used to be spectacularly gruesome affairs; a high level of suffering was essential to manifest the power of the state and define the gravity of the crime. Maximum pain was reserved for the maximum offense, which was rebellion against the king. In 1660 Major-General Thomas Harrison, who had fought against Charles I, was given the sentence: “That you be led to the place from whence you came, and from thence be drawn upon a hurdle to the place of execution, and then you shall be hanged by the neck and, being alive, shall be cut down, and your privy members to be cut off, and your entrails be taken out of your body and, you living, the same to be burnt before your eyes, and your head to be cut off, your body to be divided into four quarters, and head and quarters to be disposed of at the pleasure of the King’s majesty.”

Eventually, the spread of liberal democracies and human rights discourse made this kind of display unseemly. The history of the death penalty in the Western world is the history of its withdrawal from the public square, and from the pedagogical exhibition of bloodshed. The gallows became death chambers; hanging and beheading were replaced by electrocution and poisoning with gas or chemicals; crowds became small groups of witnesses.