WALLINGFORD, Conn.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Jill Rubin Hummel has been named president and general manager of Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Connecticut, effective December 30. Hummel will replace outgoing president, David R. Fusco, who has lead the state’s largest health benefits plan since 2005, and announced his retirement in September.

In her new position, Hummel will be responsible for the management of Anthem’s local group and individual business in Connecticut, including sales, account management, provider relations and contracting, underwriting and product delivery, as well as executing tenets of the Affordable Care Act and maintaining strong customer relationships. In addition, she will be responsible for the development of Anthem’s long-term strategic direction and collaborating with local and state elected officials and thought leaders to improve the health of Connecticut residents.

Hummel currently serves as the vice president of payment innovation for Anthem’s parent company, where she has led the creation of innovative payment-for-value initiatives that reward value over volume by working with primary care physicians to enhance data and resource sharing while improving access to quality health care that is more affordable.

In July 2013, Hummel was named to the board of directors of the Patient-Centered Primary Care Collaborative Initiative, or PCPCC, a nationally recognized thought leader in promoting health care transformation.

“Jill has a proven record of delivering results,” said Doug Wenners, senior vice president of provider engagement and contracting for Anthem’s parent company. “Her extensive experience in payment innovation techniques, profit-and-loss management, strategic planning, and operations management, in addition to her market knowledge, will be an asset to our Connecticut team.”

Prior to assuming her current role, Hummel served as the vice president of provider engagement and contracting for the company’s Northeast markets (New York, Connecticut, New Hampshire and Maine). As such, she was responsible for the management of provider networks, including implementation of innovative payment and health care delivery models with participating physicians and providers.

“I’m very excited to join the Connecticut team,” said Hummel. “This is an incredibly important and transformative time in health care, and Anthem is well-positioned to make a positive impact on the health and wellness of millions of Connecticut residents.”

Before joining WellPoint, Hummel worked for UnitedHealthcare in a variety of ways including serving as the Northeast regional vice president for network management, the vice president for hospital network management for UnitedHealth Networks, and as the chief operating officer of UnitedHealthcare of the Midwest, Inc.

Hummel started her professional career as a practicing attorney specializing in health care law. During her 17-year legal career, she represented physicians, hospitals and other health care providers as well as payers through both in-house legal positions and as outside legal counsel. Hummel received her law degree from Washington University and her BA degree from the University of Rochester.

About Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Connecticut:

Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield is the trade name of Anthem Health Plans, Inc., an independent licensee of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association. ® ANTHEM is a registered trademark of Anthem Insurance Companies, Inc. The Blue Cross and Blue Shield names and symbols are registered marks of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. Additional information about Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Connecticut is available at www.anthem.com. Also, follow us on Twitter at www.twitter.com/healthjoinin, on Facebook at www.facebook.com/HealthJoinIn, or visit our YouTube channel at www.youtube.com/healthjoinin.