BRUNSWICK — I read with great interest the Portland Press Herald article concerning the Biddeford Free Clinic (“State’s first free clinic will close doors in Biddeford this autumn,” Page A1, July 4).

I have had the pleasure of meeting Dr. Frank Kleeman, founder of the Biddeford clinic, and Joan Gordon, the longtime executive director.

about the author Richard P. Corbin, M.D., is president of the board of directors of Oasis Free Clinic in Brunswick. Search photos available for purchase: Photo Store →

Through their efforts, the clinic has made an enormous contribution to the health and well-being of low-income residents of the Biddeford-Saco area. The clinic has served the community for 22 years and, at this time, they feel that their mission is fulfilled.

Oasis Free Clinic in Brunswick has been serving the health care needs of its community – low-income residents of northern Cumberland and Sagadahoc counties – for more than 22 years, but we do not feel that our mission is yet complete.

Despite the enactment of the Affordable Care Act, we have not seen a decline in patients seeking medical and dental care or prescription assistance, which is provided through our Community Prescription Assistance Program.

This program serves not only our patients but also patients of other practices, as long as they meet certain income criteria established by the drug companies that supply the medications. The Community Prescription Assistance Program provided nearly $1 million in prescription assistance to our clients in 2014.

We continue to serve as the primary care provider for about 500 patients, and this number has remained stable for the last three years. Although we were successful in helping a small number of our patients qualify for health insurance through the ACA, most of our patients have no options under the ACA because Maine has chosen not to expand MaineCare eligibility.

The Biddeford clinic is in proximity to three federally qualified health centers, which provide care for low-income patients. Brunswick has no such resource; the nearest federally qualified health center is in Richmond.

In addition, the Biddeford Free Clinic is located near the University of New England’s colleges of osteopathic medicine and dentistry. Perhaps clinics associated with these schools have provided alternative sources of care.

Oasis Free Clinic was established by several area physicians, led by Dr. Peter McGuire, as a form of outreach to residents of the Tedford homeless shelter in Brunswick. Demand for care rapidly increased, and, in 1995, the clinic was incorporated as an independent 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.

The clinic has grown dramatically over the ensuing two decades. McGuire served the clinic as medical director for more than 20 years, recently retiring from that position; he is now on the board of directors.

To qualify for care at Oasis Free Clinic, our clients must live in our service area, have no medical insurance and have income that is equal to or less than 175 percent of the federal poverty level.

Over the last three years, Oasis has implemented a patient-centered medical home model of primary care, a national standard. Our patients have assigned providers who see them on a regular basis for acute and preventive health care, as well as chronic disease management.

We have been able to accomplish this thanks to a dedicated group of primary care and specialist providers who donate their time on a regular basis; they provide more than $500,000 of in-kind services per year. Other communities around the country have not been so fortunate, and some have had to limit services or close because of difficulty recruiting volunteer providers.

Oasis is able to see new patients and offer follow-up appointments to existing patients on a same-day or next-business-day basis. This has markedly reduced our patients’ reliance on costly emergency room visits for routine care, and improves continuity of care as well.

Oasis was fortunate to receive a generous one-time grant from the Next Generation Foundation of Maine, enabling us to locate our medical and dental services under one roof. This will increase service capacity and enhance patient accessibility. Mid Coast Hospital continues to generously provide office space and administrative support.

Part of Oasis’ long-range strategic plan is to expand free dental care, as there will be continuing need for the foreseeable future. Should the need for our medical services decrease, the demand for our dental services will remain.

Oasis providers and board members would very much like to be “put out of business” by the implementation of comprehensive health and dental coverage for all citizens. Until this occurs, Oasis will remain an oasis of care for our patients.