Matt Reardon, 30, Tinton Falls. (Photo: COURTESY OF MARC LOMURRO)

TINTON FALLS – Alcohol, grief and the Internet — it’s the perfect recipe for a social media blunder.

Matt Reardon learned that the hard way, while surfing the web on the anniversary of his father’s death. He said he was drinking tequila when he wrote an inflammatory Facebook comment about police brutality.

His post: “Don’t wanna get clipped while sitting in your squad car?? Don’t be a (expletives deleted) pig who’s looking to get killed...Everyone who goes out of their way to (expletive deleted) with other people should get executed in cold blood.”

Sure enough, it unleashed the fire of online lynch mobs.

But it also landed the 29-year-old township man in jail for a week in late December on assault and disorderly conduct charges — charges based on language that an assignment judge later called “too trivial” to count as a threat.

“He mentions nothing about the Tinton Falls Police Department. He doesn’t mention anything about any New Jersey police,” Judge Lisa Thornton told the prosecution in July. “If you were a good lawyer — and I’ll give you a benefit of the doubt on this one — you would say that he doesn’t even say he is going to threaten to hurt anybody.”

Thornton dismissed the charges July 10, after Reardon’s attorney, Richard Lomurro, filed a motion to appear. At most, she said, his message was “you reap what you sow.”

After reviewing the judge’s decision, the Monmouth County Prosecutor’s Office decided not to appeal.

But the case still isn’t over. Reardon and his attorney are still considering whether to sue authorities for wrongful arrest.

‘True threats’ online

So what constitutes a real threat on the Internet?

That question came to a head in Elonis v. United States, recently decided by the Supreme Court. The court overturned the conviction of a Pennsylvania man on charges that he threatened his estranged wife and an FBI agent, among others, in a series of Facebook posts Elonis characterized as rap lyrics.

One post, referring to his wife’s protection from abuse order, said “fold up that PFA and put it in your pocket, will it stop a .23 bullet?”

“(In the amicus brief) we asked the court to be very careful about what’s construed as or considered a true threat, particularly based on the way communication happens on the Internet,” said Hanni Fakhoury, an attorney at the Electronic Frontier Foundation who was involved in the case.

The Supreme Court overturned the conviction based on the federal threat statute — not First Amendment speech protections. The government, the court said, had to prove Elonis intended to harm those people when he wrote the posts.

“It was very narrowly focused on the specific federal statute,” Fakhoury said. “It kind of left things unsettled.”

Policing the Internet

Fakhoury said he hoped for a broader decision that would have extended free speech protections to even the most divisive and inflammatory threads on the Internet.

“One of the reasons we have to be really careful on how we prosecute online-based speech is, you’re bringing in the machinery of the criminal justice system, which could have terrible results,” Fakhoury said.

Reardon, now 30, spent months fighting the terroristic threat and disorderly conduct charges. He said his post was clearly rhetorical. He also said the disorderly conduct charge was for him yelling “what the (expletive)?” and calling for his mother when he was arrested.

His ordeal began the night of Dec. 21, when Reardon found himself drinking tequila and watching graphic videos on YouTube of what appeared to be police brutality. His post then followed.

Two weeks had passed since a grand jury decided against indicting white New York Police officers in the chokehold death of Eric Garner, a black Staten Island man being arrested for selling loose cigarettes. That week, two NYPD patrolmen were gunned down by 28-year-old Ismayil Brinsley, who then killed himself. He had posted an image in social media of wings on a pig.

A screenshot of Reardon’s comment quickly went viral, sparking outrage from officers and supporters throughout the state.

Reardon was arrested the next day outside of his house, on charges that he wrote a terroristic threat and was being disorderly when approached by the arresting officer, according to the police report.

Several calls and messages to the Tinton Falls Police Department went unreturned.

Reardon spent eight days in jail in lieu of $75,000 bail, including Christmas. Then a judge lowered the bail. He spent months fighting the charges.

“My Facebook post was not meant to be, or could it be interpreted as a threat,” he wrote in a motion to dismiss. “Even taken out of context, the Facebook post did not state I would do anything or name anyone in particular.”

Judge Thornton agreed. At the court appearance in July, she said the prosecution was conflating two questions: “Should police officers be upset?” versus “Was the comment that made police upset illegal?”

“He yelled, he took his hands off the hood of his car, and he turned to his mother, when the officer told him to face the hood of the car,” Thornton said. “There was no attempt to prevent (an arrest), no flight, no intimidation.”

With that, Thornton said she was dropping all charges.

Joe Bahgat, a local media attorney following the case, said he didn’t see how Reardon’s comment could warrant the aggravated assault and terroristic threat charge.

“If I were a cop, I wouldn’t be thrilled with Reardon’s comments, but the cop’s reaction in this circumstance only made things worse,” Bahgat wrote on his blog, Internet on Trial. “In fact, by unlawfully arresting a citizen for exercising his First Amendment rights, the cop essentially vindicated Reardon’s words.”

After the case was dismissed, Lomurro told the Asbury Park Press the judge’s decision emphasized that First Amendment rights should apply to social media networks such as Facebook.

"Although speech can be offensive, it is still protected and we can't allow people to be jailed for expressing an opinion when no crime has occurred," Lomurro said. "This was a true victory for the First Amendment in its modern application."

Cheryl Dorsey, a retired officer and policing expert, said while she could see how officers would have perceived Reardon’s comment as a threat, there are some who make questionable arrests to retaliate against civilians who disrespect authority.

She said that’s a police officer’s way of saying, “you don’t get to go on social media and talk smack without there being a consequence,” said Dorsey, a former Los Angeles Police Department sergeant.

Months after the arrest, Reardon still suffers the consequences. He said he lost his job as a drummer in an up-and-coming band and couldn’t get work as a machinist.

“In the past, my work ethic, experience and know-how spoke for itself,” she said. “Now the record of this arrest and that I was in jail scares employers, and they will never call me back.”

For some experts, Reardon’s experience shows how the Supreme Court could do more to ensure free speech protections on social media. The justices, in deciding the Elonis controversy, could have changed how millions of Facebook users, including law enforcement, understand free speech in the digital age.

“It shows you the real problem with having an expansive definition of what qualifies as a threat,” Fahkhoury said. “That’s the reason we should be careful before we deploy the criminal justice system on people. That’s kind of the larger debate we are having.”

Steph Solis: 732-643-4043; ssolis@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1LkBRxY