Bid leaders for Denver’s 2016 Republican National Convention threw some elbows at competitors Monday as they welcomed about two dozen site scouts to town.

Pete Coors, the bid committee’s chairman, and Colorado GOP chairman Ryan Call drew sharp contrasts with Dallas, Cleveland and Kansas City, Mo. They played up Denver’s weather, robust downtown and fundraising that, despite trailing others’ totals, relies on private dollars, with no public money. They downplayed the importance of legal pot sales.

Their message, during an airport news conference, was that Denver is the only option for a successful gathering, given its infrastructure and experience with the 2008 Democratic National Convention.

The arriving delegation was set to attend a reception Monday night at the posh, high-rise City Park South condo of Don and Linda Childears, a power couple in banking and philanthropy.

The schedule for Site Selection Committee members, Republican staffers and advisers is jam-packed. Venue visits, security and transportation briefings and other activities are set mostly for Tuesday.

After a morning tour of the Pepsi Center, the potential convention hall, other activities include a working lunch at Coors Field and a tour of the Brown Palace Hotel.

The group leaves Wednesday for the last site visit, in Republican donor-rich Dallas, which some see as Denver’s major competitor. The party is expected to settle on a host city in late summer or fall.

On Monday, local Republican staffers and volunteers met delegation members at their airport gates and treated them like VIPs.

But compared with some frills in Kansas City and Cleveland last week — including a motorcade escort, fireworks and celebrity appearances — Denver’s treatment will be more spartan, bid leaders said. The only celebrity appearance planned is by Thunder, the Denver Broncos mascot.

“We’ve pitched to the RNC the way we think they want it to be pitched,” Coors said, “and that is, this is a business meeting.”

Jon Murray: 303-954-1405, jmurray@denverpost.com or twitter.com/JonMurray