Walk down the cosmetic aisles in any drugstore, and you'll see hundreds of different products promising lots of different things. But can all that beauty in a bottle have some ugly consequences?

More and more, consumers are raising questions about what exactly is in the products they use. And many are calling on companies and the FDA to keep unsafe chemicals out.

A study found American women use an average of 12 products a day — exposing themselves to 168 different chemical ingredients!

"You know, to be honest with you, I've never really looked at what it's made of," shopper Doreen Vanbuskirk said.

Critics of the cosmetics industry say that's a problem. Right now, the FDA doesn't regulate cosmetics the same way it regulates food and drugs.

The Environmental Working Group is one of several organizations pushing for legislation to increase transparency and regulation of products.

"The FDA doesn't even require safety testing of ingredients before products are placed on store shelves," Christine Hill, the EWG's director of government affairs, explained.

That means cosmetics companies can use almost anything in their products, including ingredients known as endocrine disrupting chemicals or EDCs.

A recent study shows possible links between EDCs and infertility, obesity, diabetes, and even some types of cancer.

Many forms of these chemicals are banned in the European Union from use in cosmetics, but not here. In fact, the EU bans more than 1,300 ingredients — the FDA only 10.

"These are laws that haven't been changed since the late 1930's," Hill said.

EWG and other consumer advocate groups are backing the Personal Care Products Safety Act.

The bill, filed last year with bipartisan support, aims to increase transparency and regulation of cosmetics. Companies would have to register their facilities and ingredients with the FDA.

It would give the agency greater authority to regulate the chemicals companies use in their products, and require the agency to investigate several ingredients a year.

"You do want to know that the product you're using is safe," Hill said, "And has been tested to be safe."

But not everyone agrees the proposed bill is the right solution.

Cosmetic Dermatologist Cynthia Strohmeyer thinks the legislation is creating more of a problem that doesn't necessarily need fixing.

"To add another layer into bureaucracy of marketing or making these cosmetic products, I think is unnecessary," she said.

Strohmeyer, who practices in Naples, says more regulation could be difficult on smaller companies, and drive up costs for consumers.

"They're going to have to raise the cost of their products in order to cover all these regulatory issues," Strohmeyer said.

Right now, everyone seems to agree on one thing: the burden is on the consumer to know what's in the products they're buying, and how it could affect them.

"The skin is the largest organ," she explained, "It is important to actually think about reading labels and knowing what it is you're using."

"As a consumer, you should be aware of what you're putting on your body," Hill agreed, "But we first need to have that information and right now we don't have that information."

So what will force companies to change their ingredients? The women who buy their products.

And trends may be changing. Ada's Natural Market in Fort Myers sells only cosmetic products with only a very limited list of ingredients, and says demand is growing.

"We've always carried these items here, and we've expanded, and new lines are coming out all the time," Product Integrity Manager Winfield Lentz said.

Get More: How Do You Know What's in the Products You Use?

There are a lot of great resources out there to help you better understand those labels - some you can even take to the store on your smartphone!

Skin Deep is managed by EWG. It's a cosmetics database of more than 72,000 products.

It assigns a safety rating based on the ingredients and how much information is available about each product.

There's also Think Dirty — a similar app that will help you keep a list of the products you use, track the "dirty" ingredients in products, and even shop for cleaner options.

Both allow you to scan barcodes and shop smarter.

You can also print out this quick reference guide from ABC7 to see what some of the symbols on your cosmetics really mean.

Click here to learn more about the Personal Care Products Safety Act, and how you can contact your legislators to weigh in on the legislation.