Mentioning the name of Rob Portman, the Ohio senator, as a potential Republican nominee in 2016 gets this reaction, especially from Republicans: “Really?”

Yet there he was last month in New Hampshire, fueling speculation that he will make a bid for the White House. While there are a lot of obvious reasons to think a moderate Republican who supports same-sex marriage could never win the party nomination, there’s a good deal of data that suggests the opposite. Research on emotion and persuasion suggests that Mr. Portman may be exactly what the party needs to win in 2016 — and beyond.

Mr. Portman has a few potential advantages. The first is that very few people know anything about him. In August 2012, when he was being discussed as a possible running mate for Mitt Romney, many pollsters asked people whether their opinion of Mr. Portman was favorable or unfavorable. Most people had no opinion of him whatsoever. The CNN/ORC poll, for example, revealed that 52 percent of the population had “never heard of” Mr. Portman, and another 20 percent had “no opinion” of him. Even among Republicans, 65 percent couldn’t rate him. That’s a big, blank slate.

It may seem counterintuitive, but for Mr. Portman, being unknown is a good thing. It gives him the chance to tell his story from scratch and persuade people to trust him. If it is not obvious why this is a plus, consider being Hillary Rodham Clinton, whom nearly everyone already knows, and who has to convince many people that, despite their predispositions toward her, they should trust her. Only 5 percent of the electorate cannot rate Mrs. Clinton on the same favorability scale.

Being unknown is even better for Mr. Portman than it would be for other candidates, because the story of his evolution on the topic of gay equality is personal and emotional. Those qualities of the story are likely to make him seem authentic and sincere, someone voters can trust.

Photo

Research in communication studies, psychology and political science has shown that emotion can enhance the impact of political messages in news stories or in ads in compelling ways. Mr. Portman has a tale in his support of gay equality that can evoke an emotional response. The senator’s son told his parents he was gay three years ago, when he was in college. Last year, Mr. Portman announced a change of his position on marriage equality. He, like a majority of Americans, now supports same-sex marriage. Republicans support it less than Democrats or independents, but even so, roughly 4 in 10 Republicans are supportive.

When he speaks about his transition on the issue, Mr. Portman can be seen as both a father and a husband — not merely a politician. He can come across as a father who wants the same support, love and connection for his son that he has had through his own marriage. It’s a powerful vulnerability and, if done right, may suggest to voters that Mr. Portman will speak honestly to them about other topics as well.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But can he win with a moderate position on same-sex marriage? He will be running in a party whose members thought the 2012 primary battle was a contest to choose “anybody but Romney” — because Mitt Romney was seen as moderate. This belief that moderates are unacceptable, however, turned out to be more of a myth than a motto.

In “The Gamble,” John Sides of George Washington University and I used data from the 2012 Cooperative Campaign Analysis Project to show that Mr. Romney was viewed positively by likely Republican primary voters regardless of whether they were conservatives or moderates, pro-life or pro-choice, relatively wealthy or not, or Tea Party members or not. In fact, Mr. Romney was viewed more favorably among the very constituencies that were supposed to want anyone but him. For example, about 74 percent of conservative Republican primary voters had a favorable view of him, compared with 62 percent of liberals and moderates in the party.

Even if some in the party were not enthusiastic about Mr. Romney’s moderate positions, they were not rejecting him because of it. The same may hold true for Mr. Portman.