The Club for Growth, a pro-free market group that endorses and invests in GOP primaries, has endorsed Ben Sasse in the Republican primary for the open U.S. Senate seat in Nebraska.

“Ben Sasse is the rare candidate who can clearly and forcefully prosecute the case against Obamacare, not only because it’s an unconstitutional assault on our liberty, but also because he’s read every word of it,” said Club for Growth President Chris Chocola.

“We need more Senators like Ben Sasse who will stand on principle to challenge the big-government status quo in Washington and his unique skill-set makes him ideal for the job. Club members look forward to strongly supporting Ben Sasse for the U.S. Senate,” he added.

Sasse, 41, has served as president of Midland University since 2010 and has some past experience in politics and government, working as chief of staff to Rep. Jeff Fortenberry (R-NE) and as an appointed official in the Justice Department (2003-2005) and Health and Human Services (2007-2009) during the Bush Administration. He announced his Senate candidacy last month, calling himself the anti-Obamacare candidate.

“If [Obamacare] lives, America as we know it will die. If the idea of America is to live, it must be stopped,” Sasse said in his formal campaign announcement last month, according to the Omaha World-Herald. He raised $815,000 in the third quarter of the year, an impressive haul for a first-time candidate on his first disclosure.

The Senate Conservatives Fund endorsed Sasse last month, calling him a “Ben Sasse is a strong conservative with a proven record of solving difficult problems.” The organization also noted his expertise in healthcare policy and commitment to free market reforms.

The Weekly Standard recently noted that Sasse, the clear frontrunner in this race, is the rare candidate that can bring both the conservatives and mainstream Republicans together. “The key appears to be Sasse’s anti-Obamacare message, which the former Bush official is able to speak about fluidly and persuasively,” wrote Daniel Halper.

Dave Weigel chatted with Sasse recently, discussing a number of topics, including healthcare, as it relates to Obamacare and entitlements, and foreign policy. Sasse has also spoken in-depth on issues surrounding Obamacare in a video released by his campaign.

Sen. Mike Johanns (R-NE) announced earlier this year that he wouldn’t seek a re-election. There are three other Republicans — Sid Disdale, Bart McLeay, and Shane Osborn — running in the primary. No Democrat has announced for the race. The seat is expected to remain in Republican hands.