By William Louch

David Rubenstein, co-founder of the Carlyle Group, predicted that private equity fees would come down in the coming years, because investors will no longer accept certain fees that buyout firms charge – a development that he said could transform “the whole industry”.

At the London School of Economics Alternative Investments Conference on January 18, Mr. Rubenstein said that “the biggest disruption for private equity in the future [will be] when investors will only invest money if the manager takes no fee on committed capital and you have lower carry. People who are prepared to work for less than the industry rate will attract the investors.”

Private equity firms typically charge a 2% management fee on money allocated to private equity funds, as well as an additional 20% fee on profits, known as “carried interest”.

As of September 2015, 72% of firms globally charged a 2% to 2.24% management fee, while 85% take 20% in carried interest, according to data provider Preqin.

“In most areas of money management you only pay a fee when the money is invested,” Mr. Rubenstein said. “At a private equity firm, you get a fee on committed capital.”

A December 2015 survey of 81 private equity professionals by specialist bank and asset management firm Investec found that nearly a fifth of private equity firms intend to lower their management fees either imminently or in the long term. Pressure from investors was cited as the main driver behind the change to fee structures.

“If an investor comes along and says ‘I will give you $5 billion but I am not going to pay a fee on committed capital and I am not going to give you 20% [carried interest]. I will give you 10% but no hurdle’, what are you going to do?” Mr. Rubenstein said. “If you don’t take the $5 billion on those terms, they will give it to somebody else who will accept those terms.”

However, he added that “disruption is an innovator’s dilemma”, suggesting that not all firms would be rushing to change their fees.

“If you are at the top of the heap in any industry you are reluctant to do anything to change your business model,” he said.

Carlyle declined to comment on whether it charges fees on invested or committed capital.

Write to William Louch at william.louch@wsj.com