The federal government took a dangerous step backwards late last month that will not only cost taxpayers more, it will eventually lead to the broader use of narcotics and other pain medications.

Under proposed rules related to the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as Obamacare, the federal government's Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services issued proposed guidelines earlier this summer. Those proposed guidelines offered some cuts in payments for interventional pain management practices.

Fair enough. The cuts were tough, they were bad policy, but they were bearable.

But, in an unexpected final release of these rules, CMS made a huge policy shift and suggested draconian cuts to payments for these services, but only when those services are provided outside of a hospital.

What does this mean?

It is vital to explain the types of services in question. These services, known collectively as "interventional pain medicine," are offered to the sickest and most debilitated members of our society who suffer severe and chronic pain. And these services are very, very different from those offered at so-called pill mills that offer generalized pain-killing drugs that treat the whole body.

Interventional pain treatment involves complex procedures that diagnose, treat and cure pain at its source. Physicians who practice this highly specialized medicine often have more than 14 years of intensive medical training.

As patients most-often require repeated treatment, outpatient and office-based (i.e. non-hospital) services are the most accessible and affordable means of providing safe quality care without the hassle, inconvenience or possible exposure to infection of being admitted to a hospital.

During the past decade, more and more surgical procedures have moved to this proven means of serving patients and so too has interventional pain medicine. As a result, the health care delivery of these services has saved billions in health care costs while providing safer, more accessible care for those who suffer from chronic and severe pain.