April 15 --The mothers of Skylar Neese's killers argue that insurance companies should have to provide a defense in a wrongful-death case.

Patricia Shoaf and Tara Clendenen recently filed a response in federal court to insurance companies' request for judgment in the case. In their filing, they argue that the companies should have to provide defense as the policies cover personal injury.

The companies have argued that their policies do not cover murder, a deliberate act. They sought a federal order stating as much with regard to a wrongful-death case filed in Monongalia County Circuit Court .

Dave and Mary Neese sued their daughter Skylar's killers, Shelia Eddy and Rachel Shoaf , who were both 16 at the time of the murder, and their mothers.

According to the initial lawsuit, the two teens maliciously and deliberately murdered Neese, who was 16. As a result the family suffered mental anguish, the loss of expected income and other damages. The suit also alleges the two moms were negligent and provided the weapons and opportunity to harm Skylar Neese .

Rachel Shoaf and Shelia Eddy admitted to the July 2012 murder of Skylar Neese . They picked her up from her Star City residence and the three friends drove to Pennsylvania , where Shoaf and Eddy attacked and stabbed Skylar to death. It wasn't until Shoaf confessed to police months later that Skylar's remains were found.

Eddy pleaded guilty to first-degree murder and was sentenced to life in prison, though she will be parole-eligible after 15 years. Shoaf pleaded guilty to second-degree murder and was sentenced to 30 years in prison, though she will be eligible for parole after10 years. Both are housed in the Lakin Correctional Center , in West Columbia .

In addition to the insurance companies, Patricia Shoaf and Clendenen have asked for summary judgment.

___

(c)2015 The Dominion Post (Morgantown, W.Va.)

Visit The Dominion Post (Morgantown, W.Va.) at www.dominionpost.com

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC