Fifth co-op collapses

With help from Paul Demko

ANOTHER CO-OP BITES THE DUST — Kentucky Health Cooperative is the latest insurance co-op under the ACA to fold because of financial instability. The co-op, serving about 51,000 customers, announced that it will close on Dec 31. The co-op’s interim CEO Glenn Jennings blamed the decision on not receiving the full risk corridor payment it had requested. CMS recently announced that plans would receive just 12.6 percent of what insurers had requested — meaning $9.7 million for Kentucky’s co-op, instead of the $77 million it wanted. Kentucky’s co-op is the fifth to fold — following the collapse of co-ops in Iowa, Louisiana, Nevada and New York.

Story Continued Below

… Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell seized on the collapse of his home state’s co-op — calling it “another harmful consequence” of Obamacare. Rachana Pradhan has the details here.

CMS OFFERS HAND TO STRUGGLING CO-OPS — CMS and state regulators have tried to ease pressure on at least five Obamacare co-ops by allowing them to reclassify certain loans as a surplus — a move intended to help keep them from shutting down. The co-ops, which were seeded with hundreds of millions of dollars in low-interest start-up loans, are required to repay the federal government within five years. But analysts say that five co-ops have received permission from federal and state regulators to treat their start-up loans as capital rather than debt on their financial filings. The co-ops include New Mexico Health Connections, Colorado HealthOP, Health Republic Insurance of Oregon, Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative in Wisconsin, and Nevada Health Co-op, Pro’s Rachana Pradhan reports. More here.

EARLY REINSURANCE $S FOR HEALTH PLANS — Insurers participating in Obamacare's exchanges can expect partial reinsurance payments in March, months earlier than anticipated, according to guidance issued by CMS on Friday. That should be welcome news to insurers, particularly the struggling coops.

— Reinsurance payments are designed to protect insurers who attract particularly costly exchange customers. For 2015, those payments will kick in when a customer's medical bills exceed $45,000 and shut off when they top $250,000. The March payments will cover 25 percent of eligible claims. CMS has said it anticipates that it will eventually cover half of medical bills eligible for reinsurance payments. The guidance: http://go.cms.gov/1OuYQ98

GOOD MONDAY MORNING and welcome back to PULSE, where we’re celebrating Indigenous Peoples Day instead of Lost Spanish Explorer Day. The federal government is closed today and Congress is out this week, but we’re still here for you, so keep sending us those tips and scoops to behley@politico.com and emershon@politico.com

All you need is PULSE,

All you need is PULSE

All you need is PULSE, PULSE

PULSE is all you need …

JERRY BROWN VETOES "RIGHT TO TRY" — California Gov. Jerry Brown vetoed his state's "right to try" bill,saying the FDA's "compassionate use" program should be given a chance to work to speed up critically ill people's access to experimental drugs. So far, nearly two dozen states have passed right to try laws, but even their backers admit that they have not given patients access to these drugs - they've merely made it easier for patients to request them. More here.

SURGEON GENERAL MISSING FROM GUN DEBATE — Surgeon General Vivek Murthy’s outspokenness on gun violence as public health issue snarled his confirmation and made him a target of the NRA. When he was finally confirmed in December, gun control advocates touted as a major victory against the powerful gun lobby. But as gun violence once again dominates the national conversation after a spate of mass shootings — the SG has been mostly silent from the debate. His only "call to action” so far was to get Americans to walk more. His swearing-in address touched on a host of public health issues he planned to tackle from his bully pulpit, including encouraging physical activity, the health consequences of tobacco, violence against women and the harm associated with climate change. Gun violence didn't make that list. That could change as Democrats and President Obama pressure Republicans to bring gun control legislation to the Senate floor. Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) said the Senate Democrats plan to talk to the surgeon general about getting involved in their efforts. My story here.

IN THE STATES — In California, state regulators approved a $1.2 billion deal for Blue Shield to acquire Care1st, a Medicaid managed care plan that covers about a half-million patients in Los Angeles and San Diego, Pro’s Rachana Pradhan reports. Washington state will keep its small group market at 50 workers, now that the PACE act gives states that option. In Iowa, Wellmark Blue Cross Blue Shield announced that it will offer plans on the state’s exchange for the first time in 2017. That news follows the demise of CoOportunity Health, the ACA co-op plan that had offered plans in Iowa and Nebraska. In Kansas, aides in Gov. Sam Brownback’s office are pushing back against arguments that expanding Medicaid would save an Independence hospital that has announced its closure. More here.

HAPPENING THIS WEEK: JEB! TALKS ACA — Jeb Bush will give a big campaign policy speech Tuesday on repealing - and replacing — the health care law at the New Hampshire Institute of Politics at Saint Anselm College.

DEMOCRATIC DEBATE — CNN and Facebook host the first Democratic presidential primary debate in Las Vegas. 8:30 pm ET. Vice President Joe Biden has an open invitation, but so far he hasn't taken it up.

— The Senate and House are on recess this week. And House Republicans are still looking for a speaker … and are mulling a "plan C" if Rep. Paul Ryan can't be convinced to jump in. Our Congress team has the story: http://politi.co/1FWSVbW and if Ryan can be persuaded to take the job, here's how a Ryan speakership might look. and ICYMI: our colleague, Glenn Thrush has a terrific list of five reasons no one should ever want the job: http://politi.co/1QjorkC

OBAMACARE: THE MATCHMAKER — Nothing brings two people together like health care reform. Playbook reported the weekend wedding of Kara Carscaden and Scott Mulhauser got married — and they initial met during the drafting and passage of the ACA. Mulhauser, a former aide to Sen. Max Baucus, is now his chief of staff at the U.S. Embassy in Beijing.

OUR FAVORITE OBAMACARE TWEAK SUGGESTION — Former Rep. John Dingell, who was recently hospitalized, jumped on Twitter to express frustration with himself for forgetting to include an extremely important provision in the Affordable Care Act. “I fought for universal healthcare for 89 yrs and forgot to slip in one damn line requiring super-long phone chargers during hospital stays,” he tweeted. Who knows, maybe his wife, Rep. Debbie Dingell, will offer an amendment?

WHAT WE’RE READING by Erin Mershon

The New York Times has a heartbreaking story on mental illness in West Africa, as groups like the United Nations and the World Health Organization start to call attention to the issue: http://nyti.ms/1jjxW93.

The WSJ reports on an ongoing debate over the FDA's August decision to approve certain drugs for children as young as 11: http://on.wsj.com/1jjytI3

A year in, only 1 percent of pharmacies have taken advantage of a Drug Enforcement Administration program to let the stores accept and destroy customers' unwanted prescription drugs — results that are dismaying advocates, the NYT reports: http://nyti.ms/1jjygVt

The Washington Post looks at what happens to poor children when their parents come into a little bit of money — and the study results are "nothing short of remarkable," they write: http://wapo.st/1jjxszS

Heroin overuse is overburdening the foster care system, Pew's Stateline reports: http://bit.ly/1jjxVlI

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **