Here's a stat: the Republican-led House of Representatives has voted to repeal Obamacare more than 60 times. The Republican candidates for president are gouging each others' eyes out, each trying to prove he'll be the Repealer-in-Chief. So it's as good a time as any for a reminder that Obamacare was put into place for reasons beyond destroying our freedom and weakening the resolve of our allies. In reality, the law has helped millions of people, and likely kept quite a few of them from dying or going bankrupt because of a serious health issue.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Need proof? Here's Brent Brown, lifelong Republican from Mosinee, Wisconsin, with a letter to President Obama via Quartz:

To My President,

I sincerely hope that this reaches you, as far too often praise is hard to come by. Apologies to people who deserve it perhaps even less so.

I did not vote for you. Either time. I have voted Republican for the entirety of my life.

I proudly wore pins and planted banners displaying my Republican loyalty. I was very vocal in my opposition to you–particularly the ACA.

Most Popular

Before I briefly explain my story allow me to first say this: I am so very sorry. I understand written content cannot convey emotions very well–but my level of conviction has me in tears as I write this. I was so very wrong. So very very wrong.

You saved my life. I want that to sink into your ears and mind. My President, you saved my life, and I am eternally grateful.I have a 'pre-existing condition' and so could never purchase health insurance. Only after the ACA came into being could I be covered. Put simply to not take up too much of your time if you are in fact taking the time to read this: I would not be alive without access to care I received due to your law.

So thank you from a dumb young man who thought he knew it all and who said things about you that he now regrets. Thank you for serving me even when I didn't vote for you.Thank you for being my President.

Honored to have lived under your leadership and guidance,

Brent Nathan Brown

Cue the calls of Fake! and Hoax! from deep within the bubble realm. It won't convince anyone voting for Trump or Cruz, but it's a reminder that, as the circus and the WWE Presidential Smackdowns threaten to drown us in mindless politico-infotainment, people's lives really are at stake. Choose wisely, wrestling fans.

[H/T: Quartz]