A conservative nonprofit backed by billionaire businessmen Charles and David Koch is running new television spots in a top-tier Senate race in Colorado and a close House battle in New Hampshire.

The political advocacy group Americans for Prosperity announced Wednesday that it will go on the air in support of Rep. Cory Gardner (R-Colo.), who is attempting to unseat Sen. Mark Udall (D-Colo.), and against Rep. Ann McLane Kuster (D-N.H.).

The group told CNN that it's spending $150,000 on the Colorado ad over the course of about 10 days.

"Congressman Cory Gardner supports building the Keystone pipeline, to create new high-paying energy jobs," the narrator says in the ad. "He's focused on spending less and spending smarter and voted to balance the budget. And Cory stood against Obamacare and for real health care reform."

In New Hampshire's 2nd Congressional District, where Kuster is expected to face a tough reelection, AFP is running an ad hitting the representative on her support for the Affordable Care Act.

"Obamacare is hurting us, yet Congresswoman Ann McLane Kuster defends Obamacare," says the ad's narrator.

State Rep. Marilinda Garcia and attorney and former state Sen. Gary Lambert are contesting the Republican primary in the hope of challenging Kuster.

The group's spending on the new ads in Colorado and New Hampshire brings its total to more than $35 million on TV spots in competitive Senate and House races, with the vast majority of the issue-based spots focusing on the Affordable Care Act.

Politico reported last week that the group plans to spend more than $125 million this year.

Also on HuffPost: David Koch David Koch

1 of 13 David Koch FILE - In this April 11, 2011 file photo, David Koch, executive vice president of Koch Industries, attends a meeting of the Economic Club of New York. Koch is donating a record $35 million to the Smithsonian’s National Museum of Natural History to build a new dinosaur hall on the National Mall. The Smithsonian is announcing the gift Thursday from the executive vice president of Koch Industries Inc. of Wichita, Kan. It is the single largest gift in the museum’s 102-year history. (AP Photo/Mark Lennihan, File) Share this slide:

AP