Today is Election Day for the 2014 primaries.

Polling places open at 7 a.m. throughout Lubbock County and will close at 7 p.m.

Dorothy Kennedy, Lubbock County’s elections administrator, said voters have 37 polling places from which to choose, depending on which is convenient for them.

“No (United Supermarket polling locations) are open on Election Day,” she said. “It’s just the vote centers, and there’s 37 centers for tomorrow.”

This year’s primary election is the first using vote centers instead of precincts.

“Voters need to stay in vote-center mode and not think back to precincts like in past primary years,” she said. “You can go to any one of these locations and vote. No matter where you work, live or play, there’s a vote center around you.”

Voters can text a zip code to 75044 to receive three voting center options, she said.

Registered voters would have received a red, white and blue-colored brochure with a list of all polling locations, Kennedy said.

Residents can also visit www.votelubbock.org to view a list of vote centers in the county.

“It’ll even give them a Google map to go as well with it,” she said.

Residents who plan on voting will have to present one of seven approved forms of photo ID.

According to county records, 153,730 voters are registered in Lubbock County.

Texas voters are not required to register their party affiliation, according to Kennedy.

“Not having to register, and everybody being able to go anywhere, if you’re a husband and wife in a split-party household, then you can go together to any location you choose and both your ballots will be there for your parties,” she said.

According to early voting results collected last week about 15,000 registered voters voted early in Lubbock County. The number is smaller than the 24,125 voters who voted early in 2010 primaries, which also featured a gubernatorial race but no presidential race.

However, this year’s number is more than the 2006 primary early voting turnout, when 11,961 voted early.

gabriel.monte@lubbockonline.com

• 766-8707

Follow Gabe on Twitter

@AJ_GabeMonte

(Vote for one unless otherwise noted.)

Democrats

Federal offices

■ U.S. Senator

Maxey Marie Scherr

Harry Kim

David M. Alameel

Kesha Rogers

Michael “Fjet” Fjetland

■ U.S. Representative, District 19

Neal Marchbanks

State offices

■ Governor

Reynaldo “Ray” Madrigal

Wendy R. Davis

■ Lt. Governor

Leticia Van de Putte

■ Attorney General

Sam Houston

■ Comptroller of Public Accounts

Mike Collier

■ Commissioner of the General Land Office

John Cook

■ Commissioner of Agriculture

Richard “Kinky” Friedman

Hugh Asa Fitzsimons III

Jim Hogan

■ Railroad Commissioner

Dale Henry

Steve Brown

■ Chief Justice, Supreme Court

William Moody

■ Justice, Supreme Court, Place 6 (unexpired term)

Lawrence Edward Meyers

■ Justice Supreme Court, Place 7

Gina Benavides

■ Judge, Court of Appeals, Place 3

John Granberg

■ State Representative, District 84

Ed Tishler

County offices

Lubbock County

■ County Judge

Austin Michael Carrizales

■ Justice of the Peace, Precinct 3

Aurora Chaides-Hernandez

■ Party Chair

Kenny Ketner

■ Party referenda: Vote for or against

Democratic Referendum No. 1: On Immigration Reform

The United States Congress must pass immigration reform; including an earned path to citizenship for those individuals contributing to the economy and the dependents of those individuals.

Democratic Referendum No. 2: A Living Wage for all Texans

The Texas Legislature should raise the state minimum wage to a livable wage and Congress should pass legislation raising the federal minimum wage to 110% of the federal poverty level for a family of four without exception.

Democratic Referendum No. 3: Medicaid Expansion

The Governor and the Texas Legislature should accept federal funds; as provided in the Patient Protection & Affordable Care Act of 2010; for the expansion of Medicaid to provide coverage to millions of uninsured and underinsured Texans.

Democratic Referendum No. 4: On Non-Discrimination Legislation

The Congress and the Texas Legislature should adopt legislation that expands protections against discriminations in employment; housing; and public accommodations based upon sexual orientation and gender identity.

Republicans

Federal offices

■ U.S. Senator

Curt Cleaver

Dwayne Stovall

Ken Cope

Chris Mapp

Steve Stockman

Reid Reasor

John Cornyn

Linda Vega

■ United States Representative, District 19

Chris Winn

Donald R. May

Randy Neugebauer

State offices

■ Governor

SECEDE Kilgore

Lisa Fritsch

Greg Abbott

Miriam Martinez

■ Lt. Governor

David Dewhurst

Todd Staples

Jerry Patterson

Dan Patrick

■ Attorney General

Ken Paxton

Barry Smitherman

Dan Branch

■ Comptroller of Public Accounts

Debra Medina

Harvey Hilderbran

Raul Torres

Glenn Hegar

■ Commissioner of the General Land Office

George P. Bush

David Watts

■ Commissioner of Agriculture

Sid Miller

J. Allen Carnes

Tommy Merritt

Joe Cotten

Eric Opiela

■ Railroad Commissioner

Malachi Boyuls

Wayne Christian

Ryan Sitton

Becky Berger

■ Chief Justice, Supreme Court

Nathan Hecht

Robert Talton

■ Justice, Supreme Court, Place 6 (unexpired term)

Joe Pool

Jeff Brown

■ Justice, Supreme Court, Place 7

Jeff Boyd

■ Justice, Supreme Court, Place 8

Sharon McCally

Phil Johnson

■ Judge, Court of Criminal Appeals, Place 3

Bert Richardson

Barbara Walther

■ Judge, Court of Criminal Appeals, Place 4

Kevin Patrick Yeary

Jani Jo Wood

Richard Dean Davis

■ Judge, Court of Criminal Appeals, Place 9

David Newell

W.C. “Bud” Kirkendall

■ Senate District 31

Kel Seliger

Mike Canon

■ State Representative, District 68

Drew Springer

■ State Representative, District 83

Steve Massengale

Charles Perry

■ State Representative, District 84

John Frullo

■ State Representative, District 88

Ken King

■ Chief Justice, 7th Court of Appeals District

Brian Quinn

■ District Judge, 137th

Judicial District

John “Trey” McClendon

■ District Judge, 237th

Judicial District

Les Hatch

■ District Judge, 364th

Judicial District

Billy Eichman

Lubbock County

■ Criminal District Attorney

Matt Powell

■ County Judge

Tom Head

■ Judge, County Court at Law No. 1

Mark Hocker

■ Judge, County Court at Law No. 2

Drue Farmer

■ Judge, County Court at Law No. 3

Judy Parker

■ District Clerk

Barbara Sucsy

■ County Clerk

Kelly J. Pinion

■ County Treasurer

Sharon Gossett

■ Party Chair

Carl H. Tepper

■ Republican Propositions: Vote for or against

Republican Proposition 1: Religious Freedom

Texans should be free to express their religious beliefs, including prayer, in public places.

Republican Proposition 2: Second Amendment

Texas should support Second Amendment liberties by expanding locations where concealed handgun license-holders may legally carry.

Republican Proposition 3: Franchise Tax

Texas should abolish the state franchise tax, also known as the margins tax, to encourage business growth.

Republican Proposition 4: Welfare Reform

Texas recipients of taxpayer-funded public assistance should be subject to random drug testing as a condition of receiving benefits.

Republican Proposition 5: No Lawmaker Exceptions

All elected officials and their staff should be subject to the same laws, rules, regulations and ordinances as their constituents.

Republican Proposition 6. Obamacare

The Affordable Care Act, also known as “Obamacare,” should be repealed.