WASHINGTON (CBSDC) — The hosts of SiriusXM Radio’s “Opie and Anthony” show slammed Obamacare for losing their health insurance due to President Barack Obama’s signature health care law.

Gregg “Opie” Hughes, who has a wife and two kids, went into detail Thursday about receiving an insurance cancellation in the mail for him and his family.

“I’m a little annoyed today because I got my insurance cancellations yesterday,” Hughes said. “And I got kids and the wife that needed all that stuff.”

Hughes went on to say that he had “no issue” with his cancelled health insurance and doesn’t “even know where to begin” with the new paperwork.

“I have no (expletive) idea how to even attempt this,” Hughes steamed. “I don’t even know where to begin.”

Read: Bank Fraud Brother and Sister Go To Jail

Hughes described that he had “perfect health insurance” for himself and his family before it got taken away.

“Finally, after all these years, I had perfect health insurance and now I have to redo the whole thing. It’s ridiculous,” Hughes said.

Anthony Cumia chimed in talking about how he recently lost his health insurance too due to Obamacare and the mountain of paperwork he now has to deal with.

“The papers came in yesterday and I started looking through it. And then I’m like, ‘I think I can do this,’” Cumia explained. “And then it turned to you must include your corporate tax form number … Now this Obamacare thing is an IRS issue, so you need to supply tax documentation for your (expletive) insurance.”

Hughes responded: “I don’t know why we’re not having a revolution at this point.”

Obama announced earlier this week that more than 7 million Americans enrolled for health care insurance by the April 1 deadline. The Associated Press reports that the next open enrollment begins this November to have coverage for 2015.

(TM and Copyright 2014 CBS Radio Inc. and its relevant subsidiaries. CBS RADIO and EYE Logo TM and Copyright 2014 CBS Broadcasting Inc. Used under license. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.)