State Rep. Adam Neylon, R-Pewaukee, in the Wisconsin State Assembly chamber in Madison.

Submitted photo WAUKESHA — As a state representative for three years, Adam Neylon has made an impact on Wisconsin by authoring bills on robotics funding for schools and pushing to decrease expensive regulations for businesses. As the chairman of the Committee on Jobs and the Economy, Neylon has toured area companies and met with business leaders to create a more focused approach to governing. Although he has taken an active approach as the representative for the 98th Assembly District that covers parts of Pewaukee, Sussex and Waukesha, it was some recent photos of him standing behind former presidential candidate Ted Cruz that got him the most publicity. Neylon took the jokes in stride about his appearance, and is now assessing what he feels about the presidential race after he helped to organize Cruz’s campaign in Wisconsin and Waukesha County, now that Donald Trump is the Republican Party’s presumptive nominee.

On Trump and the GOP “I am still working through that. I ultimately I will support the nominee of the party and be a team player,” Neylon said while visiting The Freeman’s office Thursday afternoon. Neylon said Trump’s only policy proposal that he feels strongly against is banning all Muslims from entering the country, because just in terms of American foreign policy it would be a disaster. “In terms of his other policy proposals, a lot of it I agree with, I just don’t necessarily like his approach to politics,” Neylon said. “I think we should be trying to unite people. I think we should try and build coalitions. I don’t think that we should demean or insult people and I think that has been an unfortunate part of the presidential campaign thus far and it makes it difficult to get behind somebody just because of their attitude toward certain people. “But in terms of his actual policy proposals, I think there is a lot of merit to some of what he says.” Neylon said Trump has struck a nerve with voters and he is one of the first politicians in a long time who has fans versus supporters. It’s Trump’s strong name recognition and people are drawn to him for his attitude and edginess. “When you boil it down, we are a pocketbook party. We are concerned about how many taxes we are paying, what our utility bills are, how many jobs there are available,” Neylon said. “And I think that he doesn’t depend on philosophy where a lot of people preach the free market without explaining the benefits of a free market. “He has been able to tap into something that is not a philosophy but it is a populace message of ‘I will be better for you in terms of your pocketbook, in terms of opportunity.’”

Bringing jobs stateside Neylon also disagrees with Trump’s proposal to punish companies for moving jobs overseas; instead, he’d rather focus on making it attractive to keep them in the United States. “I think if you look at manufacturing, we’re at the beginning of a renaissance in manufacturing because of automation, because of robotics, because of the Internet of things where everything is integrated and I think now with the innovation in America, we are able to compete with countries like China and Mexico because we don’t have to have that low wage worker issue where other countries pay those unskilled workers a lower wage and can’t compete with that because a lot of those unskilled positions are going to be replaced by automation,” Neylon said. He said he’d like for there to be investment in the workforce, to provide more opportunities for Americans by offering robotics and other educational programming. By investing in the next generation of workers, Neylon believes that America will be able to close the skills gap with which Wisconsin manufacturers struggle.

Addressing education and regulation This past legislative session, a bill Neylon authored to create the Wisconsin Robotics League participation grant program and authorize up to $250,000 of funding for the Department of Public Instruction to be disbursed to robotics teams throughout Wisconsin was signed into law by Gov. Scott Walker. This bill primarily focused on high school programs, but going forward Neylon said he’d like to work on bringing robotics programs to elementary and middle schools. He also introduced the Reins Act, which is based on federal legislation but geared directly toward Wisconsin’s administrative rule process. He said it would freeze all expensive regulations that have a price tag of more than $10 million during the first two years. As part of the bill, an independent economic analysis could be conducted by someone outside the government to fully understand the cost of compliance for the private sector. “The bill would also require cost of compliance estimates included in the fiscal estimate because often the fiscal estimates we currently receive are simply how much the government will have to pay to implement this new rule or to implement this new law,” Neylon said. “So how much is it going to cost to hire new employees? How much is it going to cost to update the software? How much is it going to cost to administer and enforce this new rule or law? It would actually spell out in plain language that when a fiscal estimate is put together, there needs to be a cost compliance estimate, including the fiscal.” Bill 251 was approved by the Assembly along party lines, but never got a vote in the Senate, so Neylon plans to reintroduce it during the next legislative session that starts in January. Another bill he introduced was aimed at stopping the trafficking of vulnerable youth by allowing more information to be shared between child welfare agencies and law enforcement. Currently, privacy laws can prevent that.

What he hears from constituents Neylon said there are four things he hears most often from his constituents: taxes are too high; there is too much red tape; education is a top priority; and urban crime is spilling into other counties. Since 2013, Neylon said the state has lowered income taxes by $423.6 million, but the perception is they remain high. He also feels that property taxes in Wisconsin, which are some of the highest in the country, are a burden for homeownership. He said the higher taxes on businesses are also a detriment to Wisconsin’s success. He also hears that small businesses are negatively affected by regulations. “I think the major regulation hurdles right now, a lot of it comes from Obamacare, a lot of it comes from federal rules and regulations, but that is not always clear to people,” he said. “I’m going to do everything to cut the red tape before it strangles us.” When it comes to crime, Neylon said he thinks there is concern that inner city crime will spill over to Waukesha County, for which there is no easy answer. “I think what happens in Milwaukee affects what happens in Waukesha County. I don’t think we can really just hone in on keeping Waukesha County streets safe; we need to look at how we can do a better job of keeping everywhere in the state safe and reduce crime in every community,” Neylon said. Going forward, Neylon said he wants to take a focused approach to improving educational opportunities in Wisconsin and reducing hindering regulations. “I don’t believe in just saying let’s increase funding by 10 percent — that’s not a good goal. I think we should increase opportunities for robotics. I think we should increase opportunities for computer science. I think we should increase the amount of STEM schools there are for children to choose and their families to choose to send them to,” he said. “I think really pinpointing educational needs and doing what we can to improve opportunities and to grow those opportunities in Wisconsin is a priority of mine.”



Email: kmichalets@conleynet.com