Photo

Good Wednesday morning from Washington, where attention is shifting from baseball and back to midterm elections, President Obama and his party continue to drift apart, and Sarah Silverman makes a political ad that we can tell you about but cannot show you.

The Senate field is quickly narrowing, elevating the importance of the tight Colorado and Iowa races in the battle for control.

An official of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee confirmed Tuesday that the group was significantly scaling back its television advertising buy in Michigan. That follows a decision by its Republican counterpart to cancel about $1 million in commercials for two weeks in late October.

Those decisions reflect strategists’ beliefs that Representative Gary Peters, the Democrat, has the race in hand against the Republican, Terri Lynn Land, and that the money could be better spent in races that are up for grabs.

Here’s the emerging math. Republicans are heavily favored to take Democratic-held seats in three Republican-leaning states — Montana, South Dakota and West Virginia — giving the party three quick pickups of the six it needs to to take over.

Strategists for both parties now say that Minnesota, Oregon and Virginia — always seen as long-shots for Republicans — will remain in the Democrats’ hands. In New Hampshire, Senator Jeanne Shaheen holds a solid lead over Scott Brown, although neither side is writing off that race quite yet.

Republicans believe Alaska and Arkansas are going their way (the fourth and fifth pickups). But Senator Pat Roberts, the veteran Republican, is in trouble in Kansas, putting a seat at risk. Still, Republicans like their chances in Democrat-held Louisiana, a race that appears headed for a December runoff. And the Georgia seat, now held by a Republican, might not be decided until Jan. 6.

That leaves Colorado, Iowa and North Carolina as the “states the majority runs through,” as one Republican operative put it.

But Kay Hagan, North Carolina’s Democratic senator, is leading in polls after an $11.5 million splurge over the last three months. So watch for the resources being diverted from Michigan (and elsewhere) to help Republicans close a spending gap in Colorado and keep pace in Iowa.

— Carl Hulse

As always, one of President Obama‘s main messages to Democratic donors on Tuesday was his fear that stagnating wages were erasing hope for a generation of middle-class Americans. And as always, it seemed almost comically divorced from his anything-but-middle-class audience.

The pitch on Tuesday was in Greenwich, Conn., at the gated mansion of Richard Richman – yes, his real name – a real estate mogul whose company has investment banking, construction, mortgage-banking, asset and property-management arms.

Flanked by a set of paintings depicting a fox hunt, Mr. Obama addressed the donors, who had paid $10,000 to $32,400 each to attend the dinner. “A combination of technology and globalization, but also policy, have made for a winner-take-all economy where folks in Greenwich, most of the folks in this room, are doing very well,” Mr. Obama said. But ordinary people, he said, worried about their children doing as well as they did.

Political fund-raisers — like this one, for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee — are ultimately about thanking the big-money donors, starting with his hosts. Mr. Obama praised the Richmans for their hospitality, though he joked that their dog, Spree, had gotten hair all over his pants.

“Fortunately, these days, I travel with one of those,” he paused for several seconds, searching for the word “rollers.”

The dog, he added quickly, was still adorable.

— Mark Landler

New York — long proud of its reputation as the nation’s melting pot and the birthplace of the women’s movement — shares with Delaware a dubious distinction: They are the only states in a new study to rank in the bottom 10 in the proportion of both women and minorities among elected officials.

Illinois, Indiana, Maine, Montana, New Hampshire and the District of Columbia made the Top 10 as places where officialdom is “most reflective” of the women and the racial and ethnic minorities who live there.

In the study, to be released Wednesday by the Women Donors Network, states were ranked separately, by gender and race, on whether officials — from sheriff to United States senator — reflected their populations. The worst states for electing women were mostly in the South; those where minorities are under-represented were more evenly dispersed.

In the country as a whole, the study found, whites make up 63 percent of the population but fill nine out of 10 of the country’s more than 40,000 local, state and federal offices. Fifty-one percent of American are women, but men hold 71 percent of elective offices.

— Jackie Calmes

Maine’s three candidates for governor will face off at 8 this morning at the “Eggs and Issues” debate sponsored by the Portland Regional Chamber of Commerce.

The gubernatorial candidates in Massachusetts are to meet Wednesday at a chamber forum in Boston, also at 8 a.m.

And in Tennessee this month, Senator Lamar Alexander will meet his Democratic challenger, Gordon Ball, at a forum sponsored by the Tennessee farm bureau in Cookeville. Start time: 7:30 a.m.

More and more, it seems, candidates are debating at sunrise, rather than sunset, and less often in television studios than at events sponsored by the local chamber of commerce or another non-media outlet.

Nighttime debates sponsored by news organizations are still the norm, of course. But bit by bit, that quaint family-time ideal ritual has been blown to bits in the Internet era. Voters can now live-stream debates on their computers, replay them at another time or skip them and pick up highlights on Twitter.

The ratings for live televised debates in midterm elections are usually fairly low, said Ken Goldstein, a professor of politics at the University of San Francisco and a specialist in political media. And stations would rather not disrupt their early evening lineups for debates, which rarely break for a commercial sponsor.

KYW Newsradio in Philadelphia, which has been broadcasting live debates during morning drive time for 20 years, simulcast a governors’ debate last week in the morning on television, repeated it Sunday afternoon, made it available on its website and used excerpts on its TV and radio news shows.

But it has not broadcast the debate on television at night.

— Katharine Q. Seelye

President Obama, who got low marks in a new CBS poll for his handling of the Islamic State threat, heads to the Pentagon to meet with senior military leaders and his national security team.

Michelle Obama is hosting a fashion workshop at the White House to connect students and fashion professionals.

Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. is in Oregon campaigning for Senator Jeff Merkley.

The Federal Reserve releases minutes from its latest policy meeting at 2 p.m.

Photo

The comedian Sarah Silverman wants to do for pay equity what she did for President Obama in 2008 when she encouraged young Jews to head to Florida to persuade their grandparents to vote Obama. (That video went viral.)

Ms. Silverman is rather expressively raunchy in an unsuitable-for-work video to be released this morning in which she makes a pitch for donations to offset the $500,000 average lifetime earnings difference between men and women in similar jobs, a tax on womanhood, so to speak.

In the video, she appears to be preparing for a sex change and ambitiously says she hopes to crowd-source the more than $29 trillion needed to pay each woman what she is owed. Since that seems a stretch, Ms. Silverman says any contributions will go to the National Women’s Law Center, an education and advocacy group whose name, Ms. Silverman admits, sounds like “an old ladies’ gym.”

— Carl Hulse

Justice John Paul Stevens, in The New York Review of Books, recommends the new book “Judging Statutes” and analyzes Justice Antonin Scalia’s approach to the law during his time the Supreme Court.

The New Republic says former Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas had the “scariest reaction” to the Supreme Court’s gay marriage decision.

Christianity Today reports that more and more Americans are comfortable with their pastors talking politics from the pulpit.

Senator Kay Hagan and her Republican opponent, Thom Tillis, held their second debate last night. You can watch it here. Watch the Georgia governor’s debate and the Senate face-off, the Senate debate in West Virginia, the Virginia debate and the Colorado debate.

The Des Moines Register has posted a video of Representative Steve King, the outspoken Republican, reading mean tweets about himself. One example: “I bet Steve King smells like mothballs and dusty Bibles.”