The couple that dress together! Guy Pearce and wife Kate Mestitz wear matching black tuxedos to The Rover premiere in Cannes



They have been married for over 17 years.

And it seems that Guy Pearce and Kate Mestitz's style has obviously rubbed off on one another.

The couple wore near-matching black tuxedos as they walked the red carpet at the Cannes premiere of the actor's new movie The Rover on Sunday evening.

A matching pair! Guy Pearce and his wife Kate Mestitz wore matching tuxedos as they attended the premiere of The Rover at Cannes on Sunday



Heavily-tattooed Kate looked stunning in a double-breasted black jacket teamed with matching trousers, a white shirt and a ribbon-style bow tie.

The brunette wore her short brown crop in a high quiff-style and carried a silver metallic clutch.

Meanwhile, Guy looked suave in a classic black tuxedo, white shirt and bow tie and his reading spectacles.

Stylish: Heavily-tattooed Kate looked stunning in a double-breasted black jacket teamed with matching trousers, a white shirt and a ribbon-style bow tie while Guy was dapper in a similar ensemble

Close: Guy also posed with his co-star Robert Pattinson during the evening in France



The happy couple have been married for 17 years after the actor tied the knot with the psychologist in March 1997.

Guy also posed with his co-star Robert Pattinson during the evening in France, as well as director of the film David Michod and producer David Linde.

The men cut all cut striking figure in black suits, white shirts and bow ties, and all but Twilight star Pattinson donned stylish specs frames.

Rave reviews: The talented Aussie star has been garnering rave reviews for his performance in The Rover



Boys' night: Guy and Robert also posed with director David Michod and producer David Linde



The Australian directed film has received extremely positive reviews since being screened to press at the annual film festival.

English-born Australian acting veteran Guy was praised as giving 'his strongest role since Animal Kingdom' by Indiewire, while The Los Angeles Times described it as 'exceptional'.

Pattinson has also earned accolades for his performance, with Variety describing it as 'career defining' and one that 'reveals untold depths of sensitivity and feeling in the erstwhile Twilight star'.

Having a laugh: Robert and David shared a laugh as they mingled with the cast and crew of the film

Proud: Michod proudly posed between his two leading male leads



The handsome Brit will arrive on Australian shores next month to attend the local premiere of The Rover at Sydney Film Festival on June 7.

He will also take part in a panel discussion with co-star Pearce and director Michod during Vivid Sydney - a festival of lights held around the city from May 23 to June 9.

Meanwhile, Paris tried her best to steal the show as she randomly showed up to the premiere.



The American socialite walked the red carpet in a bold dress that featured a full black and white skirt, and embellishment on the sheer bodice on top.

Homecoming: Guy and Robert will arrive on Australian shores next month to attend the local premiere of The Rover at Sydney Film Festival on June 7

It was unclear why the 33-year-old attended the premiere of the thriller, made by Animal Kingdom director Michod and set in the South Australian outback. Paris twisted and twirled in sky-high black heels, waving at the crowd and pulling poses for photographers. She did not pose with the film's tuxedo-clad male cast and crew present on the night, which included Pattinson, Pearce, director Michod and producer David Linde. Who invited her? Meanwhile, Paris tried her best to steal the show as she randomly showed up to the premiere