More local food producers, but less reported income

Kayann Short, owner of Stonebridge Farm, stands on a bridge on her farm east of Lyons. ( Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer )

On a gently sloping field along Colo. 66 just east of Lyons, Kayann Short stood on her Stonebridge Farm enjoying that fact that all of the snow has melted off her 10 acres.

"This season we should be OK. We've had really good snow pack," Short said. "But we'll see how hot the summer gets."

She has farmed here for 24 years and can't imagine doing anything else.

Short's Stonebridge is one of 855 farms in Boulder County, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture's (USDA) latest census, from 2012. That number is up 15 percent from the 2007 census, which listed 746 farms in the county.

By the numbers Farms in Boulder County 2012: 855 2007: 746 2002: 736 Acres farmed 2012: 132,948 2007: 137,668 2002: 107,629 Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture Census

The USDA's definition of a farm is any place from which $1,000 or more of agricultural products were produced and sold in a year. That means the numbers in the county include many smaller farms that are more of a hobby for the owner.

Stonebridge Farm is what's called a community supported agriculture (CSA) farm. Short sells shares, and that's her entire business model. She doesn't sell to restaurants or farmers markets.

"We were the first CSA in Boulder County," she explained. "We've seen a lot of awareness on the part of people who eat food."

While her business is strong, with almost all of her 90 shares at $500 a pop sold for the season, there remain challenges in the region for her and other farmers.

"Our biggest challenge right now is climate, because of climate change," Short said. "It's more unpredictable now than it used to be. We have to always be on our toes. We could get an early freeze, a late freeze, we could get a flood like we did two seasons ago."

Over the long term climate change could become a problem, and experts say the county isn't prepared for that possibility.

"We don't have significant water storage projects that capture the water runoff from this watershed that would allow us to better manage the supply and demand variables around water and irrigation," said Adrian Card, an agent at the CSU Extension office in Longmont.

He explained that a warmer climate will not be good in the future. "We'll see a tapering off on some of the vegetable crops."

Those crops are the bread and butter for most of the county's small and medium-sized farms.

But in the present, small farms here are thriving.

"Business is better than ten years ago," said Allison Edwards, who owns the Sol y Sombra Farm in Hygiene. "People are really interested in sourcing locally. They really want to support the farmers."

Sol y Sombra focuses on heirloom variety organic vegetables, fruits, herbs and flowers. In addition to being a CSA farmer, Edwards sells at the Longmont Farmers Market and is one of a growing number of area farmers selling to restaurants in the area.

She said that having more small farmers is good for everyone here.

"It's become more competitive. Especially with the farmers markets, there are more farms involved. This is great for us as a county. It gives us a great variety of vegetables and fruits, and they are fresher than what you find in the grocery store," she said.

Kayann Short, owner of Stonebridge Farm, with some of her greenhouse plants. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Timothy Payne of Longmont buys a lot of produce from Sol y Sombra and other local farms. He owns Farmer Girl, a food enterprise that includes several businesses: the Tasterie Truck, which is a food truck that operates in Boulder County; Farmer Girl at Avanti Food and Beverage, which is a food collective of seven eateries that is opening in Denver in late May; and his catering and farm dinner business. His company is focused on promoting and using local, organic and sustainable ingredients.

"During the growing season, the menu for the truck tries to use local farms exclusively for vegetables," Payne said. "Farmer Girl uses local farms for beef, pork, chicken, and eggs year round."

He believes it's a no-brainer to go local.

"There is a big difference between agribusiness produce and local farms and the farmers market," he said. "First, the relative ripeness of the produce is always better. The food does not have to be transported very far, so it can be picked and shipped when it is ripe. That is not the case for produce at the supermarket."

In addition he points to the smaller carbon footprint in not having to ship produce long distances.

Pursuing farmland

According to the USDA, 132,950 acres are being farmed in Boulder County. That's almost 30,000 more acres than were being farmed 10 years ago. However, some farmers still can't find land to expand their operations.

"Things are going well, but I struggle with getting enough land to have a sustainable farm," said Michael Moss who owns the Kilt Farm in Niwot.

He's also a CSA farmer and sells to restaurants, but he said he needs to expand for his operation to be sustainable.

"I'm pursuing open space and private lands to expand," he said. "If you can find the land, at least five acres, then it's a good market to be in. Right now we aren't meeting the demand."

Moss says at present he has just one acre, which will be packed end to end with vegetables this season.

By the numbers

"The farm industry is relatively small in Boulder County, and it is generally flat or shrinking," explained Brian Lewandowski, research associate at the Leeds School of Business at CU Boulder. "That being said, I think there is some niche work in this area in Boulder County such as in natural and organics."

His numbers appear to bear that out.

Lewandowski's research shows that the gross domestic product (GDP) from farming in Boulder County dropped considerably from its peak of $20 million in 2004 to $11 million in 2011.

"It's shocking really," he said of the numbers. But there may be an explanation.

With smaller farmers, more farm stands, and more activity at farmer's markets, there may also be much less reporting — as in reporting income. Lewandowski believes that may be why we're seeing an increase in farms but a decrease in reported income.

Card, at the CSU extension in Longmont, hints that the future of farming in the county could lean small. It revolves around aesthetics.

"It is a challenging place to be a farmer. This is farming in the urban interface," Card explained. "Farming has a certain messiness that urban dwellers don't want to see. They want something much more pastoral. We think of a garden, but really it's row covers and drip tape and tractors, and pieced together irrigation systems. Not to mention the 20 people that have to drive to the bigger farm to provide labor."

"There is a bit of a disconnect of what it takes to be a viable agricultural operation and what the public is interested in seeing," he added.

The public, he said, is more interested in the small pastoral settings such as Kilt Farm, Sol y Sombre and Stonebridge.

That's fine with Allison Edwards at Sol y Sombra Farm.

"I love what I am doing, beyond belief," she said. "I am the happiest person I know."

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel