Topics: economy, Employment, Energy, Environment, GOP, infrastructure, Jobs, Keystone Pipeline, Republicans, The Right, Business News, Politics News

Notwithstanding the conventional wisdom TransCanada CEO Russ Girling recently peddled to ABC’s Martha Raddatz, that approving the Keystone XL Pipeline would mean “42,000 … ongoing, enduring jobs,” the State Department places the number of permanent full-time jobs the project would create at 35. The other 41,965, so to speak, would be manufacturing and construction jobs that would end after a year or two, necessitating new job creation.

At Reason.com, Scott Shackford taunts that liberals are trying to have it both ways by trumpeting the 35 figure, pointing out that this is an essential characteristic of all infrastructure projects, which constitute a substantial portion of President Obama’s jobs legislation. It’s true: The thing about installing capital goods is that the installation process concludes. Shackford’s gotcha is hollow, though, unaccompanied as it is by a workable libertarian long-term full employment strategy.

If pipeline champions are so interested in an approach that can really bring meaningful, long-lasting improvement to American jobs, there are several initiatives awaiting their support. So let’s be clear about what we need:

1. A large – temporary – infrastructure program. There’s plenty of stuff worth building, like a national bullet train infrastructure, a smart grid with renewable energy sources, and fiber-optic telecommunications network – hell, solar roadways (which, did you know a Republican senator is into?). These projects might all be combined into one large-scale construction initiative, which once complete, could basically cede operation and maintenance of the infrastructure to robots. The temporary jobs would stimulate the currently measly U.S. economy, but the central appeal is the infrastructure we’d be getting out of it.

2. A permanent job guarantee. Conventionally, stimulus is done trickle down-style, by employing the skilled, educated, and relatively highly-paid and hoping the boost they provide to aggregate demand will result in employment for everyone. This approach tends not to reach the long term unemployed, the formerly incarcerated, those born into poverty, &c. The bottom-up version is to offer guaranteed employment not in manufacturing and construction, but the service, care, education, and community development sectors. Among the stated merits of such a program are a built-in check on inflation, and the pairing of national funding with a decentralized, local planning structure.