Sioux Falls, SD

Along with the new year, some new babies have made their way into the world. We stopped by Avera and Sanford Hospitals to meet the newest additions to the community.

New Year's Eve is traditionally a day for celebration. But it was especially exciting for a Southeast South Dakota family, who welcomed the last baby born at Avera Health in 2014.

"I figured there'd be more babies because I think there was some last night. I thought there was more going into labor after us, but I guess not," mother, Brittany Clark said.



Johanna Jane Clark was born around 12:30 p.m. yesterday. She joins 3 other siblings, who all have an easy way to remember each other's birth years.

Brittany: We have one in 2012, 13 and now 14.

Sammi: Did you plan that out? Or was that a pleasant surprise?

Brittany: No. They're all surprises.

While Johanna was the last baby born in 2014 for Avera, it was a little boy over at Sanford who was the first 2015 baby born in Sioux Falls.

Corban Judson Selzler was born around 2:00 a.m. Unlike Johanna, Corban did not arrive when planned. He was already five days past due.

"I was more than ready. He was actually scheduled for an induction tomorrow morning. So apparently he didn't want to wait that long. He wanted to have a moment in the spot light apparently," mother, Kymberlee Selzler said.

And even with the holiday births, both moms say they'll make sure birthdays are a special celebration.

"I had a few of my friends and family who wanted him to be born on Christmas, so I'm glad that that didn't happen. I think there's enough space that we can definitely make sure that his birthday is independent of Christmas," Selzler said.

Both moms say they are not going to try for another new year's baby any time soon.

HealthBeat

Children's Health {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.