2016 Presidential candidates off and running





The 2016 United States presidential race is underway with several candidates from both political parties announcing their candidacy for their party’s nomination for president in recent weeks.

A range of candidates have announced, each with different backgrounds, political beliefs, qualifications and experience. The American people need to familiarize themselves with the candidates and their positions on an array of issues, so they can choose well from the field of contenders.

Here are candidates that have announced so far and their positions.

Hillary Rodham Clinton

Former Secretary of State

New York Senator 2001-2009 (Resigned to become Secretary of State in Obama Administration)

First Lady of the United States 1993-2001

Education: Yale Law School

Yale Law School Occupation: Attorney

The Campaign Message

“I’m running for president,” Clinton said in a YouTube video, ending two years of speculation and immediately establishing herself as the likely Democrat nominee. “Every day Americans need a champion and I want to be that champion,” Clinton said, positioning herself as the defender of middle class economics able to take tackle income inequality.

Clinton has a base of support among white working-class women and Hispanics. The Hispanic vote will be crucial to winning states like Florida, Nevada, Colorado or even Florida considering immigration reform will be a topic likely discussed in the upcoming debates. In 2008, Hispanics hugely supported Clinton over Obama. However, she needs to win over blacks and young, college educated white voters who heavily supported Obama in 2008 and 2012.

Clinton will likely discuss her role as a mother and grandmother to try to win over working class women. Expect her to emphasize that her experiences and record as a public official qualify her above other candidates to create a better future for Americans. Anticipate hearing from her on issues of income inequality and the struggling middle class. Also, expect to hear, not just from Clinton but from all the candidates, on issues of higher minimum wage, paid family medical leave, early childhood education and affordable child care. These issues are particularly important to women whose support Clinton will try to earn. Expect several other candidates to go after the women’s vote as well.

On the issues:

Supports a two-state solution between Israel and the Palestinians,

Believes in the scientific evidence for climate change and calls for government to combat it,

Supports President Obama’s executive order of deferred action for undocumented immigrants,

Supports raising the federal minimum wage,

Supports closing corporate tax loopholes,

Supports cutting taxes for the middle class and investing in infrastructure,

Supports same-sex marriage.

Potential Advantages for Clinton

Wide name recognition,

Support of loyal followers from her 30-year career span,

Has substantial campaign chest that is the result of her “super PAC” donations,

Appeal to the establishment.

Potential Disadvantages

She will have to appeal to blacks and young people, as well as the college-educated white people who helped Obama win the presidency

She will have to clearly focus her campaign toward the future over the past.

She will have to address controversies: Use of personal email account for official State Department business, Her handling of the Benghazi fiasco, A potential conflict of interest regarding fundraising for the Clinton Foundation.



Ted Cruz

Freshmen Senator from Texas

Education: Princeton University and Harvard Law School

Princeton University and Harvard Law School Occupation: Attorney

Attorney Known for delivering a senate filibuster by reading “Green Eggs and Ham”

The Campaign Message

A Republican associated with the Tea Party movement, Cruz became the first candidate to officially announce his entry into presidential race with a tweet — “I’m running for President and I hope to earn your support!” It also showed a video post of his 30-second campaign video: It’s “a time to rise to the challenge, just as Americans have always done,” Cruz said in the video. “I believe in America and her people, and I believe we can stand up and restore our promise. It’s going to take a new generation of courageous conservatives to help make America great again. And I’m ready to stand with you to lead the fight.” He eventually gave full announcement of his candidacy at Liberty University, a private Christian college in Lynchburg, Virginia.

His early Spring announcement will allow him, like Clinton, to take advantage of the full second fundraising quarter to accumulate the funding needed for the long presidential run.

On the issues:

Wants to repeal Affordable Care Act,

According to a Facebook post, wants to abolish the Internal Revenue Service and called for a flat tax,

Denies scientific evidence on climate change,

Supports a constitutional amendment for a balanced budget,

Wants to repeal the Common Core education standards; a co-sponsor of the Local Control of Education Act, which will allow states to continue receiving federal grant funding regardless of their decision to participate in Common Core Standards,

Opposes President Obama’s deferred immigration program for young arrivals as well as a pathway to citizenship,

Opposes same-sex marriage,

Supports the interpretation that the Second Amendment allows an individual the right to keep and bear firearms,

Wants to repeal Dodd-Frank that originally tightens regulations of financial institutions

Would use military action to battle Islamic State militants, if necessary,

Opposes abortion even in cases of rape.

Potential Advantages:

Appeal to evangelical voters,

Rhetorical skills,

Biographical appeal; Canadian Born-American whose father was Cuban,

Tea Party association,

Able to rouse up the base of the Republican party,

Known for being a superior debater.

Potential Disadvantages:

Could be outspent by more well established candidates like Jeb Bush, though his recent fundraising from PACs of $31 million in one week following his announcement surprised experienced political reporters,

Electability; his positions may alienate important constituents,

Known for being a provocateur as well as strident and uncompromising,

May struggle to appeal to independents and moderate Republicans,

Helped orchestrated the 2013 government shutdown.

Rand Paul

Freshmen Senator from Kentucky

Education: Baylor University and Duke University

Baylor University and Duke University Occupation: Ophthalmologist

The Campaign Message

With the theme of “Stand with Rand; Defeat the Washington Machine,” Paul became the second Republican senator to declare his candidacy for his party’s nomination, promising supporters that he will do some major housecleaning in Washington if he gets elected president. Known for his libertarian views calling for reduced federal drug sentences, advocating for oversight on the nation’s intelligence agencies, and calling for a more carefully planned approach to the use of military force. Paul is also known for being a maverick, criticizing Republicans as much as he does Democrats. Expect the campaign message to focus on three key areas: civil liberties, non-interventionist military and economic prosperity.

Paul, the son of a former Texas Congressman and two-time presidential candidate, will likely have the advantage with his father’s base of loyal supporters from the past two elections.

Paul has large appeal to a wide variety of voters. College students are drawn to his views on reigning in domestic surveillance, and many are encourage by his advocating to ease drug-sentencing laws. Paul can rely on libertarian followers who supported his father in the prior two elections as well as the Tea Party enthusiasts to help in the primary. However, he needs to win one of the first four states in the nominating contests: Iowa, New Hampshire, Nevada or South Carolina, in order to be considered a serious contender.

On the issues:

Calls for a balanced budget amendment,

Supports term limits for the house and the senate,

Wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act,

Supports construction of Keystone XL pipeline,

Wants to reform the criminal justice system such as restoring the voting rights of every non-violent felon,

Believes Common Core to be a one-size-fits-all model and wants to abolish it,

Agrees with Supreme Court ruling striking down the Defense of Marriage Act,

Agreed with President Obama’s plan to restore relations with Cuba and to lift the embargo,

Wants to reduce military aid to Israel.

Potential Advantages:

Has an ideology that is inclusive of a wide variety of people across the political spectrum that includes appeal to black minorities,

Has strong libertarian followers and Tea Party support,

Has support of loyal fans from his father,

Holds adjunct occupation as a physician (most presidents were lawyers).

Potential Disadvantages:

He’s trying to appeal to too many different groups of people;

His views on defense spending and the use of military force could complicate his candidacy in a party generally described as hawkish;

The Republican establishment views him as an isolationist, though he has been trying to be more of an internationalist in recent weeks;

In his 2010 senate campaign, he said that private businesses should not be forced to obey anti-discrimination laws such as the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

Marco Rubio

Freshmen Senator from Florida

Education: University of Florida and University of Miami Law School

University of Florida and University of Miami Law School Occupation: Politician

Campaign Message:

Surrounded by his family and hundreds of cheering supporters, Florida Senator Marco Rubio officially made his bid for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination by calling for “A New American Century.” The youngest candidate so far on the Republican side, at 43, Rubio says, “Too many of our leaders and our ideas are struck in the 20th century,” appealing to people eager for a generational change in leadership. The son of Cuban immigrants, Rubio’s campaign will emphasize American greatness and the American dream. As a senator, Rubio’s major initiative was on immigration reform. He was part of a bipartisan group of senators that drafted a comprehensive immigration bill that included a pathway to citizenship for the 11 million unauthorized immigrants already in the country. Moreover, he is a member of the Foreign Relations and Intelligence Committees and is generally considered more hawkish than Paul.

On the issues:

Wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act,

Opposes restoring relations with Cuba and lifting the embargo,

Favors comprehensive immigration reform, however, opposes President Obama’s 2014 executive actions,

Opposes same-sex marriage,

Would be in favor of military action to prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon.

Potential Advantages

Youthful face and charismatic personality that may help with young and minority voters,

Speaks fluent Spanish and his stance on immigration reform would help with the garnering the Latino vote,

Appeals to moderate Republicans as well as other factions within the party,

Will have an advantage in Nevada, which has a large Latino population, and would give him momentum to continue in the race,

Appeals with his biography and inspiring rhetorical skills,

Has a record of being bipartisan.

Potential Disadvantages: