Appearing on “Hannity” Tuesday night, TheBlaze’s Dana Loesch clashed with Patricia Ireland, a leader in the feminist movement and former president of the National Organization for Women, over the Supreme Court’s decision in the Hobby Lobby case.

The two were at odds early and often as Ireland claimed that Hobby Lobby was denying women basic health care needs.

Loesch began by reminding Ireland that Hobby Lobby was already providing 16 out of 20 forms of contraception that were eventually mandated by Obamacare.

“They were providing birth control to their employees, who they pay way above minimum wage by the way and gave Sundays off, they were doing this before Obamacare was even a thought,” Loesch said. “Women who work for Hobby Lobby, they still have access to birth control as provided by Hobby Lobby.”

Hobby Lobby objected to being forced by the government to provide Plan B, which is also known as the “morning after pill,” Ella, another emergency contraceptive, Copper Intrauterine Device and IUD with progestin, which some believe can cause or are similar to abortion.

When host Sean Hannity asked Ireland why she couldn’t respect the family-owned business’ religious beliefs, Ireland said she doesn’t believe the “commercial business has religious views.” She then asked why an owner wouldn’t now be able to deny all medical care if he or she didn’t believe in it.

“That’s a horrible misunderstanding of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act,” Loesch interrupted.

“I’m quite familiar with religious freedom,” Ireland replied.

“Apparently, you’re not,” Loesch shot back.

After asking Hannity if she would be able to make her statement, Ireland repeated herself, saying a woman’s “right under a federal law to health coverage shouldn’t be denied based on the corporation owner’s views.”

When it was Loesh’s turn again, she didn’t hold back.

“I’m sure Patricia is an educated woman, but it does women a disservice when we have women speaking out on this topic and they don’t seem to understand the facts at hand — so let me set something straight here,” she began.

“I understand completely the facts, I just disagree with your conclusions,” Ireland interrupted.

“No, apparently you don’t, so I’m going to educate you,” the Blaze TV host continued, seemingly sneaking in a crack about “respecting my elders.”

Loesch then explained that under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, businesses would have to prove to the government that their religious beliefs and First Amendment rights are being restricted or violated.

“The hypothetical slippery slope, ridiculous argument that, ‘Well they could just deny all health care,’ that wouldn’t actually be supported by the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. So it’s a bunk, fallacious argument that we are wasting time discussing.

The two weren’t done battling, but Hannity was forced to wrap up the segment.