Greg Mandile forks leaves and other yard waste from a trailer attached to his Dodge Ram vehicle on Sunday. In order to get ready for inevitable snow, Mandile collected leaves from his yard and his mother-in-law's yard and took them to the Loveland Recycling Center. ( Jessica Benes / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Disposing of yard waste Permits are required only when bringing yard debris to the site. Permits are mailed to eligible residents each December. The Loveland Recycling Center is located at 400 N. Wilson Ave., 7:30 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Tuesday-Sunday. Yard and raw wood debris includes: Grass clippings Leaves Garden trimmings, including Halloween pumpkins Branches, all sizes accepted Untreated lumber, plywood, oriented strand board (OSB), particleboard (no furniture) Pallets and spools Shake shingles No permit is required to dispose of recyclables. Call 962-2529 or visit ci.loveland.co.us/index.aspx?page=188 for details.

From truck beds, trash bags, trailers and vans, Loveland residents are cleaning up their yards and getting rid of yard waste before the real cold hits. And that cold could be this week.

National Weather Service meteorologists predict a 40 percent chance of snow Monday night and a 20 percent chance Tuesday. The temperature will continue to drop through the week, with a high near 15 on Wednesday.

Around 1,100 to 1,400 vehicles a day have pulled into The Loveland Recycling Center the last several weekends to deposit leaves and branches, according to Eric Tallman, lead equipment operator at the Loveland Recycling Center. He estimated that people drop off around 3,000 cubic yards in a weekend, although he said that could be a light estimate.

Advertisement

Cars up to 10 deep on Sunday waited to drop off yard waste by the truckful.

"We had almost 1,200 people on Saturday. That's been the same the last three weeks," Tallman said. He guessed that it would start to slow down in another week.

Many people Sunday loaded up their cars to drop off leaves before the possible snow on Monday night.

In a long row of waving trash bags and scraping rakes, people dumped their yard waste on towering heaps of leaves.

Ronnie Gray pulled up to the leaves pile with a van full of trash bags. Craig Lloyd was on his fifth truckload. Daniel Herl had a Chevy truck bed packed with yard waste. Greg Mandile collected leaves from his own house and his mother-in-law's house and loaded them into a trailer attached to his Dodge Ram. Carol and Dave Rustici also had a trailer from which they forked out leaves their grandchildren enjoyed the week before. And Phil Jarvis was pushing pieces of a pine tree from his truck.

"I didn't want all this snow on top of these leaves," said Gray, who packed her van with black trash bags of leaves from cottonwood, willow and ash trees in her yard.

"And this is the second time from the front yard. We've already done the backyard and have to do it again," Gray said.

Herl, who pulled in next to Gray, had a Chevy truck bed packed with leaves, grass and a few pumpkins.

"I was trying to beat the weather and everyone in the neighborhood is trying to get their lawns looking nice again from the Halloween season," he said.

The Rusticis were unloading leaves after their two grandchildren enjoyed big piles of the stuff last week.

"They had a great time (playing in the leaves)," Carol said.

The couple has enjoyed the warm fall so they could get a head start on yardwork like cleaning leaves out of their bushes — which they usually reserve for spring — but they are also looking forward to snow.

"We're looking forward to winter because we're big skiers," Dave said. "Hopefully it starts snowing soon. I'm worried it won't."

Tallman advised that loads — especially leaves — should be covered when transported to the recycling facility. It's a state law to cover loads so leaves don't blow into the storm drains.

Tallman said that the yard waste is hauled away by A-1 Organics, which turns it into compost.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/jessicabenes.