Buy Photo Science students gather for studies at the Renaissance Academy in Clarksville. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)Buy Photo

Public school systems in the southern part of Indiana increasingly find themselves in a weird position – competing with one another for students and the state funding each student brings to the district.

With the introduction of school-choice programs such as charter schools, private school vouchers and open enrollment, competition for public dollars has become increasingly fierce – the most competitive public education has ever been, some educators say, in a time out-of-district transfers can mean the difference of hundreds of thousands of dollars for a school district.

“The financial lifeblood of a school district is enrollment,” said Greater Clark County Schools Superintendent Andrew Melin. “We’re all competing for students, and it’s probably more competitive here in this part of the state than any other part of the state I’ve been in.”

The pressure to compete isn’t going anywhere as the state's push for school choice continues to attract families to Clark and Floyd counties, where four school districts already compete with one another for students.

For Southern Indiana superintendents, this has meant building up their own districts’ programs – in some instances to aggressively recruit students.

“Choices have greatly expanded in recent years,” said Erin Sweitzer, spokeswoman for the Institute for Quality Education, an Indianapolis-based nonprofit organization that advocates for educational options. “… because of that, schools are being motivated and forced to innovate.”

Such was the case several years ago, as Indiana rolled out its open-enrollment program, which allows parents to send their kids to any school corporation in Clark and Floyd counties free of charge, even if it's outside the district in which they live. The roughly 1,300-student Clarksville Community School Corp. knew that if it didn’t differentiate itself, it would continue to lose kids to other educational options.

Its solution was the charter-like Renaissance Academy, which this year serves ninth- and 10th-graders in a building without the bells, textbooks and lockers found in a traditional high school. The school, which is part of the New Technology Network, opened in 2014 in the old Value City site after the district’s enrollment had fallen to the lowest point in years.

Buy Photo The Renaissance Academy in Clarksville found a home in a former Value City story, which had been vacant for about 10 years. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

Today, Clarksville’s total enrollment is up 4 percent since the school opened – and nearly 40 percent of the school’s 95 students have sought out Renaissance Academy from another school district.

“We heard repeatedly from parents in our meetings they want choice,” Superintendent Kimberly Knott said. “They want options to traditional public schools.”

Annette Dailey, of Sellersburg, decided to send her son, Logan, now a high school sophomore, to Renaissance Academy two years ago after her mother-in-law received a postcard in the mail about the new school. Dailey, who previously homeschooled Logan, said the emphasis on technology and project-based learning was a good fit for her son. She has two other children who attend school on West Clark's Silver Creek campus, within their home school district.

"That’s what’s really nice about living in Indiana," she said. "It’s nice to have the choice.”

Limited use of option

Although all Indiana schools can participate in open enrollment, not all of them do. It's a local decision left up to school boards, said Indiana Department of Education spokeswoman Samantha Hart. Only about 4 percent of students across the state attend a public school outside their home district, although that number includes students who pay tuition to attend a school outside their home corporation, Hart said, and the department is unable to break the data down further.

In addition to building up educational programs, the expansion of school choice has forced schools to pour additional resources into marketing campaigns.

Buy Photo Renaissance Academy's World Language teacher Amy Clere worked with student Austin Grant on a class problem. There are no books at the school, students use laptops in all classes. Feb. 8, 2016. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The CJ)

Becky Gardenour, a longtime New Albany-Floyd County’s school board member and current president, said the expansion of school choice has resulted in school districts investing more in marketing, sometimes strategically placing advertisements in other school districts. She’s OK with that, too, because she believes that ultimately it’s about getting parents to whatever option is best for the child. The district spends roughly $130,000 on communications and marketing, about $30,000 more annually than it did before school choice.

"We’ve had billboards, ads and done separate mailers specifically for the purpose of recruiting new students since school choice has been implemented," the district's Chief Business Officer Fred McWhorter said in an email. He said the money has been well spent, too, because "we have over 500 transfer students generating over $2.8 million in revenue for us."

Schools and marketing

Late last year, Clarksville’s school board approved a marketing budget of between $130,000 and $180,000 for marketing in 2016, a significant hike from several years ago, when there wasn't a marketing budget, said district spokeswoman Nikolette Langdon.

During the Dec. 8 meeting, Clarksville School Board President Bill Wilson said he was happy with the district’s return on investment, since it brought in about 300 students, and has noticed that other school corporations are investing more in their own campaigns. Greater Clark's budget for marketing and communications has tripled from about $30,000 to $95,000 over the last decade, spokeswoman Erin Bojorquez said.

After Clarksville, where more than 20 percent of students are out-of-district transfers, West Clark Community Schools has perhaps benefited the most from open enrollment, with nearly 8 percent of its students currently living in another school district. This year, the demand was so high that the district had to place a moratorium on out-of-district transfers into the Silver Creek campus, turning away about 75 prospective students.

The demand, however, has less to do with new programs or more marketing – the district has recently added a communications director, but it does not send out fliers or erect billboards – and more to do with its central location and recent development in the area, Superintendent Chad Schenck said. He's not interested in recruiting outside students as much as he is building up the educational program that's already there, he said.

Greater Clark's Melin, whose school district has benefited marginally from the state's open enrollment policy, feels similarly. As of last August, 150 students had transferred in from other school districts, although that also includes students whose families moved and became residents of the school district. The school system serves about 10,500 students total.

He said the competition created by limited state funding puts superintendents in a difficult spot: they need to balance the need to compete with the need to collaborate.

When the first school choice initiatives were introduced about 10 years ago, he recalled, the Indiana Association of Public School Superintendents tasked school leaders with acting “in an ethical manner” – not actively and aggressively trying to recruit students from other districts.

“But as time has gone on, as funding becomes more and more of a constraint, it has almost forced school systems to more openly and more aggressively compete for kids,” he said. “And I think that’s a shame because as educators, our goal should be to collaborate … and make sure we’re doing everything in our power to improve everyone’s circumstance.”

Reporter Kirsten Clark can be reached at 502-582-4144. Follow The Courier-Journal's Education Team on Facebook at Facebook.com/SchooledCJ.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1XpFZiM