Topic category: Other/General

Ice-Age 5: The UnWarming-- The Polar Vortex of 2014 versus "Claim-It Changes."

GAIA Minister Neytiri Naked Truth Report on Ice-Age 5-- the UnWarming and its effect on Climate Change, now known as Claim-It Changes.

First, there was Global Warming; then there was Climate Change; then there was ClaimIt Changes a.k.a., Claim-It Changes; and now there's Ice-Age 5 caused by Global UnWarming. Now, get ready for the blockbuster hit movie coming for the Summer of 2014 (from the Winter of 2014): "Ice-Age 5-- The Unwarming"

Blockbuster Hit Coming for the Summer of 2014 (From the Winter of 2014):

Ice-Age 5-- The Un Warming

First, there was Global Warming; then there was Climate Change; then there was ClaimIt Changes a.k.a., Claim-It Changes; and now there's Ice-Age 5 caused by Global UnWarming.

Now, get ready for the blockbuster hit movie coming for the Summer of 2014 (from the Winter of 2014): "Ice-Age 5-- The Unwarming" :

This brand-new GAIA Minister Neytiri Naked Truth Report is also in a brand-new genré known as the "VideOccumentary." The Executive Producer is GAIA Minister Neytiri; the Director is Al Gore; the Screenwriter is Al Gore.

Just as that "Downton Abbey" actor's Christmas video as "Santa Claus" warned children that Global Warming was bringing an end to the North Pole in order to "Wake Up the Children" in order for them to "Wake Up Their Parents," this VideOccumentary shows how Global Warming made the Winter of 2014 the most severe winter in many decades and how we are on the verge of entering Ice-Age 5 as a reslt of Man-Made Global Warming, and this will wake-up Millenials so they will wake up the Millynials in time to stop Global Warming.

It graphically illustrates how the Polar Vortex of 2014 turned GAIA frigid. Can the Bi-Polar Bear ever hope to reverse the Polar Vortex? Can Al Gore make GAIA hot again? What will happen to Mankind ... Humankind ... Humynkind ... Humanity ... Humynity ... Womynity?

It features an exciting set of characters against the backdrop of Global Catastrophe played by an all-star cast: GAIA played by Neytiri, Gore played by Al Gore, Bi-Polar Bear played by Al Gore, Hot-Air Vortex played by Al Gore, All Scientists played by Al Gore.

Credits for this VideOccumentary go to people universally recognized as the best in their fields: Viral-Video Promotion by Hillary Clinton; Frost-Bite Treatment by ObamaCare; Gaffer-- Joe Biden; Cosmetics by Nancy Pelosi (with Face-Warming Assistance from Newt Gingrich); Costumes by Michelle Obama; Distribution by Al's Jazeera; Trailers by Wendy Davis; Twerking by Sandra Fluke, Lighting by Solyndra.

Even Claim-It-Changes Deniers will find themselves captivated by the heady visual effects of Double-D in 3-D featuring two of Neytiri's three most important parts illustrating the Science of Curvature on which the Preeminent Global Warming Scientist, James Cameron, relied for conveying to Millenians the Hard Science of Global Warming in his scientific tour-de-force known as "AVATAR."

SEO Tags (Search Engine Optimization Tags) by Al Gore and Barack Obama: Global Warming, Global UnWarming, Global Cooling, Climate Change, ClaimItChanges, ClaimIt Changes, Claim It Changes, Global UnWarming, Ice-Age 5-- The UnWarming, Polar Vortex, Hot-Air Vortex, GAIA Minister Neytiri Naked Truth Report, etc.

For More Naked Truth, go to GAIA Minister Neytiri's Naked Truth Report :

--Jim Wrenn, Editor at PoliSat.Com.

Permanent links to this installment:

http://PoliSat.Com/Ice-Age-Five-The-UnWarming.htm

OR

http://polisat.com/DailyPoliticalSatire-Commentary/Archives2014/du20y14m02d16-01.htm

Click Image Below to Order Bumper Sticker: "The PRICE of what's FREE is FREEDOM"

Jim Wrenn

Political Satire/Commentary at PoliSat.Com (Editor)

Send email feedback to Jim Wrenn

Biography - Jim Wrenn

Jim is a proud descendant of 18th Century criminal exiles from England who swam to the Outer Banks when the British ship taking them to a Georgia penal colony sank in a storm near Cape Hatteras. Having the prescience to prevent their descendants from becoming "TarHeels," they immediately migrated to Virginia, where, within just a few generations they worked their way up into poverty. Jim's grandfather was the first in the family tree to see the distant horizons, but his career was cut short by severe injuries he sustained when a cousin cut down the tree.

After a brief stint in the Amry (ours) following graduation from law school, he began his legal career in the state bureaucracy but was never able to break into the federal bureaucracy. Several years later, he entered the private practice of law and co-founded a small law publishing company. Later, finding the publishing of small laws unstimulating and finding his private practice too private to be lucrative, he began writing political satire/commentary. His greatest vice is taking himself too seriously.

He wrote the definitive books on the Clinton Era Error: the Clinton Li e brary Book (pre-October, 2000), which he later updated as the Clinton Li e brary Book 2001 Edition to include Election 2000, the post-election shennanigans, and related events through August, 2001. The 2001 edition is the only known literary source that conclusively shows why Bill Clinton pardoned Susan McDougal but not Webster Hubbel. It also presciently contains the Billary/Hillary Dueling Memoirs. At every opportunity he shamelessly promotes his books for orders on-line or by fax at www.ClintonLiebraryBook.Com. He's also the Librarian at the Clinton Li e brary (www.ClintonLiebrary.Com), which owns exclusive rights to Bill Clinton's most famous speech as well as Bill Clinton's comments after revelation of the identity of Deep Throat in 2005.

As an amateur scientist as well as a scientific amateur, he de-bunks the man-is-causing-Global "Warming" theory, and predicts that by the middle of the 21st Century (when he will be safely dead) physicists will discover the obvious flaws in Einstein's Theory of Relativity, which will lead to vastly-faster-than-light travel through polarization of gravity. As a constitutional-law scholar, he's trying to teach those who hold a static, zero-sum-game view of economic and social theories to understand that "property" is not a "thing" but rather is a human right.

Although he regularly teaches Continuing Legal Education courses to lawyers, he's too-often available through he Rubber Chicken Speakers Bureau to speak on politics, satire, etc., at luncheons, dinners, root canals, funerals, etc. His speaking fees are so outrageously high they border on criminal price-gouging, but as a free-market advocate, he defends his fees on the higher moral ground of charging whatever the traffic will bear. For more information (surely more than one would want or need), go to www.PoliSat.Com.

Visit Jim Wrenn's website at Political Satire/Commentary at PoliSat.Com

Copyright © 2014 by Jim Wrenn

All Rights Reserved.