Topics: 2014 elections, Editor's Picks, Gov. Andrew Cuomo, Interviews, Liberals, mayor, Mayor Bill de Blasio, Minimum wage, New York, New York City, The Left, Working Families Party, Zephyr Teachout, Elections News, News, Politics News

A year ago polls showed New York Public Advocate and mayoral candidate Bill de Blasio running fourth, fighting hard for media coverage in a race that included the compulsively coverable train wreck also known as Anthony Weiner. But just last week, in a plot twist almost as unlikely as his landslide win, de Blasio was in the media spotlight as an unlikely kingmaker, brokering the progressive Working Families Party’s uneasy endorsement of Gov. Andrew Cuomo.

It was unlikely, or seemed so, because the centrist Cuomo, a nominal de Blasio ally, became the progressive mayor’s primary antagonist almost as soon as he took office. He blocked his plans to raise taxes on the wealthiest New Yorkers to pay for pre-kindergarten programs, and ostentatiously sided with corporate charter schools titan Eva Moskowitz in her battle to get de Blasio to approve all of her new charters. Cuomo dismissed de Blasio’s appeal to allow New York City to raise its minimum wage as “chaotic,” and tried to stop him from using state funds on rent subsidies for homeless families. (On that one, Cuomo relented; he also agreed to add $300 million to expand New York’s pre-kindergarten programs after blocking the tax hike, a victory of sorts for de Blasio, minus the funding stream guaranteed by a local tax hike.)

The governor’s almost gleeful obstruction of de Blasio fed the growing unhappiness within the Working Families Party. But there was more: New York progressives see Cuomo as the face of a Democratic Party that has moved in their direction on social issues – the governor’s hard work on gay marriage and gun control have been exemplary – while tilting toward Wall Street and the rich on economic policy. He’s not only blocked tax hikes for the wealthy, he’s lowered New York’s estate tax and unrolled a host of tax cuts and tax exemptions for businesses and individuals.

For grass-roots activists in the WFP, rebuking Cuomo would signal a new willingness to punish Democrats who blocked a progressive economic agenda. As WFP executive director Dan Cantor recently told David Sirota in Politico, before the Cuomo conflict: “We needed to defeat some corporate Democrats in primaries to be taken seriously,” he says. A Cuomo challenge would have seemed tailor-made: Former Howard Dean organizer and Fordham University law professor Zephyr Teachout announced she would fight Cuomo for the party’s nomination at its late May convention.

Enter de Blasio. For weeks he worked to broker peace between Cuomo and WFP leaders. Most of WFP’s union membership favored working with the governor, not shafting him (lest they’d be shafted in turn, whether on contract talks or policy issues). But nothing could avert a convention floor showdown. Cuomo didn’t show – he agreed to speak to the group in what could only be compared to a hostage video – but de Blasio showed up at the Desmond Hotel near Albany, energetically working the phones and brokering a deal in which Cuomo agreed to pledge support for items like public financing of elections, marijuana decriminalization and a plan to increase the state’s minimum wage and allow cities to raise theirs 30 percent higher — along with working to win Democratic control of the state Senate, in exchange for the WFP endorsement.

In the end, Zephyr Teachout (who could still challenge Cuomo in a Democratic primary) won standing ovations with a fiery anti-Cuomo speech, but de Blasio carried the day with a passionate appeal that called a new WFP-Cuomo alliance “a transcendent moment” in progressive politics, a rhetorical flourish for which he was affectionately mocked. But the Wall Street Journal editorial page is not amused.

A few days after the WFP fireworks subsided, I had a chance to sit down with de Blasio, along with Katrina Vanden Heuvel of the Nation and Ebony’s Zerlina Maxwell. It already seemed far away: The day before he’d watched as many (though not all) Brooklyn parents learned their children had gotten places in the city’s expanded pre-kindergarten program, while the morning of our meeting, he’d attended the funeral of 7-year-old P.J. Avitto, who was stabbed in his East New York housing project last week. The conversation has been edited.

When we talked not quite a year ago, universal, full-day pre-kindergarten was your big idea, but it seemed very far away. Now you’ve gotten the money for it, and kids are being enrolled – and you’re only five months in office. That’s fast in politics.

It’s amazing, it’s joyous. It’s an amazing moment. When we put it forth over a year and a half ago, there was a substantial debate over, How much do we want to cross the Rubicon here?

Meaning what?

Meaning we really want to say we are going to create full-day Pre-K in the city in a short period of time. But are we really going to take on all those attendant challenges? It was a substantial discussion that in the scheme of things ended quite quickly, because my view is, I’m really uncomfortable with undue reliance on pilot projects and small victories and incrementalism. There’s a place for it, particularly when you have an untested idea. But pre-K is not an untested idea. The jury is so back on pre-K, compared to almost any idea in public policy – I’d say the same for after school and certainly paid sick leave.

And so once you recognize that you have the answer, then it’s a question of political will, resource prioritization, audacity and moving government toward the goal. I knew, having the dynamic of mayoral control of education, which is incredibly crucial to this equation – in the absence this would not be possible. The mission is to reach everyone, the goal is universality, to reach everyone. You have to be uncomfortable with incrementalism when you don’t need incrementalism.

You had a very interesting week with the Working Families Party convention. Why was it so important to mediate that conflict with the governor?

I think this achievement from last Saturday night is a very big deal, worth everything that went into it and everything that will go into it. The fact that we now have a huge coalition to raise the minimum wage to $10.10, with indexing, and with municipalities having the ability to go 30 percent higher, is a sea change for this state. This state is so backward on minimum wage policy, for such a blue state. In fact it’s fair to say the WFP formed on this question, the minimum wage question, in 1998.

The wage issue, and the issue of control of the state Senate, are related. The blockage on the wage issue was the Republican control of the state Senate. You remove that problem, you open up a world of possibilities. So you can be happy with the policy items that were delineated but I would argue you should be even more happy about the structural changes that are made possible by this unified agreement to take back the state Senate. And I believe that once it’s taken back it will not revert, because of demographic changes. I think it’s been artificially behind the curve, and once in Democratic hands, it will stay there. Our entire agenda will be greatly enhanced with a Democratic state Senate.