Families need to talk about this with their loved ones .. It’s not just about those basic needs. People don’t think about all those other needs."



With her bad knee, Jeanne McLaughlin rarely travels far, having chosen her doctor, grocery store and hairdresser for their proximity to her Ocean County retirement village.

In the depths of winter, that small circle shrinks even more.

"I don’t go out, period, when the weather is bad," said McLaughlin, an 86-year-old widow who lives by herself. She still recalls the time she fell when putting out the trash after a rainstorm. Luckily, she was able to crawl to her car in the dark, then pull herself up using its door handle.

While the recent string of storms may give nearly everyone cabin fever, it can be particularly burdensome for the elderly — turning even the relatively independent into temporary shut-ins.

Doctor and hair appointments are canceled. Visitors call to reschedule. Those who still drive face icy porch steps as daunting as a Sochi luge run.

"They’re stuck inside and can’t get visitors. Oftentimes it can be very lonely," said Liz Fandel, of Fellowship Village’s Helping Hands, a Basking Ridge agency that provides home health care. "And we know that social isolation — particularly with the elderly — can lead to other issues."

Piercing that isolation is the whole point of "telephone reassurance" programs set up for seniors by county agencies, as well as groups such as Catholic Charities.

"This lady has been a savior," McLaughlin said of Pat Shick, a volunteer for the Ocean County program who calls her almost every day. "If I didn’t have Pat, I don’t know what I’d do."

Shick is one of 17 volunteers with the county’s Meals on Wheels program who call to check in with seniors. Another 17 volunteers visit in person, said Jim Sigerdson of Meals on Wheels. The program was designed in hopes it would forestall depression in the elderly.

"It gives them something to look forward to," said Judy Cascella, of Manchester, another "telephone reassurance" volunteer.

In her nine years as a volunteer, Shick has gone well beyond a daily "wellness" call to McLaughlin.

She invites McLaughlin to her own family’s get-together on Christmas Eve, and, as the most recent storm was approaching, called from a supermarket to ask McLaughlin if she needed anything.

"I call her my guardian angel," McLaughlin said.

When the weather forecast is alarming, friends or relatives of older residents will often make sure their basic needs — food, heat, shelter — are met. If a storm is coming, Meals on Wheels programs will deliver tomorrow’s meal today, in a so-called "Blizzard box."

But human companionship often isn’t in the forefront of those preparations, nor very easy to provide in bad weather.

"Families need to talk about this with their loved ones," Fandel said. "It’s not just about those basic needs. People don’t think about all those other needs."

When a storm is coming, some of her elderly clients will have their visiting aide come the day before, or even stay overnight to safeguard them. That carries a price tag, or course, but it can help during extended bad weather.

"Oftentimes when someone’s alone for a longer period of time than they’re used to, they feel uneasy," Fandel said. Her service charges $21 an hour for home health aides.

After the storm, out-of-state adult children may contact her agency to do something as simple as take their relative to get her hair done — a "non-essential" need that can wear on one’s mind.

The reluctance of some older residents to brave the elements is prudent, experts say, given how devastating any fall can be.

The New Jersey Department of Health reports:

• At least one in three N.J. adults 65 and older will fall over the next 12 months.

• On average, 194 older adults are admitted to the hospital or treated in an emergency room every day because of a fall.

• Falls are the leading cause of unintentional injury, hospitalizations and death among older New Jerseyans.

Technology may be able to make a dent in this isolation down the road. Fandel said continuing care communities nationwide are now talking about making their social activities — such as in-house talks or seminars — available to older people who live nearby, but outside the actual complex.

Even older people who claim they "don’t use the computer" can navigate an iPad, she’s found. "So buy them an iPad. Set them up with Skype!," she advises adult children who live far away from their aging parents.

Catherine L’Insalata, division director for volunteer services of Catholic Charities, said she’s noticed something odd: A bad winter often triggers the impulse in some people to become volunteers themselves.

"Maybe it’s feeling boxed in ... or not being able to get the car out ... or just the need to communicate," she theorized. "But we get a lot of calls to volunteer. I think winter becomes a time of reflection," she said.