A 7-year-old Topeka girl and a mustang once considered difficult to ride are turning heads in the world of competitive riding and horsemanship.

Angeline Saliceti, a student at North Fairview Elementary in Seaman Unified School District 345, recently placed sixth in the Young Guns division for ages 7-11 at the Extreme Cowboy Association’s world championships in Hamilton, Texas. Angeline was the youngest rider in the competition.

“I like how you bond with a horse and how you’re like one with a horse,” the youngster said of her love for riding horses.

Angeline began taking English riding lessons about three years ago with a trainer near Virginia Beach, Va., where her father, Jose (Tony) Saliceti, was stationed with the U.S. Coast Guard.

“I first rode One-Eyed Jack and did hunter jumper riding,” she said. “I wasn’t competing then.”

About 1 1/2 years ago, her father was transferred to the Coast Guard office in Topeka. Angeline was hoping to find an instructor who offered English riding lessons. When that didn’t pan out, she starting taking western riding lessons from Cindy Branham, a certified horse trainer and clinician, at the Rockin’ RC in southeast Topeka.

Kristina Saliceti, Angeline’s mother, said she saw a Bureau of Land Management flier advertising a wild mustang and burro adoption event in the summer of 2012 in Lawrence and decided to take her children to see the wild horses.

The mustangs are halter- or saddle-trained by inmates at the Hutchinson Correctional Facility. Branham, a longtime volunteer with the program, helps with the horses’ gentling process.

“The girls were enamored with a horse named Andy,” Saliceti said, describing how she and Branham later drove to the Hutchinson Correctional Facility so she could adopt Andy and bring him home. However, once home, Andy bonded most with her husband.

“Cindy told us later about another horse in Hutchinson,” she said.

So Saliceti made another drive to Hutchinson to look at a mustang pony named Samson. She was told the horse had been adopted previously but had been returned to the facility when the new owners couldn’t ride him. Still, Saliceti and Branham thought Samson would be a good match for Angeline.

“Samson is nice, friendly and sweet,” Angeline said, adding the mustang also has a mischievous streak. “When we ride, he’ll take a chance to gallop off with you.”

Samson and Angeline quickly bonded and began training with Branham, earning enough points to qualify for the world championship in late November. During the competition, they had to maneuver through an obstacle course and were judged on speed, horsemanship and technique.

Angeline said she and Samson continue to work on their competition skills, such as riding with a large, brightly colored flag.

“Samson really trusts her, so he may not like (what he is doing), but he knows she won’t put him in a bad situation,” Saliceti said. “He’ll go over bridges and do jumps with her.”

In addition to Angeline, four other riders from the Topeka area qualified for the Extreme Cowboy Association’s world championship. Madison Branham placed 10th in the Young Guns division; Justin Branham and Alaina Rohnke competed in the youth division for ages 12-18 but didn’t make it into the finals. Branham competed in the professional division.

Branham said she is working on establishing a Bureau of Land Management wild mustang and burro adoption program similar to the one at the Hutchinson Correction Facility at the Topeka Correctional Facility for women.