Indiana Gov. Mike Pence won federal approval Tuesday for an Obamacare-inspired health care expansion, a development he cheered — but one that GOP operatives say could put him in political peril if he runs for president.

The first-term Republican and former congressman is angling for the party’s conservative mantle. And like a handful of other governors jockeying for the GOP nod, Pence has embraced a version of Obamacare’s expansion of Medicaid.

Story Continued Below

It’s a policy advocates say will ensure hundreds of thousands of Indiana residents get access to health care but that conservatives argue will blow a hole in federal and state budgets. And it’s just the kind of ammunition opposing candidates are likely to deploy in a crowded presidential primary as they try to distinguish themselves.

“If you’re going to have candidates who are trying to be the conservative in the race and then back Medicaid expansion in their states, it opens the door for other conservatives to certainly chip away at them,” said Jamie Burnett, a New Hampshire-based GOP strategist.

A senior Republican policy source who has worked on presidential campaigns put it more bluntly, previewing the potential line of attack: “They aided and abetted the implementation of Obamacare, and they were just as complicit in making Obamacare work as Democrats in Congress or Barack Obama himself.”

Other Republican governors eyeing the White House have walked a similar plank. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie worked with his Democratic state Legislature to pass Medicaid expansion. Ohio Gov. John Kasich circumvented GOP leaders to implement the policy. Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker refused to expand Medicaid but implemented a separate plan that leans heavily on Obamacare’s insurance exchange.

It’s a split that former Texas Gov. Rick Perry or Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal — fierce Obamacare opponents who rejected Medicaid expansion in any form — could capitalize on when they face the base in next year’s primary. And GOP prospects outside of statehouses, from Sens. Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio and Rand Paul to establishment-backed Jeb Bush and Mitt Romney, are poised to pile on.

“The two things that primary voters are just really really upset about are Obamacare and Common Core,” said one adviser to a prospective Republican presidential candidate. “I think that the best that [expansion supporters] can hope for is to change the subject.”

For Bush, opposition to Medicaid expansion could help him mollify a base that views him skeptically for moderate statements on immigration and Common Core education standards. The former governor of Florida met quietly with state lawmakers in early 2013 and lobbied against Medicaid expansion, just days after his successor, Gov. Rick Scott, embraced the policy on moral grounds.

“It’s tougher for people like Pence or Walker or Kasich to portray Bush as some moderate,” said Burnett. Bush, he said, could argue that his primary opponents were “complicit in it.”

The right isn’t relenting on Obamacare heading into 2016. The law is likely to remain at the center of the GOP pitch for a fourth straight election cycle.

“Obamacare, it is a unifier for conservatives,” said Matt Schlapp, president of the American Conservative Union. “I really don’t know anyone who sees much value in the law as passed. There’s no question that it helped Republicans tremendously in the last election.”

Pence has defended his nod toward Obamacare by noting that the version of expansion he’s backing relies on private-sector coverage and doesn’t expand the rolls of the traditional Medicaid program. It’s a message that’s been repeated in other states where GOP governors and lawmakers moved toward expansion, from Arkansas and Iowa to Pennsylvania and Utah. Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder, another potential dark-horse candidate, also embraced a version of Medicaid expansion.

Walker’s plan relied on state funds to expand coverage to tens of thousands of impoverished residents, but it also removed nearly as many from the rolls and directed them to enroll in Obamacare’s federal insurance exchange.

Tim Albrecht, an Iowa-based Republican strategist and former aide to Gov. Terry Branstad, said Republicans who support components of Obamacare can win over primary voters if they explain that it was in the service of seeking a state-based solution to the perennial issue of health care access.

“These candidates will have to package this issue in a way that shows they can offer a conservative alternative to expand access to health care,” Albrecht said. “Obamacare is toxic, but there are still things within Obamacare that prove very popular.”

And it’s worth noting, he added, that GOP governors who implemented Medicaid expansion, including Kasich, Branstad and Snyder, cruised to reelection last year without significant primary opposition.

But presidential primary politics is a different story, added a Republican strategist advising another prospective White House campaign.

”In the reality of modern-day presidential politics, especially primary politics, you don’t have the time or the luxury to be educating the electorate … for why your policy implementing Obamacare was the right one,” the strategist said.

Adding to the intensity is a looming Supreme Court decision that could gut the law. Although the high court protected the law from a challenge in 2012, new questions about Obamacare’s legal construction could reignite the political battle just as the 2016 campaign begins in earnest this summer.

Correction: An earlier version of this story incorrectly described Pence as a second-term governor. He’s in his first term.

CORRECTION: Corrected by: Trevor Eischen @ 01/27/2015 10:15 PM CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story incorrectly described Pence as a second-term governor. He’s in his first term.