It's not every day you see a congresswoman checking in guests at a hotel.

"Welcome to the Sugar Sands Inn and Suites. Thank you for being here. Welcome to North Florida, the most beautiful beaches in the world," said Representative Gwen Graham.

On Friday, Representative Graham spent the afternoon working at the Sugar Sands Inn and Suites in Panama City Beach, and she wore many hats.

"She did hands on pretty much everything. She started with house keeping, worked with maintenance, and then she worked the front desk actually checking in guests," said David Coupe, the front desk manager at Sugar Sands Inn and Suites.

She did such a good job the house keeping staff wants her to come back again.

"She does a good job. She learned fast, she learns quick," said House Keeping Manager Glorida Coyde.

Representative Graham says she hopes with the contacts she made and what's she learned she'll be able to help our tourism industry from Washington.

"The regulations that come down from Washington at times can be over bearing. I want to make sure we're in a position where we can help the businesses grow here in north Florida and see in talking with the owners here about some of the challenges that they face," Representative Graham said, "and now I have direct contacts and friendships that I can turn to and make sure I'm making the right decisions."

Graham says the goal of her work day is to promote north Florida's summer tourist season.

"One of the most critical and important economic areas in north Florida is the tourism industry and the hospitality industry. Me being here today and working in the hospitality industry is just something where I can learn from my experiences here and be an advocate and a voice for north Florida and get more families to come down," said Graham.

Graham said her father, Bob Graham did a work day in the hospitality industry back in 1977, where he also worked in a hotel. He's a former Florida Governor and Senator, but she says during his career he did 409 workdays, so she has some catching up to do.