Becoming a homeowner can be a daunting process for anyone, especially young adults or those without experience making such big purchases.

If you intend to buy a house in the next five years or so, here are four steps to help lead you down the path to homeownership.

Don’t buy a home where you live now, just for the sake of homeownership. For many 20- and 30-somethings still exploring their career paths, buying a home can really limit their freedom.

If you’re serious about becoming a homeowner, make sure the city you decide to buy in is a place you won’t mind sticking around for a while.

Experts often advise would-be buyers to plan on staying in a new home no fewer than five to seven years. “You’re going to spend thousands of dollars to get into the home. To get out of it is going to be equally expensive and may possibly cost more when you do it in less than five years or in a down market,” says Keith Gumbinger, vice president of HSH.com, a publisher of mortgage information and rates.

Once you’ve decided where you want to live, use a home search website, such as Realtor.com or Trulia.com, to get a detailed look at the market, recommends Eric Tyson, co-author of Home Buying for Dummies. It’ll provide perspective on the types of properties for sale and what sellers are asking for.

Seeing exactly how much homes cost will help you determine how much you can actually afford and how much you’ll need to save for a down payment.

Your credit score plays an important role in qualifying for a mortgage. A score of 740 or above will help you secure the best interest rates.

Many young would-be home buyers might find themselves with blemishes on their credit report, thanks to missed student loan or credit card payments. If you check your credit report early, you’ll have ample time to correct any issues. “What you don’t want is to have to address a bunch of mistakes on your credit report while actively looking for a home and trying to get approved for a mortgage loan,” Gumbinger says.

Visit AnnualCreditReport.com to get a free report from each of the three major credit bureaus. Note that your free credit report does not include your actual credit score. You’ll usually have to pay to see your FICO score. At myfico.com, you can get your credit report and FICO score from each of the three credit bureaus for about $20 each.

In addition to building stellar credit, you should also save enough for a down payment of at least 20 percent of the home price to snag the best mortgage terms. That amount saves you from having to pay for private mortgage insurance, which protects the lender if you default on the loan.

That down payment’s not chump change. For many young adults with starting or even midlevel salaries, it can take many years to stash away that much. Start saving now!

You should keep the cash liquid because you’re aiming to use it in the next few years. You might also consider a short-term certificate of deposit. Neither option will earn you much right now, but your money will be safe from market losses and easy to tap as soon as you need it.

Andrea N. Browne,

Kiplinger