Blue Cross’ Medicaid HMO growing, adding quality programs

For many years, the membership of Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan’s Medicaid HMO plan – Blue Cross Complete – totaled less than 20,000 members, a fraction of Blue Cross’ overall 4.3 million members.

But over the past two years, Blue Cross Complete, formerly called BlueCaid, has doubled in size to more than 39,000 members and is one of the nation’s highest-rated plans for quality by the National Committee for Quality Assurance, said Nancy Wanchik, CEO of Blue Cross Complete.

“We are continuing to grow in our service area of Washtenaw, Livingston, and about one and a half years ago we expanded into all of Wayne County,” said Wanchik. “This is where we are seeing that growth.”

Under health care reform, Blue Cross Complete and the other 18 Medicaid HMO plans are expected to continue steady growth. In 2012, Medicaid HMO enrollment in Michigan stood at 1.4 million compared with 300,000 in 1994.

Starting April 1, Michigan plans to expand its Medicaid program by an estimated 475,000 low-income people under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Nearly 20 percent of the state’s population will be covered by Medicaid over the next several years.

The top three Medicaid HMO plans in terms of enrollment are Meridian Health Plan of Michigan with about 295,000 members, United Healthcare Community Plan with about 243,000 members and Molina Healthcare of Michigan with about 214,000 members, according to the 2012 Michigan Health Market Review.

Moreover, six of the nation’s top 20 Medicaid HMO plans for quality are based in Michigan, according to NCQA. Those plans include Priority Health, Blue Cross Complete, HealthPlus of Michigan, Midwest Health Plan, United Healthcare and Upper Peninsula Health Plan.

Wanchik said Blue Cross Complete will most likely apply to expand in other Michigan counties in 2015, when the Michigan Department of Financial and Insurance Services next opens Medicaid applications.

“We have been seeing about a 700-member growth per month this year,” Wanchik said. “With Medicaid expansion in 2014 and over 475,000 people eligible, we will get our fair share in Wayne County.”

Another factor in Blue Cross’ Medicaid expansion efforts has been its investment in AmeriHealth Caritas, a national Medicaid HMO with more than 800,000 members in three states that Blue Cross paid about $215 million for a minority interest in 2011.

“We have been working hard to leverage some of their health management programs,” said Wanchick. “They have some really unique things, not just to help members address medical needs, but helps members communicate with nurses by (phone) call lines.”

Over the past several years, Blue Cross also has improved its quality scores with NCQA, one of the nation’s leading quality accreditation organizations for health plans.

“We are very proud of our NCQA ranking. We strive to be one of the top plans in Michigan,” Wanchik said, nothing the Blue Cross Complete was No. 1 in Michigan in 2012 and is No. 2 this year behind Priority Health. In 2012, Priority Health was No. 2 in Michigan, she said.

Over the past 18 months, Blue Cross Complete has added a number of programs to improve member outcomes and customer service. They include:

A rapid response outreach team that identifies recommended health services for members that include preventive screens (mammograms, cholesterol) or services that a person with a chronic condition has missed (diabetic eye exam, specialist visit for a child with asthma).

An expanded behavioral health care program that allows members to seek mental health benefits without a referral. Each month, staff of Blue Cross Complete and the Detroit Wayne Community Mental Health meets to discuss ways to integrate behavioral and medical care.

meets to discuss ways to integrate behavioral and medical care. A pharmacy management program makes sure members are filling prescribed medications for chronic conditions like diabetes and asthma.

A partnership with Matrix Human Services ensures members receive a complete assessment of economic, educational, social and psychological needs.

Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325, jgreene@crain.com. Twitter: @jaybgreene

Related Links