Less than three hours into the new year, a Birmingham woman was shot and killed, making her the city's first homicide victim of 2016.

Tiffany Nolen, 32, was shot and killed in the 3600 block of Pine Avenue, according to the Birmingham Police Department. Police said her death appears to be a domestic incident. She was a mother of two.

Officers responded to a call around 2:30 a.m. Jan. 1 to find the suspect sitting on the porch of the home. They observed several shell casings around Nolen's body on the scene.

Nolen and the man who police believe shot her were in a relationship, but it's unclear if he was her husband or boyfriend. Neighbors said they had lived together for awhile, but they saw Nolen move out of the house late last year.

Police say that their preliminary investigation reveals that the suspect called a witness and told her that Nolen would not leave the house. He called the witness again saying that he shot Nolen by mistake.

The suspect is currently in custody on a 48-hour hold. His name has not yet been released and he has not yet been charged.

Police have not released any other details about the case.

Annetta Nunn, who is a domestic violence court advocate for the YWCA, says when it comes to domestic violence, it is one of the few crimes that can be prevented, if victims feel empowered to speak up about it.

She said sometimes having a helpful hand from a friend or loved one can give them the strength they need to speak out.

"The campaign that's going on with Homeland Security, ‘See Something-Say Something,’ it's the same with your personal homeland. If you see something, say something. Friends and neighbors, you may not necessarily have to call police. But if you could just say something to the individual about what you're noticing and your concern for them--that if you need help, here's someone who can help you and give them the hotline number--you can't make them call, you can't make them accept help, but at least you can give them the information that will hopefully help them make a better choice,” Nunn said.

Nunn said if anyone would like a presentation on domestic awareness, in which they know the signs to look out for, they can contact her at the YWCA.

Also, if you know someone who is in need of help right now, these are couple of hotline numbers:

Here in Birmingham, the number is: 205-322-4878

The statewide number is: 1-800-650-6522

Police are asking anyone with information about the case to call the BPD Homicide Unit at 205-254-1764.

Copyright 2016 WBRC. All rights reserved.