Topics: Books, Criminal Justice, Editor's Picks, excerpts, Rikers Island, Life News, News

At the end of a long cinder-block corridor, a correction officer in an elevated booth passes the time with a paperback book. Across from the booth, a barred gate cordons off a dim passageway. Along the passageway wall are the words: central punitive segregation unit.

The officer looks up as I approach, and nods. As acting chief of the Mental Health Department, I’m a regular over here at “the Bing”—a curious moniker for this five-story tower of nothing but solitary confinement cells, one hundred per floor. They were designed for Rikers Island’s most recalcitrant inmates, the ones who have been pulled out of the general population for fighting, weapons possession, disobeying orders, assaulting staff. The officers refer to them as “the baddest of the bad,” “the worst of the worst.” I’m not so sure about that.

The officer throws a switch, and the gate shudders open. Around a bend, I step into an elevator car. Since the problem inmate is on the third floor, I hold up three fingers to a corner camera, which connects to a TV monitor. This is no ordinary elevator—no buttons to push here. The sweaty little box starts lifting, and as muffled wails seep through, my stomach tightens, the way it does every time I’m called over here. Which is often.

Solitary confinement is punishment taken to the extreme. Rikers folklore has it that the term “Bing” was coined to describe the human brain under the strain of solitary—it goes . . . bing! Whether or not this story is true is unclear, but it makes sense. Solitary confinement induces the bleakest depression, plunging despair, and terrifying hallucinations. The Mental Health Department looms large in these units, doling out antidepressants, antipsychotics, and mountains of sleeping pills. If these inmates didn’t have mental health issues before they entered solitary, they do now. But even the most potent medications can only do so much, and when they give out—when human behavior deteriorates into frantic scenes of self-mutilation and makeshift nooses—we’re called to a cell door.

The elevator rattles open on the third floor. Ahead, a long tinted window separates two plain doors, each one leading onto a fifty-cell wing. Behind the window, correctional staff hover over paperwork. A logbook is thrust out; I sign it and point to the door on the left, “3 South.” When the knob buzzes, I pull the door open and step into what feels like a furnace. A long cement floor is lined with gray steel doors that face each other—twenty-five on one side, twenty-five on the other. Each door has a small window at the top and a flap for food trays on the bottom.

At the far end, Dr. David Diaz and Pete Majors are waiting for me. I hesitate for a moment, dreading the walk through the gauntlet of misery. The smell of vomit and feces hangs in the hot, thick air. Bracing myself, I start past the doors, trying to stay focused on my colleagues. Still, I can see their faces—dark-skinned, young—pressed up against the windows, eyes wild with panic. “Miss! Help! Please, miss!” They bang and slap the doors, sweaty palms sliding down the windows. “We’re dying in here, miss, we’re dying!” Resisting my natural instinct to rush to their aid, I keep going, reminding myself that there’s a reason they’re in here—that they’ve done something to warrant this punishment. The officers, themselves sweat-soaked and agitated, amble from cell to cell, pounding the doors with their fists, spinning around and kicking them with boot heels, “shut the fuck up!”

Diaz, a silver-haired psychiatrist, greets me with a weak smile. Pointing to a door that’s slightly ajar, he says, “We got a head basher.” He hands me the inmate’s chart. The label on the manila folder reads “Troy Jackson.” “He’s been going downhill for a while now,” Diaz explains. “I’ve upped his meds, changed them. We’ve talked to him, but at this point, we’re out of options.”

“He’s been in for two months now,” says Pete, the lanky therapist who works with Diaz. “With three more to go.”

I wince at the length of punishment. Two entire months spent inside an eight-by-nine-foot cell—just enough room to pace back and forth, about the only activity the cramped quarters allow. No phone, no TV, with one hour of “rec,” which amounts to a shackled walk to an outdoor cage to stand alone and glimpse the sky. Although the maximum punishment for any single infraction is ninety days, there’s nothing to keep infraction tickets from piling up, which is apparently what’s happened in this case.

“All right, let me talk to him,” I say, with some vague hope of dispensing calming words that might enable Troy Jackson to hang on a little while longer.

The officer pulls open the creaking door and steps back. Inside, a Black youth stands trembling, beads of sweat dripping from his chin. He’s barely out of his teens. Behind him, a little mesh-covered window transforms the day’s brilliance into grayness. A dingy sheet is strewn across a cot; across from it is a tiny metal sink and toilet. “Please, miss, please,” he whispers. “Help me . . . ”

For a moment, Troy Jackson and I stare at one another. In his jeans and T-shirt, he looks no different from every other kid on the street. I can easily picture him shooting basketballs on a city playground, or bounding up subway steps headed for school. Instead, he’s trapped inside a cement box on Rikers Island. As his eyes plead with mine, blood seeps through his scalp, running down behind his ears. How could his young life have derailed this badly? I feel a clutch in my throat and my mind starts swirling back to my earlier days on Rikers, when I would have worked with him, listened to his story, helped him to find a better path for himself. But my days as an upbeat therapist are starting to feel like the distant past. As a newly appointed administrator, I remind myself that I’m not here to get to know Troy Jackson, or even to find out why he’s in solitary. I’m here to make sure of exactly one thing: that he remains alive. “Mr. Jackson, I’d like—”