Not many new books use critical blurbs from 1950 to promote their contents, but “Nijinsky: God of Dance” isn’t a typical book.

It’s more like a gallery of great photographs and it’s only available as an app for $7.99. The release is built around a collection of photos of Vaslav Nijinsky, who lived from 1889 to 1950 and left a legacy as perhaps the greatest dancer of all time.

Nijinsky teamed with ballet impresario Sergei Diaghilev around the turn of the (last) century, and stunned the world working in the famed Ballets Russes, based in Paris. He danced for less than a decade, the story goes, before a crippling schizophrenia ended his career. There is no known video footage of him at work.

The photos were collected by Roger Pryor Dodge (1898-1974) a dancer himself who was taken by Nijinsky and the originals currently reside in the New York Public Library. The 242 photos are a combination of costume stills, formal portraits and publicity shots. As a set they easily earn the praise “One of the most remarkable collections in the world,” as Dance magazine labeled them back in 1950.

The app certainly has use for dancers who can gaze at it to study Nijinsky’s peculiar body positioning but I found it appealing, on a wider level, as time capsule of a certain period in dance history and as a rounded portrait of an artist at his creative height. Like the silent film stars of his day, the dancer said a lot in his facial expressions, so the sealed images are captivating. So are images of the dancer’s famous, and unusually large, thighs, thought to be the secret to his famous sky-high leaps.

Picture book apps are still a new form, so pegging an audience for “Nijinsky: God of Dance” is not easy. There are a few collected articles written about the photo collection over time included, but this is not a high-tech app by any stretch; the work is basically self-published by the collector’s son Pryor Dodge. Its kicks rely on visuals, but what high kicks there are to see.

Available as a phone app at the Apple store, but it looks just fine on the iPad, too. You can also find an Android-friendly app at Google Play.