At the City Club last September, Lee Fisher introduced Bruce Katz of the Brookings Institution by laying out two alternative futures from Dicken's Tale of Two Cities: hope and despair. In his book, "The Metropolitan Revolution," Katz calls for constructive optimism and for pragmatic approaches to social problems. As the holiday season approached, I watched the film, "It's a Wonderful Life." I asked myself: Do we live in idyllic Bedford Falls or in the nightmare of Pottersville? Is our society headed towards hope or despair?

To restore hope, we need to agree across the political spectrum on this principle of political pragmatism: minimum necessary social intervention by government into our mixed economy and civil society. Next, we should look at the pros and cons of current social policies and compare them to the pros and cons of a range of policy alternatives. Such a common-sense, bipartisan form of policy analysis, informed by social science research, can enable our democratic institutions to determine the best mix of the public, nonprofit and market sectors to fund and to deliver services and benefits addressing human needs in education, health, housing, employment, human services, etc. and to do so in a way which advances economic development.

However, instead of addressing social problems with needed reforms or major policy change, facile solutions to social problems are often proposed. For instance, two easy fixes to public school finance have been adopted elsewhere, with little demonstrated success: substituting statewide sales taxes for local property taxes and asking tax-exempt hospitals to pay PILOTs (payments in lieu of taxation).

The Plain Dealer has reported on local advocacy for PILOTs. According to the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, PILOTs have numerous pros and cons. Among the cons are that they are haphazard, inequitable, limited in scope and hard to track. Although the payments are voluntary, they are often made under political and legal pressure, and in my view could lead to new forms of public and nonprofit sector corruption. There are many pros as well, but only if PILOTs are seen as a temporary solution. Our public schools should not be dependent upon charity from charitable institutions.

In Boston, the mayor convened a PILOT task force of public officials and leaders from hospitals, business, labor, higher education, philanthropy and community organizations. Before PILOTs are adopted in Cleveland, a broad and diverse School Funding Task Force should be convened to consider whether PILOTs should be adopted and also to make solid proposals for how to achieve equity and adequacy in Ohio school finance.

Two policy alternatives illustrate how minimum necessary social intervention can involve both incremental and fundamental changes for the better. Incrementally, PILOTs could be made unnecessary by GILOTs (grants in lieu of taxation). In Connecticut, GILOTs reimburse most school revenue lost to property tax exemptions. Ohio could amend its existing GILOT formula – which primarily benefits schools in towns with state universities – to include tax-exempt charitable, educational and cultural institutions. In turn, tax-exempt hospitals would commit to expanded charity care for immigrants without papers and others not eligible for care under the Affordable Care Act.

More fundamentally, in order to devise our Ohio constitutionally-required "thorough and efficient system of common schools throughout the state," we should remember three Ohio examples of one lesson of "It's a Wonderful Life:" Do the right thing. In 1935, Ohio did the right thing for children by implementing the Ohio School Foundation Program Law. In the 1940s, Ohio did the right thing for veterans by establishing a Compensation Fund, financed by a dedicated statewide property tax levy. Recently, Ohio did the right thing for the near-poor by adopting Medicaid expansion. Rather than using a recession-prone sales tax or relying on the annual state budget, Ohio should seriously consider a dedicated statewide property tax levy for school funding and equalization purposes.

Greater Cleveland can lead the way towards Ohio adopting solutions to the school funding crisis. Ohioans will do the right thing once more if asked to do the right thing for our public schools.

Michael A. Dover, Ph.D., L.I.S.W., teaches social policy at the Cleveland State University School of Social Work. His dissertation was an historical sociological study of property-tax exemptions and abatements in Ohio's urban areas.