Student Health Insurance Representative on Campus Dec. 9

Ivan Kopecky

(Dec. 6, 2013) -- A representative from Academic HealthPlans will be visiting from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Monday, Dec. 9, in the University Center Window Lounge across from the bookstore at UTSA Main Campus. Ivan Kopecky will assist you with questions regarding the University of Texas Systems school-sponsored student health insurance and the Affordable Care Act.

On March 23, 2010, President Barak Obama signed the Affordable Care Act that allows Americans to choose health care plans in a competitive insurance market. This reduces premium costs, reduces extra costs by capping out-of-pocket expenses, and requiring preventative care to be fully covered without any out-of-pocket expenses. The Affordable Care Act requires, other than for a few rare exceptions, that everyone be covered under a Health Insurance Policy that meets the coverage requirements outlined under the law.

"Having the Academic HealthPlan's representative on campus provides the convenience of directly addressing specific questions regarding coverage and cost with the school insurance representative. Students and their parents may then compare the Academic HealthPlan coverage with those plans offered in the MarketPlace," says Beth Wichman, M.D., Director of Student Health Services.

Health Plan coverage made available to eligible students of UTSA provides coverage that meets all the requirements of the Affordable Care Act. It is designed to coordinate with Student Health Services, can be financed as an eligible expense in student loan packages and provides access to one of the largest Provider networks in the state and in the country from Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas, a name recognized throughout the State for health care coverage. The program is managed by Academic Health Plans a company with long experience and dedicated solely to developing and managing University health insurance programs for students.

"All of us, regardless of age, can experience debilitating illness and while younger and more active we are exposed to more serious risk of injury associated with active lifestyles and activity," says Kopecky, representative of Academic HealthPlans. "The ability to access and afford treatment when those unexpected illness or injuries occur provides the ability to get the right care at the right time and quickly resume activities related to your education." Health Plans provide not only treatment for illness or injury but they also provide coverage for preventive services that help evaluate current health and develop and manage programs designed to improve health or maintain good health.

You can review and enroll in the student health insurance online. Go to UTSA's HealthPlan. For questions regarding the plan, please call the toll-free number at (855) 247-2273.

For more information, contact Barbara Reyes at (210) 458-6419 or email at Barbara.Reyes@utsa.edu.

UTSA Student Health Services has provided medical care for students since the 1970's. They offer general medical care, well-women's care, immunizations, laboratory, health education and preventative services. Clinic services are limited to currently registered students, and they provide seasonal influenza vaccinations to faculty and staff. Call for an appointment or to speak to a nurse.

Main campus clinic: Recreation Wellness Center 1.500. (210) 458-4142

Downtown campus clinic: Buena Vista Street Building 1.308. (210) 458-2930

Health Education Office/Women’s Resource Center: Recreation Wellness Center 1.812. (210) 458-6428