BIRMINGHAM, Alabama -- Citing "profound shifts in healthcare," the University of Alabama at Birmingham has informed UAB Medicine employees there will be no annual merit raises coming in January.

"We wanted to notify you as early as possible so that you can take this information into account in your own financial planning," according to an emailed letter dated June 23.

UAB Health System chief operating officer Reid Jones said today by email that layoffs were not off the table -- but there are no plans for them.

"The decision to not implement raises is one of many initiatives to reduce costs," Jones said. "There are no plans for layoffs.

About cutting out the raises: "Unfortunately it would not be prudent to implement increases this year in the current climate."

On the positive side of the balance sheet for employees at UAB Medicine are two new holidays added to their days off schedules: Friday, Dec. 26, 2014 and Friday, Jan. 2, 2015.

The holiday additions, according to the letter, are "to allow our faculty and staff more time to spend with family and friends."

There are 13,000 full time and 3,300 part time employees at UAB Medicine, which includes the state's largest hospital, UAB Hospital.

Currently, before the additions, regular full-time employees received eight designated holidays and three personal holidays. Hospital employees receive 11 personal holidays.

The letter, signed by Dr. Selwyn Vickers, dean of the medical school, Dr. Will Ferniany, CEO of UAB Health System, and Dr. James Bonner, president of the health system, cites "significant external economic pressure" in deciding to forgo raises this year.

This pressure affects all three of the system's missions: education research and clinical care, the letter stated.

Here's how, according to the letter:

There is less funding for education from the state;

The National Institutes for Health (NIH) funding for grants is flat.

Regulatory burdens continue to grow in an effort to increase transparency and reduce waste in the industry.

On top of these three things, the letter cites, is a change in the way hospitals are paid by the federal government is changing under the Affordable Care Act.

"Soon, we will be paid not on the volume of patients we treat but on the quality of their care and their level of satisfaction with their experience," the letter states.

For months UAB has been conducting a sweeping review of operations to find ways to cut expenses, the hospital confirmed in May.

The financial pressures hitting UAB are being felt at virtually all of the nearly 100 hospitals across the state.

Baptist Health System in early May confirmed it had laid off 23 people in a reorganization across four hospitals and its headquarters.

Rural hospitals are especially vulnerable, officials say.

Previously on AL.com, Glenn Sisk, CEO of Coosa Valley Medical Center, said the three biggest factors stressing hospital budgets in Alabama are no Medicaid expansion, $220 billion in Medicare cuts to hospital services and Alabama's low wage index which helps determine Medicare reimbursement rates.

The Medicare cuts came from the ACA as a way to pay for expansion of health care coverage in the country. Part of that plan was to expand Medicaid to lower and middle income citizens who are uninsured. But at least 21 states, including Alabama, have declined the government's offer to fund that expansion.

Said Jones: "Alabama Medicaid has been historically underfunded to meet the needs of the state, and those challenges continue."

Read more health coverage from Mike Oliver.