LMC Medical Supplies, Inc. and LMC Pharmacy, a fully licensed pharmacy and Medical Equipment Supplier, has been authorized by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to be a Certified Application Counselor Designated Organization (CDO).

LMC’s staff are trained and certified under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) as Certified Application Counselors (CAC) to help consumers understand, apply and enroll for health coverage in the state of Florida..

Under the CAC program, consumers will be able to get live in-person help as they go through the process of applying for and choosing new coverage options in the Marketplace. Consumers will be able to compare insurance options based on price, benefits, quality and other factors. They will receive fair and impartial information, and be able to obtain a clear picture of premiums and costs to assist in deciding the best-fit insurance.

LMC is committed to helping the uninsured receive quality and affordable health care by providing fair, impartial information and facilitating the selection of a Qualified Health Plan. For assistance, information, enrollment, etc. please call toll free 1-877-855-6655 to schedule an appointment, Monday through Friday from 9:00 AM to 5:00 PM EST.

LMC’s staff is trained and fully compliant with HIPAA laws privacy and confidentiality of personal information. Consumer personal private information will be kept safe and strictly confidential.

For more information about LMC Medical Supplies, Inc and LMC Pharmacy contact the National Health Insurance Marketplace Call Center or on HealthCare.gov under “Find Someone Local.”

About LMC Medical Supplies, Inc. and LMC Pharmacy:

LMC Medical Supplies, Inc. and LMC Pharmacy, a wholly owned subsidiary of MED-CARE Diabetic & Medical Supplies, Inc., is a fully licensed pharmacy and Medical Equipment Supplier located in Boca Raton, Florida. LMC provides an extensive menu of products and services that assist patients, care givers and their employers manage their health. LMC works together with Nurses and Doctors to facilitate the continuum of patient care from hospital to home by ensuring necessary medications are ordered and delivered prior to a health care professional visit. For more information, visit http://www.lmcmedical.com/.