There isn't a serious candidate running for office on the notion President Barack Obama should be impeached. Lynching, thankfully, is a disgraceful piece of history, not a current event.

But you wouldn't know that if you listened to some of the Democrats seeking re-election in a midterm environment tilting against them. The race card has begun to rear its head in state elections. Even in places where Democrats are almost a lock to win, campaign literature with distasteful and dishonest claims is popping up.

In Maryland, where a black candidate was expected to cruise to the governor's mansion and still enjoys a lead, the Democratic Party chooses to remind voters of what once was. A campaign mailer there features black-and-white photographs from the Civil Rights era, and one of goofball Donald Trump with some conspiracy themed anti-Obama billboard.

None of this touches directly on Anthony Brown, the state's Democrat lieutenant governor seeking a promotion. In many ways, however, his campaign is struggling. He hasn't performed particularly well in debates and Brown had a prominent role - he and his staff artfully dodge questions about just how prominent - in Maryland's Obamacare exchange. The exchange has been a disaster that has cost taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars.

That's not a winning line for Brown or other Democrats. Democratic candidates can't say, "Look, we know most of you don't like Obamacare and never wanted it done. And, sure, we've spent billions of your dollars and years advertising the thing and trying to get a decent website and all regardless of whether the product is anything you want or like. But it's getting better! One of these days! Just you wait!"

Much better to take Brown's stance and simply pretend you had nothing to do with it. That's smart politics, I suppose.

Furthermore, it is absolutely reasonable for his team to pitch him as Maryland's first black governor. That would be an historic development, and if the voters there want Brown for that reason who is to say they shouldn't?

But Brown doesn't confine his case to making history. His campaign is dredging it up. Brown's opponent isn't suggesting a return to the days when "Colored" signs pointed to separate entrances or water fountains and the like. No one is. But black-and-white photos of those disgraceful days a half-century ago are on the Maryland Democratic Party's mailer.

Over in North Carolina, an equally scurrilous campaign flyer has appeared backing incumbent Democrat Sen. Kay Hagan. This one features grainy black-and-white images of a lynching. Does the Klan ride again across the Tar Heel state? Arecrosses burning in the research triangle? Anyone praising Bull Connor on the campuses of Duke, UNC, NC State?

Of course not.

The flyer declared that, should Hagan lose, Obama would be impeached. That's another theme that enjoys traction only in liberal circles. It's never heard from serious Republicans. No one in Louisiana, for example, will open their mailbox or turn on their television and see U.S. Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-La., and retired Air Force Col. Rob Maness shaking a fist and declaring that as soon as they get elected the first thing they are going to do is vote to impeach President Obama.

It's complete garbage; the shot isn't on the board.

Hagan herself didn't put the flyers on the windshields of North Carolina churchgoers. Such grubby work was left to members of a group called Concerned Citizens of Cumberland County. Thus far, however, no Democrats have condemned the underhanded tactics.

Not to be undone, in Georgia, where a former senator's daughter (Democratic political dynasties aren't confined to Massachusetts and New Orleans) is in a tight campaign, the race card is playing an unusually ugly role.

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution this week revealed peachy Democrats there have tried to get out the vote by warning of "another Ferguson." That's correct: Democrats in Georgia want people, particularly black people, to think that if they don't vote for a particular party then more black men will be gunned down in the street, businesses will burn and Georgia communities will be ravaged with unrest.

All is fair in politics. That is to say, it may not seem polite in some circumstances to mention a woman missed a tax payment a decade ago, or that once upon a time as an undergraduate some guy got a DUI ticket. In a campaign, though, such ancient history is germane.

But there isn't a Republican seeking office in Maryland, North Carolina, Georgia or any other state who wants black people sent to the back of the bus. It's a desperate lie to say they do.



James Varney can be reached at jvarney@nola.com