One can’t operate a successful restaurant without offering beverages, be it sodas, coffee, teas, juices, shakes, smoothies or alcohol-based drinks. The drink menu these days is as critical as the food menu as it influences a customer’s restaurant experience, as well as a restaurant’s branding strategy and growth.

"Being a fast casual restaurant is all about being on trend," Elizabeth Friend, senior analyst at Euromonitor International, said during Monday at the Fast Casual Executive Summit in Miami. "The most interesting growth we’re seeing in beverages is in lighter flavorings."

The three major beverage trends for 2016 will be "adult" sodas involving mixology, more innovation in coffees and teas, and sophisticated juices. Those "adult" sodas and mixology (with or without alcohol) reflects a new world in the beverage experience, said Friend.

This also includes "sparkling" beverages, which are often being handcrafted as customers are seeking sophisticated flavors, especially bitter and sour.

"Mixology equals experience," Friend said. "A lot of this trend is being driven because sugar and sweet are not the main drivers anymore."

More coffee and tea innovation is also trending. There are many ways coffee and tea can be served such as cold-brewed tea and new espresso drinks.

"Coffee is not just for coffee shops anymore," Friend explained, as quality coffee drinks can be made and served at all kinds of restaurants.

Sophisticated juices are gaining in popularity. Green, herbal, functional, refreshing, and juices that are not too sweet lead the pack.

"Sophisticated juices is all about packaging and presentation," Friend said. "People want a sense of discovery, something they can talk about."

Ensuring a fast casual’s beverage program is the right one is vital as consumers have endless choices in beverages.

To determine what to put on the drink menu and what to leave off requires restaurants to identify some important factors.

"You have to ask, ‘Is it a right fit?" said Scott Davis, creative director and managing partner of Culinary Concepts Group. "What capabilities do you have in your restaurant concept?"

That's why having a beverage program plan is essential. Do you want your beverages to drive restaurant traffic or the check average, are questions that require answers.

"You don’t want beverages to be a meal replacement," Davis warned.

Having beverages integrate with the brand is an important consideration and how to make that integration happen requires a strategy. Does your staff have the capability to make quality, handcrafted beverages and do so consistently, for example. Does your restaurant have the proper equipment to make a major beverage program change?

Mike Remes, corporate chef for Burger 21, said fast casual operators can win with their customers by making beverages as important as the food offerings and making sure there is a clear brand connection that provides a strong customer experience.

"Go beyond the ‘better burger experience,'" Remes said. "Be fun. Be playful. Be nostalgic with something that reminds you of your childhood."