If the Guinness Book of World Records has a category for it, this will be the year the Affordable Care Act breaks the world record for unintended consequences.

It’s the first year the IRS has tried to enforce the penalty provisions and the rest of the tax consequences of the law known as Obamacare.

Even before health care subsidies were added to the IRS workload, National Taxpayer Advocate Nina Olson, warned Congress that the agency could “fail at its mission,” which she said now goes beyond “merely collecting tax revenue” to being “a significant disburser of government payments.”

Congress turned the IRS into a huge social welfare agency by creating special tax credits intended to help low- and middle-income families pay their bills and take care of their kids. The credits are paid out as tax refunds to people who qualify, even if they didn’t pay any taxes during the year.

This week the Government Accounting Office admitted that the IRS sent out $17.7 billion in “improper payments” to tax filers who claimed one of those credits, the Earned Income Tax Credit, last year. The rate of impropriety — or fraud — was 27 percent.

And it’s nothing new. For the 10-year period ending in 2013, the agency paid out over $124 billion in “improper payments” for the Earned Income Tax Credit, and it just admitted that last year it paid $5.8 billion to identity thieves.

The IRS isn’t just failing in its mission, it’s in Bernie Madoff territory.

Now the overwhelmed tax agency will try to enforce health insurance penalties by withholding money from tax refunds. This includes, as an unintended consequence, the refunds Congress invented to help low- and middle-income families.

This year the IRS will search through the tax returns of the millions of people who bought health insurance through the exchanges and match up the month-by-month income of the 85 percent who received a subsidy. Meanwhile, 2 percent to 4 percent of tax filers owe a penalty, 30 million people could be exempt from the penalty if they file the right form, the federal government sent out 800,000 incorrect forms, California sent out 100,000 incorrect forms, and the IRS is trying to sort this all out on computers that are running COBOL.

Advertisement

Yes, COBOL. The IRS has computers that use a programming language from the days when televisions had three networks and they were all in black-and-white.

If you have a morbid sense of humor, and who doesn’t by now, consider this: When the Affordable Care Act passed, some people believed it was secretly intended to force the collapse of private medicine in America and prepare the ground for single-payer healthcare. But instead, it may turn out to be the straw that broke the camel’s back at the IRS, overloading the agency to the point of collapse and preparing the ground for a flat tax.

Why a flat tax? Because it’s probably the only system of taxation that could be up and running quickly in the event of an IRS meltdown. It might be temporary at first, just long enough to allow the IRS to spend our money on new computer systems, and maybe another year or two while the bugs are worked out.

Perhaps by then, a free and roaring economy would drown out calls to return to provisions and penalties, exemptions and exceptions, incentives, deductions, credits and subsidies. A flat tax could unleash authentic growth and job creation, a bidding war for workers, and raises and benefits that America hasn’t seen since COBOL was an upgrade.

The Guinness Book of World Records may even send a photographer.

Susan Shelley is a San Fernando Valley author, a former television associate producer and twice a Republican candidate for the California Assembly.