Dear Action Line: Is the Edmunds.com car shopping service guaranteeing that buyers will get the prices promised them while car shopping at dealerships? — M.G., Tulsa.

According to Edmunds.com, its staff is "driven to the point of distraction by two facts: 1. Car shopping is still very painful (further evidenced by surveys continuously showing low trust levels for dealers); and 2. While our own customers trust us a lot, they have told us repeatedly that our service isn't unique. Plenty of sites provide fairly comprehensive information these days; the alternatives to Edmunds.com are good enough." See Edmunds Price Promise at technology.edmunds.com

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

On Oct. 10, Edmunds.com president and COO Seth Berkowitz issued a release pondering the question, "Can you envision a world in which you trust your car dealer? Edmunds.com, the premier resource for car shopping and automotive information, says that if you don't already, you will be able to soon."

By "belonging to Edmunds.com — much like being an Amazon Prime customer — (consumers) will have a substantially easier time" at dealerships; they "will get what they want, from sales personnel they want, in a manner (they) can trust," Berkowitz wrote in a blog on the site.

Berkowitz led Edmunds.com through a strategic shift that made car buying easier. The company, already established and valued as a free car research stop on the road to buying a car, is transforming itself — strategically and through a site redesign launched Oct. 15 — into a unique car shopping destination: a place where car shoppers can trust dealers.

"In conjunction with our dealer partners, we offer actual prices on hundreds of thousands of cars -— in industry parlance, on specific pieces of inventory. Our dealer partners —- in making the Edmunds Price Promise (at edmunds.com/price-promise.html) — are promising our customers they will honor that price when presented with a physical or digital certificate for that car, and that promise is also backed by Edmunds.com. We track each and every case to ensure those promises are being upheld," wrote Berkowitz.

Since the Price Promise pilot launched in February, rolling out to the whole country in June, Edmunds.com found enrolled dealers ratings and review scores have risen 10 percent. (See bit.ly/edmundsdearratings.)

Other impressive Price Promise program results:

60 percent more car shoppers are submitting their personal information on Edmunds.com in exchange for Price Promise certificates. These shoppers look at 150 percent more inventory pages. One-third of all Price Promise deals close within two days of the certificate download. Price Promise leads close 15 percent faster than any other type.

"Trust levels and satisfaction levels inspired by the partnership with Edmunds.com are tangible and measurable," wrote Berkowitz.

Edmunds.com was named — along with TripAdvisor, Zagat and OpenTable — one of the four most trusted prominent online review sites, according to Maritz Research's 2013 Online Customer Review Study.