Ms. Baldwin was more discreet. “We have a perfectly cordial relationship,” she said in her soft-spoken murmur, which can be hard to hear.

The divides in Congress that have grown deeper in an era of increasing political polarization are on evident display in the words and actions of Wisconsin’s two senators. Mr. Johnson and Ms. Baldwin represent the kind of political diversity that has been relatively uncommon in Congress, a legacy of 19th-century politics when geography largely determined how people cast their votes for statewide office. Today, just 16 states have one Democratic senator and one Republican senator. Vermont has a Democratic senator and an independent, Bernard Sanders, who caucuses with the Democrats.

In several of those states, the senators often find areas of political agreement, or camaraderie at the very least.

Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, and her colleague Angus King, an independent who caucuses with the Democrats, have drawn up official letterhead with both of their names stripped across the top. A prolific texter, he sends her so many messages that her once-minimal texting skills now rival a teenager’s.

Mark Begich, a Democrat, and Lisa Murkowski, a Republican, regularly share long flights home to Alaska and live a block and a half from each other in Washington. They often chat when Ms. Murkowski is out walking her dog in the neighborhood.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Johnson and Ms. Baldwin have very little relationship inside or outside of the Senate. Neither could recall the last time they spoke at length.

Photo

Dinner together, perhaps? “Haven’t done that, no,” Mr. Johnson said. “First of all, we don’t have time.”

There was lunch once in the Senate dining room, which Ms. Baldwin said she brokered with the help of Representative Jim Sensenbrenner, the senior Republican from Wisconsin. They had a businesslike time talking mostly about federal judges, but no one offered to make it a standing appointment.

Mr. Johnson won in 2010, a year with no presidential contest when energized conservatives were toppling Democratic candidates all over the country. It was a low-turnout election, with only 2.2 million Wisconsin voters showing up at the polls.

When Ms. Baldwin was elected in 2012, President Obama was on the ballot, and three million people cast ballots for senator. The president carried the state, and she easily beat Tommy Thompson, a Republican former governor.

“This state has always vacillated from one extreme to another,” said Representative Ron Kind, a centrist Democrat from the western part of the state. “You go back to Bob LaFollette, the father of the modern-day Progressive Era, and then there was Joe McCarthy,” he added, referring to two of the state’s most famous senators.

Mr. Kind said he was encouraged that Ms. Baldwin and Mr. Johnson have worked together when Wisconsin is concerned, citing their effort to fill empty seats on the federal bench. “That seemed to work well,” he said. Besides, rivalries between members of the same party can often be far worse, others pointed out.

Those who have worked with both of them said their differences even extend to their delivery style and demeanor.

Photo

Mr. Johnson travels the state showing a PowerPoint presentation on the country’s financial woes — not exactly inspirational stuff, he is the first to acknowledge. But it animates him to the point that he can talk himself hoarse and now carries throat lozenges.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“He’s not trying to appeal to your heartstrings,” said Robin Vos, the Republican speaker of the State Assembly. “He’s trying to appeal to your head. And I have to say, sometimes it’s a little depressing.”

Ms. Baldwin’s low-key approach is what endears her to supporters. “She seemed to have an equanimity about her, almost a serenity,” said Senator Al Franken, Democrat of Minnesota, one of her closest friends in the Senate, who started campaigning for her in the 1990s when she was running for the House.

Last month they had one rare area of agreement on a major piece of legislation that Republicans largely opposed: they both voted yes for the budget bill that will keep the government funded. And in a move that surprised many in his party, Mr. Johnson was highly critical of his Republican colleagues for forcing a government shutdown in October.

If Ms. Baldwin was at all heartened to hear him speak out against the shutdown, she wasn’t showing it. “I hope it would be an obvious fact that this was not something that was constructive,” she said.

And Mr. Johnson emphasized that his budget vote and shutdown critique were not signs that he is going soft.

He likened his approach to government to taking candy away from someone with a sweet tooth — if candy were government-subsidized assistance, and the sweet tooths were the American people. “We are in the unenviable position of saying, ‘We know you like that candy. And we like it too,’” he said. “But if you notice, that candy caused you a cavity. It’s an abscess. It’s infecting the body. In the end it could kill you.”