Now that the Obama administration assures us HealthCare.gov is working smoothly, Democrats have no reason to run away from Obamacare, right? After all, House minority leader Nancy Pelosi and DNC chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz both assured us Democrats will be “standing tall” and will be running on the successful, popular issue of Obamacare in 2014.

Strangely, it appears the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee didn’t get the memo. There’s no mention of Obamacare on their homepage this morning.

The Democratic National Committee did put up a “how to talk to your Republican uncle who doesn’t like Obamacare” post on Wednesday. But immigration is the top issue on the DNC web site now.

Surely the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee isn’t afraid to discuss Obamacare, right? All of those endangered red-state Democratic senators aren’t afraid to tout their votes, and to tell people why it’s such a good idea, right?

Hmm. While there are generic “stand with Obama” messages, the top two issues featured are “voting rights” and employment non-discrimination.

Why, it’s almost as if all the Democratic campaign committees are still convinced Obamacare is a deeply unpopular, toxic issue, and they don’t think their candidates should run on it. But that would mean Pelosi and Wasserman Schultz are lying, and we know that can’t be the case!

UPDATE: The new spin from the DCCC is that when they write “GOP Hypocrisy,” they really mean Obamacare. Of course, at the link, neither “Obamacare” nor “the Affordable Care Act” is mentioned. They merely assert Republicans are “so intent upon taking away your health care they shut down the government over it.”

Of course, conflating “your health care” and Obamacare/ACA is precisely the point. One is something you’ve always had; the other is a tangled monstrosity of requirements, fees, taxes, regulations, rules, higher premiums, higher deductibles, and a dysfunctional website recently imposed upon the nation by a party-line vote.

If the DCCC wanted to write something like “We proudly stand by the Affordable Care Act,” you figure they would and could do that.