Back to regular health system

Regarding the comment about Bernie Sanders being too radical. He wants free Medicaid or healthcare for all but nothing comes for free. This system means that everybody will be taxed to death. It is rehashing a system that currently is barely working. I say get rid of Obamacare and let's get back to a regular system. I paid into Medicare for 40 years and I still have to pay $500 a month. Now they want to cut my healthcare to help pay for somebody else's healthcare. No thank you. At least I'm paying for my healthcare.

Thank you

I want to express my sincere gratitude to the young lady named Tracy who found my phone outside of a pet store in Gurnee and turned it in to the management. Thank you very much. People like you are few and far in between.

Read about Bernie

For anyone who believes that Bernie Sanders is too radical and fears him and wishes him bad luck has obviously not been to his website. They haven't taken the time to read his explanations for how he intends to put in place the policies that he's running on. Please take the time to invest in our country by reading about Bernie Sanders on his website.

Rauner's words

I've noticed something about the way Gov. Bruce Rauner talks during speeches. He leaves the "g" off the end of words ending in "ing." So we have hard workin people payin too much for taxes and so on. Tryin to sound like Sarah Palin isn't folksy, it's just bad diction and unbecoming of a governor, 'don't ya know.'

Obstructionists

The obstructionist Republicans are at it again. They are trying to block President Obama's proposed 2016 budget that would cut Great Lakes Restoration Initiative funding by $50 million. Last year the obstructionists successfully blocked Obama's attempt to cut $25 million from it.

Pension politics

What entitles politicians to only work for four years and they get a pension when they're trying to pillage and cancel everybody else's pension.

Surprise!

Surprise, Gov. Rauner said he may have to raise Illinois state taxes. He wouldn't have won the election if he said he was going to raise taxes. That's no surprise.

Twitter @newssun

Editor's note

Talk of the County is a reader-generated column of opinions. If you see something you disagree with or think is incorrect, please tell us. Call us at 312-222-4554 or email talkofthecounty@tribpub.com. For a continuously updating blog of Talk of the County comments, visit newssunonline.com/talk.