ENLARGE Bassist Christian McBride will host ‘Jazz Night in America,’a new multiplatform show. ‘He crosses generations in the best way.’ Anna Webber

Collaboration is a hallmark of jazz musicians, but now a trio of institutions is working together on a groundbreaking gig.

Jazz at Lincoln Center, National Public Radio and Newark-based jazz radio station WBGO 88.3 FM are expected to announce Thursday a new multiplatform show, “Jazz Night in America,” in an effort to reach broader audiences. A rare example of a coordinated digital effort within this genre, the weekly one-hour program is in direct response to the rise of music consumption via online services and mobile devices.

The partnership is meant to meet listeners where they are.

“You can put a progressive show on the radio, but are you reaching the audience if radio is not the medium they’re looking to receive it in?” said Amy Niles, president and chief executive of WBGO.

WBGO will be the show’s primary audio producer, and performances will come mainly from Jazz at Lincoln Center, though some of the shows will come from other venues around the country.

NPR will distribute the program to its member stations, more than 100 so far, and will consolidate its jazz coverage onto an online platform featuring a chat room and videos.

“We want to make sure it connects to people in the way they listen to music now,” said Anya Grundmann, director and executive producer at NPR Music.

The three organizations raised about $1 million to support the project.

“When you work together with strong strategic partners, everybody wins. You have a better shot of keeping things going longer,” said Gabrielle Armand, a vice president at Jazz at Lincoln Center.

Jazz bassist Christian McBride will host the program, solidifying his emerging role as a leader in the field. He is jazz adviser at New Jersey Performing Arts Center, where he performs regularly and has input in programming.

“He’s becoming an important spokesperson, curator and advocate,” said the center’s president and chief executive John Schreiber, who isn’t involved with the radio program but created the advisory role for Mr. McBride. “He crosses generations in the best way and encourages a respect for the history of the music.”

“Jazz Night in America,” which won’t be live, will emphasize storytelling and the themes behind the music. But Mr. McBride said he hopes to hit a balance of smarts and swing.

“Jazz is always fighting a battle of being cerebral,” he said. “That’s not a bad thing, but we don’t want to turn off the people who are curious by being too dogmatic or too much on the academia side.”

There may be times when Mr. McBride is performing in addition to his hosting duties, but he’s hoping the audience will roll with it: “People will listen to it and say ‘Get a load of this guy. He’s introducing himself.’ ”

Write to Pia Catton at pia.catton@wsj.com