Retro-inspired swimsuits offer figure-flattering cuts in quirky prints.

A model walks the runway in a design by Blue Glue Bikinis at the Swim Designer Showcase show at Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week Australia 2015 at Carriageworks on April 15, 2015 in Sydney, Australia. (Photo: Getty Images)

Hot mama or you look like my mama?

Retro-inspired swimsuits will be everywhere this summer, from high-waisted bikini bottoms with ruffles that mask yesterday's crab cake to halter-neck one-pieces in quirky prints.

Growing up, I remember my grandmother lending me a cream-colored shower cap covered in faux flowers that I found absolutely hilarious. I felt bad for all the housewives-in-training from the 1940s and 1950s who were forced to wear boy-cut shorts and tragic "bikinis" that only showed a finger's length of midriff.

But then I realized how good they had it. Covering up meant you could actually play in the ocean or sit on a towel without hating on your poochy belly. Sadly, one-pieces back then were mostly boring razorbacks that steamrolled over any cleavage.

Keep the retro details minimal, like in this Profile by Gottex Belle Curve Halter Two-Piece ($100) at SouthMoonUnder.com. (Photo: Courtesy of South Moon Under)

Thanks to the hit series "Mad Men" and Marilyn Monroe's enduring popularity, we've seen a resurgence in darling suits that fit and flatter multiple body types.

Online retailers like Atomic Cherry and Modcloth specialize in pin-up bathing beauties, while more mainstream outfits like Anthropologie, South Moon Under, Urban Outfitters and Macy's add retro details to traditional swimwear. A search for "retro swimsuit" on the crafting website Etsy pulls up more than 4,500 entries.

Even the queen of sultry suits, Victoria's Secret, carries a high-waist mesh bikini for all those angels with stretch marks.

"Many women were tired of the smaller-the-better approach," says ModCloth stylist Emily Seibel. "Retro-inspired suits provide a respite for women who want to sport a sassy swimsuit without baring it all."

Coco Rave Forever Young Bandeau One-Piece Swimsuit ($88) at Macys.com. (Photo: Courtesy of Macy’s)

The two bestselling suits on ModCloth are — surprise, surprise — one-pieces. The polka dot Beach Blanket Bingo ($90) features a flattering halter neck and ruched body that extends past the bikini line. Bathing Beauty ($90), also by Esther Williams for ModCloth, has a similar cut and shape except in solid colors. Both come in plus sizes.

Like Mom jeans, retro swimwear can go from fad to oh-so-bad if you select dated designs and cuts. Sailor stripes with anchor buttons can border on costumey in a cheap fabric. Kitsch is best used in small doses: A ribbon here, a long-line bustier there.

It's important for retro wearers to feel confident rocking the gingham, cherries, hibiscus or pineapples.

"Women who slip on vintage-inspired swimsuits instantly feel gorgeous and glamorous," says Seibel.

Read or Share this story: http://www.delmarvanow.com/story/entertainment/culture/2015/05/24/retro-swimsuits-return/27887175/