Duo combining for an average 14.2 points per game in preseason

Denver Nuggets center Jusuf Nurkic, left, shoots over Phoenix Suns forward Shavlik Randolph in a preseason game Oct. 10 in Phoenix. (Rick Scuteri / Associated Press)

Just two games into the preseason, the largely unknown commodity was quickly becoming known.

His name: Jusuf Nurkic.

Opposing coaching staffs told Nuggets head coach Brian Shaw how impressed they were. "Just about him and how physical he is and the way he goes after rebounds," Shaw said.

Nurkic, 20, has been a rebounding machine through five preseason games. Even though he has only five years of organized basketball experience, the 7-foot center went into Saturday night's exhibition game against the Los Angeles Clippers in Las Vegas ranked sixth in the NBA in rebounds, averaging 9.4 per game.

Nurkic is one part of a rookie duo — 20-year-old Gary Harris, the other — that is showing flashes of becoming the players the Nuggets hope they can be.

"They are pretty mature," said Denver forward Danilo Gallinari. "They know how to play basketball already; the IQ is at a good level."

Harris, a 6-foot-4 guard from Michigan State, has had an up-and-down preseason, like Nurkic — good in some spots, suspect in others, but full of promise.

A first-round draft pick, Harris arrived as much more of a known quantity. During the summer, rookie peers in the NBA voted him among the most undervalued players in this year's draft class. They know Harris was as an effective defensive specialist at Michigan State, with a catch-and-shoot offensive game. They're sure he will turn out to be more than that with the Nuggets.

But the first thing Harris has to learn is the NBA game, as does Nurkic.

Advertisement

Both had butterflies in their first preseason game. Nurkic's showed up more than Harris', and the big man was so distraught about his performance afterward that he wept and apologized profusely to his teammates. He made amends by grabbing 15 rebounds in his next game.

Harris, meanwhile, just wanted to slow himself down.

"I feel like I'm playing too fast," he said. "I need to let the game come to me, just get more comfortable."

Harris has averaged about 21 minutes per game in the preseason, while Nurkic has averaged just under 20. Going into Saturday's game against the Clippers, Harris was averaging 7.4 points and shooting 35.7 percent from the 3-point line. In addition to his rebounding prowess, Nurkic was averaging 6.8 points and one block per game.

"They just want to see us play hard and continue to get better," Harris said. "Continue to learn and try to get better and do whatever they ask."

Harris is projected to back up Arron Afflalo and Randy Foye at shooting guard, while Nurkic went into camp as the third-string center behind Timofey Mozgov and JaVale McGee. McGee, though, has yet to start practicing full time as he recovers from surgery to correct a stress fracture in his tibia. The Nuggets are quietly getting Nurkic ready to be the backup center should McGee not be ready when the season starts Oct. 29.

Nurkic has lost some weight during camp and is now at around 290 pounds, with a physical game to match.

"You can't just say he's a rookie and he's not going to play," Mozgov said. "He wants to play and he's going to show the coach and show everybody he wants to play. He will go hard."