Governor Christie threatened to cut funding for hospitals if they fail to meet his expectations for substance-abuse treatment programs next year, issuing a stern warning to a room full of doctors a day after his administration announced it would cut funding for hospital charity care to help fill a shortfall in the state budget.

AP Governor Christie

At a forum on opioid addiction at Jersey Shore University Medical Center in Neptune, Christie took questions from several doctors and health-care professionals. The medical center’s president, Ken Sable, bemoaned the state’s declining reimbursement rates to hospitals and said that as charity care funding has gone down amid an expansion of Medicaid, “let’s look to hopefully reallocate some of that money to solving our behavioral health problems, which are enormous in this state.”

Even though his administration plans to cut $279 million from charity care funding to hospitals over two years, Christie said he is adding $127 million in the coming budget specifically for addiction treatment and behavioral health services. But if hospitals end up using those funds on other services – or taking it to boost their “bottom lines” – Christie would pull the money the following year, he warned.

“I want to see the results,” Christie said. “And if I don’t see the results … then I’m going to have to go in another direction for the resources that the state has.”

Responding to Sable, Christie threatened to reallocate the $127 million to other parts of the state budget if access to addiction and mental health services does not increase over the next fiscal year.

“We’re going to have to see whether the health care system in the state just takes that money and puts it to their bottom line or whether in fact they expand access to care,” Christie said. “What the hospitals have told me all along is, ‘Well we don’t have more access to this kind of care because your reimbursements are so awful.’”

He continued: “Now I’m going to see whether or not there’s going to be more beds allocated to this, both on the behavioral side and the addiction side. Because if not, I will tell you that in next year’s budget, you think charity care is a problem this year? I will take that $127 million out of charity care, and then you all can take that off your bottom line.”

An increase in health insurance coverage facilitated by the President Obama’s Affordable Care Act has allowed Christie to cut funding for hospitals that provide charity care in New Jersey, without patients suffering devastating consequences.

Christie opposes the Affordable Care Act, or “Obamacare,” and promised to repeal it during his short-lived campaign for the presidency. But New Jersey taxpayers and the governor’s budgets have gotten significant relief under the federal law.

The governor chose to expand New Jersey’s Medicaid program, NJ FamilyCare, under provisions of the Affordable Care Act in 2013. That move will have provided insurance to more than 450,000 in New Jersey by next year, according to state Treasury Department estimates.

And thousands of other state residents have acquired coverage through a separate part of the Affordable Care Act that established a new online marketplace for health insurance, known as a “federal exchange.”

“More than 700,000 additional New Jerseyans have signed up for health insurance since 2012 via the expansion of NJ FamilyCare and launch of the federal exchange,” acting state Treasurer Ford M. Scudder testified at a budget hearing Thursday.

Obamacare’s expansion of health insurance coverage has reduced the need for charity care, the state reimbursement program to hospitals that treat people with low incomes and are either underinsured or uninsured, according to the Christie administration.

Now, amid a budget crunch, Christie intends to cut $279 million from charity care funding over two years. He cut $104 million in the current year’s budget and is proposing to cut $175 million in the next. Because the federal government provides matching funds for charity care, the $175 million cut planned for next year would lead to a net reduction of $350 million for charity care in New Jersey.

“We very much appreciate the expansion of Medicaid and the behavioral health funding the governor spoke about today,” said Kerry McKean Kelly, spokeswoman for the New Jersey Hospital Association.

But she noted that New Jersey hospitals “continue to provide more than half a billion dollars in charity care services despite the expansion of Medicaid and some of the improvements we've seen from the Affordable Care Act,” citing statistics from 2014.

“We have to remember that there are still large numbers of New Jerseyans who still don't have health insurance and under the Affordable Care Act will still not get health insurance,” such as undocumented immigrants, McKean Kelly said.

State Sen. Teresa Ruiz, D-Essex, said the Christie Administration must take steps to ensure that hospitals that continue to provide charity care do not lose their state funding.

“I hear what you're saying,” she told Scudder at Thursday’s budget hearing. “All these other things are supposed to alleviate some of the costs. I have a hospital in my district that … is still seeing a $12.5 million deficit in charity care. You’re talking about a hospital that’s in the south Newark ward. The consumer that is coming into the emergency room is predominantly using charity care.”

Email: racioppi@northjersey.com