A Mt. Pleasant man is being held in Maury County Jail after he allegedly held a gun to the heads of his wife and stepson, according to the Mt. Pleasant Police Department.

Jason Lewis Mosley, 32, of 1120 First Ave., Mt. Pleasant, was arrested Thursday and is facing charges of first-degree attempted murder, aggravated assault, aggravated domestic assault, two counts of reckless endangerment with a weapon, evading arrest and resisting arrest. He remained jailed Saturday in lieu of $330,000 bond.

About 6:45 p.m. Wednesday, Tabitha Mosley came home from work and beat on her front door for Jason Mosley to open it, according to a report from the MPPD. Ten minutes later, Jason Mosley opened the door and told his wife he had passed out on the couch after drinking, according to the report.

Tabitha Mosley asked one of her four children if Mosley had left them home alone to go to the liquor store, but the child refused to say, according to the report. Tabitha Mosley then told her husband she was angry that he had left the children, according to the report.

Jason Mosley then allegedly flipped a table and began to assault his wife in their kitchen, police said. Tabitha Mosley told her husband she was going to leave him, but he responded that he would “take care of this,” and went into another room and allegedly returned to the kitchen with a .25 caliber pistol, according to the report.

He reportedly held the pistol to the right side of her head and pulled the trigger, not knowing the weapon was unloaded, according to the report. Jason Mosley placed the pistol on a counter and went to retrieve a .22 caliber rifle, MPPD said. He then allegedly tried to aim the weapon at Tabitha Mosley, but she kept pushing it out of the way, according to the report.

Jason Mosley then reportedly threatened he would shoot the child instead for “snitching,” and began chasing the boy around the house, according to the report. Tabitha Mosley placed herself in between Mosley and the child, telling the boy to run outside, the MPPD reported. Tabitha Mosley then ran outside herself and dialed police, according to officer reports.

Jason Mosley also allegedly threatened to shoot any officers that approached him, according to the report. When he heard law enforcement approaching, he tried to flee in his truck before getting out and running into a wooded area behind the home, according to the report.

Officers began looking for Jason Mosley while a Maury County Sheriff’s Deputy got Tabitha Mosley and her four children into protective custody, according to a report.