I'm sure I should feel appreciated now that BVSD presented substitute teachers with a "special treat" on Nov. 20 at the schools. I walked into the school and saw a basket with 2" x 2" packages of Starbursts, M&Ms, or a similar treat. Cute notes were stapled to the treat: ("We CHIP our hat off to you!" for a bag of chips.) I also received a special message from Dr. Bruce Messinger, our superintendent, expressing appreciation for our hard work.

I have to admit that, while the gestures were meant well, I did not feel particularly appreciated. I had replied to the initial message from the district, which told the substitutes that we would be receiving these treats, with a suggestion that a bonus check would be nice.

The fact that BVSD has not recognized the substitutes with any pay raise for over 15 years has come to light lately. The fact is that there are not enough substitutes to cover all classes on some days. Recognizing that there is a connection between these two facts will be a beginning to fixing the problem. Simply put, low pay is the primary cause of the diminishing number of substitutes. In fact, I find it difficult not to be insulted by the pay, given my education level, expertise, and experience (30 of years of full-time teaching, in my case.) I understand that some districts actually pay substitutes with five or more years a higher rate. I just heard of some substitutes in Australia earning $300/day!

Advertisement

I was in front of a class the other day during announcements. The school was encouraging the students to sign up to help keep score for basketball games. The pay was $15 for a little over an hour. I sat there processing the reality that I was receiving less than $14 an hour! People seem to be more interested in helping service workers earn $15/hr. than rewarding education with decent pay.

As a substitute I was required to have a college education and current teacher certification. Just last year I paid the Colorado Department of Education $80 to be recertified, a process teachers need to complete every five years. I also am required to take classes for that recertification, which also may require several hundred dollars. I spent over a week of subbing just to earn back what I paid to be a substitute!

Since 2001, teachers have received a well-deserved base-pay increase of 44 percent (from $27,823 to $40,000); substitutes have received a pay increase of 0 (zero) percent! Further inequity is found when contract teachers are paid extra to sub in a class during their plan period; substitutes are not.

Consider, if you will, your own past experiences as a student with a substitute in class. Likely, your first reaction was, "What can we get away with today?" Most BVSD students are very fun and inspirational to work with. However, substitutes are often expected to deal with not only some interesting behaviors, but also the curriculum and very specific lesson plans the regular teachers expect to be followed. Subs are also entrusted with the safety and well-being of up to 150 students per day.

Another question is: Are more teachers taking more time off, which requires more substitutes? The fact is that teachers are being required to do more and more every year: join more committees, attend more meetings with parents and colleagues, adopt new requirements for classes, attend professional development classes, understand new testing standards, fulfill demands for immediate grading, communicate constantly with parents, and learn new computer programs. Frankly, I see teachers burning out earlier and earlier in the year. Perhaps relieving teachers of some of this increasing load would lessen the demand for more substitutes.

Boulder Valley School District has gotten away with low pay for substitute teachers because Boulder is an attractive place to live. But shortly, subs learn they have to get another job or move. Of course, substitutes should recognize that subbing is a part-time job and that one cannot live in Boulder on such pay, even if they work every day. But if the district wants to value education, show real appreciation for substitute teachers as well as gain more substitutes instead of losing them, a meaningful pay raise is necessary. I can assure you that if the district increased the sub pay to $120/day (the district has a lot of years to make up for), they will not have any trouble finding substitute teachers.

Susan Planck lives in Boulder.