By of the

Slowly and steadily, American companies are beginning to make acquisitions again — and it can be a lucrative endeavor for them and their investors.

Coming out of the recession, investors flocked to dividend-paying stocks with the attitude that the payouts signaled a healthy balance sheet and strong cash flow. When the Federal Reserve began hinting in May that it was thinking about tapering its monthly bond buying, which has kept interest rates low and bolstered stock markets, dividend stocks faltered.

Not so with stocks of some of the companies using strong cash flow to fund acquisitions that immediately add to earnings, said Mike Honkamp, a senior vice president at Brookfield-based Dana Investment Advisors.

"Companies that do a lot of bolt-on acquisitions and have a history of not reporting write-downs — that helps build your confidence in management," said Honkamp, who is also co-manager of the Dana Large Cap Equity Fund.

Honkamp and his colleagues have found several smaller companies generating high growth rates, partly fueled by acquisitions.

Iconix Brand Group Inc. (ICON, $38.47), New York City, owns and licenses brands that include Candies, Joe Boxer, Rampage, Mudd, London Fog, Mossimo and Danskin to retailers, wholesalers and suppliers for use across a range of product categories.

Iconix management tries to find undervalued brand assets and improve them, then uses joint ventures or licensing arrangements "to monetize them as much as possible," Honkamp said. The company does not do manufacturing or design, he added.

Iconix has spent more than $100 million this year on acquisitions, "and there's a strong likelihood they'll find brands to purchase in the next few quarters that will provide a boost to their earnings trajectory," Honkamp said.

Iconix is projecting sales of $430 million this year, and has $326 million of cash on its balance sheet, he said. Analysts expect the company to increase revenue by 22% and earnings by 35% in 2013. Yet the company is trading at a below-market multiple of 15 times estimated 2014 earnings, he said.

The biggest risk with Iconix is that the company's brands are sensitive to consumer trends, Honkamp said. Its shares have traded in a 52-week range of $18.07 to $39. They have the potential to outperform the Russell 2000 consumer discretionary segment over the next 12 months, he said.

Astronics Corp.(ATRO, $48.97), East Aurora, N.Y., designs and makes aerospace and defense products and test systems.

Global trends are in Astronics' favor, and demand for Boeing's new 787 Dreamliner has added momentum, Honkamp said.

"Astronics has done a great job of acquiring niche companies that enhance its overall business model," he said.

The company has made three significant acquisitions so far this year, including the purchase of PECO Inc. for $136 million in cash. PECO makes interior components for the aerospace industry, and now represents about 17% of Astronics' revenue, Honkamp said. PECO has helped Astronics to have an entree into Boeing, he added.

Astronics has a clean balance sheet and is expected to increase earnings by more than 30% this year, Honkamp said. The company is trading at about 22 times estimated 2014 earnings, he added.

Not only is Astronics growing revenue and earnings, it has been adding to its backlog, which is at about $168 million, Honkamp said.

The biggest risk to Astronics is anything that would create a downturn in Asian air traffic, he said.

Astronics shares have a 52-week trading range of $15.41 to $49.99. They have potential to outperform the Russell 2000 over the next 12 months, Honkamp said.

ABOUT THIS

The Journal Sentinel focuses on one Wisconsin money manager or analyst in this weekly feature, looking at a trend that helps investment pros make their decisions.