Shaq provided backup for the Gainesville, Floridapolice officer. Photos by Ofc. Ben Tobias/GPD.

The former NBA star was one of millions who watched a viral dashcam video of an officer playing ball with some kids.

Shaq poses for a group photo with the kids after a pick-up game. Photos by Ofc. Ben Tobias/GPD.

NBA All-Star Shaquille O'Neal was one of the nearly 14 million people who watched a viral video of a Gainesville, Florida police officer who played basketball with some kids in the street.

Officer Bobby White responded to a noise complaint about kids playing ball "loudly" by joining the game instead of shutting it down.

The kids "defeated" White at the friendly game of backup, but before he left, he promised to return one day with "backup."

A week later, the Florida officer followed through on his promise and brought someone with him , although it wasn't just any old basketball player: It was Shaq.

The former NBA player was so impressed with White's message to "let kids be kids," that he decided to schedule a rematch.

"I told you I was going to bring some backup, right?" a confident White asked the kids while exiting his patrol car on Saturday.

While continuing to dribble, the kids simply replied, "Yep."

"Look at these big boys I brought," said White, pointing to other officers. "Are you sure you can take them?"

"Yeah," the group responded, without taking a second glance.

Gainesville Police Department Facebook Page

Then the 7-foot-1, 325-pound former basketball superstar exited a black SUV, slamming the door behind him -- and the kids changed their tone.

"You're huge!" one of the kids shouted.

After shaking some hands and taking some warm-up shots, Shaq was ready to play.

"Oh no, I've got [Charles Barkley] on me," joked Shaq during the pick-up game.

Despite getting double-teamed for most of the game, Shaq continued to coach the kids mid-game.

"Play on defense right there!" he advised one young boy. "Roll, big dog."

At the end of the game, he rounded up the kids: "Step into my office."

After each of the eight kids took a shot at the free-throw line for a chance to win $100, Shaq called them over for a final group huddle.

"I'm proud of you guys," Shaq said. "You can be anything you want to be; I'm from the same neighborhood y'all are from -- I grew up just like this."

If you continue to respect your elders, Shaq continued, "you can change this."

After fist-bumping each kid, Shaq asked the boys to repeat after him: "I will become whatever I want to be. I will be a leader and not a follower. I will respect my peers, my elders and especially my parents."

Before leaving, the kids posed for a group photo.

"This is so cool!" one of them shouted.

Shaq agreed, "I'll see you guys around."