French Ambassador to the U.S. Gerard Araud is skeptical a nuclear deal with Iran can be worked out on deadline. Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images

The French ambassador to the United States said Tuesday he did not believe the major powers and Iran would agree to a nuclear deal by a June 30 deadline and that, due to the complicated nature of the negotiations, the process could have a somewhat "fuzzy end."

"The negotiations are extremely complicated technically. They're also extremely complicated because you have a lot of different issues which are linked," Ambassador Gerard Araud said. "Which means that it's very likely that we won't have an agreement before the end of June or even after June. You know, the Iranians for the moment are obviously not negotiating to get an agreement very shortly."

Araud spoke Tuesday at the Atlantic Council along with British Ambassador to the U.S. Peter Westmacott and German Ambassador to the U.S. Peter Wittig, detailing the European perspective of the progress on nuclear negotiation. The three countries, along with the U.S., China and Russia, are negotiating with Iran to ensure Tehran's nuclear program is purely peaceful in exchange for relief from crippling economic sanctions.

RELATED RELATED Private Firms May Tread Cautiously in Iran Once Sanctions Are Gone Even when sanctions are removed, banks and businesses will hesitate to go into Iran because of the risks involved.

All three ambassadors expressed hope that a deal could be reached, but Wittig said he expects the countries will need the push from the June 30 deadline to come to a consensus on the remaining issues.

"It's going slow because the substance of the issues are difficult. They are technical. That's one point. And the second is there is a dynamic in negotiations. You need the pressure of timeline in order to facilitate the heavy lifting issues," Wittig said. "We have a difficult path to walk on. We have tremendously complicated technical issues to clarify, so it's no wonder that we are not making a lot of fast progress right now. But it's not a prediction on what will happen by the end of June, it's just a feeling of the pulse right now."

Negotiators established the framework of an agreement at the beginning of April but now have until the end of June to reach consensus on all the technical details. The two most contentious remaining issues include the scope and timing of sanctions removal as well as the monitoring mechanisms that will allow the international community to ensure Iran is complying with its agreements. Tehran insists sanctions relief must be immediate as soon as a deal is reached, while the West says the country must wait until the International Atomic Energy Agency has confirmed Iran is complying with all aspects of an agreement.

Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said last week that the IAEA would not have access to Iranian scientists nor the country's military sites. Araud dismissed these claims as required political posturing during negotiations, saying it didn't necessarily dictate a final Iranian position.

"At the beginning of a negotiation there is chest banging," Araud said. "Each side says, 'I'm not going to cave in and that's my demands, my absolute demands.' But, of course, after that they compromise on their absolute demands. I don't think we have to attach too much importance to the declarations."

Indeed, on Sunday Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi said the Islamic republic had agreed to "managed access" of military sites, apparently contradicting the supreme leader's previously stated position.

The British, French and German ambassadors also said it isn't clear what would happen if no deal were reached. They refused to speculate on what steps would be taken by the major powers, but indicated that, were the Iranians to be faulted for the collapse of talks, the international community could seek to increase sanctions.

They also cautioned that much more financial pressure on Iran may not be possible, even if no deal is reached because the Islamic republic walks away.

"My sense is that we are probably not far away from the high water mark on international sanctions against the Iranian economy, but exactly what happens next depends," Westmacott said.

Were it to be the fault of the European negotiators or actions from Congress, Westmacott said the international community would have a hard time imposing more sanctions.

The three ambassadors echoed reassurances from the Obama administration that no deal would be preferable to a bad deal. They said the international community must operate on the "distrust but verify" concept when it comes to Iran.