Sioux Falls, SD

Travelers flying out of Sioux Falls Regional Airport will soon have a place to stay before or during their trip. The $5 million AeroStay is nearing completion.

Convenience is the name of the game at the AeroStay. Connected to the airport, the soon-to-open hotel will make things easy for travelers.

"Winter, you don't even have to go outside. You get up in the morning, you're down a hallway and you're on your plane. I think people are going to love it and I'm excited to get started," Kary said.

Levi Kary will be the General Manager once it opens. The hotel boasts 76 rooms that range from big with king size beds to eco-efficient getaways.

"Extremely luxurious and upscale finishes. While it's a smaller room, it's a very comfortable and a very nice room that we think people are going to really like," Kary said.

The construction company plans on handing the hotel over to the management company by the end of the month. The hotel will open around June 1.

"I think the place is cool. A lot of these finishes we've never put in hotels before like the sliding bathroom door, the Euro cabinets and stuff like that, and wood floors in some of these guest rooms is also new for us," Dave Potratz with Beck & Hofer Construction said.

The AeroStay will be run by the same management group that takes care of the Ramkota and ClubHouse Suites. The proximity between hotels allows the group to pool resources.

"We'll just shuttle that back and forth every day and it's a five-minute drive away. We'll cross train people. It will really help our operations I think," Kary said.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.