Photo

To the Editor:

The headline of Ezekiel J. Emanuel’s March 6 Op-Ed essay asserts, “In Health Care, Choice Is Overrated.” I disagree.

The Affordable Care Act is forcing me to give up my primary care physician if I want my doctor bills to be covered by insurance. I have an outstanding primary care physician. But he (like many excellent doctors) does not accept direct payment from insurance companies. The patient pays him, and he gives the patient the forms to file with the insurance company for reimbursement. This makes him an out-of-network doctor.

I don’t want to change doctors. I don’t want to have to look through lists trying to find someone that Dr. Emanuel thinks is just as good. I want this guy. Many other people face this same dilemma.

Until now, I was able to buy insurance that reimbursed a minimum level of reasonable out-of-network medical expenses. That kind of individual policy is no longer available in most of New York.

Dr. Emanuel suggests that there should be out-of-network coverage but only in exceptional situations — certain serious situations (who defines these?) in which patients could go out of network to certain nationally recognized “centers of excellence” (who selects these?).

Limiting out-of-network coverage to these as yet undefined situations will certainly be unsatisfactory. General out-of-network coverage, using the thoroughly defined guidelines already used by insurance companies, should be available to those individuals who want to buy it. This needs to be fixed.

GLENN N. EICHEN

New York, March 7, 2014

To the Editor:

To minimize costs, many health plans on the insurance exchanges mandated by the Affordable Care Act offer consumers only limited choices of hospitals and doctors. These so-called narrow networks have added controversy to a controversial law.

Ezekiel J. Emanuel argues that attention focused on the size of a plan’s provider network is misplaced. The quality of the doctors and hospitals is what matters. He suggests that an organization with experience evaluating health care quality should develop a grading system for these new provider networks. Oddly, he dismisses the only group we know to be developing one: us.

U.S. News & World Report has been gathering and analyzing relevant health data for more than 20 years, including an evolving model to rate health insurance plans. So far, for example, we’ve found that narrower networks in California are less likely to include hospitals that excel on the kind of quality measures, such as patient safety scores, that underpin the U.S. News hospital rankings. Yet there are exceptions, which underscores that narrowness should not necessarily be equated with poor quality.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

We know that much of the insurance network data in the public domain is limited and unreliable. But in time, we expect to obtain better network data — and to add it to our existing ratings of health plans. That will help millions of consumers make more informed decisions about which insurance plan to purchase. We’re not the only ones who can or should be doing this, but so far, we’re the only ones we know of who are.

BEN HARDER

Washington, March 6, 2014

The writer is managing editor and director of health care analysis at U.S. News & World Report.

To the Editor:

Ezekiel J. Emanuel tries to persuade readers that the more restrictive networks of newer insurance policies aren’t so bad after all.

Provider networks are designed to save insurance companies money, by sharp-elbow negotiating with doctors and others and by shortchanging patients when possible. Insurers are in business to make a profit. So are doctors. And so there must be a Gresham’s law for medicine: If a physician is good enough to command a bigger payday by steering clear of insurance networks, any physicians who do join such networks may not be as good.

Perhaps more important is a key aspect of the American psyche: We like our choice. Just look at a supermarket cereal aisle. We don’t like being told where to shop, the make of car we may drive and which doctors and hospitals to use. Affordable Care Act or no, this mind-set long ago entered the American DNA.

BILL APPLE

New York, March 6, 2014