A sampling of the hand-crafted items that will be available at the bazaar.

Handcrafted soaps, knitted items and jewelry are just a few of the items created by over 24 talented local and regional artisans that will be available for sale at the "Treasure Tables" Bazaar this Saturday, Oct. 11 at the YMCA of the Rockies in Lewis Dick Hall from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Free admission. Signs will to the Lewis Dick Hall.

Vendors from Estes Park, several Front Range cities, as well as Cheyenne, Wyo., will have one-of-a kind items, including quilts, jewelry, ornaments, designer wood and acrylic pens, knitted and crocheted pieces, cooking nuts, selected teas, salsas, plus books, antler products, frames, toys, cosmetics, fruits and nuts, fun and functional gifts. Baked goods will be available.

Vendors at "Treasure Tables" this year include Antler Addiction from Fredrick, Handcrafted by Anita Fiedler of Estes Park, N.M. Works - jewelry from Nancy McCalla of Cheyenne, Stuffed Cuties from Doris Norris of Drake, Mountain Man Fruit & Nuts - Mike Ramirez of Estes Park, Jewelryxpressions - glass art and jewelry from Ft. Collins, Faye's Quilted Dreams (Faye Gaudet), Elegant Elk Studios from Estes Park, The Tin Daisy from Estes Park - Sara Bergsten, Walt and Nancy Kaesler - frames, wildlife pictures and book, "The Little Girl in the Yellow Dress, Angels & More - hand-turned wooden and acrylic pens, Sandy Bordson's jewelry from Cheyenne, Mary Kay cosmetics & makeover - Mollie Houlihan of Loveland, Estes Park Museum Gift Shop, Handmade for Ewe - Beth Pfeifer and Jill Eccleson of Drake, Jennifer Gance's children's book, "A Rocky Mountain Tale" from Highlands Ranch, Amy's Art to Wear and handcrafted soaps from Estes Park, Rocky Mtn.

Advertisement

Orchards from Estes Park, A. Leigh Designs - jewelry, Dragon Leaf Tea Co. from Estes Park, Dances to Own Drum from Suzy Patch, P.E.O. Chapter GX from Greeley, Chapter EQ from Boulder, Chapter II from Longmont, and Chapter IY from Estes Park. We are excited to have these vendors at this event and especially thank Kind Coffee from Estes Park for its support and contribution.

The "Treasure Tables" Bazaar is dedicated to helping local P.E.O. Chapter IY raise awareness and support for P.E.O. International. All proceeds from Chapter IY will directly benefit P.E.O. International projects. Since its inception in 1869, P.E.O. International has given more than $94.6 million in grants, scholarships, awards, and special projects and more than $143.6 million in low-interest educational loans to over 90,000 women to further their education. Several women in Estes Park have received support from P.E.O. to further their educational goals.

Come to the YMCA this Saturday, Oct. 11, and shop at "Treasure Tables." Estes Park P.E.O. Chapter IY is the sponsor of "Treasure Tables".