The PulseAdoption

According to the St. Louis American, the Ferguson officer who wrote racist jokes about black women who have abortions reducing crime has resigned from the force.

Sgt. William Mudd resigned on Thursday, March 5, 2015.

As I previously wrote, the Justice Department announced the findings of its two civil rights investigations related to Ferguson, Missouri. The Justice Department found that the Ferguson Police Department (FPD) engaged in a pattern or practice of conduct that violates the First, Fourth, and 14th Amendments of the Constitution. The Justice Department also announced that the evidence examined in its independent, federal investigation into the fatal shooting of Michael Brown does not support federal civil rights charges against Ferguson Police Officer Darren Wilson.

The DOJ wrote this about the stereotype of Black abortions reducing crime:

“Our investigation has revealed that these disparities occur, at least in part, because of unlawful bias against and stereotypes about African Americans. We have found substantial evidence of racial bias among police and court staff in Ferguson. For example, we discovered emails circulated by police supervisors and court staff that stereotype racial minorities as criminals, including one email that joked about an abortion by an African-American woman being a means of crime control,” the report reads. “A May 2011 email stated: “An African – American woman in New Orleans was admitted into the hospital for a pregnancy termination. Two weeks later she received a check for $5,000. She phoned the hospital to ask who it was from. The hospital said, ‘Crimestoppers,’” the report states.

Sgt. Mudd was allegedly responsible for that email.

Click "like" if you are PRO-LIFE!

Interestingly, the idea of crime reduction from abortion is perpetuated by pro-abortion people dating back to the days of eugenics and include ObamaCare architect Jonathan Gruber.

But- where does the media point this out? No where.

I detail the ties of this racist attitude here.

Reprinted with permission from Saynsumthn's Blog.