While many people sat around their tables Thursday in their homes filled with holiday spirit, some didn't have that luxury.

To make those less fortunate feel at home in their community, the Panama City Rescue Mission stepped up to the plate, and handed them out.

"Thank you," said Jason Duncan, who spent his Thanksgiving at the Rescue Mission.

Those words, thank you, are the reason the Panama City Rescue Mission has once again hosted an outstanding Thanksgiving meal, free to the community.

Thurman Chambers, President and CEO of the Panama City Rescue Mission said, "When you walk in and you see the people and you see the volunteers and get to talk with them you just really realize how blessed you are."

For weeks the Rescue Mission has been preparing a Thanksgiving feast for more than 700 people, and even children understand why.

Danisha Siples, a young volunteer said, "The real reason is to build the community up."

Instead of sitting at home and celebrating with loved ones, those who love the community decided to volunteer. With so many people willing to help, the Rescue Mission had to turn away volunteers.

"It's hard to turn them away," said Chambers.

For months volunteers have been looking forward to giving back.

Brenda Parker and Vicki Iseminger, volunteers from Hancock Bank said, "This is the first year we've done it and we hope it will be an ongoing thing."

"It's not my first time, but I do it yearly," said Siples.

Jim and Karen Rodi, first time volunteers said, "Our family's not coming in until Saturday, so we're providing some time."

Each table was assigned four of those volunteers who waited on their peers hand and foot.

It was a simple gesture that made those who can't afford to eat in a restaurant, feel like a king or queen.

"All the servers and everybody that came out was awesome and great," said Duncan.

Whether you were giving or receiving, everyone walked away with a full stomach and a life long memory.

'We're just thrilled to be here," said Iseminger. "We just want to love on these people we want them to know that they're important they're special and that God loves them."