Jack A. MacDonald, 70, a long­time resident of Great Falls, Va., who was born on March 10, 1945, in Spokane, Wash., passed away peacefully near his home June 22, with his beloved wife, Paige, and dedicated sons, Andrew and William by his side after a courageous battle with cancer. An avid champion and legislative advocate for quality care in our nation’s long­term and post acute care community, Jack served as executive vice president and chief public affairs officer for Golden Living, one of the country’s largest skilled nursing, hospice and physical therapy providers. Jack was an integral part of the company’s senior management team during his 32 years with the organization and was responsible for the company’s national government relations, public relations and communications, as well as the international development for Golden Living and its affiliated long­term care companies. Jack personally was instrumental in shaping the regulatory landscape to protect patient rights and benefits as well as vigorously advocate for the delivery of high­ quality health care each day to our nation’s most fragile population. Jack also served as executive vice president of the National Council of Health Centers and director of government relations for the American Health Care Association. Most recently, Jack led the effort at Golden Living to participate in new payment models in response to the Affordable Care Act and ongoing health-care reform. These new payment structures will serve as the foundation for how health-care is provided to patients today and for generations to come. Jack was avidly committed to assuring that as the new health care regulatory and payment models were established, that long­term care had a seat at the table. Jack leaves a lasting legacy that impacts the entire health care industry, and he served as a beloved mentor to his colleagues and peers. An avid outdoors-man, Jack particularly enjoyed snow skiing and winter sports with his sons and he enjoyed the natural environment surrounding his family’s retreat in Whitefish, Mont. A graduate of the University of Idaho, Jack earned a bachelor’s degree with a double major in history and political science and also a master’s degree in international relations. In addition, he attended Texas A&M University for a brief period of time, remaining a proud “Aggie” and attended the College of Law at the University of Denver. Jack was the only child of Allen C. MacDonald and Ruth G. MacDonald, who were long­time residents of Walla Walla, Wash.

He is survived by his loving wife of 46 years, Paige who resides in Great Falls, Va.; his devoted sons, Andrew, 37, who resides in Seattle, and William, 34, who resides in Whitefish; as well as many close friends and colleagues in Virginia and Montana.

Funeral services will be held July 2, in Whitefish at St. Charles Borromeo Catholic Church at 11 a.m. with burial services to directly follow. In mid­-September, a memorial service will be held in Virginia.

In lieu of flowers, a health-care policy scholarship is being established in Jack’s name to carry on the work that he passionately pursued throughout his life and career.