Hadley Mills, left, and Sofia Springer check out flooding at Ninth Street and Balsam Avenue on July 30. A record 2.56 inches of rain fell on Boulder that day. ( Paul Aiken/Daily Camera )

July's weather stories were diverse.

On the evening of July 7, towns from Louisville to Arvada were battered by a thunderstorm that dumped damaging hailstones. The Rock Creek neighborhood in Superior was hit particularly hard. Just about every building received damage to roofs, siding and windows.

The first week had four days in the 90s. This included the month's high temperature in Boulder of 97 on the 7th.

A weak monsoon season followed. Ten of the 14 days between July 8 and July 21 had measurable precipitation in Boulder.

The second weekend of the month brought two fatal lightning strikes on two consecutive days in Rocky Mountain National Park. Colorado averages three deaths and 15 injuries a year from lightning.

July 15 set the stage for a uniquely Boulder event, when people are encouraged to tube along Boulder Creek to get to work. Many participants showed up for work that day in soaked suits and ties.

A rainstorm on the 16th brought Fairview High's Old School Dirtbags' baseball game to a halt. The team had to finish that game, which went into extra innings, and then play another full game on the 17th in order to get back on schedule.

After a fairly active monsoon that brought deluges to many areas of the state, July made a weak attempt at a heat wave. The weather forecast for the first 18 days of the month was always: "Cooler than normal with a chance of rain, some of which could be heavy, especially along the Front Range foothills." But, on July 19, the forecast changed to: "Boulder and Denver will have no weather issues except for the heat."

Advertisement

This mini heat wave lasted for a week before the monsoon made a vengeful encore performance on the 26th. The 29th and 30th carried a flash-flood watch for just about all of Colorado.

Boulder proper did receive 0.15 inch of rain on the 29th; and 2.56 inches of rain fell on the 30th, a record for the date. The previous record for July 30 was 1.74 inches in 1998. Fortunately, the rain was spread out over a 36-hour time period.

Other areas of the state and county weren't so lucky. Lyons was hit particularly hard, and streets up and down the Interstate 25 corridor had submerged cars.

July had 15 days with measurable precipitation and ended up being the fifth-wettest July in history.

The final day of the month was partly sunny and mild. Boulder's first-ever Underpants Run had a herd of about 200 scantily clad runners race down Pearl Street as a fun precursor to Sunday's largest-ever Ironman competition.