Topics: amazon, automation, Facebook, Google, innovation, Jobs, Nicholas Carr, technology, Innovation News, Technology News

Technology writer Nicholas Carr’s newest book, “The Glass Cage: Automation and Us,” examines how the tools, innovation and technology utilized today are fundamentally changing the way we behave and think. Wary of being slotted in the “technophile vs. technophobe debate,” Carr walks a delicate line between adulation and distrust of technology, examining how emerging phenomena like widespread automation are changing society, for better and worse.

Automation, no matter its pitfalls, is only going to become a bigger part of our lives. What Carr is interested in is, to use his words, “whether we can do it wisely and avoid some of the drawbacks, and make sure that we use these powerful new tools to enrich our lives rather than impoverish them.”

Salon spoke to Carr about how to determine what technology is “good” versus “bad” and where we should begin to ask questions about the tricky process of automation. This interview has been edited for length and clarity.

You’ve managed to articulate the drawbacks of technology without coming off as a Luddite. Was that difficult?

It is difficult because it seems to me that people swing between extremes of enthusiasm and skepticism, and I’ve felt this in my own career and in my own writing. It’s very easy to be, on the one hand, really enthusiastic about technology and attracted to it for its amazing qualities. That can short-circuit the critical part of your mind. On the other hand, it’s also easy to fall into the trap of just being skeptical and becoming so suspicious of technology that you lose the enthusiasm for the amazing stuff that software can do.

In some ways I think [my previous book] “The Shallows,” for instance, is a darker book than “The Glass Cage.” One thing I deliberately tried to do with “The Glass Cage” is try to give voice to both my sense of enthusiasm for computer technologies but also my skepticism. I wanted to try to strike the balance that allows you to remember why you get enthusiastic about technology but also ensure that your critical faculties are working all the time.

Is there a specific sector of technology that gives you pause, or that you feel we need to be more critical of than we are?

What interested me in the new book was the deep effects that relying on computers can have on our attentiveness to what we’re doing; on our engagement with our own work, and even on our engagement with the world. What I find particularly interesting, and kind of ominous, is the fact that while these disabilities that can come from automation have been well-documented in areas like flying and driving cars – the professional side of our lives – these same phenomena are now beginning to enter our personal lives.

I think I know what you’re saying. If it were not for the fact that I live in a grid system, I might not know where I was going, because I rely so much on my phone and Google.

The most insidious effect is that when you become dependent on the software, you can quickly conclude that, well, this wasn’t a skill that was important to know anyway. In addition to losing the skill, you start to pretend to yourself that that skill didn’t matter anyway – that the computer can do it for me.

I do think that’s dangerous, to just assume a computer can do things. Or that we can give [skills] away without suffering ill effects or without lessening our involvement with important things, or lessening our sense of fulfillment from learning stuff and exercising our talents.

Right. We’re constantly sold the idea of technology as a means of connection, but I think what you’ve shown is that we’re also disconnecting with the desire to learn about and engage with the world.

I think it’s very easy for us to always put a computer screen between us and the world. Whether that world is the natural world or the cultural world or the social world or the physical world doesn’t matter.

There are a couple of reasons we’re quick to do that. One is that we have this sense of convenience and efficiency – and sometimes it’s real – that we can do things better just by pulling out a smartphone or a computer and, as people in Silicon Valley like to say, remove the friction from our lives. I think most people would admit to this after some reflection, but it certainly shows up in the psychological literature as well.

We get a sense of satisfaction from directly engaging with people and culture and the world, and in struggling with our challenges. That is where a lot of the fulfillment in our lives comes from — from constantly coming up against friction and resistance. That can be in building friendships, it can be in exercising your navigational skills, it can be in really doing research; all of those things, I think, are very important to the richness of our lives. And, unfortunately, we seem very eager to sacrifice them, simply to get a little convenience, or the kind of thrill that comes from simply using technology.

One of the first images that came to my mind reading your book was the movie “Wall-E” and its vision of future humans as devoted to the most unengaged version of life.

I think you see it in a lot of science fiction, anticipating this dark world. Whether it’s H.G. Wells’ “The Time Machine” or “Brave New World,” a common theme is that life becomes too easy, and we become passive people whose superficial needs are immediately gratified but who lack any kind of deep satisfaction with their lives.

The ability to critically think…

Right, because that too is a form of friction. It’s pushing back against the status quo, and that too requires a kind of engagement that we can lose when we just rush to Google everything or get a recommendation from Amazon or whatever.

Popular culture celebrates innovation very broadly, to the point where innovation has just become this buzzword that has lost some of its meaning. Is there a way to have a better, more nuanced understanding of how we should be looking at new technology?