Dr. David Satcher has served in many high-profile medical positions, including president of Nashville’s Meharry Medical College. For the past 12 years, he has taken care of his wife, who has been diagnosed with Alzheimer’s. (Photo: File / AP)

Dr. David Satcher has served as the 16th U.S. Surgeon General, the president of Nashville's Meharry Medical College, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and many other prestigious positions.

A leader in the medical community, Satcher has also taken care of his wife, who has been diagnosed with Alzheimer's, for the past 12 years. He is deeply interested in promoting better research for treatments and standards of care for patients.

Satcher returned to Nashville this month to speak at a fundraiser for Abe's Garden, a nonprofit organization that will partner with Vanderbilt University to develop best practices in caring for Alzheimer's patients. Abe's Garden is also building a new facility on the Park Manor property off Woodmont Boulevard.

Satcher spoke with Tennessean reporter Shelley DuBois about how little we know about Alzheimer's and how health care reform could affect treatment of the disease.

Why do you think Alzheimer's has been such a difficult disease to understand?

I think there are a few reasons. First, I think we should acknowledge that we have not invested in Alzheimer's research in any way comparable to the way we've invested in HIV, cancer research or cardiovascular disease.

(The) second thing is I think it's a very difficult disease — it's so tied in with aging. And even the pathology of it continues to be confusing, in that we identify what we think are the characteristics of Alzheimer's in the brain, and then you see people with those characteristics who have no symptoms. There's still a lot of work to do, but I mean, that's research. You've got to invest in research, and we have not done that yet.

Given what we know now, how can caretakers help patients and families suffering through this disease?

I think the strategy of Abe's Garden is the right one. I think you have to study the care of patients the same as you study diseases and pathogens — you have to look at different models of care. You have to investigate which models work better for which types of patients. And I think that's the plan here, is really to have a center that takes care of Alzheimer's patients and geriatric patients located at an academic health center. That will be the first time that a care center will work together with an academic health center to look into these issues. That's what excites me about it. I think that's a very good move.

That's interesting that the first center of this kind will be in Nashville.

Well, I was president of Meharry and I started the Vanderbilt-Meharry alliance. So it's really good for me to see this happening here from a personal perspective, too, because one, I think it's needed. Number two, I think Nashville is a great place for something like this; I think it's a great family town. It just all comes together in this community.

Is the health care system set up to reward best practices in care for Alzheimer's patients?

Despite all of the politics and controversy around the Affordable Care Act, I think there are three or four ways in which it moves us forward in terms of caring for these types of patients. Number one, it rewards physicians for value instead of volume.

It also incentivizes the use of electronic health records, which means much better sharing of information and record keeping. Last is the prevention agenda. Which, as you know, has not been implemented because it couldn't pass Congress. But I'm just hoping that we're going to get over all of that and the politics will die down. I don't know, but I'm an optimist.

When you served as Surgeon General, did you see this change in health care on the horizon?

Oh yes. Well you know, before I became surgeon general, I worked on the commission with Mrs. Clinton, and we developed a proposal for health care reform, which was, quote, "dead on arrival" when it got to Congress. It was the National Security Act, you probably don't remember that, but it was the name of the reform that the Clinton administration proposed.

It was quite an effort, but it's very hard to reform health care in this country; there are too many people benefiting from the system as it is.

Reach Shelley DuBois at 615-259-8241 and on Twitter @shelleydubois.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1snXQeH