In a letter to union officials last week, Warren County gave its clearest signal yet that officials plan to sell the county-run nursing facility.

"Warren County continues to maintain that it is in the best interests of both resident care and taxpayers to have a clean break with the Warren Haven Nursing Home," according to a letter from county labor attorney J. Andrew Kinsey to union officials. The letter was obtained by The Express-Times.

The comments came in response to a proposal from AFSCME Council 73 aimed at increasing revenues and lowering labor costs at Warren Haven in an effort to stave off a sale to a private owner. County officials deemed the plan unworkable and freeholders said today the facility's sale seems imminent.

"I would say ... where we are right now, I don't see a solution," Freeholder Director Ed Smith said. "The board does not have a solution to the labor expenses before them. We are where we are."

Council 73, the group that represents the two Warren Haven labor unions, acknowledged the ideas were concepts and would not delay the nursing home's sale, according to the county's letter. The letter indicated the union had done nothing to persuade the county "to change its present course"; it was dated just over two weeks after a July 1 meeting between county and union officials.

"What the public suspected all along, what staff suspected all along and what the families suspected all along is they just wanted to sell it," said Gerard Meara, executive director of AFSCME Council 73. "They put us through the motions and to me it's just disgusting."

Cost cuts, keeping jobs

The union's proposal sought to maintain jobs and salaries while ridding the county of pension and health care costs, according to Meara. The proposal included bringing in a nonprofit management group that would employ all Warren Haven's nonsupervisory staff, while the much smaller supervisory staff would remain under county employ, he said.

Under the union's proposal, the county would continue to pay salaries through what would amount to a management fee and the employees would assume a more traditional 401(k) retirement plan and purchase medical benefits on the private market or through the Affordable Care Act, according to Meara.

This is not a model the union would normally promote and employees would have seen a loss in pension and health benefits, he said.

"The main thing we were looking to do was protect jobs and salaries," Meara said.

He maintains the transition process wouldn't have taken any longer than the county's efforts to subdivide Warren Haven at the Mansfield Township campus and the bidding process.

The union also proposed increasing revenues by filling vacant beds and increasing private pay rates. The revenue increases and labor savings would have generated the $2.5 million to $3 million freeholders have said is necessary to keep Warren Haven in public hands, Meara said. Union officials are now telling members to prepare for the sale, he said.

"We're telling people that we came up with reasonable ideas which were rejected," Meara said. "So we told membership to prepare for privatization."

But freeholders said the union proposal was unworkable as evidenced by the eight-point letter from labor counsel laying out the issues.

"The plan is ambitious and nearly impossible from a legal standpoint," Freeholder Jason Sarnoski said, adding that the county seriously reviewed the proposal.

"And in the end you end up with fully privatized labor anyway," he said.

Funding concerns

Sarnoski and Smith point to the proposal's reliance on subsidies through the Affordable Care Act and the fact that a recent court decision ruled subsidies are not available in states that did not establish a state-run exchange, like New Jersey. The decision will likely be appealed, but there's no guarantee the ruling would change or do so in time to put the union's plan in effect, Sarnoski said.

He applauded the union's efforts but maintains the county's labor attorneys raised some very serious legal concerns.

"We're really at the point where we're going to move forward with the sale," Sarnoski said.

Freeholder Rick Gardner declined to comment on the county's review of the union proposal except to say he had remained hopeful that union officials might have been able to come up with a workable plan.

"It's a sad day for the county, but I don't see many other options out there," Gardner said. "Maybe the union can still formulate another plan that would give us the opportunity to come up with a plan to save Warren Haven. But it looks a bit grim at this point."