By Kristi L. Nelson of the Knoxville News Sentinel

Advocates for Gov. Bill Haslam’s Insure Tennessee plan say the cost of not passing it is high — in both human life, and money.

The Tennessee Justice Center and the Tennessee Health Care Campaign, which both support Medicaid expansion, are making Knoxville the 11th stop on their “Counting the Cost for Tennessee Communities” tour of the state.

In conjunction with a new Knoxville Coalition for Insure Tennessee, the two groups will have a public meeting at 7 p.m. Tuesday, Sept. 1, at Concord United Methodist Church, 11020 Roane Drive.

The coalition will provide what it says is information on the economic impact of the state Legislature declining to pass Insure Tennessee, citing federal matching dollars already lost, the number of people who continue to lack health care, and the effect on the economic health of the state’s hospitals (the Tennessee Hospital Association supports the plan).

“Many Tennesseans who have insurance don’t realize the cost to them, as well as (to) Tennessee communities, for not having Insure Tennessee implemented,” said coalition member and local activist Todd Shelton. “We feel that when people realize these facts, an even larger majority of Tennesseans will ask that Insure Tennessee be voted on by the full state Legislature.”

A poll by Vanderbilt University this past spring suggested about 64 percent of Tennesseans support Insure Tennessee, Haslam’s individualized plan to substitute for a Medicaid expansion. About 19 percent oppose it — but 78 percent want the full Legislature to vote on the proposal. (One Senate committee voted against the plan in a special session, and then a second committee voted against it in the regular session, which stopped it from moving forward.)

An estimated 280,000 Tennesseans would be covered by the plan, which would draw $2.7 million a day in federal funds. Last month, the White House Council of Economic Advisers released a report that said if Tennessee had expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, as the federal government originally planned, it could have received $1.77 billion of federal money.

At the Sept. 1 meeting and others on the tour, the Tennessee Justice Center wants to “collect information” about how the lack of a Medicaid expansion “affects individual residents in the Knoxville area,” Shelton said.

People who originally would have been covered under the Medicaid expansion are now in a coverage “gap,” where they don’t qualify for TennCare but make too money to purchase an Affordable Care Act insurance policy through the federal marketplace. They don’t quality for federal subsidies to help them pay for health insurance, since the ACA assumed they would have Medicaid coverage. But the Supreme Court ruled it is unconstitutional for the federal government to force states to expand their Medicaid programs, and Tennessee is among 19 states that so far have opted not to expand.

Under Medicaid expansion, the federal government would pick up the entire cost of new, previously ineligible enrollees for the first three years, phasing to 90 percent by 2020. At that point, the state would be responsible for the 10 percent balance.