WARSAW, Ind. (21Alive) - Pam Galloway wasted no time making her bid for Congressman Marlin Stutzman's seat in the U.S. House of Representatives. She made the announcement Monday, only days after Stutzman announced his intention to run for the seat that will be left vacant by retiring Senator Dan Coats.

Galloway, a Republican and a retired physician, comes to the Hoosier State from Wisconsin where she was elected to the State Senate there in 2012, unseating a 20 year incumbent majority leader. She was in office for 14 months before she resigned and moved to Warsaw, citing family health issues.

However, some believe she may have been running scared, and here's why. While Galloway was in office, the Wisconsin Legislature was dominated by Republicans who passed a collective bargaining bill that was signed into law by the Governor. Not long after, Wisconsin unions initiated a recall of several Republican senators, including Galloway. She resigned before the recall could happen.

Galloway feels strongly about a number of issues. The two she feels are most important are Obamacare and second amendment rights. She says Obamacare needs to be repealed, saying passage of the law was a power grab and made healthcare more expensive, therefore, less accessible. She's also a certified NRA instructor, and feels strongly about protecting second amendment rights, especially for women who have a harder time physically protecting themselves.

A former surgeon, who in her last three years focused mainly on breast cancer, thinks her medical background will benefit her in this campaign.

"As a surgeon you learn to work very hard and learn to work in adverse conditions, and obviously you learn to listen to people because we're taught in medical school that if you listen to a patient long enough they'll tell you what's wrong with them. So if you listen to the voters long enough, they will tell you what's on their mind and what's really bothering them, " said Galloway.

She says her biggest challenge going forward will be getting her name out there. Republican Senators Jim Banks and Liz Brown, who will also run for Stutzman's seat, are well-known names in the state. Galloway knows she'll have to campaign hard so she plans to travel to all the different counties and meet with as many voters as she can.