Every week, CIO Journal offers a glimpse into the mind of the CEO, whose view of technology is shaped by stories in management journals, general interest magazines and, of course, in-flight publications.

A room where executives get help from IBM’s Watson. Executives often resort to outside expertise for advice on possible acquisitions, or in an effort to overcome the limits of groupthink about the next strategic move. Imagine a future in which tapping an independent expert involves traipsing down the hall to an office housing a giant display and microphones that stud the ceiling. International Business Machines Corp. has prototyped such a room, where executives can pose their business challenges to Watson, the Jeopardy-winning supercomputer technology. MIT Technology Review’s Tom Simonite writes of an experiment in which researchers, role-playing as executives, first fed Watson data on the imaginary company’s artificial intelligence strategy and then sought advice from Watson on acquisition candidates in that field. But before CEOs start envisioning a Watson room at their company, they should know that the power of technology cuts more than one way. “People may feel freer to question their boss’s opinion if Watson is the first to suggest there is another way of looking at a problem,” Mr. Simonite writes.

Sashenka Gutierrez/European Pressphoto Agency Robots win! A team of robots play soccer during an event in the World Challenge of the Spanish LFP.

AI, robotics, and the future of jobs. With Watson angling for the corner office, no job is safe from automation. Are the robots coming to take our jobs? The Pew Research Center recently asked nearly 2,000 technologists what the employment landscape will look like over the next decade, as artificial intelligence and robotics continue to gain ground. The experts, who included CEOs, tech journalists, Internet pioneers and researchers at tech vendors, are divided almost 50-50 on whether AI applications and robots will displace more jobs than they create. Some foresee more income inequality and more blue and white-collar displacement. “The central question of 2025 will be: What are people for in a world that does not need their labor, and where only a minority are needed to guide the ‘bot-based economy?” wonders Stow Boyd, lead researcher at GigaOM research. Others are more optimistic, citing humanity’s ability to bounce back. “Technology will continue to disrupt jobs, but more jobs seem likely to be created,” said Jonathan Grudin, principal researcher for Microsoft Corp. So the short answer is that the jury’s still out on whether we’re heading towards a breakdown in social order or a new era of techno-based entrepreneurship. Someone should ask Watson what it thinks?

World will have 34 ‘super-aged’ nations by 2030. The FT’s Sarah O’Connor reports on a Moody’s study that predicts that the working-age population worldwide will grow half as fast between 2015 and 2030 as during the last 15 years. More than one in five people in 34 countries, including the U.S. and China, will be over 65 in 2030 as well. Some countries, such as Japan and Germany, already have crossed that threshold. Having all these old people tottering around will slow global economic growth by 0.9% between 2020 and 2025, although technological innovation could lessen the impact, Moody’s notes. Bring on the robots. Indeed a number of participants in the previously cited Pew study argue that technology will play a larger role assisting aging populations. “I expect more robotic assistance for the elderly and infirm, because the demands are manageable and the need is increasing,” Microsoft’s Mr. Grudin said.