HARTFORD — Some people who buy health insurance on Connecticut's public exchange and receive a subsidy could see their premium jump more than 20 percent next year, a consulting group said Thursday.

However, the prices will vary from county to county and plan to plan, and some customers could see prices drop, Wakely Consulting Group said.

Thursday morning, consultants for the actuarial and health care firm gave their review to the board of Connecticut's exchange, Access Health CT, during its regular monthly meeting Thursday at the Legislative Office Building. The exchange hired Wakely to review rates.

The Affordable Care Act allows for subsidies — in the form of a federal tax credit — for anyone who earns up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level, meaning $45,960 for an individual or $94,200 for a family of four.

Subsidies are tied to the price of a benchmark health plan. All health plans sold on a public health exchange are classified on a scale like Olympic medals: bronze, silver and gold. The benchmark plan is the second least expensive silver plan in a given market.

If the price of the benchmark plan declines from one year to the next, subsidies decline, too, Wakely senior consulting actuary, Julia Lerche, told the board.

"Let's say the benchmark plan changes," Lerche said. "Let's say it's lower. Now, your subsidy has gone down. Even if the rate for the plan that you're in does not change before subsidies, because your subsidy has gone down, now that differential between your plan and the benchmark plan has changed, then you could … see a higher increase than the zero change in the rate."

The Wakely Consumer Impact Analysis offered two examples, using premiums weighted by enrollment this year in all plans within each of Connecticut's counties. Prices vary by county for lots of reasons, such as the contracted prices with doctors and hospitals, and the claims experience, in a certain location.

In the first example, a person who will turn 26 years old next year and makes $22,980 annually — 200 percent of the federal poverty level — would have a very different price change next year in Fairfield County than in, say, Windham County. That person's subsidized bill would jump from $97 per month this year to $122 per month next year in Fairfield County. For the same person in Windham County, the price would decrease from $112 per month to $108 per month, or 4 percent.

Using the same age and income, that person's subsidized health-insurance price would increase 6 percent in Hartford County, 2 percent in Litchfield County and 10 percent in Middlesex County. The same person would see a decrease of 1 percent in New Haven County, 4 percent in New London County, 2 percent in Tolland County and 4 percent in Windham County.

The next example was a family of four with income of 350 percent of the federal poverty level, adults both aged 35, and two children under 21 years old. In Fairfield County, the family's subsidized monthly bill would jump 21 percent from $561 this year to $678 next year. The same family would pay the least in Windham County, $627 per month next year, up 1 percent from $621 per month this year.

The increase in monthly subsidized premiums for the same family would be 8 percent in Hartford County, 5 percent in Litchfield County, 10 percent in Middlesex County, 3 percent in New Haven County, 1 percent in New London County and 2 percent in Tolland County.

Of course, receiving a subsidy decreases the price substantially. For example, without a subsidy, the family would be paying $1,137 per month next year in Fairfield County or as low as $908 in Hartford County. The 26-year-old next year would pay $312 per month in Fairfield County without a subsidy, or as low as $249 per month in Hartford County.

This summer, the state Insurance Department' modified proposed rates for 2015, largely to the benefit of customers by reducing or striking down premium increases. The Insurance Department modified full-price premiums.

The Wakely consulting group looked at how much customers could pay before and after a federal tax credit, or subsidy, for anyone who earns up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level.

At the board meeting, Insurance Department actuary Paul Lombardo spoke to board members about the department's regulatory review of health plans that will be sold on the exchange this fall.

The Affordable Care Act has a number of changing, and temporary, factors that affect the price of health insurance, such as a temporary federal reinsurance program and terms of a risk adjustment program so no one insurer is hurt by the population it insures, Lombardo told the board.

"There's a lot of uncertainty," Lombardo said. "We would expect that rates are going to be on a little bit of a roller coaster over the next couple of years, which I'm sure everyone is not too happy about, but that's just the fact of all the mechanisms that are working."