GALESBURG — The Public Library Board has opted to stick with the city’s health insurance plan for at least six more months to complete more research on outside plans.

The board met with library employees Friday morning to discuss the library’s options for health insurance, which is scheduled to increase starting next year under the Affordable Care Act.

“What I’m suggesting is staying with the city for six months,” said Library Director Harriett Zipfel. “In those six months we’ll get a professional opinion.”

The board agreed, and voted 6-0 to stick with the city for at least half a year. On July 1 the state will start its fiscal year, which means the city’s plan will renew. At that time the library can opt to leave the city’s insurance plan and seek private coverage. Plans are changing at the first of the year due to deadlines created by the ACA.



Zipfel brought in private insurance Chartered Life Underwriter Matthew Schellenberg of Peoria-based Group Benefits, Ltd. to speak to the board and employees about the plans his firm could offer the library. She also invited City Manager Todd Thompson to touch upon the changes to the city’s plan, but he was not in attendance.

Two plans offered by Schellenberg would cost about $20,000 less that the city’s $144,000 plan, and would offer similar coverage.

“Whenever you make a change there’s good and bad,” Schellenberg said. “But I think we offer a competitive plan (to the city’s).”

There was concerns that the private plans were Health Maintenance Organization plans instead of Preferred Provider Organization plans, which employees currently receive from the city.

Schellenberg said his proposal, “looks and feels like a PPO.”

PPOs generally offer more flexibility in health care provider, whereas HMOs are based under one primary physician of the customer’s choice.

The out-of-pocket prices are $4,000 and $4,500 for the two plans proposed by Schellenberg. The plan with the higher costs comes with more copays.

Assistant Director Jane Easterly said what Schellenberg proposed sounded great, but she had concerns about comparing the city’s plan to the private ones.

“He’s a salesman. We didn’t that kind of pitch from the city,” Easterly said.

Easterly, Zipfel and members of the board all felt it is better for them to get an unbiased explanation of the options available before leaving the city’s insurance. However, the deadline for the city is Nov. 30, and Schellenberg said he wants a decision on Dec. 1.

“My other concern is, it’s Nov. 21, it feels like it will be a rushed decision,” Easterly said.

Board member Laurie Muelder said agreed, saying, “I don’t understand what exactly we’re getting for the money.”