Family HealthCare Network, located at 401 E. School Ave., in Visalia (Photo: Submitted)

Forty health care facilities across California are receiving millions of dollars, and Family HealthCare Network is on the list.

On Wednesday, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services announced that more than $36 million is being distributed to California health facilities for renovation, expansion and construction.

Family HealthCare Network, headquartered in Visalia, is receiving $1 million for a new health center in Hanford, said Kerry Hydash, chief executive officer of Family HealthCare Network.

“Family HealthCare Network has been working closely with the city of Hanford on the project for approximately a year,” she said. “The new Hanford project is in development, and set to open within two years.”

Hydash said funds will help triple the size of the new facility, compared to the current location of 10,000 square feet. The site will offer services including primary care, pediatrics, obstetrics, dental, pharmacy, optometry and extended walk-in services.

The millions in funding are coming out of the Affordable Care Act’s Community Health Center Fund, which was extended with bipartisan support in the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015, according to a news release.

“Health centers are cornerstones of the communities they serve,” said Sylvia Burwell, health and human services secretary. “Today’s awards will empower health centers in California to build more capacity and provide needed health care to additional individuals and their families.”

Wednesday’s announcement totaled $260 million in funding to 290 health centers in 45 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. The awards allow health centers to provide care to more than 800,000 new patients nationwide.

About Family HealthCare Network:

Family HealthCare Network is a private nonprofit organization that operates 20 sites, 16 of which are federally qualified health centers located throughout Tulare and Kings counties. With more than 160 medical and dental providers, the network provides access to a wide range of coordinated health services. Family Health Care Network also offers pharmacy services, free transportation and extended evening and weekend hours.

Read or Share this story: http://vtd-tar.co/1T1K8s0