Guide to buying condo from your landlord

Today, I've got answers to questions on buying a home from your landlord, retiree health insurance under Obamacare and charitable donations.

Q: Ann T. of Sausalito asks, "Our landlord has offered to sell us the condo we have been renting. Any advice what to think about?"

A: First ask yourself:

-- Is this a home you can afford? Get a ballpark estimate of the price and talk to a bank or mortgage broker.

-- Will the down payment deplete your emergency fund? What happens if you lose a job?

-- Will you have enough left over to save for retirement, college or other long-term needs?

-- Do you see yourself living in this home long enough to offset the costs of buying and selling it?

Jed Kolko, chief economist with real estate website Trulia, suggests using Trulia's rent-versus-buy calculator ( www.trulia.com/rent_vs_buy). "The reader could put in the rent they're paying now, the price the landlord is offering, and how long they plan to stay there - and see which way the math favors."

Note: For monthly condo fees, click on advanced settings and add them to utilities.

If you decide to proceed, don't go it alone. In most cases, "a landlord is going to be more savvy about real estate than a tenant, who is likely to be a first-time buyer," says Janelle Boyenga, a broker with Intero Real Estate Services.

Find an attorney, real estate agent or friend who has experience buying and selling homes. An expert can help you value the condo, write an offer, understand the required disclosures and walk you through the mountains of paperwork.

Most important: Don't overpay. Visit nearby open houses and look at recent sales prices for comparable condos. This information is available on sites such as Zillow, Trulia, Redfin and Realtor.com. Include pending sales in your search and look at the most recent asking price.

An agent active in your area might have a better understanding of the market than an attorney, but an attorney can provide legal advice. Interview several and ask what services they will provide and at what price.

In a traditional sale, the seller signs an agreement with a listing agent who agrees to market the home in exchange for a percentage of the sales price. Commissions are negotiable but typically range from 4.5 to 6 percent. The listing agent usually gives part of this commission to the buyer's agent. The buyer does not does pay his or her agent directly.

A landlord who is not hiring an agent might accept a lower price, but then you probably will need to pay for help.

How much you will pay depends on how much hand-holding you need and how complicated the deal becomes. Fees are negotiable and you should interview several people.

Lawyers typically charge per hour, whether or not you buy the house. Ask for an estimate and see if they will agree to a flat fee or cap. Larry Scancarelli, a real estate lawyer in San Francisco, says that for a simple transaction in Sausalito, attorney fees for a buyer might range from $2,000 to $5,000.

Agents might want a flat fee or a percentage of the sales price. They might agree to get paid only if the deal closes.

Boyenga and her husband/business partner Eric Boyenga have been involved in several landlord-tenant transactions. In one case, "the buyer paid us a commission to represent them. The seller was unwilling to pay anything," Eric Boyenga says.

In another, the seller paid them a standard listing commission. "She felt she was still saving money (by not putting the house on the market) because she didn't have to paint it or have it vacant for two months," Janelle says.

Eric adds, "There have been cases where we have guided friends and not been paid a dime, but it was not run through our brokerage."

The Boyengas say they won't quote a fee until they have spoken with the tenant and landlord to gauge how much time it will take.

Rich Arzaga, a financial planner with Cornerstone Wealth Management who specializes in real estate investments, says the tenant should also hire an accredited buyers representative, who is a Realtor who specializes in representing buyers. (Find one at www.rebac.net/membershipdirectorysearch.aspx.)

He says a tenant buying from a landlord could get help from an agent for about $4,000 to $5,000 or from an attorney for $5,000 to $10,000.

You could ask the landlord to pay a commission to your agent, "but if the landlord feels like, 'Hell, I'm paying a commission, I'm going to put it on the market,' you could lose what could be a really good deal," says Ilona Bray, co-author of "Nolo's Essential Guide to Buying Your First Home."

Even if you think you know the condo, be sure to get a pest and contractor inspection. An inspector can look at your unit and any common areas that are accessible, says Redfin agent Landon Nash.

In California, people buying into a condo or other common interest developments are entitled to a long list of documents from the homeowners association including its articles of incorporation, bylaws (also called CC&Rs), budgets, board meeting minutes and financial statements. It is important to read them.

Things to look for: Does the HOA have adequate reserves to pay for maintenance? Is there pending litigation? Have HOA dues being going up every year? Are there issues that could result in special assessments? Are there rental or other restrictions?

Q: Gordon T. asks, "I am a retiree. My ex-employer (well over 50 employees) allows me to stay enrolled in the group health insurance provided for all employees (not through Cobra). However, I pay the full premium for the insurance. How could/will I (and others in similar position) be affected by Obamacare?"

A: If you have retiree health benefits, you're considered covered under the health care law and won't have to pay a fee that some uninsured people will pay.

However, "the retiree needs to consider whether a plan on the public exchange makes more sense. The public exchange will offer more choices, but probably more importantly, if the retiree is below 400 percent of the federal poverty line, he or she will get a subsidy to cover part of the premium," says Paul Fronstin, a director with the Employee Benefit Research Institute.

Q: Pat M. asks, "I donate to NPR radio during the 'begathons.' A recent gift offered was 'Downton Abbey' DVDs. I'm a big fan, so I donated $180 and received a confirmation letter showing that seasons one through four were (about) $150. The letter did not say how much I could deduct for tax purposes, so I calculated it would be only $30! I called and they said that was correct - even though they paid just $52.50 for all four seasons. That makes no sense, since they actually received a donation of $127.50. Are they right?"

A: Yes. "The reader can only deduct as a charitable contribution what was contributed in excess of the fair market value of what was received," says Mark Luscombe, principal federal tax analyst with CCH. "Fair market value is the price at which the property would change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller. ... We do not know what NPR used to determine value, but it sounds like it was retail value, which appears appropriate in this case."