Frontiers’ Gay-Friendly Health Care Guide for Southern California 2016

Finding a doctor who understands queer health care can be difficult, but with this second annual guide, we're here to help

Are you happy with your health care? Do you feel comfortable talking to your doctor? Could you afford a medical emergency? If you hesitated when answering any of these questions, you’re far from alone. According to a Gallup survey, one-third of Americans don’t believe the health care system works for them. Face time with doctors hovers around 15 minutes, with only five dedicated to whatever ailment originally brought you into the room. Almost half of Americans couldn’t afford an unexpected $400 bill.

For LGBT Americans, the picture is even worse. According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, nearly a quarter of bisexual men are uninsured. Half of transgender Americans have skipped necessary medical care because they couldn’t afford it. As for those with access to care, a stunning 50% of LGBT Americans aren’t out to their doctors.

Health care in the gay community is a pressing issue, whether it’s affordability or comfort with a provider. For the second year in a row, Frontiers has created a comprehensive guide to health care in Southern California. We’ve expanded the range of providers covered and compiled more information on each. Specifically, we’ve added two new categories—mental health and senior services—and provided a brief summary (albeit not comprehensive) of the insurance each individual or practice accepts.

The goal of this information is to let you discover a provider you truly like, whom you can afford, and one that offers the services you need. A good doctor-patient relationship is one of the bedrocks of great health care, but finding that great general practitioner or psychotherapist is a challenge most aren’t equipped to take on.

“The most important part of finding a doctor is finding one you can have a consistent relationship with,” says Dr. Anthony Scarsella, the President and Medical Director of Pacific Oaks Medical Group, one of the most prominent gay-friendly providers in SoCal. “It doesn’t matter if it’s someone you see through an HMO, or if they take your PPO, Medicare or Medi-Cal; you want a doctor who knows you.”

As the massive health care industry still settles into the laws and requirements of the era-defining Affordable Care Act, it’s becoming harder to maintain a consistent provider. “Insurance can change yearly; that’s what’s happening now,” says Dr. Scarsella, “and it can be confusing and upsetting. As a doctor, it’s not easy to start a relationship and figure out a person’s medical needs in one visit. It’s too daunting.”

For the LGBT population, this problem is conflated with finding a doctor whom we trust and with whom we feel comfortable discussing intimate details and issues. Most often a person’s sexuality won’t be relevant information, but when it becomes a part of the discussion, doctors unequipped to deal with an LGBT client can make mistakes that either bristles or silences a patient. Dr. Scarsella believes that because most doctors received training years—even decades—ago, their sensitivity training and knowledge can be limited. In fact, a Kaiser Family Foundation survey of providers reported that most respondents’ only training regarding gay and lesbian patients was limited to HIV/AIDS.

“A doctor might be too timid to bring up important information, because they don’t want to offend someone, or they might start asking really uncomfortable questions,” says Dr. Scarsella. “They might ask if you have HIV, or a drug problem, and the patient might be sitting there thinking, ‘I wanted to just talk about this other issue!’ It feels like they’re searching you for every possible problem. You don’t feel like they’re seeing you as a whole person. It’s a form of subtle discrimination.”

Dr. Scarsella believes gay patients might be more forthright with information if their doctor is also LGBT. However, he points out that finding a doctor who clicks with you should encompass a wide range of choices and could take effort.

“I think that if you meet a doctor and they might not be the right person for you, it’s perfectly OK to give another one a shot, whether it’s in the same practice or elsewhere,” he says. “A doctor should be someone you feel comfortable with, but a person you’ll listen to when they have to tell you information you don’t want to hear. What works for you is very personal.”

As for L.A.’s gay population and its health, a trend Dr. Scarsella sees is young men moving to the city alone, attempting to navigate both a new life and their wellbeing. “A lot of the time they don’t have insurance, and their health suffers. They won’t get care because they can’t afford it,” he says. “They’re worried about what happens if they get sick, because they don’t know many people,” he says.

Free or low-income clinics can be useful for those without coverage. Ranging from STD testing to low-cost immediate care, these clinics—which are both private and government-run, can have a massive impact on the overall health of the city’s gay population. Even with rigorous testing, proper treatment and the advent of PrEP, gay or bisexual men make up one-half of those living with HIV and an unbelievable two-thirds of new infections. Commitment to care—whatever the form—makes a critical difference in everyone’s quality of life and overall health.

“Accessibility, comfort and consistency are what we need out of health care,” says Dr. Scarsella. “We should make sure everyone has those opportunities.”

Go to Page 2 for General Practitioners listings

Go to Page 3 for HIV Services listings

Go to Page 4 for Dentists listings

Go to Page 5 for Mental Health Services

Go to Page 6 for Senior Services

Go to Page 7 for Free and Low-Cost Services

Go to Page 8 for Help Navigating Covered California

This guide was created from reader-generated nominations and research that included information from the Gay & Lesbian Medical Association, the Southern California Lambda Medical Association and the American Academy of HIV Specialists. In this second edition of the guide, we do not cover alternative medicine, though we welcome suggestions and updates for our ongoing directory online and in future print editions. Please email us at [email protected].

Pages: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 »