It appears the race for Maryland governor is getting tighter and the outside influence is growing stronger.

Mobile users tap here to watch video

The candidates are wrestling for control over the campaign narrative as a new poll finds voters agree with Republican candidate Larry Hogan that the economy is the most important issue, but Democratic Lt. Gov. Anthony Brown isn't acting like he's in trouble.

There are no signs Brown plans to change his focus on social issues and the Democrat Governors Association is kicking in even more money to help him do that.

A just-released Gonzales Research poll shows Brown's lead over Hogan is 4 percent. The national Democratic Governors Association, which has already pumped $750,000 into TV advertising for Brown, is now buying additional TV time.

Former President Bill Clinton recently subbed for former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton at a Maryland fundraiser that raised more than $1 million for Brown. His campaign said they've raised more than $3 million since the primary. Hogan is accepting public funding.

"Brown has run a terrible general election campaign, just terrible. His handlers don't seem to understand Maryland's climate at all. They are running basically a national, highly partisan, highly charged negative campaign," political analyst Barry Rascovar said.

The Brown campaign has tried to make the race for governor about social matters that include a woman's right to choose and gun control, issues already settled by Maryland law.

Hogan is focused on economic issues, relentlessly attacking the record of the O'Malley/Brown administration's tax and fee increases.

More than 800 registered voters told the Gonzales survey that the economy, jobs and taxes are the most important issues in this election.

"I find that a majority of people, regardless of their party affiliation, really want to go in a different direction," Hogan said.

But Hogan talks in generalities. He pledges to get state spending under control then begin rolling back taxes. He promises to eliminate stormwater fees and the levy on retirement income, but he hasn't detailed how he plans to accomplish that.

"What Hogan needs to do is to be a little more specific on how he would go about improving the economy because that is clearly the No. 1 issue for voters," Rascovar said.

Political observers said Brown needs a large turnout from his base and Hogan has to persuade independents and conservative Democrats that he's a better choice.