Topics: Agriculture, bees, colony collapse disorder, Photography, usgs, Sustainability News

It’s Pollinator Week, a national celebration of the massive contribution pollen-transferring insects and animals make to the global food supply — and economy — and a call to action to help protect them before it’s too late. Chief among those needing our help: bees, which have been dying off by the hive-full in a mysterious phenomenon known as Colony Collapse Disorder.

You should care about the fate of the bees if you care about almonds, apricots, mangos, melons — even coffee, to start. In the U.S., honeybees bring $15 billion of added value to agricultural crops. Pollinators as a whole, which also include birds, bats, beetles and butterflies, are responsible for about a third of the entire world’s crops.

But you should also care because they’re pretty damn incredible. As these macro-focused photographs made public by the U.S. Geological Survey’s Bee Inventory and Monitoring Lab attest, the classic image of a fat, yellow and black bumblebee doesn’t do justice to the range of spectacular colors and features found in other bee species.

Check out some favorites below, with edited captions provided by the USGS:

1 of 12

of Close

Fullscreen

Thumbnails Previous Next Bees, like you've never seen them before USGS Bee Inventory and Monitoring Lab Ah, what a lovely ethereal composition. This is the male of the Blue Orchard Bee, studied for its use in orchards as a pollinator. Collected and photographed by Laura Campbell in the Virginia Beach area.

Previous Next Bees, like you've never seen them before Euglossa....the orchid bees, swanky glintlings of the New World tropical forests. This one from our joint trip with the Smithsonian Ant Heads to the interior of Guyana rainforests.

Previous Next Bees, like you've never seen them before USGS Bee Inventory and Monitoring Lab A male Megachile mendica caught in Green Ridge area in western Maryland. One of the more common leaf cutting bees in the state.

Previous Next Bees, like you've never seen them before USGS Bee Inventory and Monitoring Lab Exearete frontalis. Big, Big, Big, In all its black-winged metallic glory...this species is larger than any bee north of Mexico, we trekked 2 days into the jungles of Guyana to find it.

Previous Next Bees, like you've never seen them before USGS Bee Inventory and Monitoring Lab Exearete frontalis again. This species, and the genus as a whole, is a nest parasite on other equally large canopy dwelling Orchid Bees.

Previous Next Bees, like you've never seen them before USGS Bee Inventory and Monitoring Lab White Oak Borer (Goes tigrinus) - larvae live in living white and related oaks.

Previous Next Bees, like you've never seen them before USGS Bee Inventory and Monitoring Lab A male Nomia from Thailand. Note the corkscrewed antennae and the greatly expanded leg segments (presumably useful in mating at nest aggregations).

Previous Next Bees, like you've never seen them before USGS Bee Inventory and Monitoring Lab India. An unknown species of Amegila collected by Suzanne Batra. The fluorescent hairs banding the abdomen of this old-world species are what give the group the general name of blue-banded bees.

Previous Next Bees, like you've never seen them before USGS Bee Inventory and Monitoring Lab First Maryland record for this species: a possible nest parasite of Andrena wilkella. Picked up at Andelot Farm in Kent County, Maryland.

Previous Next Bees, like you've never seen them before USGS Bee Inventory and Monitoring Lab Paraguay! Cactus! This species and its kin feed their young cactus pollen. Specimen from the Packer lab at York University.

Previous Next Bees, like you've never seen them before USGS Bee Inventory and Monitoring Lab A male Nomia from Thailand. Note the corkscrewed antennae and the greatly expanded leg segments (presumably useful in mating at nest aggregations).

Recent Slide Shows "The Bachelorette" men are the worst: 7 reasons why this season is going to be a glorious disaster Script to Screen Donald Trump is a horror movie: No, really! Blood moon magic: 17 amazing images of the supermoon around the world Previous