Miron won the Deloitte 75 award for its employment practices and workplace environment. The Wauwatosa office has some unique features such as studios where people can collaborate on projects, and most of the employees have a window view from their work space. Credit: Angela Peterson

By of the

Before getting hired at Miron Construction Co., one of the state's largest general contractors, candidates have to receive the endorsement of the bosses: CEO David Voss Jr. and Timothy Kippenhan, vice president and chief operating officer.

It's standard practice at Miron, a company with 1,200 employees with its headquarters in Neenah and offices in Wauwatosa, Madison, Wausau and Cedar Rapids, Iowa.

"If you are going to work at Miron, Dave and Tim are going to have the final blessing on whether you get to wear a Miron jersey or not," said David Walsh, vice president of leadership and organizational development.

Miron's annual revenue of approximately $675 million places it on the 2015 list of the 75 largest privately or closely held companies in Wisconsin. Its work can be seen throughout the region in industries as diverse as entertainment (including improvement and expansion projects at Lambeau Field), health care (Aspirus Wausau Hospital addition and remodel) and commercial real estate (One Financial Place, Middleton), among many others.

Miron won this year's Deloitte Wisconsin 75 People award for its commitment to its employees.

Miron was founded in 1918 by Canadian immigrant Patrick G. Miron. In its early years, the company rented office space for $25 per month, and its work was largely concentrated in the Fox River Valley.

Today, Miron's office space includes the 112,000-square-foot Neenah headquarters, which is also a showcase for prospective clients.

Often, a tour of the building and an explanation of how the company functions persuade someone to hire Miron, according to Walsh.

"We consider the building to be a learning tool," he said.

Prospective employees are told that Miron is a place they can expect to retire from. When candidates are hired, regardless of their position, their photo and a short story are posted on the company's website.

"It's the line-level employees who are doing the day-in and day-out work at Miron. So we celebrate and highlight all of them," Walsh said.

The company has a full-time "dream coach" whose job is to help employees balance their work and personal goals. Employees can meet with the coach, privately and confidentially, on matters such as setting financial goals, pursuing education, and starting a small business.

In one case, Walsh said, the coach helped find an employee's birth mother.

About eight times a year, the company's senior leaders host "field appreciation events" where the leaders serve dinner to employees at various locations. At the events, employees also learn more about the company, recent work that's taken place, and other things.

"It's a chance for the craftspeople to see Dave (Voss) and Tim (Kippenhan) in a relaxed setting. I think it's been a good way to keep that bond with the field employees," Walsh said.

Miron has a large fitness center at its headquarters and an employee wellness program manager who organizes various events and helps individuals with their health goals.

The company sponsors the Fox Cities Marathon, and it's the sponsor of Quarry Quest, an annual event that raises awareness of careers in the construction industry.

At Quarry Quest, youngsters can see what it's like to control a crane in a rock quarry or what it's like to be a carpenter or a mason.

The event, which attracts several thousand people, comes as the Associated General Contractors of America has found that 86% of contractors have difficulty filling jobs.

"This is an opportunity to plant that seed about construction being a positive employment opportunity," Walsh said.