I am a hard-line constitutional conservative who believes in the Constitution and the original intent of the Constitutional Amendments, not these watered-down versions we’ve allowed the crooked politicians in Washington to foist upon us.

I no longer consider myself a Republican because they have betrayed us and the Constitution they took an oath to protect. And although in my youthful naiveté I made the colossal mistake of voting for Jimmy Carter once, I am definitely not a Democrat.

Over the years both Republicans and Democrats have gradually twisted and undermined the original intent of the Founding Fathers and the foundational document forged by them to such an extent that I fear for the continued survival of our great republic and our existence as a free people.

The Washington establishment crowd have become so enamored of themselves and intoxicated with power and greed that they no longer serve the people. Instead, they cater to corporate America and other anti-American special interests who own them lock, stock and barrel.

They have sold their souls and the well-being of the citizens and this nation “down the river” by intentionally circumventing and bending the Constitution to accommodate themselves and their corporate bosses.

Can any clear-thinking, common-sense person really believe that mega corporations “donate” millions of dollars to politicians with no strings attached? They do not! Those large sums of money are “given” to the corrupt Washington elites with the full expectation that laws will be passed to protect and serve their interests, and to heck with the people.

Far left-wing politicians such as Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, Nancy Pelosi, Harry Reid and others of their ilk are a socialistic cancer eating away at the Constitution and the heart of this once-great nation.

They are aided and abetted by most of the establishment Republicans who are so intent on maintaining their gravy train, the status quo, that they’re doing everything in their power to usurp the will of the people by attacking the candidates chosen by an overwhelming majority of voters.

Those candidates who are Washington “outsiders” and anti-establishment Republicans are under full-blown attack from within their own party because they’ve said they WILL do what the majority of believers in the Constitution and the Bill of Rights want them to do and turn Washington’s corrupt little playhouse upside down.

The Constitution was designed to limit the powers of government, something most politicians have forgotten. The essence of the Constitution can be found in the enumerated powers doctrine which says the powers of the federal government are specifically enumerated and limited.

The Tenth Amendment clearly points this out by saying those powers not granted to the federal government are reserved to the states or the people. “The powers granted to the government,” as James Madison stated, “are few and well-defined.” The increasing lawlessness in Washington stems from the political Elite’s intentional rejection of that idea.

The most disturbing challenge to the Constitution of late has been the bipartisan effort to tip the balance of power among the three branches of government in favor of the Executive Branch.

The open contempt presidents, past and present, have shown Congress, and Congress’ apparent willingness to abdicate its constitutional responsibilities, should be sounding an alarm to all Americans. We are headed toward a dictatorship, if we are not already there, and have only been living under the illusion of freedom for the past several decades.

While we have been dozing at the wheel, our civil liberties have been under a continual onslaught from the far-left socialists. The many federal scandals exposed over the past several years underscore this fact and reflect a society in which individual rights are no longer a primary concern in Washington.

Meanwhile, the mainstream media has all but ignored the Benghazi debacle and other federal crimes against the America people by their hand-picked candidate, Hillary Clinton, while she was Secretary of State, and is giving her the same free pass it gave Obama when he was running for president.

Look, all I’m saying is if you want more big government control, more attacks on personal freedoms, would love to see the expansion of Obamacare, want totally open borders and more illegal immigration, and don’t mind having your Second Amendment rights trampled on, and more anti-Christian laws and a more socialistic-leaning nation, then by all means vote for Hillary Clinton. That is your right.

On the other hand, if you’re sick of Washington’s “business as usual” attitude by lying career politicians, then vote for Trump or Cruz. Either of them will be far better than Hillary or whichever alternative “candidate” the establishment Republican Party may try to force on us.

My preferred candidate was Dr. Ben Carson, but now that he has suspended his campaign, I stand ready to back whomever wins the most electoral delegates, be it Ted Cruz or Donald Trump.

Mark my word, if the Republicans continue their divisive war on the candidate chosen by the majority of voters and pull some kind of backroom “good-old boy” shenanigans at the RNC Convention, Hillary Clinton will be our next president. Then God help us all. We might as well change the name of our country to “The United Socialist Republic of America” because we will be well on our way to becoming just that!

O.T. Haygood Jr. of Huntington can be reached at Othcla@yahoo.com.