The Treasury’s schedule of financing includes the regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills, which will be held Tuesday as the markets will be closed Monday for Martin Luther King’s Birthday. The regular four-week bill auction will be moved to Wednesday.

At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 0.24 percent. The rate on the six-month issue was 0.36 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 0.19 percent.

The following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:

MONDAY

Florida Transportation Department, $173.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.

TUESDAY

Florida Board of Education, $145 million of debt securities. Competitive.

Owatonna, Minn., Public School District, $66.3 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.

WEDNESDAY

Minnesota, $121.3 million of school district general obligation bonds. Competitive.

Montgomery County, Pa., $55 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Newton, Mass., $76.5 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.

University of Kentucky, $109.3 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.

Washington State, $673 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.

THURSDAY

Athens, Tex., Independent School District, $59.9 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.

Cecil County, Md., $51 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.

Eastern Carver County, Minn., Independent School District $65 million of general obligation bonds. Competitive.

University of Houston, $285 million of revenue bonds. Competitive.

ONE DAY DURING THE WEEK

Forsyth County, Ga., $100 million of general obligation bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.

Harris County, Tex., $265.5 million of unlimited tax school building and refinancing bonds. Wells Fargo Securities.

Hidalgo County, Tex., Drainage District, $53.5 million of unlimited tax refunding bonds. Jefferies.

Indiana Finance Authority, $163.4 million of hospital revenue refunding bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.

Lakeland, Fla., $124.5 million of energy system revenue and refunding bonds. Goldman Sachs.

Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $176.5 million of health care revenue bonds. Morgan Stanley.

Massachusetts Development Finance Agency, $235.3 million of health care system revenue bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Massachusetts, $100 million of health care system taxable bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.

New York State Housing Finance Agency, $68 million of affordable housing revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.

New York Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, $300 million of general revenue bonds. Citigroup Global Markets.

Rochester, Mich., Community School District, $128 million of school building and site debt securities. Stifel, Nicolaus.

Rockwall, Tex., Independent School District, $111.5 million of unlimited tax school building bonds. Raymond James.

University of Southern Mississippi, $58.5 million of revenue refunding bonds. Raymond James.

Vermont Education and Health Building Finance Agency, $170 million of University of Vermont medical center debt securities. Citigroup Global Markets.

Washington, D.C., Water and Sewer Authority, $372.3 million of public utility revenue refinancing bonds. Loop Capital Markets.

Washtenaw County, Mich., $70.7 million of school building and site unlimited tax general obligation bonds. J. P. Morgan Securities.