Employment of physician assistants is projected to grow nearly 40 percent by 2022. Itâ??s a big reason why Grand Valley State University is expanding its program to Traverse City.

Grand Valley did a study to find out what cities had the greatest need for medical providers, and the most demand from students, and they say Traverse City won hands down.

Next fall, 12 students in Traverse City will begin studying to become physician assistants in Grand Valley's expanded program.

â??I think the most exciting part of this is that we're going to be providing health education to people in the community so that when they graduate they can provide medical care to the citizens of this community,â?? said GVSU Associate Dean of the College of Health Professions Theresa Bacon-Baguley.

It's the only PA program north of Mount Pleasant, and the only one in Michigan to have a distance learning program using satellites to communicate from Traverse City to Grand Rapids.

â??Across the country the need for physician assistants is greatly increasing with the Affordable Care Act, with the need of healthcare providers,â?? said GVSU Physician Assistant Studies Program Chair Andrew Booth. â??The need is astronomical.â??

And that includes Traverse City.

â??Munson Healthcare is the dominant employer in this region,â?? said NMC President Tim Nelson. â??In fact, itâ??s the largest employer in Michigan north of Grand Rapids. As rural organizations here, we have problems attracting people and so by you adding this program, this is going to make a huge difference to delivering healthcare in northern Michigan.â??

â??Where we train individuals is a very good indicator of where they might end up working so what we wanted to do instead of to bring them to Grand Rapids to train them as PAs we wanted to bring the program to them,â?? said Booth.

Therefore all of the students in this program must have a connection to northern Michigan.

â??If the individual is from that area, born and raised, gets educated in that area, they are more apt to stay,â?? said Bacon-Baguley. â??They have roots. They want to make their community better.â??

Grand Valley has had nearly 400 PAs graduate since their program began 20 years ago, and 98 percent of their students pass the board certification.