An 8-year-old Florida child grew his hair out for over two years to help children affected by hair loss.

An 8-year-old Florida child grew his hair out for over two years to help children affected by hair loss. Facebook/Deeanna Thomas

Hair loss caused by cancer treatment or any other medical condition can be tough to deal with, especially when the patient is a child. That’s exactly what 8-year-old Christian McPhilamy thought two years ago after seeing a commercial for St. Jude’s Children Research Hospital with his mother Deeanna Thomas.

Eight-year-old grows his hair out for over two years to help children affected by hair loss. Facebook/Deeanna Thomas

Christian, who at the time was sporting a short spiky hair cut, knew exactly what he wanted to do. This past Wednesday, two and a half years after seeing the St. Jude’s commercial, Christian’s blond locks that fell down his back were tied into four 10-inch-long pony tails, chopped off by Dad, and sent to Children With Hair Loss, a nonprofit donating wigs to children with hair loss due to cancer, alopecia, etc.

8-year-old grows his hair out for over two years to help children affected by hair loss. Facebook/Deeanna Thomas

“Two years ago my son saw a St. Jude commercial that changed his life forever,” Thomas said in a Facebook post. “He chose to do his own research and find a way to help.”

Just as impressive as his altruism is Christian’s knack for ignoring the unwarranted criticism he received due to his flowing blond locks. Despite negative reactions from some of his classmates and even some adults, Christian was unshaken and continued his two-year quest of not going to a barber. According to Children With Hair Loss COO Christine Wong, around one out of every 50 donations come from boys.

8-year-old grows his hair out for over two years to help children affected by hair loss. Facebook/Deeanna Thomas

“He has endured an awful lot of criticism, and yes even bullying, throughout this time,” Thomas added. “From his peers calling him a girl to even coaches and family friends telling him he should cut it or offering him money to. Even still, he has never once, strayed from his goal and always took the time to educate others on why he made the choice to grow his hair. I am one proud mommy as always.”