Hospital emergency rooms have their hands full providing care.

And from the incessant sounds of sirens echoing through many city streets, ambulance operators seem just as busy.

Outsourcing these services has become common practice.Envision Healthcare Holdings ( EVHC ) comes to the rescue on both fronts.

The Colorado-based company is a leading player in staffing hospital emergency departments through its EmCare division and providing medical transport through American Medical Response, or AMR.

Both businesses have "brand recognition," said Envision Chief Executive William Sanger, who has been overseeing both as CEO since 2005.

Envision went public last year, for the second time -- two years after a private-equity firm had taken it private again. But the firm's roots go back much further.

EmCare, the larger business of the two, was founded in 1972, two decades before AMR. At first it provided emergency-department staffing and related services to hospitals in Texas. But acquisitions broadened its reach nationwide.

Now more of EmCare's growth is organic rather than acquired.

Doctors On Call

Hospitals can buy single services or bundled packages to meet their staffing needs. EmCare can provide ER physicians, trauma surgeons, anesthesiologists, radiologists and "hospitalists" -- doctors who give care in the hospital after an initial episode is treated.

"They have really differentiated themselves with their bundled offerings. And that's led to industry leading organic growth," said analyst Richard Close of Avondale Partners.

He says Envision's new contracts are growing 13% to 15% annually. In contrast, chief rivalTeam Health Holdings ( TMH ) is primarily growing through acquisitions, he says.

On the medical transportation side, competition is fragmented. About 50% of 911 emergency requests are handled by local fire departments, the other half by private ambulance services, Sanger says.

Not only is Envision's AMR the largest of its kind in the country, it has been "benefiting from financial woes of some competitors," says Jason Gurda, an analyst with KeyBanc Capital Markets.

For example, one of its largest rivals, Rural/Metro, declared bankruptcy last year. More recently, a smaller rival "went out of business overnight," he said.

Sanger says AMR has "several hundred 911 contracts and literally thousands of relationships with hospitals," the latter for transporting patients to facilities such as dialysis centers and nursing homes.

"We've identified protocols to improve survival rates," Sanger said of its ambulance service. AMR gets high marks in cardiac survival and is looking to improve stroke survival rates.

Both of Envision's core businesses are getting modest boosts from health care reform under the Affordable Care Act, or ObamaCare.

"It's translating into more patients, more revenue and more profit," Sanger said of expanded insurance coverage under ObamaCare.

The 20% of patients who weren't able to pay for ambulance services or emergency-room visits is now closer to 18% because of ObamaCare, he says.

"Generally the positive impact from the Affordable Care Act has been a shift from the uninsured into Medicaid," Close said.

Health care reform has also put a sharper focus on integrated health care, which is a positive for Envision. Reimbursement based on outcomes or quality metrics has "positioned Envision to be a partner to hospital systems," Gurda said.

That's because EmCare provides a more integrated approach to health care than the fragmented care typically delivered by hospital staffs, he says.

"One of the things EmCare does well is help those partners achieve quality outcomes. Part of it is being focused -- making that a key operational point for employees. And it's invested quite a bit on the (information technology) side," Gurda said.

New Hospital Deals

Such strategies have led to a growing number of contract wins with hospitals, which in turn is driving much of the company's revenue growth. Revenue year-over-year has grown in double digits for seven straight quarters.

EmCare has around 750 individual contracts with hospitals or hospital systems, Sanger says. Its largest ones are with Hospital Corporation of America, orHCA Holdings ( HCA ), and Baylor Health Care System in Texas.

EmCare generated net revenue of $690 million in the second quarter, a 21.2% gain over the prior year. AMR's revenue rose 16.7% to $385.3 million, its strongest performance in years.

Total revenue in the second quarter jumped 19.6% from the earlier year to $1.08 billion. Adjusted earnings were 28 cents a share, up from the equivalent of 5 cents in the prior year.

Based on improving financial results this year, Envision raised its full-year adjusted EPS guidance to $1.15 to $1.20 from $1.10 to $1.15 previously. Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters expect full-year revenue to climb 17% over last year to nearly $4.4 billion and per-share earnings to rise 73% to $1.17.

Aftercare Opportunity

A third business, called Evolution Health, is in early development. It currently generates just a small amount of revenue, Sanger says.

Evolution embraces a "continuum of care" model, he says, which seeks to manage patients' health care after they are discharged from a hospital.

"We started an integrated-care model in the hospital so we're taking it to another level," Sanger said.

Evolution has been lining up work with health plans to manage their most seriously ill customers and has already hired roughly 1,500 clinicians.

Starting in January, Envision's Evolution will spearhead six pilot programs in conjunction with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, or CMS, involving the "sickest patients," Sanger says.

He thinks Evolution will grow quickly over the next five to seven years.

"It could be the size of our other two services," Sanger said.