Senator Ted Cruz and Sarah Palin showed up Sunday at a Tea Party rally as famous politicians who were there to talk about how it’s wrong to politicize the World War II monument (which has been closed since October 1 thanks to Tea Party congressmen refusing to fund the government). Naturally, they made this anti-politicizing argument by way of attacking the president.

“We are here to honor our vets,” Palin said. “You look around though and you see these barricades and you have to ask yourself is this any way that a commander-in-chief would show his respect, his gratitude to our military?” and concluded, seemingly blind to irony, “Our veterans should be above politics.”

Ted Cruz chimed in to throw a zinger at Obama, insisting, “”He said, ‘If you open the memorial I will veto it.'”

Of course, this is false. What Obama did say is that he would veto a measure to only open the parts of government that are giving Republicans bad PR during the government shutdown (like the World War II monument) while keeping everything else closed. Which seems fair enough.

But the one thing the Tea Party conservatives are good at is having the sheer cojones do stuff like shut down the government and then hold a protest about Obama shutting down the government. When he totally did not do it. At all.

Polls show that most of America rightly assesses blame on Republican House members for the shutdown. After all, they were the ones who refused to sign a continuing resolution to fund the government unless the Affordable Care Act, which was signed into law three years ago and upheld by the Supreme Court in 2013. But still Tea Partiers find a way to make this Obama’s shutdown.

It’s incredible magical thinking that had thousands of people protesting in DC on Sunday. Tractors were on hand to rip down barricades that block access to the World War II memorial in lieu of usual park rangers, and that protesters dumped them on the White House lawn.

Meanwhile, back in reality, Guardian reports thousands of veterans are scheduled to rally DC over concerns that the shutdown will result in a suspension of disability payments and benefits like mental health care for vets.

So Ted Cruz will shut down government, then show his face at a rally and blame the president for blocking these sad, sad veterans who just want to celebrate World War II at their monument, all while potentially blocking actual care for veterans who really need it. Classy.