[Post updated at 9:32 p.m.]

A 5-year-old boy died Sunday after being found inside a hot car in Burleson, according to city officials.

Zachary Elshaarawy, who had autism, is thought to have wandered from his house and gotten into the backseat of an unlocked car unnoticed. He may have been in the car for an hour, Officer Jae Berg said.

The boy’s grandmother called 911 at 1:05 p.m. after she and others could not find him after looking for more than 15 minutes, he said.

More than a dozen residents, police officers and firefighters did a sweep of the area, including inside the house, a nearby lake and near Highway 174, city spokeswoman Sally Ellertson said in a statement.

A patrol sergeant found the unresponsive boy inside a car parked on the street between the child’s home and a neighbor’s house.

Firefighters and medics performed CPR and tried to cool down Zachary, Berg said. The boy was taken by ambulance to Cook Children’s Medical Center, where he died in the emergency room about 3 p.m., according to the Tarrant County medical examiner.

Kansas-based Kids and Cars, a national child safety organization, reported that 15 children have died in hot cars in the U.S. this year. Four have been in Texas.

North Texas had a hot car death this year, in July, when a 2-year-old girl was unknowingly left strapped in her safety seat.

Janette Fennell, president and founder of Kids and Cars, said for years, Texas has had more hot car deaths than most states.

She advised parents to always “look before you lock” to prevent the possibility of forgetting a child in a car.

“The most important thing that parents need to understand … they need to understand that this can happen to anyone,” Fennell said. “The biggest mistake people make is they say, ‘No this could never happen to me.’”

She said 33 percent of cases of hot car deaths happen when a child gets into a car and can’t get out. In 54 percent of hot car deaths, parents forget to take their children out of the car.

She advised parents to always lock their doors and keep their car keys out of reach of children.

“These vehicles are really attractive to little ones,” she said. “They may not understand that once you get in … they may not know how to get out.”

Texas House Bill 2574, which passed in June, requires new parents to receive vehicle heatstroke education, along with other materials, upon discharge from the hospital. That bill goes into effect Sept. 1.

The temperature reached 98 degrees Sunday afternoon at the Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport.

Jan Null, a meteorologist and lecturer at San Jose University, said that a car in 98-degree weather could have an internal temperature of 140 degrees.

“Objects or a person inside the car in direct sunlight would have been significantly hotter,” Null said by email.