The Capitol building in Washington. Bloomberg News

The Bipartisan Policy Center‘s Commission on Political Reform has spent the past year assembling a “blueprint” for electoral changes and congressional reforms to encourage greater citizen engagement in the political process.

It should, however, be no surprise that a report from a Washington organization headed by former members of Congress would take a decidedly insider view of what needs to be done to reform our politics and would offer, by its own admission, only “incremental” reforms.

The most detailed part of the plan deals with congressional rules changes. The suggestions may be a step in the right direction–former Senate majority leaders Trent Lott and Tom Daschle wrote about some of their proposals here Tuesday–but very few would engage or even interest the average voter.

The central problem with the commission’s tepid recommendations is evident in the name of the report: a “Bipartisan Blueprint to Strengthen Our Democracy.” That leaves out the 40% of voters who don’t identify with either major party. A far more apt name for what’s needed to reform our political process would be a Non-Partisan Agenda for Political Transformation.

Most of the people who participated in this effort are former Republican and Democratic officeholders and staff members who have thrived in the current system. But most Americans think the two parties and Washington’s insider culture are responsible for our political dysfunction. The latest Gallup poll found Congress’s approval rating at a measly 7%.

Here is one example of where Tuesday’s report gets it wrong: In calling for redistricting reform to address gerrymandered, uncompetitive legislative districts, the report says “a good redistricting process is one that has the support of the legislators and voters of both parties.”

Most voters would say a good redistricting process takes power away from partisan politicians interested in ensuring their own reelection and gives it to Republican, Democratic and independent voters. The successful California Citizens Redistricting Commission is an example of such an effort, adopted through a ballot initiative, not by the legislature.

To be fair, the Bipartisan Policy Center has some good proposals, including adopting open primaries for all registered voters, eliminating caucuses and conventions to select candidates, expanding voter access through online voter registration, and extending early voting in all states.

But in too many instances the recommendations exclude or dismiss the concerns of the very voters the project aimed to engage in the political process.

Linda Killian is a journalist and a senior scholar at the Woodrow Wilson Center. Her most recent book is “The Swing Vote: The Untapped Power of Independents.” She is on Twitter: @lindajkillian.

RELATED IN THINK TANK:

Former Senators Lott and Daschle: Filibuster Reform and Other Fixes for the Senate

Congress’s New Low

Why So Many Voters Distrust Congress