No Quarter Blog Daniel Bice, the Journal Sentinel's watchdog columnist, holds politicians and the powerful accountable SHARE

By of the

President Barack Obama recently quoted a nonexistent Bible verse to help sell his executive action on immigration, earning the scorn of his conservative foes.

But it appears that Gov. Scott Walker -- whose father was a Baptist minister -- made a similar mistake when talking to the Wall Street Journal last month about Obamacare and Medicaid. Walker is angling to run for president in 2016.

“It’s probably not fair to ask the son of a preacher to use biblical metaphors,” Walker said. “My reading of the Bible finds plenty of reminders that it’s better to teach someone to fish than to give them fish if they’re able. . . . Caring for the poor isn’t the same as taking money from the federal government to lock more people into Medicaid.”

OK, where exactly does the Bible say that?

In one of his best-known miracles, Jesus feeds a crowd of 5,000 by giving them fish and bread. Jesus performs a miracle on another occasion after telling his followers where to throw their fishing nets. In yet another instance, Jesus directs his disciples to be "fishers of men."

But those passages don't make Walker's point.

The recently re-elected Republican governor is actually referencing an old Chinese proverb:

"Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime."

Team Walker disagrees.

"The governor specifically says it’s in his reading of the Bible," said Laurel Patrick, press secretary for Walker. "He’s not quoting scripture."

But one Walker critic said it's clear the governor confused text and source.

"It's technically true that Medicaid funding isn't in the bible, but the Chinese proverb Gov. Walker references isn't there either," said Scot Ross, head of the liberal group One Wisconsin Now.

Obama came under fire earlier this week by attributing a cliché to the Bible while talking about immigration during an event in Nashville.

"The Good Book says, don't throw stones in glass houses," the president said.

Walker was himself the butt of a number of jokes -- including a bit on "The Colbert Report" on Comedy Central -- after an old letter surfaced this week from his days as Milwaukee County executive in which he told a Jewish lawyer: "Thanks you again, and Molotov."

Walker probably intended to say "mazel tov," a Yiddish term used to congratulate someone. He has chalked up the gaffe to a "typo."