Dr. Johnny Serrano said he just wants the Latino community know he’s available. He has appeared on Spanish radio, where he talks about being aware of the need for check-ups, especially when it comes to screenings dealing with the colon, thyroid, bladder and hemorrhoids.

He wants patients to know they can take care of varicose vein issues right in his office at Precision Surgery at 5310 W. Thunderbird Road.

He said, “Varicose veins are treatable and most are covered by insurance.”

As a member of the Arizona Latin Medical Association, Serrano stays in touch with other Latino physicians.

“So, now they know me,” he said, referring to patients in the Hispanic community. “They feel comfortable. I speak the language, not just over the phone.”

Being comfortable with a physician makes it easier to get a diagnosis. And Serrano believes he manages that situation very well.

“Older people, Mama, I call them, just a sign of courtesy. Older gentlemen, I call them Papa,” he said.

As a transplant 20 years ago from New York, Serrano confessed he “wasn’t enthralled with Spanish” until he was a third-year medical student.

“That was a big deal,” he said. “I would go here and there” and he eventually learned it was “a big deal” to know Spanish.

“It’s been a huge help to me,” he said.

Serrano ticked off the statistics, saying his Hispanic patient population is now at 40 percent. At one point, his English-speaking colleagues were referring patients. Now, he gets referrals from the ALMA. And, he said, patient referral works very well. He considers it an honor.

“There’s no greater flattery,” he said. “They really trust me to send their friends. Also, hospital staff, trusting you and knowing your skills; surgery can go wrong in the wrong hands.”

He speaks at physicians’ offices three times a month, and has recently begun advertising in ValPak, a free ads-only flier that reaches households throughout the Valley.

He works alone at Precision Surgery, and said he is happy to be solo, “until they let the hammer down and force me to join a group.”

“They” is his word for the Affordable Care Act, commonly referred to as ObamaCare.

Serrano wants to reach out to the Hispanic community and let members of that segment of the West Valley know he is a physician who can talk with them in their own language, and understand their needs.

Serrano is aware of the numbers. With 17 percent of the U.S. population being Hispanic, he wants to increase the percentage of Hispanic physicians, which stands at just 5 percent.

“That translates to 2,000 patients per doctor,” he said. “I’m representing that 5 percent being in the community.”

He’s a preceptor, which means medical students come to his office and go to counsultations with him.

“They get one on one with me, experience surgery,” he said. “It’s a way for me to give back. I make sure they walk away with something. Knowledge is power.”

He is attempting to gain more Hispanic students. He was hoping that a June 12 varicose vein lecture he was presenting at the Arizona College of Osteopathic Medicine would be an inspiration to students in attendance. He encourages students who want to stay in Arizona to learn Spanish.

At his office, Serrano employs four individuals, three of whom speak fluent Spanish. He can be reached at 602-547-3300.