Jeff Tittel, head of the state chapter of the Sierra Club, said the state is settling with ExxonMobil for "pennies on the dollar.''

Buy Photo Gov. Chris Christie (file photo). (Photo: File photo.)Buy Photo

Gov. Chris Christie's administration wants to settle New Jersey's 11-year-old environmental damage lawsuit against ExxonMobil for a fraction of the $8.9 billion that was sought, a potential deal criticized by an environmentalist as "a complete giveaway to corporate polluters.''

The parties have not announced the deal publicly and it still must be approved by a judge, according to the New York Times, which reported the settlement Friday and said New Jersey will receive around $250 million.

However, the proposed settlement still is also subject to a public process. The notice of the consent judgment is scheduled to be published April 6 and there will be a 30-day public comment period that the state Department of Environmental Protection must consider.

If the DEP signs off, the consent agreement then goes to a judge for approval.

Jeff Tittel, head of the state chapter of the Sierra Club, said the proposed settlement represents "pennies on the dollar.''

"All along the judges were ruling in favor of New Jersey. The administration had no reason to settle, other than balancing the budget and giving away the store to Exxon at the expense of New Jersey's environment," Tittel said.

Christie this week proposed a budget for the fiscal year that begins July 1 that is balanced but does not take into account a $1.6 billion pension payment a state Superior Court judge recently said is due. The state plans to appeal the payment ruling.

The state went to court in 2004 seeking damages from the energy giant for contamination and loss of use of more than 1,500 acres of wetlands, marshes, meadows and waters in northern New Jersey.

ExxonMobil, which did not respond to a request for comment, is a prolific contributor to political campaigns. The company donated $500,000 to the Republican Governors Association when Christie headed that organization last year.

Christie, a potential but undeclared candidate for president, is in California Friday and Saturday on a political trip. Spokesman Kevin Roberts declined to comment.

A Democratic lawmaker, Assemblywoman Annette Quijano of Union County, in a statement said it is "confounding as to why the state would settle for such a low figure after all the time and resources spent litigating this case over a decade and with the judge expected to rule soon."

"Residents in my district and the surrounding areas have seen their quality of life altered by damage that will likely never be undone,'' Quijano said. "This settlement figure does not even come close to restoring these lands to their natural state.''

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1AikUsE