Two bicyclists ride along an unpaved section of the West Ashley Greenway. In the next phase, officials plan to pave 3.35 miles of the Greenway, from Stinson Drive to Croghan Landing, and replace a wooden bridge with an aluminum bridge near Parkdale Drive.

The West Ashley Greenway will remain a little greener for a little longer, as the city’s plans to pave its next section have fallen behind schedule.

Charleston project manager Matt Compton said earlier last year that the 3.35-mile-long paving work would be done by December.

But Compton said recently that the work was delayed because it took longer than expected for the city to get approval and funding from the state Department of Transportation. Also, a few other city projects needed to be done first, he added.

Currently, the easternmost three miles of the 8-mile Greenway have been paved. Compton said the next section, from Stinson Drive to Croghan Landing, could be paved by early 2017.

Kurt Cavanaugh, executive director of the advocacy group Charleston Moves, said his group supports the Greenway paving project, so he’s disappointed it has fallen behind schedule.

The linear path, created on an old railroad right of way parallel to Savannah Highway, is used for both recreation and transportation.

“Anything bike- or pedestrian-related gets pushed to the back burner,” he said. “If we keep doing this, we’re not going to have a bikeable and walkable city any time soon.”

Howard Herbert, who lives near Parkdale Drive in West Ashley, said he’s going to wait to buy a new bike until the paving is done.

When he first learned the Greenway would be paved, he didn’t like the idea. He has traveled on the unpaved portion on an old beachcomber bike, and he enjoys that. But he said he also would like to bike the trail to run errands, such as going to the Harris Teeter grocery store. Such trips would be a lot easier if the entire Greenway were paved.

“With a speedy bike, I could start a Starbucks habit at South Windermere,” he said.

The city plans to pave the next 3.35 miles in two phases, Compton said.

Work on the first 1.1-mile section, from Stinson to Parkdale Drive, will begin in the fall and should be done in early 2017, he said. That work is expected to cost about $235,000, with $188,000 coming from the state DOT and the rest coming from the city.

That portion includes a wooden bridge over a creek near Parkdale Drive. The city plans to replace that with an aluminum bridge that will be built off site, then transported to the Greenway. Installing the bridge likely will take only about a day, Compton said.

Meanwhile, the city will begin paving the 2.3 miles from Parkdale Drive to Croghan Landing around the same time, Compton said. That section could be finished in late 2016, a bit ahead of the Stinson to Parkdale section.

The Parkdale to Croghan section is expected to cost about $670,000, about $500,000 of which will come from the city and about $170,000 of which will come from Charleston County’s share of the state gas tax.

The city has not made plans to pave the final 1.5 miles, from Croghan Landing to Main Road.

All of the paved portions of the trail will be 8 feet wide, he said, which is the minimum for a bicycle trail.

City leaders said they have received mostly positive feedback from residents regarding the paving. Many people have said a paved trail is safer and easier to use.

But West Ashley resident Jock Stender, who regularly rides his bike on the Greenway, said he prefers the unpaved portion, and he was glad to learn he’ll have several more months to enjoy it.

He said paving the last few miles of the trail is a waste of taxpayers’ money because they simply aren’t used as much.

“Why pave everything?” he asked.

Reach Diane Knich at 843-937-5491 or on Twitter @dianeknich.