The next head of the Oklahoma Center for Community and Justice is a Tulsa native who is thrilled to be moving back to her hometown.

And she's excited about taking the reins of an organization with goals and values that perfectly mirror her own.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

OCCJ announced this week that Jayme Cox will be its new president and chief executive officer, replacing Executive Director Nancy Day, who is retiring after 32 years.

The Tulsa-based nonprofit organization works to promote respect and understanding between people of diverse backgrounds through education, advocacy and dialogue.

Cox will transition out of her job as manager of government affairs for Shell Oil in Houston over the next three months and will work into her new Tulsa position.

"I couldn't be more excited and energized by this opportunity," Cox said in an interview before an OCCJ board meeting Thursday in Tulsa.

She said her decade in Houston was a great professional experience, a time to learn and travel and grow, but Tulsa has always been home.

At Shell she worked in public affairs and policy-making for a five-state region, lobbying lawmakers and monitoring legislation that affected the oil and gas industry. Her job took her to China, the Middle East, Europe and other parts of the world. Before that she was with Sunoco in Tulsa, doing similar work.

Earlier, Cox was a career counselor for Resonance Inc., helping women re-enter the workforce, and then was executive director of Leadership Tulsa.

While in that position, she met a lot of people in the nonprofit world, including Day, and she eventually was invited to be on the OCCJ board.

"This is a great organization. I just loved it" from the start, Cox said. "It has always been its mission that really gets my attention."

Her son and daughter, now adults, attended OCCJ's Camp Anytown, a human relations summer camp for high school students.

"At first they said, 'Oh, Mom, do we really need to do that?' But they went, and they both loved it," Cox said.

During her time in Houston, she kept up with what was going on in Tulsa and at OCCJ. When Day told her she was retiring, she was immediately interested in the position.

"I've always thought that some day I would come back to Tulsa, but the idea that I could come back in this way, and be at OCCJ, was just mind-boggling and incredible to me."

Now that her traveling days are over, she said, she can't wait to get a dog.

Looking back on her career, she said, "It's like everything I ever did has pointed toward doing this."

Cox said progress has been made in human relations in the U.S.

"Look where we've come from," she said. "But there's still a lot of work to do."

She said OCCJ's emphasis on education will continue.

"Nelson Mandela said education is the most powerful thing you can use to change the world. And that's what OCCJ does. We use education to make people's lives better and help people understand.

"Prejudice is usually born out of a lack of education."

Cox said that in the future, OCCJ will have to deal with the changing demographics of the community.

"In the next few years, the minorities are going to become the majority. So what does that mean for an organization like ours? We need to look at those kinds of things and be prepared to address community concerns," she said.

Cox described Tulsa as a "very welcoming" community, and part of OCCJ's mission is to make it even more so.

"That's also good for economic development and for business," she said. "If we raise kids who treat people with respect, and they grow up in a community where they're respected, they're going to be confident to go out and do things in the world.

"If everybody feels valued, and they're succeeding in the community, then businesses are going to thrive.

"I think it's essential that we do this work."

Cox described herself as a deeply patriotic person who takes seriously the ideals of liberty and justice for all, and who sometimes cries during the Pledge of Allegiance.

"We're all lucky to be born in this country, at this time," she said. "It's just a miracle, an accident of God."