Local breast cancer survivors and their caregivers gathered for a frozen yogurt social at Menchies in Panama City Beach on Sunday afternoon. Survivor Day is meant to celebrate the lives and friendships of women who beat the disease.

"It's really not the way you want to meet your friends," Marcee Strickland, a breast cancer survivor said. "But there's a bond there that nobody else has."

For the survivors, the mixture of fate and fellowship marks the promise of a brighter, pinker future.

"It's not pink and glitter. It's not. It's a very hard disease Emotional disease and it affects families, friends," Deana Williams, a survivor said. She is on the Survivor committee of the local Making Strides Against Breast Cancer chapter and helped to plan the social.

"So on this day it is a celebration and we can talk about the good, the bad, the ugly and cry together, laugh together. Take someone to chemo sit with them while they have radiation," she said. "I'ts just a network of people who really understand."

For their caregivers, the social network is a promise to them that they aren't alone either.

"It affects one, but it affects everybody in the family also," Neel Hampton said of his mom's battle with cancer. "You gotta be emotionally there for her."

Neel said his mom's diagnosis was a challenging addition to the end of his senior year and the start of college. But he said he has learned so much from the entire experience.

"You look at someone that when she was going through chemo and all that," he said, "and you think about how blessed you are that you can do those things."

"You see someones hair growing in and you know how long it's been since they finished chemo," Williams said. "Or you can see somebody brand new and you can say 'it's going to be OK eventually.'"

For the ladies filling their cups with sugar cookie frozen yogurt topped with chocolate chips and candies, friendship is the sweetest reward of their toughest battle yet.

"It's like an acceptance," Williams said. "You don't have to worry about what you're wearing. What your hair looks like. And I thank God that they signed me up for it."

"Our stories are not the same, yet they are the same," Strickland said of her friend, Keyela Hampton. "Me being six years out, she's not even a year out, I can help her see that there's a future and giver her faith that she will have a good future."

To learn more about the local Making Strides Chapter, you can visit the Facebook page here: https://www.facebook.com/msabcpc