Sioux Falls, SD

The kindness of friends and strangers help a Sioux Falls single mom, who lost just about everything on Christmas Eve.

Sara Rogers came home last night to find someone had stolen most of her children's presents. After taking to social media, she received an outpouring of help.

It's a picture perfect moment for 25-year-old Sara Rogers, celebrating Christmas with her three kids.

Just a few hours earlier, her Christmas didn't look so merry.



Rogers had just returned home from taking her seven-month old son Emmerson to the hospital to treat his seizure disorder.

"Came home Wednesday about 11ish and noticed the doors were all open and walked in and noticed first that the TV was missing and the computer," Rogers said.

So were most of her children's Christmas presents.

This isn't the first time her home has been broken into. It also happened last fall.

This time Rogers turned to social media to find comfort.

"I just posted something on Facebook that oh my gosh my house was robbed again everybody I cannot even believe it my Christmas presents are gone and I am just heartbroken… my kids are sweethearts they are not going to care if they don't have a Christmas but I care, I am a mom and I want to give that to them," Rogers said.

It didn't take long before her post created an opportunity for people to give back.

"I got a knock on the door and it was people I didn't know and I had never seen them before and they were like are you ready for Christmas,” Roger said.

The generosity from others filled her empty living room with even more gifts that were once there before.

"And they walked out to their car and they carried in bag after bag after bag of presents and like I said they don't know me they just said I am really glad I could help I wanted to help someone this year," Rogers, said.

Her 10 year-old-son Andray was shocked at what he saw when he woke up to presents under the tree.

"I think it's a really good Christmas for all of us here I am just shocked that we just have a really good Christmas now," Andray Rogers said.

But he has a message to those bad guys...

"Stop robbing my house," Andray Rogers said.

It's a Christmas the Rogers’ won't soon forget.

"You just can't expect something like this from anyone and people just do it because they care and they are nice," Sara Rogers said.

Rogers called the police and will report her losses to her landlord and her insurance company.

She says she may move in the future, but in the meantime she's grateful for the generosity of others and plans to pay it forward.