Funding education can help schools grow strong. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Well folks, it’s that time of year again. The Legislature is getting under way so school teachers and administrators across the state will be lining up to tell the state how much money we need to survive and to thrive. And we will — again — hear that we are misguided, foolish, greedy and that we will need to get by with less.

Why should we have any hope that this year will be different when the leader of our state government obviously has no intention of supporting the most sacred democratic institution our state has? Gov. Terry Branstad began his term claiming that education was to be his top priority. If this is how he handles his top priority, then I’d like to beg him to put us lower on his list.

The way I see it he has reached into our pockets to steal millions of dollars set aside for our children. He put locks on our school doors until a date that he — and his business partners who care only about squeezing every last cent of profit from Iowa families — deemed appropriate. He plans to mess with school monies to try to help agricultural businesses get off the hook for water they polluted. He allowed for a push to implement Smarter Balanced assessments, which will make huge money for testing companies coming from our state, and is being dropped by other states that have found it to be problematic to say the least. The only real school improvement plan he has focused on is his teacher leadership initiative, which sends the clear and incorrect message that teachers are the main problem with our schools.

Aren’t Republicans supposed to believe in less government intrusion? I’d like governor to stay true to his party and trust local districts to spend the allocated state money. Districts have a strong track record of knowing what is needed to serve our local communities, and the diversity of school populations across the state makes one-size-fits-all mandates nonsensical.

With talk of next year’s budget there is inevitably the constant assertion that “just throwing money at it won’t help.” I wonder if the millions of Americans purchasing Powerball tickets this week would agree with that?

I have to admit there are times when having extra money cannot help. For example, if you’re being attacked by a grizzly bear, I don’t believe throwing money at him will help. Or if you’re grieving the loss of a loved one, no amount of money can take away the pain.

But when it comes to children, having more money can almost always improve lives. More money can mean more books to read in the home and better quality clothes. It can mean more available time from a parent who doesn’t have to work three jobs to make ends meet. It can mean superior health care, child care and healthier foods.

It is the same with children in a classroom. Money means smaller class sizes with more individualized instruction. It means updated materials and technology. It means well paid, high quality teachers who feel appreciated to be compensated for their professional skills. It means fully staffed art, counseling, music, preschool and health departments. It means safe and comfortable school environments. It means the ability to offer courses to reach the interests and abilities of more students. It means field trips, extracurricular clubs and non-dilapidated textbooks.

Can schools get by with less? Yes, under duress. They’ve been struggling to try to keep up with rising costs for years. But, as they say, you get what you pay for. What will the long-term outcome be for a child whose parent can afford a $1 2-liter bottle of soda pop and another child whose parent can purchase a $3 gallon of skim milk? Both children will seem to have their thirst quenched, but we know the future health of the child drinking milk will be stronger. Thus it is with our schools.

There is no single better investment that can be made for the prospects of our great state. As our legislators come together to begin discussing education funding, please ask yourselves what the people of Iowa want. Go to superintendents and ask them what is needed, not only to keep the school doors open, but to really make a difference for their students.

Do you believe that Iowans want to have their children barely getting by with soda pop schools? Or do you believe that they want skim milk schools to nurture, enrich and strengthen their children for the future?

Amy Moore (Photo: Special to the Register)

The right choice is clear. We are counting on all of you to have the wisdom to no longer accept soda pop schools for our state.

AMY MOORE is a regular contributor to A Better Iowa and teaches fifth grade at Woodrow Wilson elementary in Newton. Click here to read more of her work. Contact: primeamy@gmail.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Rm3325