Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Courier-Journal Sports Director Chris White talks about his path to his job, hockey, his daughter and his vision for covering sports for The C-J.

Buy Photo Chris White. November 25, 2014 (Photo: Michael Clevenger/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

My earliest memory is staring into the jaws of a lion.

I had wandered out of the house and across the street into the deep, dark jungle and was lost as the sun was about to set. Worried sick, my grandfather called on his friend, an elephant, who rushed through the brush to save me from a pride of hungry lions and carried me home on his back.

All right, all right — that's not exactly true. I grew up in the very unexotic suburbs of the Tampa Bay area and that was just a tale my grandfather used to tell me. But it's that memory that made me love stories. I love how they're told, how they're heard and how they live on.

It's what led me to memorizing entire stand-up comedy routines as a kid. It's what led me to books on American history, to true-crime stories, to folklore and even to more whimsical topics like alien abduction and cryptozoology (I'm delighted to be living near Louisville's own Pope Lick Monster and hope to get downright neighborly with the Mothman and the Flatwoods Monster, both apparent West Virginians).

Ultimately, it's what led me to journalism. I wanted to have a hand in telling stories, and I've been fortunate to have some great ones to tell. I've covered national championship teams at Florida, Auburn and Alabama and near-misses at the University of Georgia; Olympic gold medalists; world-champion Paralympic athletes; and some of the best high school athletes in the country, including future NFL players Marcus Smith, Jarvis Jones and Isaiah Crowell. I even still delight in having broken a tiny NBA coaching story.

Maybe my interests — along with the fact that my background is more hockey than hoops — don't make me the most typical sports journalist to have landed at The Courier-Journal, but my policy is to let the reporters be the experts. I'm not here to tell you about horse racing. That's Hall of Famer Jennie Rees' job, and there's no one better to do that. I'm just here to help facilitate the storytelling on topics you care about and make sure those stories gets delivered in the ways you want to hear them.

And for that I'm thankful, because there's arguably not a corner of the country with more interesting stories. As far as I'm concerned, Kentucky is the land of Lincoln (how'd y'all let Illinois claim that?) It's home to Muhammad Ali, the most mesmerizing sports figure of all time. And, of course, there is no better basketball the world over.

So help me feel at home in my new home. Tell me your stories and let me help tell them. It's what I want to do every day at work and at home, where my 5-year-old daughter often asks me to recount the time my friend the elephant had to save her from a pride of hungry lions.

Meet Chris White

Born: Lakewood, N.J.

First job: Grocery bagger, Kash n' Karry

Education: Graduated from Springstead High School (2001), Pasco-Hernando Community College (2004) and the University of Florida (2006).

At the C-J: Started in August. Previously worked at the Athens (Ga.) Banner-Herald, Columbus (Ga.) Ledger-Enquirer and Lake City (Fla.) Reporter.

Family: My girlfriend, Cailin, and I have a 5-year-old daughter, Sophia, and a 6-month-old mutt, Georgia (don't let 4-year-olds name dogs).

Hobbies: When I'm not stress-eating Peanut M&M's and learning how to code interactive websites and apps, I like to play ice and roller hockey, go for painful jogs and judge gas stations by the quality of their coffee.

What most people don't know about me: If there is a genre of music that annoys you, I probably played guitar in that kind of band. Ska, sludgy metal, skate punk. I barely ever have time to play anymore, but when I do it's almost only ever about stress relief and jamming along with my favorite albums. There's a sliding scale that starts with Weezer's "Blue Album" on a good day and has stops at Bruce Springsteen's "Darkness on the Edge of Town" and most of the Hot Water Music discography on the way up. It ultimately, on a rough day, ends in playing along to Metallica's "Master of Puppets" until my picking forearm burns. I fantasize about learning how to play drums, teaching my daughter to play guitar and starting the coolest band ever with her.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1rBTNeK