Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

LONDON (AP) — London Fashion Week swung into Day 3 Sunday, packed from morning to night with next season’s womenswear offerings from dozens of designers.

Fashionistas were spoilt for choice, with Temperley, Topshop Unique, Paul Smith and Pringle of Scotland all showing their spring and summer collections.

And amid the blur of models and catwalks, British fashion’s grandest dame Vivienne Westwood was keen to draw the fashion crowd’s attention to politics, using her runway to help campaign for Scottish independence.

Among the day’s highlights:

___

TEMPERLEY GOES CASUAL WITH SNEAKERS

Looking cool and stylish has never been so comfortable: Just ditch the heels, and stick to sneakers.

You know flat shoes are in when a designer like Alice Temperley, who specializes in ladylike occasion wear, makes her models wear lace-up canvas sneakers with everything.

The designer said she wanted a younger, more relaxed daywear look for the upcoming spring and summer, and Sunday’s show is just that: All rolled-up trousers, loose shirt-dresses, flowing kimonos, and soft, fluid takes on the man’s three-piece suit.

Actress Alice Eve, who recently starred in “Star Trek: Into Darkness,” was in the front row with pop star Nicole Scherzinger.

“I love a heel, but flats are good for the day,” said Eve, who was beginning filming of a new movie “Criminal,” with Kevin Costner. “She made it work. I think it was a clever and bold collection.”

Temperley opened her show with androgynous looks that played with men’s suiting, but these looks were chic and feminine instead of manly, coming in monochrome checks, a pastel pink and blue palette, and floaty chiffons. A cropped trench coat was cut high in the back to reveal a glimpse of bare waist.

Dresses, separates and kimonos in vibrant checks, stripes and marine prints followed, taking the audience from city nights out to cocktails by the beach.

The collection was classy as always, and would likely appeal to a wider clientele than the typical Temperley customer.

___

DAME VIVIENNE SPEAKS OUT ON SCOTLAND

Vivienne Westwood may be staging a catwalk show, but Scotland — not clothes — is foremost on the designer’s mind.

Never one to shy away from making a political statement, the eccentric 73-year-old used her runway Sunday to urge Scots to vote “Yes” to breaking away from the United Kingdom in Thursday’s referendum.

Westwood proudly wore a “Yes” badge, and sent her models down the catwalk sporting the same badge prominently on their lapels or hats.