Horses off to pastures unknown

Manhattan: Friends of Animals read with dismay the op-ed by City Councilwoman Elizabeth Crowley (“For animal rights, and carriage horses,” Dec. 21). It implies that carriage horses are some of the best regulated, cared for and most beloved animals in the city.

Yet when we submitted a Freedom of Information Law request to the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene to find out how many horses had entered and exited the city since 2008 and where they ended up, the department replied that it is not required to track that information .

The legislation introduced into the Council ensures the horses will not end up in slaughterhouses. If you care about animals, please don’t take a carriage ride and support the miserable and dangerous nose-to-tailpipe existence of the city’s carriage horses. Encourage everyone you know to contact their City Council members and tell them to support bill No. 573 when it comes time to vote. Edita Birnkrant

Not glue

Manhattan: Given the cachet of owning a retired NYC carriage horse and the number of people willing to cover retirement costs for the carriage horses, it is clear that no carriage horses will go to the glue factory. There are more people ready to adopt the carriage horses than there are available horses. CBS News recently reported, “If the proposal becomes a law, it’s also expected to include a retirement plan for the horses, making sure they end up someplace safe.” Indeed, there is such a provision in the proposal. Veronika Soul

Horse’s eye view

Elmont, L.I.: I am a carriage horse who is being used to plod my way through the heavy traffic of the city streets. Pollution is a big problem. I am not a happy horse. I need to be in a rural atmosphere and setting. Please listen to Mayor de Blasio’s animal-humane message. Frank Castonovo

Outlaws have guns

Manhattan: If you really want to know who has blood on their hands, why don’t you start with the Republicans who block any chance of reasonable gun-control laws that could have kept a gun out of Ismaaiyl Brinsley’s hands? It also appears Brinsley had mental issues. If the Republicans tried to improve the Affordable Care Act instead of trying to stop it, maybe Brinsley would have gotten the help he needed. Bill de Blasio’s talk with his son Dante about dealing with the police is the same conversation black kids have been hearing for decades. The mayor was being honest, not anti-cop! Kelvin McRae

Calling out names

Flushing: To Voicer Marlene Ransom: Please show some respect when addressing people. The term “boy” is racist; the word “muzzle” is used for dogs. Is that how you refer to people? Pat Lynch is not inciting a riot. He is talking to decent people, the ones who suffer in silence, the ones who leave everything to God, so that He can judge. He is not talking to the mutts who are chanting about wanting dead cops. Angel Guevara Sr.

Full spouse

Brooklyn: I wish to thank Mike Lupica for his columns of recent days. I also thank your proofreader for not capitalizing “first lady” for Chirlane McCray. People were upset because LeBron James put his arm around Kate Middleton. But why are we talking about a “first lady”? Was she elected to anything? She is the wife of the mayor, nothing more, nothing less. Voicer Lana Fusco calls for an investigation into Bill de Blasio’s background. What more does she need to know? Went to Cuba on his honeymoon, changed his name to be more electable, was a supporter of David Dinkins. It would help if the press stop reporting his victory as a landslide, which it was not. He is a divider, and we are seeing the fruit of his socialist beliefs. F.M. Gallagher

Don’t forget the councilman

Staten Island: Councilman Jumaane Williams also has blood on his hands for creating tension after tweeting encouragement for Bloods gang members to join anti-police protests. A gang member was arrested after punching a NYPD deputy inspector at a Harlem rally. What did Mayor de Blasio think was going to happen next as tensions were rising? Following the assassinations, de Blasio, Williams and Al Sharpton should have been arrested for violating the civil rights of these two heroes. They were a direct cause of their deaths! John Scanlon

Union divides

Madison, Conn.: Patrick Lynch is serving his fellow officers poorly when he wrongly accuses Mayor de Blasio of inciting the shooting of the two police officers. Au contraire! I believe that authoritarian attitudes like Lynch’s erode the legitimacy of police forces in the eyes of the public they are designed to serve. Police forces are not designed to rule and, like the military, need to first believe in the principle of public service. Yes, policing is under assault. Rather than fight, police need to change the way they do business, with a focus on de-escalation and humanizing rather than demanding obedience and militarizing ordinary encounters with their public. Tom Cleveland

Not so distant history

Jamaica: To Voicers Yvonne Klein and Vincent J. Montera Sr.: It truly bothers me when people label Mayor de Blasio, President Obama, Al Sharpton and Eric Holder as race-baiters and blame them for the killings of these two police officers. I am a 43-year-old homeowner born and raised in Queens. Having watched the history of racism in my lifetime, it is an insult to my intelligence to call these public figures race-baiters. Were they responsible for the Black to the Future 2098 Labor Day Parade in Broad Channel in 1998 where an NYPD officer and two FDNY firefighters joined a float mocking the death of a black man in Texas who was dragged behind a pickup truck? Were they responsible for the 41-shot fusillade at Amadou Diallo just because he had a wallet? Remember how back then Patrick Lynch called his murder legal and appropriate? But these public figures are the race-baiters? It doesn’t make sense! A lot of people need to take a long look at themselves in the mirror and stop blaming everyone else for overt racism! Darien Chandler

Whodunit

Brooklyn: My God, what is wrong with Voicers who blame the killing of two dedicated police officers on the mayor, President Obama, Al Sharpton and Eric Holder? Put the blame on the real culprit who started it all, who caused the tragic deaths of Officers Rafael Ramos and Wenjian Liu. Put the blame on tough guy Officer Daniel Pantaleo and the Staten Island prosecutor who did not see fit to indict this rogue cop. Had he been indicted, we would not be reading about this tragedy today. Eric Garner did not deserve to be choked to death by Pantaleo for selling loose cigarettes. Rhoda Melendez

No alternative?

Forest Hills: There’s an old saying: “Be careful of what you wish for, you might get it.” While I agree that impeaching the mayor may be a good thing, we should find out first who would succeed him. I don’t know how the law reads. If we would be stuck with the City Council speaker as mayor, what would we gain? Elaine Wohl

Freedom of freedom of speech

Bellerose: Ironic: The President and smarmy George Clooney think that a film that includes the assassination of North Korea’s President is free speech, and that Sony was wrong to pull “The Interview.” But if an American were to publish his wish to assassinate Clooney or the President, he would be hauled off to jail. How low do we have to go to get a laugh? Also, why the fuss about the executive emails uncovered by the hacking ? These should all be looked upon as freedom of expression, too. Peggy Leca

In the drink

Victoria, British Columbia: The Daily News posted a story about a girl who was allergic to water (“Woman allergic to water housebound,” NYDailyNews.com, Feb. 19). I am allergic to drinking water. Every time I drink water, I feel like I am going to throw up. I become very sick. I’m trying to survive on juice, but it, too, is making me slowly sick. I have tried Crystal Light, but every time I drink that I get migraines. Then lemon water sends me into a migraine that makes me so sick I cannot function the next day. My stomach hates water, and sometimes I even get rashes from it. Doctors here in Canada have no clue how to treat me. I’m looking for medical help! Fran Hayes