MARK KARLIN, EDITOR OF BUZZFLASH AT TRUTHOUT

Kentucky flag waves over a state that regularly elects politicians who vote against the health interests of the state's citizens. (Photo: Gage Skidmore)

Kentucky has been one of the big success stories of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), including the state's expansion of Medicaid under Gov. Steve Beshear, a Democrat.

Eastern Kentucky radio station Q95 FM reported that:

The Commonwealth is leading the nation, in the drop of uninsured individuals. In 2013 Kentucky joined 30 other states in expanding Medicaid services, and has added nearly 400,000 individuals to its programs. The Obama administration has cheered Kentucky’s efforts on multiple occasions, holding them as an example of the success of the Affordable Care Act.

The Kentucky News Network detailed in August:

The Foundation for a Healthy Kentucky has embarked on a three-year study of how the ACA is affecting Kentucky.



The group released its first report that says about a quarter of the state's population is now on Medicaid after the state decided to expand the program's eligibility requirements.



Eastern Kentucky accounts for 32 percent of the Medicaid recipients while 25 percent live in western Kentucky. Nineteen percent live in Louisville, 16 percent live in Lexington and 8 percent live in northern Kentucky near Cincinnati.



Kentucky's uninsured rate dropped 10.4 percentage points following the expansion, outpacing surrounding states and the national average.

A recent article on KY Forward states that "a new report released this week by Georgetown University’s Center for Children and Families and Kentucky Youth Advocates found that the number of uninsured children in Kentucky fell 27 percent in the first year of the Affordable Care Act."

By all statistical accounts - which represent not just facts and figures, but real people receiving medical care - the implementation of the ACA in Kentucky is a national success story.

However, with the the election last week of a rabidly anti-Obamacare governor, Tea Party Republican Matt Bevin, the health care of hundreds of thousands of Kentuckians is in jeopardy. It is not hyperbole to state that lives are at stake because of Bevin's victory in a low turnout election last week (just 30.7 percent of eligible voters participated, according to CBS-affiliate WKYT.)

Considering the hundreds of thousands of Kentuckians whose lives are cared for as a result of the ACA - not to mention some relief from often-staggering medical bills - how did a governor get elected whose key campaign promise was to end Obamacare in the Bluegrass State?

Low turnout could be one possible answer, but that doesn't explain the fact that some people whose lives may literally depend on the ACA voted for a candidate who promised to end their coverage.

A telling November 9 Washington Post article focuses on how the majority of those who voted in Pike County, Kentucky, broke for Bevin, even though the Appalachian county has a 23 percent poverty rate and its citizens benefit greatly from the ACA:

The broad contours of his condemnation of the ACA are creating a quandary here in remote Pike County, where 55 percent of voters supported Bevin even though the county benefits greatly from the health-care changes he plans to rescind....

The effects [of Democratic Governor Beshear embracing ACA] were particularly dramatic in this Appalachian county, where many coal jobs have vanished and the poverty rate is 23 percent. From 2013 to 2014, the proportion of residents lacking health coverage plummeted by half — from 13 percent to 6.6 percent.

That assessment does not include the number of Pike County residents who saved money by switching personal policies to the less expensive ACA Kentucky insurance exchange, called Kynect.

Consider 56-year-old Dennis Blackburn, who is unemployed and in need of serious medical care, but voted for Bevin. The Washington Post provides some background on Blackburn:

He has a hereditary liver disorder, numbness in his hands and legs, back pain from folding his 6-foot-1-inch frame into 29-inch mine shafts as a young man, plus an abnormal heart rhythm — the likely vestige of having been struck by lightning 15 years ago in his tin-roofed farmhouse....

Blackburn was making small payments on an MRI he’d gotten at Pikeville Medical Center, the only hospital in a 150-mile radius, when he heard about Big Sandy’s Shelby Valley Clinic. There he met Fleming, who helped him sign up for one of the managed-care Medicaid plans available in Kentucky.

On Election Day, Blackburn voted for Bevin because he is tired of career politicians and thought a businessman would be more apt to create the jobs that Pike County so needs. Yet when it comes to the state’s expansion of health insurance, “it doesn’t look to me as if he understands,” Blackburn said. “Without this little bit of help these people are giving me, I could probably die. . . . It’s not right to not understand something but want to stamp it out.”

This isn't the first time that we've written about the dissonance that often crops up among economically destitute white people in Kentucky, who both accept government programs and denounce them - and voting for candidates who vow to repeal them. In January of 2014, we wrote about a Kentucky man, Terry Rupe, who denounced US safety net programs while depending on them to stay alive. In fact, we wrote about how Rupe was attacking federal aid to a Washington Post reporter while he was signing up for Medicaid at a clinic.

In September of 2013, we wrote about Owsley County, Kentucky, where more than 97 percent of the population is white and 52 percent received food stamps in 2011. Four in ten of the residents of the county live below the poverty line. Yet, in 2012 it re-elected Republican Congressman Hal Rogers with 86 percent of the vote. Rogers virulently attacks and votes against the food stamp program.

How does one explain economically and medically disadvantaged whites who vote against their own interests - and in some cases their own lives?

Scapegoating, racism, poor education, ossified white tribalism - probably a lot of that and a whole lot more.

Conservative politicians like Bevin are winning elections through manipulative strategies - often mobilizing oppressive structural forces - not through advocating policies that will actually help their constituents.

Not to be posted without permission of Truthout.