Table Mesa has also seen several pet-coyote confrontations

A pedestrian walks his dog by a coyote warning sign on the Boulder Creek path just west of 55th Street last December, after several confrontations with the animals had been reported. ( PAUL AIKEN )

A little less than a year after a string of incidents involving aggressive coyotes harassing people on the Boulder Creek Path prompted the city to enact a month-long hazing program in the area, officials say they have no plans to do something similar in the near future.

On Christmas Eve last year a coyote came after a woman walking a standard poodle on the Boulder Creek Path near 55th Street, according to state wildlife officials.

The woman was able to fend of the coyote with the help of the dog and a stick, but the incident was the first in a series of seven such encounters along the path generally in the area between 30th and 55th streets between Dec. 24 and Jan. 2.

In reaction to the pattern of aggressive behavior, Boulder wildlife officials on Jan. 18 launched a 28-day hazing program in the area designed to instill a fear of humans in the animals. The plan included daily patrols by hazing teams, which used yelling, shaking cans with metallic objects inside and lunging toward or throwing tennis balls at coyotes, to make them wary of people.

Val Matheson, the city's urban wildlife conservation coordinator, this week called those efforts a success.

"It did seem that while we were doing the hazing every day there weren't reports of conflicts in that area with people," she said. "It seemed to affect the coyote behavior."

A pair of incidents involving aggressive coyotes occurred in March, with the first also taking place on the Boulder Creek Path. A 5-year-old boy was chased and bitten by a coyote, prompting state wildlife officials to shoot two of the animals in the area later that week in that instance.

In the second incident, which happened March 25 on the Sanitas Valley Trail, a woman was walking with her dog, which was licensed to be off leash in open space areas, when a coyote attacked the pet, leaving it with serious injuries.

Despite those incidents, Boulder has been fairly quiet on the coyote front the rest of the way in 2013, and the city has no plans to launch a similar hazing program to the one seen in January and February, Matheson said.

"We don't have anything in the works," Matheson said. "When we create a city-wide coyote management plan we will use the information we gained from the pilot hazing program but we don't have a plan yet."

Matheson said it unclear just when a coyote management plan will be drafted because the process has not been added to the city's planning budget yet.

A 22-year-old man was treated at a hospital in October after a trio of coyotes attacked him while he walking to work early in the morning near Niwot.

Wildlife officials killed the three animals involved in that incident, but other than that, have not responded to issues related to human-coyote conflict in the Boulder area in recent months, according to Colorado Parks and Wildlife spokeswoman Jennifer Churchill

"CPW is not planning a special program for Boulder's coyotes this year. Since coyotes were removed from the bike path area where the human-coyote conflicts happened, there have been no additional incidents," Churchill wrote in an email Friday. "There have been a few pet-coyote conflicts in west Table Mesa, but no human-coyote issues."

Matheson said that whenever she receives calls from residents about coyote-pet conflict, she always sends along information about the importance of hazing the animals.

Tara Teel, an associate professor in Colorado State University's Department of Human Dimensions of Natural Resources and a principal investigator in a study measuring Denver area residents' attitude toward coyotes, said Boulder's approach along the creek path aligns well with approaches taken by other communities in the region.

"There seems to be a general belief among managers that residents who understand coyotes and coyote behavior will be more equipped to avoid conflict scenarios and accurately report conflicts that do occur to appropriate officials," Teel wrote in an email. "In addition, behavioral conditioning of coyotes through hazing was seen as having promise by a majority of the managers that participated in our inventory survey, and with whom we have discussed the way forward for coyote management in the (Denver Metro Area.)"

Teel, who is working closely with CSU graduate student, Andrew Don Carlos in the research, said data collection from residents and more than 30 coyote managers in the area was completed this year and analysis is underway.

The metro-wide survey focused on neighborhood blocks defined by the U.S. Census Bureau and did not include any in the city of Boulder, but the survey did include neighborhoods in the Louisville-Lafayette area. Coyote managers from Boulder did provide input for the study, Teel said.

A summary report of the study's findings, including a synopsis of residents' experiences, attitudes toward coyotes and management strategies including hazing, is expected to be available early next year, according to Teel.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Joe Rubino at 303-473-1328, rubinoj@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/RubinoJC.