Indian Prairie School District 204 could be operating under a deficit budget next year.

Jay Strang, District 204's chief school business official, presented a tentative 2016 budget to the School Board this week that calls for projected spending of $319.3 million and projected revenues of $316.5 million. Strang said the entire budget hinges on what happens in Springfield in the next couple months.

The deficit could easily be erased, depending on how much aid Illinois officials are willing to include in the state budget or if they can't reach an agreement on teacher pension legislation. In the meantime, District 204 administrators are forced to draft a budget that's filled with assumptions.

On the revenue sides, Strang estimates the district receiving $25.7 million in general state aid, which reflects an 85 percent proration on the $30.2 million the district should receive based on existing funding formulas.

Strang said usually the district has an idea of how much the state will be allotted long before June. That is not the case this year. "We are 15 days from the next fiscal year, and we don't know what our revenue is," Superintendent Karen Sullivan added.

The chief school business official ran multiple scenarios of school funding plans being bandied around Springfield. "Based on our budget, we're either plus $2 million or minus $4 million, give or take," said board member Justin Karubas.

Strang said he chose a conservative approach going with 85 percent proration model.

The budget also projects a Consumer Price Index of 1.5 percent, which affects the amount of money a taxing body can receive from property owners. The budget estimates the district would collect $261 million from local sources.

On the spending side, the budget includes $1.5 million more for the cost of the Affordable Care Act, $2 million more in transportation costs, and $5.5 million in capital improvement projects.

Although the state has not approved the measure yet, the cost of shifting a portion of teacher pensions to District 204 was included in the budget. Strang said the district obviously would save $3.6 million and no longer operate in a deficit if the state fails to reach a consensus on the pension shift.

With so many unknown factors in play, Strang advised the tentative budget likely will change multiple times. The plan is for the board to approve the tentative budget at the July 13 meeting so it can be available to the public for the required 30 days of review. A hearing and final board approval is set for Aug. 17.

Strang said he expects the board will have to amend the budget in the fall. "Either way the board will be approving a budget that is not accurate because we don't have all of our information, and we will be asking you to amend the budget," he said.

The deficits in the tentative budgets are in the education and transportation funds.

Strang said the $3.5 million shortfall in the education fund relates to the pension cost shift. If no shift is approved by the state, the education fund would be in the black. He added the $1.2 million transportation fund deficit relates to the increased transportation costs.

"Having a deficit in any one of those funds is not a huge deal," Strang said. "Having a deficit overall is something I think we as district should be concerned about certainly with our revenue being so questionable from the state of Illinois."

Board member Mark Rising said this is the first time since he's been on the board the past five years the district is looking at deficit spending."It's disappointing to me. But the fact of the matter is that it is more a case of what's going on in the state than what's going on in our district," Rising said.

"They're asking more local tax payers to pick up the cost of public education and our percentages have gone down. The state used to give us 17 percent and now we're down to 12 percent," he added. "We still are the most efficient school district in DuPage County as far as operating costs per pupil."

Board member Michael Raczak noted the district is able to maintain high academic achievement despite large class sizes and that is testament to the quality of the staff.

Board member Maria Curry said the board needs to be responsive to requests from the community about reducing class sizes and look for ways to make cuts, like backing out of the John C. Dunham STEM Partnership School at the Aurora University as suggested by District 204 resident Sally Glavin during the public comment portion of the meeting. Curry said the partnership is considered a luxury item in the eyes of many people in the public.

Glavin told the board is disappointed with the projected 37 students enrolled in one advanced placement chemistry class next year at Waubonsie Valley High School. She said while the Illinois Report Card lists the average class size at 27, her children have repeatedly been in classes of 30 or more students.

Glavin appealed to the district to reduce class sizes and urged the district to look at the $500,000 cost of sending students to the STEM school.

Responding to Curry, board President Lori Price said removing students from the STEM school would not save $500,000 because the per-student cost is roughly the same whether students attend the STEM school or District 204 school. Price said that subject was debated before the board agreed to join the partnership.

Curry said savings could be a cumulative effect if the district finds "$100,000 here and $100,000 there."

She also asked administrators to look for ways to transfer the savings the district receives by refinancing district debt at lower interest rates into dollars the district could use in other portions of the budget.

subaker@tribpub.com