Well, yes, that pretty much sums it up:

[Rep. Paul] Ryan confirms GOP “principles” will include legal status for the 11 million, but he also says this will be a “probationary status” to make sure the 11 million will not be “preferenced over people who did follow the laws.” … Ryan also says the undocumented will be allowed to work as part of “probationary” status before security benchmarks are met. “You can be on probation,” Ryan says, “while the border is being secured.”

So, legal status for 11 million illegal aliens, before anyone even pretends the U.S. borders are secured. Just the thing Americans need when long-term unemployment is at record levels in virtually every state.

Paul Ryan just wrote off ever being president by pushing amnesty when millions of Americans are unemployed, underemployed. @DRUDGE_REPORT — Matt Maggio (@MaggioMatt) January 29, 2014

No wonder Rep. Ryan, “the most pro-amnesty member of Congress,” rose to his feet to clap last night when President Obama urged Congress to enact immigration reform.

Wasn't it a special moment to find Paul Ryan-0 applauding for Amnesty with fellow Dems #tcot #teaparty #GOP — Laurence (@Laurence4LiberT) January 29, 2014

As for concerns about the poor and rising income inequality, well, never mind all that!

Twitchy readers may recall that Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., pushed a similar bill last year. That bill didn’t go over so well with conservatives. On the other hand, it did win the endorsement of “Homeland” terrorist Abu Nazir. So there’s that.

The Daily Caller’s Mickey Kaus, as usual, sees through the pro-amnesty smokescreen:

@ThePlumLineGS @chucktodd So much for leadership plans for fake "enforcement must be in place" requirement? — Mickey Kaus (@kausmickey) January 29, 2014

@ThePlumLineGS @chucktodd Simple deal is do enforcement then have amnesty. Dems say "non starter" b/c then might actually get enforcement — Mickey Kaus (@kausmickey) January 29, 2014

Bingo.

Related:

Buzzfeed says amnesty advocate Paul Ryan is on a mission to help the poor; Mickey Kaus calls BS

Washington Post: Paul Ryan called illegal aliens ‘exploited Americans’

Mickey Kaus: If Obama were really worried about rising inequality, he wouldn’t be pushing immigration bill

Want US workers to earn more? Mickey Kaus has an idea