Forecasting court rulings is risky—just ask those who predicted so confidently that the U.S. Supreme Court would overturn Obamacare.

A similar sense of doom surrounds the law that the Illinois General Assembly enacted last year to shore up state employee pension plans. The law is headed for review by the Illinois Supreme Court after a trial judge late last month ruled it unconstitutional.

It may be the most important decision the justices will face in their careers. A pension funding shortfall estimated at more than $100 billion has metastasized into a fiscal crisis for the state. The law in question attempts to reduce the gap in a variety of ways, including reducing cost-of-living increases for retirees and raising the age at which state workers can retire with full pensions.

Trouble is, those measures appear to violate an Illinois constitutional provision declaring state pensions a contract right that can't be “diminished or impaired.” That was enough for Illinois Circuit Court Judge John Belz to dispatch the statute, writing, “Any attempt to diminish or impair pension rights is unconstitutional.”

Belz's action, along with a Supreme Court ruling last summer on state retiree medical benefits, has many writing off the pension reforms. There's no question the clean, simple logic of Belz's ruling may appeal to the justices. Also, Arizona's Supreme Court followed essentially the same reasoning in striking down similar pension changes under a constitutional provision like Illinois'.

But neither ruling is binding on the Illinois Supreme Court. And its decision in the medical benefits case didn't address the central argument Illinois Attorney General Lisa Madigan is likely to advance in support of the law.

Professor Mark Rosen of IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law says “there's ample leeway” for the court to uphold the pension law if it accepts the principle that even constitutional rights can be limited when necessary to serve an overarching state interest. I suppose the justices could dismiss the argument as airily as Belz did, but a deeper analysis could lead to a different outcome.

Plenty of courts have ruled over the years that important state interests can justify limiting constitutional rights. In fact, the Illinois Supreme Court acknowledged the principle in a 1985 case involving a change in the computation of judicial pensions that left some judges with lower benefits. The constitution “does not immunize contractual obligations from every conceivable kind of impairment or from the effect of a reasonable exercise by the states of their police power,” the court said in Felt v. Board of Trustees. The court invalidated the law because the state failed to show it was necessary to advance an important state interest.

A similar line of analysis in the pension case would lead justices to consider whether the reforms serve an important state interest. In the Felt case, the court said, “The state has an undeniable interest and responsibility in ensuring the adequate funding of state pension systems.”

The pension reforms are intended to advance the same state interest. But are they “reasonable”?

Professor Ann Lousin of John Marshall Law School says it depends on what other options legislators might have used that would have less impact on the constitutionally protected benefits. Lousin thinks this is where the state's argument breaks down, noting legislators could raise money to pay full pension benefits by hiking taxes and/or cutting spending (however politically distasteful that may be to lawmakers).

That's why she gives the pension reform “somewhere around the chance of a snowball in hell.”

She may have the odds about right. On the other hand, it's a judgment call. There's no telling which way the court will go, but it will find legal support in either direction.