Illinois EPA: Can't pay for tank cleanup without budget

hello

SPRINGFIELD, Ill. -- The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency told federal regulators Thursday it can't pay for the cleanup of leaking underground fuel storage tanks because of the budget deadlock.

The U.S. EPA ordered its state counterpart last month to explain how it would resume reimbursement to contractors pulling up leaking tanks and scrubbing contaminated soil.

But a letter from Illinois EPA Director Lisa Bonnett says state officials, lacking the authority to spend money, have no choice but to wait it out.

There's $53 million in the Leaking Underground Storage Tank fund set aside for cleanup, financed with a gas tax and tank-installation fee. That's enough to cover current expenses once there's a budget agreement, Bonnett said.

"While vendor reimbursements remain pending since July 1, vendors have previously experienced much longer delays, as long as 24 months, when the fund had insufficient funds to process claims," Bonnett wrote.

The U.S. EPA issued a statement saying the Illinois letter is under review. The agency's acting regional administrator in Chicago, Robert Kaplan, had demanded the state submit a plan for resuming reimbursement or face losing the authority to use the set-aside fund and alert gas station and tank owners they had to pay their own way in case of a leak.

Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner and Democrats who control the Legislature have been deadlocked for 10 months on a budget agreement, and consensus appears unlikely soon.

The Associated Press reported this month that contractors doing work on spill sites - where leaking gasoline or fuel can contaminate soil, seep into water supplies, or cause vapor hazards in basements - are owed $20.3 million. Documents analyzed by the AP show work continues on 211 sites, and officials say there's no way to estimate how much that work will cost.

The federal agency also questioned the state's diversion of $20 million from the leaking-tank fund to balance last year's state budget. Bonnett said the transfer did not hamper the agency's ability to pay future claims.