House leaders will have a mountain of evidence about the need to combat the nation's drug epidemic when the chamber takes up opioids legislation next week.

A new poll from the Kaiser Family Foundation shows that about two-thirds of the public thinks the government is not doing enough about the epidemic.

ADVERTISEMENT

Over 80 percent of the public said increased prescription training for doctors, more access to treatment programs, and monitoring doctors' prescribing practices would be effective in fighting the epidemic.

Forty-four percent of the public said they know someone who has been addicted to prescription painkillers.

The Senate overwhelmingly passed a bill in March to fight the epidemic, called the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act (CARA). The legislation aims to expand education efforts, increase the availability of a drug, Naloxone, to treat overdoses and bolster programs to monitor prescriptions for painkillers.

The House will not be taking up this bill, though, instead moving forward with a series of its own bills. Read more here. http://bit.ly/1rjJpJi

Cheaper opioids may be fueling nationwide epidemic

The cost of prescription painkillers has been decreasing for most patients over the last decade, with a growing share of the costs now covered by insurers, according to new research.

That shift in costs from patients to insurance companies could be partly responsible for the growing use of opioids, according to a study published Monday Health Affairs.

Out-of-pocket spending on prescription painkillers made up about 53 percent of all spending on painkillers in 1999 – about $2.3 billion in total. By 2012, consumer spending made up just 18 percent of all spending on painkillers, which had since tripled to about $7.4 billion.

Over the same period, deaths from overdoses in the U.S. nearly quadrupled. Read more here: http://bit.ly/1pYDPLe

1 in 3 antibiotic prescriptions are unnecessary

That's according to a new study from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

The study found that 30 percent of the 154 million antibiotic prescriptions each year are not needed. Most of these unnecessary prescriptions were for respiratory conditions caused by viruses, such as a cold or bronchitis, which do not respond to antibiotics.

Overprescribing antibiotics is harmful because it helps make bacteria more resistant to the drugs and more dangerous to public health. Read more here. http://bit.ly/1VJ0EAK

ObamaCare tax credits miscalculated for about 182,000 people last year

The Internal Revenue Service correctly predicted ObamaCare tax credits for the vast majority of tax returns last year, according to a report made public Tuesday.

But the agency's estimates were inaccurate for about 7 percent of 2.6 million tax filers, which means about 182,000 people either owed money or were owed money by the government. Read more here. http://bit.ly/1Z9coKE

ON TAP TOMORROW

Chief medical officer Dr. Patrick Conway will hold a briefing on the future of Medicare payments at 10 a.m. at the National Press Club.

WHAT WE'RE READING

Hillary Clinton Hillary Rodham ClintonWhy superdelegates shouldn't support Sanders Young Turks host offers million for Trump, Sanders debate An all-female ticket? Not in 2016 MORE, in West Virginia, backed Sen. Joe Manchin Joe ManchinDem senator: Sanders ‘doesn’t have a lot of answers’ Groups urge Senate to oppose defense language on for-profit colleges How Congress got to yes on toxic chemical reform MORE's (D) plan to levy a 1-cent tax on prescription painkillers (CNN)

Pfizer Inc. saw sales jump 20 percent in the first quarter with help from new cancer and arthritis treatments, despite its decision to abandon a high-profile global merger. (Reuters)

The drugmaker behind Oxycontin is officially refusing to unseal documents related to the company's marketing on opioid products. (STAT News)

Americans consume about 80 percent of the world's opioids, which is about a $24 billion market (CNBC)

IN THE STATES

Alaska is expected only to have one insurer on its ObamaCare marketplace in 2017 after Moda Health announced it is dropping out next year (Alaska Dispatch News)

Louisiana's newly expanded Medicaid program will be called "Healthy Louisiana," and is debuting a new website (New Orleans Times-Picayune)

Thousands of South Dakota patients were being held unnecessarily in nursing homes (New York Times)

ICYMI FROM THE HILL:

Federal prosecutors said Tuesday they could pursue more fraud charges against former drug CEO Martin Shkreli http://bit.ly/1NTuyj7

Officials from HHS and Texas reached a deal that will delay a contentious debate on Medicaid expansion http://bit.ly/21uhfrO

Send tips and comments to Sarah Ferris, sferris@thehill.com, and Peter Sullivan, psullivan@thehill.com. Follow us on Twitter: @thehill, @sarahnferris, @PeterSullivan4