Susan G. Komen of Central and South Jersey released a four-year study on the needs of breast cancer patients by county. (Photo: Getty Images)

Monmouth County has been identified as a “high priority” county whose patients face obstacles to breast cancer care, according to a Susan G. Komen Central and South Jersey study.

The four-year community needs study published in September identifies where the most significant breast cancer-related issues are compared to other counties. The organization’s 13-county service includes Somerset, Hunterdon, Middlesex and all counties south.

“We focus our efforts where the most statistics pop,” said Jessica Morton, mission director for Komen of Central and South Jersey.

Monmouth County has a particularly high rate of new breast cancer cases per 100,000 people, Morton said. And the outlook overall is bleak.

The report shows it will take 13 years to reduce the number of late-stage diagnoses in Monmouth County to meet federal goals that were originally set to be achieved by 2020.

It’s also expected to take seven years to meet goals to lower the death rate, which is the number of people who die every year from breast cancer per 100,000.

Projections show that the number of new breast cancer diagnoses in the county will increase over the next several years, Morton said.

Monmouth County has the third highest number of new breast cancer cases in the service area: 140.1 per 100,000

The highest is Hunterdon County with 153.7 per 100,000; the second-highest is 142.7

The average in New Jersey is 129.3, and 122.1 nationally

Monmouth and Burlington counties, which are considered one area, are listed with Atlantic, Camden, Gloucester and Salem/Cumberland counties as needing the most attention.

The study, which is published every four years, analyzes medical data, screening rates, survival rates, insurance rates, demographics, access and feedback from medical professionals in the community in an effort to better understand where Komen should focus its efforts.

One of the major problems identified by the study is access to care in Monmouth County. There are an “abundance” of resources, according to the report, but hospitals, doctor’s offices and care centers are only in specific pockets.

Monmouth is a large county with rural pockets and little walkability, which makes it difficult for some patients to get the care they need, according to the study. The lack of adequate public transportation – including not enough stops and routes – was identified by care professionals as a major problem, Morton said.

“If you’re a sick breast cancer patient and you have to wait for transportation to pick you up – and these people are going back and forth regularly – it’s very challenging,” Morton said.

Although Ocean County isn’t considered a priority area, it has one of the lowest screening rates in the 13-county service area.

Morton said Ocean County faces more socioeconomic-related breast cancer issues. Education levels and median income is lower than in Monmouth, which are two elements that typically correlate with healthcare outcomes, Morton said.

Ocean is also more medically under-served than Monmouth, but the most significant issues in all the counties are centered around access, affordability and education about risk factors and screenings.

"Some of the challenges that we face every day are educational issues," said Erin Dooley, an oncology nurse navigator at the Jacqueline M. Wilentz Comprehensive Breast Center at Monmouth Medical Center. "Patients come in thinking they don't need screenings or mammograms, or they read something online that's not accurate."

Dooley's job is to educate and advocate for cancer patients by helping them get get the medical care and support services they need.

"Breast cancer is a huge umbrella that has multiple, varying parts. There are so many different things about that phrase that's not telling of what someone's story is going to me. It depends on the type of cancer, where it's located, if there's lymph node involvement," Dooley said. "Every individual patient has their own individual journey."

Dooley said one woman she recently spoke with has had cancer for more than a year that hasn't been treated.

Monmouth County is ranked as one of the counties in South/Central New Jersey with the most breast cancer issues. (Photo: Getty Images)

"The poor thing was just scared because she didn't have insurance and didn't know if she was going to lose everything," Dooley said. "She has children to take care of."

Morton said women in New Jersey face a lot of financial challenges when it comes to accessing care. Not having health insurance is not as much of an issue as it was before the Affordable Care Act, but people have trouble paying their co-pays, deductibles and premiums.

"The women who are under-insured, those are the ones who get caught in the cog of making too much money to receive funding from, say, Charity Care or another organization, but they're scared and can't necessarily afford their deductibles," Dooley said.

Charity Care is a state fund that exists to help those in need pay for expensive medical care.

Laura Gallo, who works for the Leon Hess Cancer Center at Monmouth Medical Center, is out in the community educating the public about the importance of self-breast exams, mammograms and other routine screenings. There are grants available through the hospital and Komen for women who need mammograms but don't have insurance.

One challenge particular to Monmouth County is language barriers, Gallo said. There are translators at the breast center, but there can be difficulties out in the community. She said there are a lot of Spanish, Russian and Chinese speaking Monmouth residents.

“(These issues) impact how people access the continuum of care – how early they go in for screenings, how quickly they go back for diagnoses and follow-ups, how quickly they’re seen and the quality of services all impact people’s care,” Morton said.

Overall, New Jersey is ranked third in the country for the highest breast cancer death rate and eighth for the highest number of new cases.

In 2015, more than 7,000 New Jersey women will be diagnosed with breast cancer and at least 1,300 will die from the disease.

To learn more about a free mammogram through Monmouth Medical Center, call Laura Gallo at 732-923-6509.

For any questions about breast cancer, medical care or support services, call Erin Dooley at 732-923-7730.

22nd ANNUAL SUSAN G. KOMEN RACE FOR THE CURE

WHEN: 9 a.m. Sunday, Oct. 4

WHERE: Six Flags Great Adventure, Jackson

REGISTRATION: $35, $20 for children 10 and younger

INFO: www.komencsnj.org/race

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1KPNDO7