Unfortunately, he also may find out too late.

Advertisement - story continues below

Right now, the country is dealing with a number of issues that are hurting the Democratic Party, including high taxes, Obamacare, the stagnant economy, and a lack of job growth in America.

Should Republicans position themselves accordingly, they’d likely secure major victories in the 2014 mid-term elections.

Unfortunately, the Speaker of the House, John Boehner, is too busy catering to the business elite to capitalize on this incredible opportunity; and his single-minded approach could result in some tragic electoral defeats.

Advertisement – story continues below

A Plan That Hurts the Middle Class

Consider this: America’s business elite represent less than 2% of the population; so by themselves, they can’t sway an election. On top of that, they don’t advocate policies that’ll win large blocks of voters.

Yet the Republicans on Capitol Hill are under a mystical trance, carrying the big business legislative agenda forward at seemingly any cost.

Advertisement – story continues below

Take immigration reform, for example. Opening the immigration floodgates is at the top of the Chamber of Commerce’s agenda.

POLITICO Magazine recently reported that the U.S. Chamber of Commerce President, Tom Donohue, said, “The GOP shouldn’t even field a presidential candidate in 2016 unless Congress passes immigration reform this year.”

And the National Association of Manufacturers President, Jay Timmons, said he “also thought immigration reform could pass this year, perhaps in a lame-duck session.” Timmons called immigration reform a “unified position of the business community.”

So it’s no surprise that John Boehner is in lockstep with these two and is pushing for increased immigration, despite polling data that says the political outcome will be similar to drinking cyanide.

Advertisement – story continues below

Meanwhile, the push for increased immigration has some seriously harmful impacts on middle-income families. American firms continue to cut payrolls, lay off workers, and hold down pay increases, while they push for immigrants to come and compete with current workers.

Businesses always use the throwaway line, “Americans won’t do these jobs anyway.” But this lie is laid bare by Facebook (FB), Microsoft (MSFT), Apple (AAPL), and other high-tech firms that would like to import software developers from India and other low-wage countries. As the flood of legal and illegal immigrants reaches our shores, Americans continue to suffer wage stagnation.

One of the few opponents of the immigration plan is Alabama Republican Jeff Sessions. His spokesman, Stephen Miller, told POLITICO Magazine that immigration reform “would also triple the admission of largely lower-skilled, permanent immigrants over the next decade – from 10 million to 30 million. Immigration reform should mean putting unemployed Americans back to work, not replacing them at a lower cost.”

The Grand Old (Misguided) Party

Unfortunately, immigration reform isn’t the only issue on which Republicans are carrying water for big business.

If the party wants to reconnect with the middle class, it could do so by rejecting crony capitalism, getting rid of the Export-Import Bank, and eliminating the subsidies to dubious “green energy” businesses. The federal budget has too many dollars that are misdirected to Corporate America.

On top of that, Republicans need to push initiatives to fire up job creation for middle-income workers. Open up oil fracking opportunities on federal land, force the Keystone Pipeline through the bureaucratic morass of the Obama stonewalls, cut taxes on smaller businesses that are creating jobs, and repeal Obamacare.

These actions – as opposed to pushing for immigration reform – would allow Republicans to win some crucial races come Election Day.

This commentary originally appeared at WallStreetDaily.com and is reprinted here with permission.

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.