MANHATTAN — On Wednesday afternoon, campaign finance disclosures showed Roger Marshall raised nearly $200,000 last quarter, proving he is a viable candidate for U.S. Congress.

On Wednesday night, Marshall delivered a baby.

The obstetrician from Great Bend said in an interview Thursday that he isn’t quite ready to give up his medical practice, despite campaigning against an incumbent and second challenger across a 63-county congressional district.

“It’s good, it keeps me grounded and I still enjoy it. So I’m definitely going to do it until December 31st,” said Marshall, a Republican. “My campaign consultants are wanting me to quit. I think I might give up obstetrics, but I’m not ready to give up my entire practice yet.”

On Thursday, campaigning brought Marshall to Manhattan. On Friday, it will take him to Hutchinson. At each stop, the political novice talks with school superintendents, business owners or residents in his bid to unseat three-term incumbent Rep. Tim Huelskamp in next August’s primary.

When asked what he thinks of Huelskamp, a tea party Republican widely considered to be among the most conservative members of Congress, Marshall laughed before pausing to collect his thoughts.

“I hear a lot of Kansans feel like they’re not being represented very well, that we have no voice right now representing the Big First on the House side of things. I tend to agree with that. We have no voice in Congress,” Marshall said.

In December 2012, Huelskamp was removed from his seat on the House Agriculture Committee, leaving Kansas without a member on the committee for the first time in a century. The removal followed the outspoken congressman’s disagreements with House leadership, namely Speaker of the House John Boehner, R-Ohio.

As for his other opponent, Clyde resident and student retention specialist Alan LaPolice, Marshall said the two have spoken on a few occasions.

“I respect Alan. He’s probably quite a bit more moderate on a lot of views than me. We have a cordial relationship and I respect his willingness to try to run again,” Marshall said.

On the issue of immigration, Marshall’s own views can be considered moderate. In addition to securing the border, which he hopes to accomplish through the use of private contractors, Marshall said he favors a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants currently in the United States.

“There has to be a pathway to at least have a job. I’m not ready to jump on the amnesty bandwagon just yet, but we need to find a way to get these people into the system,” Marshall said. “If you’ve had a job and you had a negative drug screen and you don’t have a felony record, let’s get a way to integrate them into our communities. We need them. We absolutely need these people.”

Marshall said the problem rests in bureaucratic inefficiencies that have made it difficult and unattractive for undocumented immigrants to obtain the proper paperwork. Soon after moving to Great Bend, Marshall said he and his wife met a hard-working woman who was able to become a legal citizen through the hard work of a local pastor.

“She got her papers, her husband got his papers. Her children came, got their papers, I delivered them. I coached the grandson in football and baseball. The granddaughter became the homecoming queen,” Marshall said.

“We make it so hard for good people to become citizens,” he added.

Marshall said education spending is the issue he hears about most as he travels the 1st District, though government regulations and national security are also on the minds of many. While he is opposed to the Iranian nuclear deal, believing the Iranian regime can’t be trusted, Marshall concedes that he doesn’t have all the answers on foreign policy. Instead, he said, he relies on those he considers more informed than himself.

“For foreign policy issues, I don’t talk one-on-one with Senator Roberts but when I’ve listened to Senator Roberts, he’s forgotten more about foreign policy and military issues than I’ll ever know,” Marshall said. “Congressman Pompeo seems to understand more military issues a lot better than the average congressman, as well. So I read their websites a lot and see what they’re saying.”

On the issue of health care, Marshall stopped short of calling for repeal of the Affordable Care Act but said it is causing deductibles to increase. Marshall believes the federal government should instead give block grants to states and allow the states to decide how to implement health care reforms.

“I think we have to somehow allow the Kansas Legislature to figure out how to take these block grants of money and use them for health care,” Marshall said. “The doctors I talk to and the hospitals criticize me because of that, because they don’t have a lot of faith in (legislators).”

Marshall concedes that the health care reform is complex and complicated. Despite being well versed through his own experiences, he continues to listen and learn on the issue of health care, he said. On immigration, however, the candidate is confident he’s finding solutions.

“I think I’m figuring this one out,” Marshall said.