While Republicans, pro-lifers and many who are just shocked by the Planned Parenthood videos, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell offered up the excuse of “not enough votes” to not pursue defunding the abortion group after the outrage spreads. Actually, the Obama administration doubled down on their support, saying that a $1 million grant from Obamacare is headed their way.

“The way you make a law in this country, the Congress has to pass it, the president has to sign it,” McConnell said in an interview with Kentucky TV station WYMT, conceding that there is no plan for the Senate to act.

“The president’s made it very clear he’s not going to sign any bill that includes defunding of Planned Parenthood,” McConnell said. “So that’s another issue that awaits a new president, hopefully with a different point of view about Planned Parenthood.”

The media has managed to ignore the videos by Center for Medical Progress, offering up supporters to tout the women’s health services that would be hurt by cuts in funding.

The Obama administration on Wednesday awarded more than $1 million in grants to Planned Parenthood to help promote Obamacare, a move that is drawing GOP criticism at a time when the healthcare provider is under congressional investigation.

Rep. Diane Black (R-Tenn.) blasted the White House’s decision as “unconscionable” in light of allegations of illegal activity in the health provider’s fetal tissue program, which has prompted key Republicans to call for a total defunding of the organization.

“A growing body of evidence suggests that Planned Parenthood broke federal law and now the Obama administration is thumbing its nose at Congress and taxpayers by using this backdoor maneuver to boost funding for the scandal-ridden abortion giant,” Black wrote in a statement Wednesday.

The Obama administration on Wednesday announced nearly $70 million in federal grants to groups promoting the healthcare law. The grants will go to 100 groups in 34 states, including three Planned Parenthood affiliates.

The provider’s affiliates in Iowa, Missouri and Montana will receive about $1 million in total.

Grants were also awarded to groups like the National Alliance for Hispanic Health, AIDS Alabama and Oak Hill Missionary Baptist Church Ministries. Any organization that helps sign people up for Obamacare can apply for the grants, which can be used to help train navigators and promote the law generally.

“This year’s Navigator grantees will help expand access to local help in many states,” the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services wrote in a statement.