Sisters Sue Fernley, center, and Lori Havener share a laugh with Fernley's husband, Rob, in the office at the Paugus Bay Campground in Laconia last week. (Michael Cousineau/Union Leader) Sue Fernley checks the reservation board at the Paugus Bay Campground in Laconia last week. (Michael Cousineau/Union Leader) Rob Havener rides in a golf cart within view of Paugus Bay at the Paugus Bay Campground in Laconia last week. (Michael Cousineau/Union Leader)



Teachers have range of summer projects, jobs

- Former Laconia teacher Rob Fernley occasionally tries to sneak in a math lesson while giving change to kids at the family-run campground not far from the famous Weirs Beach sign.Call it an occupational hazard..."Kids just rolled their eyes a lot of the time," said Fernley, who now lives in North Carolina during the six months he doesn't live at the Paugus Bay Campground, owned by his wife's family.The campground family counts at least a half-dozen educators who pitch in at various times during the summer. But working as a family can have its drawbacks..."You come back to the family nest, and they still treat you as the bad kid," said Sue Fernley, Rob's wife and campground co-owner.For the ninth time, George Havener, who's married to Sue's sister, finished the school year in Merrimack and headed to the campground..."I go and I help out," said Havener, who retired Friday from Merrimack Middle School. "I'm not on the payroll." ("We get paid as a couple," said his wife, Lori.)Three siblings - Sue Fernley, Lori Havener and Greg Houle - and their parents, Bert Houle, 80, and Donna, 78 - own the 22-acre campground, which offers 170 sites, including 140 rented by seasonal residents...Some of them acknowledge parallels between teaching and running a campground."We give warnings just like in school," said Sue Fernley, a former Laconia teacher.She said her siblings may let a few rules slide here and there, but that doesn't go unnoticed by others..."Kids knew when things are unfair, and the campers do as well," she said. "They call us on it: kids do and campers do."The Haveners' twin daughters also help out occasionally in the summer. Nicole is a fourth-grade teacher at a Colorado charter school while Erin is an academic adviser at Southern New Hampshire University..."All the grandchildren will help out when they're here," Mrs. Fernley said.Their family-run campground counts on family members covering different shifts."Our job description is not your normal campground because we're all doing it," Rob Fernley said..."This could be a reality show," said his wife.The campground closes in October, allowing people to return to their other homes."We all have retirement pensions and an income here," Lori Havener said.Sue Fernley said the school year was so intense, that she didn't think too far ahead to the campground summers..."It would take a good two weeks to unwind and get into the summer mode," she said.The campground lifestyle has its perks.Rob Fernley, who came into the office last week after finishing mowing the lawn, said: "It's kind of nice sitting around a campfire."..