Several hundred people, many with tears streaming down their faces, held candles for five minutes of silence as they sought to surround Michelle Wilkins and her baby with love at a vigil Sunday night at Longmont's Loomiller Park.

"All of our hearts are broken for her," said Natalie Taxiera, who came with her husband, Greg Taxiera, and their 2-year-old son. "We're all wanting to help her heal and help heal ourselves. I just wish I could do more."

Last week, 26-year-old Wilkins was beaten and stabbed on Green Place after arranging to buy baby clothes through a Craigslist ad. The suspect, Dynel Lane, is accused of cutting Wilkins' abdomen open and removing a 34-week-old baby girl. The baby didn't survive, but Wilkins — a pottery teacher who recently moved to Longmont — did.

Cheryl Swanson, left, and Elaine Derstine and her daughter, Michelle Smith, are part of a moment of silence during the vigil. A candlelight vigil was held in Loomiller Park in Longmont for Michelle Wilkins and her baby on Sunday night. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Less than 24 hours earlier, Omar Martinez, 34, allegedly stabbed both his parents inside their home on Pratt Street in north Longmont, before stabbing and killing himself. His father died on scene, and his mother was critically injured.

Public Safety Chief Mike Butler penned an open letter to Longmont residents, describing the two events as "unimaginable" and "horrific." Longmont leaders have said they plan to arrange other community healing events in the coming weeks.

Police officers, firefighters and paramedics attended the vigil, where community members thanked them for their service.

Advertisement

Firestone's Heather Surovik, who organized the vigil along with Longmont's Ryan Gwin, said her car was hit by a drunk driver when she eight-and-half months pregnant. Her son didn't survive. She said she wanted Wilkins to know she's not alone and that others understand the deep pain of losing a baby.

"We're still a community, and there's so much love,"she said.

Richard Martinez, who came to the vigil with his wife, Yolanda Martinez, added that "She has a big family here in Longmont."

Along with showing support, participants said the vigil was a start to helping the community heal after so much violence.

"I've had a really hard time," said Longmont's Cheryl Swanson. "You want to talk about it with other people. It's a way to process what happened."

Before and after the vigil, participants wrote messages of support on white hearts to be delivered to Wilkins at Longmont United Hospital. People also are displaying white hearts on car windows and in storefronts to show support.

Alaina Beaver, who lives a couple of blocks away from the house where Wilkins was stabbed, displayed a white heart on the stroller of her 4-month-old son and said the violence hit "really close to home."

"I love the symbolism of the white heart," she said. "It's a message that there's still hope. Tragedy strikes, but we can all lift each other up."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa