Stretching nearly the width of a football field, Cache Creek outside of Woodland was barely contained within its banks Friday morning.

Government researchers briefly blocked off part of an overpass to monitor its flow.

Once bone dry, NorCal creek filled with 15 feet of water

A torpedo-looking device was repeatedly lowered into the brown, murky torrent to measure the current as another member of the crew watched upstream.

"Every so often, you'll see a decent-sized tree going by, and if that were to snag on our equipment, that could cause us some problems," said Jeff Kitchen, a USGS water specialist.

The U.S. Geological Survey already has remote sensors in a number of locations on hundreds of creeks and rivers, but this allows the crews to get a more accurate check of how much water is flowing downstream and how fast.

"Any time it is raining, we are out in the field," Kitchen said. "We are trying to capture those high flow measurements because they are a rare occurrence often times in California."

At Cache Creek, crews measured 12,000 cubic feet of water per second. That's enough water to fill an Olympic-sized swimming pool every 7 seconds.

Another crew was taking water samples of something else.

"Our project is designed to try and quantify how much mercury is moving through the system, so it's an excellent opportunity to try and capture it while it is moving a lot of mercury at once," said Charles Alpers, a USGS research chemist.

That mercury ends up in high amounts in insects, birds and fish and can pose a risk to people who eat the fish.

Some of that mercury comes from old mercury mines miles upstream in the coastal range. However, it can also come naturally from the area around Woodland when it is picked up with the storm water runoff.

Researchers said half of the mercury that ends up in the Delta flows through Cache Creek, but they add that it's just as important to understand how much water is moving through here so local, state and federal agencies can better predict floods or take measures to avoid them altogether.

--

More on KCRA.com:

+How much rain did we get? 24-hour storm totals

+See how much snow fell in the Sierra



+30 photos from front lines of KCRA's storm coverage