March 15, 2016

Critics of the Department of Labor’s fiduciary rule, expected to come out within weeks, have a new leader, InvestmentNews writes.

House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., has become a major force in the opposition to the rule designed to force brokers handling retirement accounts to hold client interests first, according to the publication.

From Feb. 22 to March 7, his staff or Ryan himself have spoken or written about the rule five times, InvestmentNews says.

In one blog post, a staffer called the Barack Obama-supported rule “Obamacare for financial planning,” according to the publication.

In response, Gawker, a left-leaning internet tabloid, writes that Ryan’s claim to do his utmost to protect consumers, rather than the industry, is “literally the opposite of what is true.”

Ryan’s criticism of the rule is much the same as that of the industry at large. The red tape and recordkeeping, he and his staff claim, would make financial planning for retirement too expensive for the middle class and push out small business owners, InvestmentNews writes.

Indeed, a recent survey of financial advisors by Fidelity found that 73% are worried the rule will hurt their business, although more than half said they’ll wait for the rule to come out before making any substantial changes to their businesses, according to a press release from the company.

But while Ryan would likely go after the rule as part of his platform to reduce regulatory burdens in general, InvestmentNews writes that the Speaker receives a substantial amount of his contributions from the industries the rule will regulate.

Of the $4.6 million Ryan has raised for his personal campaign, the securities and investment industry contributed $419,812 while the insurance industry gave him $212,725, according to Center for Responsive Politics data cited by InvestmentNews.

And the financial and insurance sectors are the first and third largest contributors in Ryan’s $1.6 million political action committee, the publication writes.