Has the Iran deal become too big to fail? Last October, right-wing opponents of President Obama seized on comments by his advisor, Ben Rhodes, who suggested that the administration saw a nuclear agreement with Iran as comparable in magnitude to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in Obama’s first term. The comparison is more apt than Rhodes perhaps intended—and not just because the Iran nuclear debate has achieved levels of bitterness and partisanship reminiscent of the Obamacare fallout. Like the Affordable Care Act, if the negotiators are able to forge an initial political framework agreement in the next two weeks in Switzerland, the deal will be extraordinarily difficult to reverse.

In fact, both opponents and supporters of the deal should take a lesson from the Obamacare experience. If there is an agreement, rather than trying to fruitlessly weaken the deal as Republicans have done since the passage of the Affordable Care Act, members of Congress should look for a more constructive role. Among other things, they could seek to address perceived weaknesses in the deal—such as the “sunset clause” under which many limits on the Iranian program are eventually lifted—by enacting future-sanctions legislation that will deter Iran from ever choosing to pursue a bomb, even in the distant future. Meanwhile, the White House should find ways to more effectively engage Congress in the process.

Story Continued Below

Together, the president and Congress can use the powers of the legislative branch to convert an adequate nuclear agreement into a stronger one.

***

Since the start of March, there have been two historically unprecedented events in Washington that are the foreign-policy equivalents of the scorched-earth politics of “death panels” and healthcare town halls in late 2009. First, Speaker John Boehner and Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu went around the White House and organized an invitation for a sitting head of state to address a joint session of Congress to lobby actively against a signature foreign policy issue of a sitting President.

This action was soon followed by the letter signed by 47 Republican Senators to Iran’s Supreme Leader Ali Khameini, which stated that Khamenei should not trust an agreement with President Obama because it could be easily overturned by Congress or the next president. Many, though not all, of the letter’s signatories clearly intended to undermine the authority of the president and endanger the negotiations. Indeed, one of the greatest stumbling blocks in the negotiations is that Iran’s leaders have expressed skepticism about Obama’s ability to deliver on his end of the bargain. This letter has only reinforced that concern and complicated the delicate discussions.

Obamacare and the potential Iran deal are also alike in that, once an agreement is reached, it will be very difficult for opponents to overturn the pact since the president will hold most of the cards. Any agreement with Iran will not require congressional action for years because Congress does not have to approve a deal and will not be asked to permanently lift sanctions until much later in the process, and initially the president will be able to waive the relevant sanctions that are part of a sanctions relief package. Also, much of the early lifting of sanctions will come from Europe. All indications are that congressional removal will constitute the very last step of sanctions relief coming after Iran has a years long demonstrated track record of following through on its commitments.

Since Congress will not be able to block implementation, its only recourse will be to obtain a veto-proof majority of 67 votes for meaningful legislation that would threaten the agreement. Admittedly the Senate is closing in on such legislation right now, but it is unlikely to pass before the end of March deadline for achieving a political framework agreement. If the negotiators arrive at a preliminary deal in the next two weeks, the entire debate in Washington will be reset. In that scenario, it is hard to see Democrats and possibly even some moderate Republicans going against the president. Eventually the White House will pivot from its current stance of absolute resistance to negotiating the text for Iran-related legislation. And when that happens, the White House will have the necessary support from moderate Democrats to get the changes it needs to preserve an agreement.

Just as was the case with Obamacare, whether one supported the legislation or not, once an agreement is reached trying to unwind it could cause the equivalent of a death spiral. In the case of the Affordable Care Act this would involve massive and unpredictable chaos in the health insurance markets. In the case of an Iran agreement the consequences could be even graver.

The question would no longer be whether a deal is a good deal or a bad deal, but what happens if after the president signs an agreement it is then overturned by a veto-proof majority in Congress with the whole world watching. In that scenario, the day after the Senate rejects an agreement or levies new sanctions, Iran would remove the constraints on its nuclear program, which has been essentially frozen since the interim agreement was implemented in January 2014. Key Iranian trading partners such as China and India, which have abided by sanctions due both to American pressure and to recognition that it was Iranian bad faith that had created the nuclear crisis, would likely blame the United States. The sanctions regime would begin to unravel and Iran would find itself unconstrained and able to go even further.

There would also likely be an escalation of the covert war between Israel and Iran with a potential rise of cyber and terrorist attacks as well as the assassinations of Iranian nuclear scientists. If Iran’s nuclear program accelerates the Israelis might also begin to threaten military action. Meanwhile, Congressional action would likely undercut Iran’s pragmatic President Hassan Rouhani and instead empower hardliners in Tehran who argued all along that the Americans could not be trusted.

Congressional action to kill the deal after it is agreed would also have profound implications for America’s standing in the world. Any agreement will not be a bilateral one between Iran and the United States but will also include the great powers (China, Russia, Britain, France, and Germany). Going forward, any nation on earth sitting down to negotiate an agreement with any U.S. president would have to think twice about the latter’s authority. It would be completely antithetical to the precedent set by other executive agreements signed by the U.S. President such as the Shanghai Communique, which paved the way for normalization of relations with China. Indeed, such action would probably be the most profound foreign policy defeat executed by Congress against a sitting President since the Senate rejected the Treaty of Versailles nearly a century ago.