BRENTWOOD, Tenn.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--National healthcare communications and public affairs firm Jarrard Phillips Cate & Hancock, Inc. has hired government relations expert Aaron Campbell as a senior advisor and promoted Kim Fox from vice president to senior vice president, officials announced today.

“We are pleased to add a seasoned health policy and communications strategist to our growing team,” said David Jarrard, president and CEO of Jarrard Phillips Cate & Hancock, Inc. “Given the increasingly complex regulatory climate that healthcare providers face, Aaron’s experience is a valuable asset, and we look forward to putting it to work for our clients.”

Campbell brings 10 years of public and government affairs experience to the firm. He has been involved in many issues that impact the health and welfare of Tennesseans, such as TennCare reform, creation of the Cover Tennessee programs, mental health and substance abuse public policy, implementation of the Affordable Care Act and, most recently, Medicaid expansion. Campbell will be located in the firm’s growing Nashville office, serving healthcare clients on a local, regional and national scale.

“Having worked within state government and community nonprofits for many years, I am keenly aware of the demands facing healthcare providers today,” Campbell said. “Joining the Jarrard team provides unequaled opportunities to work with healthcare executives to address these challenges by engaging and mobilizing the support they have within their organizations and in the communities they serve.”

Most recently, Campbell was the director of public policy for the nonprofit Nashville CARES, Tennessee’s largest nationally recognized provider of HIV care and support, where he managed operation of the Tennessee AIDS Advocacy Network. Prior to Nashville CARES, Campbell was a government affairs specialist for Youth Villages Inc., a nonprofit organization with a focus on the behavioral health of troubled children and their families.

In addition to hiring Campbell, Jarrard Inc. promoted seasoned marketing and communications executive Kim Fox from vice president to senior vice president. With more than 25 years of experience (including nine years at the firm), Fox leads Jarrard Inc.’s communications engineering practice, which helps healthcare systems across the country assess and structure their marketing and communications departments, as well as their efforts for the future of healthcare. In addition, she leads crisis management and reputation-building projects for the firm’s clients.

“The role of healthcare communications and marketing is changing rapidly,” Jarrard said. “Now more than ever, healthcare systems need a seasoned, experienced advisor to help them create a structure and plan that will position them for success in the future of healthcare. This is important work, and we’re honored to have a colleague with the experience, integrity and smarts that Kim brings to this challenge.”

Fox currently serves as president of the Tennessee Hospital Association’s Tennessee Society for Healthcare Marketing & Public Relations and is a member of the Society for Healthcare Strategy & Market Development. She co-authored the firm’s “Healthcare Communications and Marketing in the Brave New World” white paper and is a frequently published expert and regular contributor to the firm’s Jack of All Trades healthcare marketing and communications blog.

Prior to Jarrard Inc., Fox was a regional marketing executive for IASIS Healthcare, where she led the marketing and communications efforts of its Texas and Florida hospitals. Before that, Fox served as a director of marketing and communications for Adventist Health System, where she headed the internal and external communications, marketing and public relations activities for a multi-campus, not-for-profit medical center.

About Jarrard Inc.

Based in Nashville, Tenn., with an office in Chicago, Jarrard Phillips Cate & Hancock, Inc. is the nation’s premier strategic communications and public affairs firm for healthcare providers experiencing a time of significant change, challenge or opportunity. The firm publishes healthcare newsletter Inside Baseball and ranks among the top 15 healthcare PR firms in the U.S. As a member of The Advisory Board, the firm is part of a collaborative effort to elevate performance and solve some of healthcare’s most pressing issues. For more information, visit jarrardinc.com or follow us @JarrardInc or @Jarrard_IB.