With 2014 now squarely in the rearview mirror, the horizon for 2015 is wide and deep with a number of new developments expected for North Central Florida.

From a new president and football coach at the University of Florida to the expected completion of the long-planned, long-delayed Northwest 16th Avenue repaving project, the new year holds plenty of promise for the region in the areas of health care, education, public safety and more.

Here then are some of the news items expected to dominate headlines in the new year:

University of Florida

The new year begins with a new president at the University of Florida. Kent Fuchs, the highly regarded provost of Cornell University for the past six years, replaces Bernie Machen today.

Even before he officially began serving as president, Fuchs interviewed many of the top administrators, deans, chairs and directors to discover their plans and needs and how to help them.

During his first 100 days, Fuchs said he plans to spend a lot of time getting to know faculty, students, alumni, donors and legislators to figure out how to best serve the needs of the university.

Fuchs said "it's an exciting time to be going" to UF. "The leadership there has positioned the university at an all-time high in terms of its stature, and it's very clear the university has even higher aspirations," he said.

Fuchs said it is his goal to take UF to that higher level and make it a top university both nationally and internationally.

***

The new year brings continued construction on UF's campus, with the much-anticipated $67 million new chemistry building underway, the ongoing renovation of the J. Wayne Reitz Union and a new medical classroom building.

The new year also will see the completion of at least two new buildings — a new president's mansion and the first new dormitory in a decade.

The new 7,500-square-foot president's mansion is being built on Village Drive, just north of the former site of the Baby Gator Child Development and Research Center and west of the law school. Private donations are paying for its construction, including a $3.5 million donation from John and Mary Lou Dasburg of Key Biscayne.

The new mansion will have larger living quarters than the old mansion, office space and a smaller, intimate area for entertaining as many as 20 guests and dignitaries at a time. It also will be wired with state-of-the-art and energy-efficient technology.

Cypress Hall, a $25 million, 82,000-square-foot, 255-bed dormitory, is going up adjacent to the Disability Resource Center in the Yulee housing complex along Southwest 13th Street.

"It is not a huge amount considering the size of our student body, but (the additional dorm beds) are very important to us," said Dave Kratzer, UF vice president for student affairs.

The project is part of a master plan to address the demand for more student housing and meet a goal to have 24 percent of the student body living in university housing by 2015.

The new dorm will increase the number of available undergraduate beds to 7,745, housing officials said.

— Jeff Schweers

Alachua County

Although the initial completion date has been pushed back multiple times, the county is on track to complete its Northwest 16th Avenue project in 2015.

The road project is now expected to be completed around May, although it originally was expected to be finished in November 2014.

The county made significant progress this year on the project, which involves resurfacing as well as reconstruction work, but finishing it is taking longer than anticipated.

***

Since voters soundly rejected the Moving Alachua County Forward referendum, which would have instituted a 1-cent sales tax to fund road repairs and other local transportation projects, the Alachua County Commission will have to find other ways to fund its massive backlog in road repairs. It's a conversation commissioners likely will revisit multiple times in the coming year, especially when the budget process for fiscal year 2016 begins.

— Morgan Watkins

City of Gainesville

Although the city and county commissions both voted this year to provide additional funding to the homeless center to help it out of a financial bind, Grace Marketplace will continue to be a major priority for Gainesville in 2015.

Establishing more well-defined performance standards for the homeless center is one issue that likely will garner much discussion in 2015, as well as how to improve fundraising efforts and expand indoor shelter services there.

***

The city of Gainesville has an upcoming election in March for which two seats are up for grabs. Several candidates already have registered to run for the At-Large Seat 1 spot currently held by Commissioner Lauren Poe, who has announced that he will not run for re-election.

Meanwhile, Commissioner Yvonne Hinson-Rawls plans to seek re-election to her District 1 seat.

— Morgan Watkins

Public safety

Gainesville saw its lowest rate of homicides in three years, but whether that trend will continue is anyone's guess.

Two homicides were reported to the Gainesville Police Department in 2014, which is three fewer than the five reported in 2013, according to data provided by the agency.

Data also show GPD saw six homicide cases in 2012.

The Alachua County Sheriff's Office also saw a decrease in homicides over the past three years. The agency saw one homicide in 2014, followed by three in 2013 and four in 2012, according to Florida Department of Law Enforcement data cited by ASO spokesman Art Forgey.

The decrease in homicides reported to GPD is also on par with a downward trend across Alachua County. In 2013, the entire county saw nine homicides, after having 10 in 2012, according to FDLE data.

A decrease in aggravated assault cases in 2014 could provide some encouragement. As of Nov. 17, GPD took 508 reports of aggravated assault, compared to the 518 taken during the same time period in 2013 and 519 in 2012.

***

The unidentified man who is believed to have attacked three females around the University of Florida at the beginning of the fall semester was never caught, but the cases reminded Gators to not walk alone.

In September, after four women had reported being attacked by a taller man with a scruffy beard and a pot belly, UF police announced a unified command with agencies across the state to catch him. The first report emerged on the night of Aug. 30 as a woman walking from a rained-out Gator football season opener against Idaho was beaten and nearly raped by a man in an alley. Hours later on Aug. 31, another woman was attacked on campus just off Southwest 13th Street. On Sept. 7, a third report emerged.

The attacks drew concern and criticism from parents and prompted the UF Police Department to bulk up its Student Nighttime Auxiliary Patrol and rejuvenate its walking escort program. The escort program remained strong through the end of the fall semester.

— Arek Sarkissian

Health care

In the year ahead, local health care advocates and safety net clinics serving the poor and uninsured plan to continue pressing the Legislature to implement the Medicaid expansion included in the Affordable Care Act.

UF Health Shands Hospital will start construction on the eight-story, 216-bed expansion on the south side of Archer Road, just east of the eight-story Shands Cancer Hospital. The new facility will house neuromedicine and cardiovascular services. A bridge will connect the new hospital with the Cancer Hospital. The new facility is expected to open in early 2018.

Also, the Alachua County Health Department will open a satellite location near the Southwest Advocacy Group Family Resource Center in the Linton Oaks neighborhood.

— Christopher Curry

Business

In business, 2015 promises to see lots of construction.

With land cleared in 2014, vertical construction will rise in Butler North and Celebration Pointe — which also will start building a new bridge over Interstate 75 — before businesses open in 2016.

Construction already has begun on the expansion at University Towne Center at Archer Road and Southwest 34th Street with the Earth Fare organic grocery store and Youfit fitness center expected to open during the year.

In the 13th Street corridor, developers are hoping to start building six-story apartment buildings with ground-floor retail on both sides of the street just north of University Avenue, one of which would involve demolition of parts of three blocks from the FreeRide Surf shop to the ABC liquor store. Construction already has begun on the Lux13 apartments farther to the north and the Social28 apartments south of University, as well as a Home2 Suites by Hilton hotel on the site of the recently demolished Bambi Motel.

Other ongoing construction projects include the TownePlace Suites by Marriott along with an Applebee's outparcel at Newberry and Tower Roads and the Infinity Hall dorm in Innovation Square. Park Avenue at Santa Fe expects to start building apartments and retail space by mid-year.

Home builders anticipate a boost in new construction in 2015 after a lull in 2014 due to a lack of available lots, with the first homes built in Oakmont and Finley Woods and new phases opening in existing developments throughout the county.

The year also could see major decisions affecting further development with Plum Creek resubmitting its comprehensive plan amendment to the county, the city considering a development plan agreement with University Corners and a potential buyer looking to reopen the Turkey Creek Golf and Country Club. A possible convention center in West 38 could hinge on whether the county grants bed-tax funding and, if not, whether the developer decides to build it anyway.

— Anthony Clark

Santa Fe College

Moving into 2015, Santa Fe College continues to ride high with the Aspen Institute's designation of the college as a top-10 community college with respect to student success.

SF College President Jackson Sasser has indicated he will push for more international education and outreach, which he's expected to address at Spring Convocation on Jan. 5 in the Fine Arts Hall, 3000 NW 83rd St.

This year, the college will expand the Kirkpatrick Center, which caters to students in the fire, EMT, police and criminal justice programs.

An $8 million construction allotment from the state will allow SF College to add 25,000 square feet to the center, which should solve its overcrowding issue.

2015 also will be the first year middle school students, with permission, are allowed to take classes at the college, the board of trustees recently decided.

— Erin Jester

County schools

Students and teachers returning from winter break will begin preparing to take the Florida Standards Assessment for the first time.

Over the past several years, Florida has phased out its old educational standards in favor of the Florida Standards, adapted from the Common Core State Standards.

The Florida Standards Assessment replaces the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test in spring 2015.

Superintendent Owen Roberts has cleared his first six months at the helm of Alachua County Public Schools and will begin executing his five-year plan for the district in early 2015.

The plan includes establishing robotics teams and chorus groups at all schools, starting with east Gainesville elementary and middle schools this fall.

Future goals include starting a mobile parent-outreach academy, with free parenting classes and continuing education for caretakers of Alachua County public school students.

— Erin Jester