Delegate Tom Rust retiring

Veteran state Del. Tom Rust, who represents portions of Loudoun, Fairfax and the Town of Herndon, is retiring at the end of his term, Rust announced on the House floor Wednesday.



A former mayor of Herndon, Rust has served as one of the most moderate Republicans in the GOP-dominated House since he took office in 2002. Recently, he was the sole member of his party in favor of expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.



“I’ve been fortunate in my life to receive some recognition and awards from various groups in both my public life and my professional life. I treasure those, I truly do, but nothing is quite like being a member of this historic body," Rust, chairman of the House's transportation committee, said to an ovation from his colleagues. "It’s truly an honor to have served with you."



Democrat Jennifer Boysko, who lost election to Rust by nearly 30 votes in 2013, announced late last year she would again seek the seat in 2015. Boysko worked for Rust's campaign several election cycles ago. She quickly released a statement Wednesday thanking the delegate for his tenure.



“It is always difficult to run against someone you personally respect," Boysko said. "I challenged him because I have been troubled by the Republicans in Richmond who have made it more difficult to govern in a moderate, common-sense manner, as Tom Rust so capably did as our mayor.”



Widely praised by lawmakers from both sides of the aisle, Rust was a leading advocate for the bipartisan transportation funding reform measure passed in 2013, and he consistently fought to increase STEM education in public schools.



Luisa Guerra, a former Rust campaign staffer, called her former boss "a true public servant."



"Humble, selfless, and hardworking, his character stood out in the assembly," Guerra said. "He set the standard for service and will be impossible to replace. As sad as I am to see him go, I know he will continue to be a strong advocate for the state."





Contact the writer at .(JavaScript must be enabled to view this email address) or on Twitter at @TrevorBaratko.







Comments

Be the first to post a comment!

Post a comment

Commenting is not available in this channel entry.

Comments express only the views of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of this website or any associated person or entity. Any user who believes a message is objectionable can contact us at [email protected].



More News