SAN FRANCISCO —Rockies third baseman Nolan Arenado is not going to be the National League’s 2015 MVP. Bryce Harper, the Nationals’ phenomenal right fielder, will win the award, of that I’m sure.

I’m fine with that.

Harper is having a season for the ages. Through Friday, he led the National League with a 1.107 OPS (on-base percentage plus slugging percentage). That is the highest in baseball since 2008, when the Cardinals’ Albert Pujols scored a 1.114 OPS.

So I’ll applaud when Harper walks away with the hardware. But what really ticks me off is the lack of respect Arenado is getting from national baseball fans and writers.

Scouring the various blogs and posts from baseball writers around the country — some of them very respected — I found that Arenado barely earns a courtesy nod, if he gets mentioned at all.

When I tweet about Arenado’s 42 home runs and 130 RBIs, trolls on Twitter will inevitably call him a “Coors Field creation.”

That’s just not true. Of the 42 homers he had hit through Friday night, 22 were hit on the road, and 41 of his 88 extra-base hits came on the road. Keep in mind, we are talking about a player with more extra-base hits in a season than any other third baseman in major-league history.

Yahoo Sports’ Jeff Passan and Tim Brown, two of the best national baseball writers in the country — and two class acts, by the way — barely acknowledge Arenado’s incredible season in their voting. Arenado is ranked 10th among MVP candidates by Brown, and he doesn’t even make Passan’s top 10.

Arenado is easily one of the top three position players in the NL this season, and even if you throw pitchers such as Clayton Kershaw, Zack Greinke and Jake Arrieta into the MVP mix, Arenado should still be in the top five.

For the record, as a member of the National Baseball Writers’ Association of America, I have an NL MVP vote this season. I’ve been asked not to reveal my vote until results are released in November, but I can guarantee you that Arenado will make my top five.

Yes, Arenado’s overall home/road splits are relatively big: .316/.350/.610 at Coors vs. .258/.294/.542 on the road. But his Gold Glove plays anywhere, anytime.

Manager Walt Weiss, who has unabashedly touted Arenado for MVP, got fired up Saturday when discussing the lack of respect for his third baseman.

Told that Arenado was failing to get recognition from many national writers, Weiss grew animated.

“That’s a dereliction of duty,” he said.

It burns Weiss, and other members of the Rockies, that pitchers such as Kershaw and Greinke are universally lauded, yet it’s rarely mentioned that they pitch half their games at Dodger Stadium, a place where hard-hit balls that would be home runs almost anywhere else die at the warning track.

Weiss knows that the Coors Field effect is real, but he says the ballpark’s reputation has unfairly branded Arenado.

“It’s mostly because of where we play,” Weiss said. “We’re a team in our own time zone, and it’s the stigma of our park. We’ve seen it for years.

“People have just assumed that Nolan is a product of Coors Field without even looking at the numbers.”

Yes, the Rockies are a bad team and don’t deserve a lot of national attention. But the Nationals collapsed in the second half and are the majors’ most disappointing team, yet Harper is not penalized for that.

Weiss simply wants Arenado to get the respect he deserves.

“We probably are not seen much on a national level, so I don’t think they get to see Nolan a whole lot,” he said. “But I think if you have a vote, you’re obligated to be well-educated, well-informed before you turn in that vote. If you’re a writer that has Nolan 10th, I don’t think you deserve to be voting.”

Weiss is aware that Harper is a big favorite to win MVP, but he proudly stood up for his own player.

“I’m a big Bryce Harper fan. I love the way he plays. If he’s the MVP, you can’t argue with that,” Weiss said. “I just wish that people would give Nolan’s defense the credit it deserves, and the (offensive) numbers are just too big to ignore.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@ denverpost.com or @psaundersdp

Spotlight on …

Josh Donaldson, third base, Blue Jays

What’s up: I wonder if Troy Tulowitzki counts his baseball blessings. In Colorado, he played next to Nolan Arenado, the National League’s best third baseman. Then he got traded to Toronto and now takes the field next to Donaldson, who’s in a down-to-the-wire race with Mike Trout for American League MVP.

Background: Donaldson has had a monster year, not just statistically — .301/.375/.575, 41 homers, 123 RBIs — but as the Blue Jays’ most powerful weapon as they won the AL East and clinched their first playoff berth since 1993. Over the last two months, as Toronto put the Yankees in their rearview mirror, Donaldson hit .310 with 17 homers and 50-plus RBIs.

Saunders take: The Blue Jays are my pick to win the World Series. Their pitching might not quite match some of the other contenders, but it’s plenty good enough and Donaldson anchors an offense that conjures up the 1927 Yankees. More than that, he’s the kind of player who not only sparks his teammates, he carries them on his shoulders to places they never thought possible. Toronto general manager Alex Anthopoulos, the man who brokered the Tulo deal and also acquired ace David Price from Detroit, says there are many reasons for Toronto’s success. However, this is what Anthopoulos told ESPN’s Jayson Stark: “Josh has brought an intensity and focus to our club every day. His passion, energy and the way he goes about his business have set the tone for our club.”