The PAC 12, the University of Colorado's conference, is among the conferences leading the charge toward further compensating athletes. Treating universities both as academic centers and as sports entertainment complexes costs universities more money than most people realize, diminishes opportunities for major sports athletes and effectively makes students and families struggling to pay for college partial financiers of those athletes. As we debate the merits of paying students to entertain us, we should do so mindful of the costs to society, the athletes, their fellow students and those younger kids who are making choices about how to prioritize their time between academics and sports. The system as currently arranged does a grave disservice to all involved, but especially to athletes who have been denied the educations they deserve to succeed in the world.

Myth: Division 1 football and basketball programs make money. In its latest annual report on this issue, USA Today found that in 2012, only 23 of the 228 Division 1 schools had positive net revenue. The NCAA itself reports that the median losses across Division 1 went up every year from 2004 to 2012. Depending on which subdivision you are in, the current median losses range from $12 million to $9 million annually. USA Today and NCAA reports show that without a subsidy from the main campus, in 2013 CU Boulder's athletic program would have spent $15 million more than it took in.

Advertisement

Myth: Division 1 schools' major sports programs subsidize other sports programs. In the FBS, roughly 50 percent of football and basketball programs have negative net revenues; in Football Championship Subdivision (FCS) schools, approximately 95 percent of men's football and basketball programs have negative net revenues; in Division 1 AAA, approximately 90 percent of men's basketball programs have negative net revenues. At the University of Northern Colorado, the only sports program that is profitable on a stand-alone basis is women's volleyball. Clearly, we must rethink what we mean when we describe "revenue sports."

Myth: Sports programs subsidize university academic programs. The opposite is true: university subsidies are necessary to keep nearly every Division 1 sports program in the black. The median subsidy across all Division 1 schools is approximately $9 million per year and increasing annually. In Colorado, every Division 1 school subsidizes its sports programs. In 2013, CU Boulder provided a subsidy to its sports programs of $7 million, CSU $18 million and UNC $8 million.

Myth: Sports programs drive alumni donations. This is true, but only for donations to the sports programs. Most studies do not show a link between sports program existence or success and any real increase to donations to universities' non-sports programs.

Myth: College sports increase academic opportunities for their participants. Graduation rates for athletes overall are roughly the same as for non-athlete students. However, for football and basketball players, graduation rates tend to be much lower than for their non-athletic student peers and are achieved only after significant subsidies. Of course, graduation rates do not take into account the quality of the classes that are taken by Division 1 major sports athletes, which are famously less rigorous than those of their non-athletic peers. The NCAA and Division 1 universities spend $175 million on tutoring and other academic support for athletes annually. This support far outstrips the academic support universities give non-athlete students. Throughout Division 1, athletic spending per athlete is greater than academic spending per student by 3-12 times. In Colorado, both CSU and CU have academic centers exclusively for athletes. CU spent 10 times as much per athlete on athletic spending in 2012 than it did on academic spending per student; CSU spent 8 times as much and UNC nearly 2.5 times as much.

Myth: College sports are the pathway to riches in professional sports. One to two percent of college football and basketball players are drafted to play professionally. Of those draftees who go on to play, most do not play very long and do not keep the money they make. The average tenure of an NFL player is 3.3 years; an NBA player 4.8 years.

Sports, especially sports that don't require a full time commitment, can teach many positive lessons about discipline, hard work, leadership, teamwork and other valuable skills. The financial support they receive, however, should be commensurate with their benefit to the participants and the universities.

University presidents have decried the growing imbalance between sports and academia - as well they might in an era of declining state support for universities. We must decide whether we can continue to afford to pay for entertainment at institutions that exist primarily to provide knowledge and to give their students the skills to survive in a modern world.

Steve Bachar is chair of Ireland Stapleton Pryor & Pascoe's Public Policy & Regulatory Affairs practice group; he is co-chair of the Clinton Global Initiative America meeting being held in Denver in 2015.