The cormorants and the gulls get along very well in nature as partners in fishing expeditions.

I watch them from my deck on the Lake Erie shore as the cormorants surround a massive school of bait and then dive into that school with great success. The submerged bodies of the cormorants frighten the bait to clear the water surface and here are greeted by a swarm of hungry gulls that dine with delight on their bountiful harvest.

No one would care if just baitfish were captured. But when this source of food disappears, the cormorants thrive on small game fish and this puts a lot of pressure on our commercial and sport fishing resources. Ninety nine per cent of their diet consists of fish.

Cormorants are also known to eat mollusks, amphibians and crustaceans. Adults can dive to depths between five and 25 feet and remain underwater for 30 to 70 seconds. They may fly five to 10 miles from their colony to search for food.

I notice as well what the explosive cormorant population has done to the healthy trees and other vegetation on nesting islands off shore.

The trees and ground vegetation have been killed by the bird droppings and this destroys nesting sites for common terns, black crowned night herons and even great blue herons. With no available trees for nesting, the cormorants will nest on the ground.

The history of cormorants has them dated as far back as the late 1700s on the Lake of the Woods in northwestern Ontario. From here they have spread by the 1930s throughout the Great Lakes in numbers that prompted control measures.

Even after these measures were removed their numbers continued to drop because of the accumulation of DDT and PCBs in their bodies that caused their eggs to break or deformities in the chicks, the same problem suffered by the bald eagles.

By the late 1970s their numbers grew rapidly after DDT was banned to the point where cormorants are now in nuisance numbers in nesting colonies that continue to spread.

But the Migratory Bird Treaty Act 1918 USA and the Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act, Ontario prohibit the culling of these migratory birds without a permit. This makes sense.

I consider the duck and goose hunting licence a permit that should allow a daily limit of two cormorants in both Canada and the USA. This allows hunters who want to be involved in a conservation project to do so.

And when the number of cormorants have been reduced to sustainable levels with minimum side effects in health to humans and wildlife then the two-bird limit could quickly be reduced to one per day or removed. Best of all the hunters will be paying for the cost of this conservation project. And for their cooperation the culled cormorants should not be a part of the daily limit for ducks and geese.

This would promote the honest reporting of culled birds and accurate culled numbers at the expense of those involved in the project.

Yes!

Erno Rossi is a bestselling JUNO nominated author. He is the author of White Death-The Blizzard of ‘77 book/DVD and Crystal Beach-The Good Old Days, book/DVD. Visit him at www.whitedeath.com or on You Tube, type in ernoinferno77 and there ride the front seat of the Comet and the old Giant roller coaster at Crystal Beach Amusement Park. His books are available or can be ordered through Coles, Barnes & Noble, Amazon and buffalobooks.com. He now accepts talks for his future speaking schedule. Call him at 905-835-8051, or email him at erossi@cogeco.ca Think gift books for Mother and Fathers’ Day, birthdays, the holiday seasons and other special occasions. Give Erno a call or email to reserve a visit to the Port Colborne lighthouses.