Most precipitation in a decade

The Calmeyn family decided to use Labor Day to have a picnic at St. Vrain State Park. Left to right, the Frederick family is Dalilah, 4, dad Andy, Gavin, 2, and mom Stephenie. ( Paul Aiken / For the Times-Call )

St. Vrain State Park on Monday appeared generally greener than it typically is on the unofficial end-of-summer Labor Day weekend. Wildflowers were still blooming and the color of the grass and shrubbery reflected what has been a much wetter summer this year.

But all the extra water didn't do much to help the fishing at one of Brittany and Andrew Metzger's favorite fishing spots.

"It's not good — it's not as good," Andrew said, as the couple tried their luck for trout Monday afternoon at the park's Sandpiper Pond.

"It's real hard to catch anything any more," Brittany said. "The park and the shorebanks have just been extremely overgrown.

The couple live in Lochbuie so day trips, as in Monday's with 5-year-old daughter Shelby, are common, they said.

. (Dave Larison / Times-Call weather consultant)

"It's been a lot wetter," Brittany Metzger said. "The fishing's been a lot worse."

This has, in fact, been the wettest summer for the Longmont area in 10 years, according to Times-Call weather consultant Dave Larison.

"The real contrast (in precipitation) is from the last two summers," Larison said. "Last year we had only 1.32 inches."

June through August, 6.45 inches of precipitation fell in Longmont, the most since 2004 when 6.62 inches fell during those three months.

July was a particularly wet month, when 3.44 inches fell compared with the normal 1.13 inches.

And the monsoon season, where almost every day someplace around the northern Front Range is getting afternoon showers or thunderstors, never usually lasts as long as it has this year, Larison said.

"Usually later in August it starts to dry out," he said.

Larison points out that despite just 1.32 inches all summer last year — to a meteorologist like himself, that's June, July and August — one should not overlook what happened in September, when a whopping 7.25 inches hit Longmont.

2014 has also been cooler that in recent summers. With the exception of June, both july and August were below normal. Larison said the mercury has hit 90 degrees or higher 35 times this year, compared with the normal 43.

Nick Hackney Jr. casts while fishing with his dad, Nick, on Monday at St. Vrain State Park. Some regular say this fishing wasn't as good this summer compared to years past. (Paul Aiken / For the Times-Call)

Last year there were 62 days when the temperature hit 90 or higher, and "in 2012 I think we had 10 days of 100 degrees, and we tied an all-time record of in Longmont of 106," he said.

Looking ahead, Larison said climatologists are noticing a mild El Niño pattern developing in the Pacific Ocean off of the west coast of South America that could have some bearing on our weather.

Bringing the possibility of added tropical moisture coming up from the southwest means the chance for some September snow, he said. The last time was 4 inches on Sept. 24, 2000, so we may be overdue.

"I remember back in the early '90s we had four years in a row where we had snow in September," he said.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com