The U.S. health-care system is experiencing market failure, and has been for years. Passing Obamacare was President Obama's attempt to reverse this trend, but it does not go far enough. The U.S. still spends 17 percent of gross domestic product on health care, more than any G20 country.

Politicians, are constantly looking to control costs, and the pharmaceutical industry made itself an easy target when Turing Pharmaceuticals' decided to raise the price of the drug Daraprim from $13.50 to $750 per pill in August. Then-CEO Martin Shkreli on Dec. 17 resigned from Turing after being arrested by the FBI on securities fraud charges, related to his involvement with a hedge fund before joining Turin.

But now Turing and other major pharmaceutical companies are being investigated by the Senate Committee on Aging for possible cost manipulation. Turing still has not reduced the price of Daraprim.

Pharmaceutical expenditures are a popular target for government budget cuts, especially when more than 15.9 percent of health-care expenditures are on drugs. However, Americans need the private sector to drive drug innovation because the government cannot afford drug development.

Since drug innovation extends lives and supports our human right to health, government officials support drug companies any way they can. But price gouging unethically breaches that social contract in three ways: It goes against free-market values, affects the solvency of Medicare and, most importantly, compromises the human right to health.

The free market permits prices to rise or fall based on supply and demand. Daraprim is a critical drug for HIV and cancer patients, but it does not have much other demand. Low market demand means no competition for Daraprim, leaving the company a small monopoly that was exploited.

After public outcry, and before being arrested, Shkreli defended Turing's 5,000 percent price increase as "reasonable," asserting that Turing's profits go to drug innovation. This alleged "reasonableness" is questionable at best, when Express Scripts is partnering with Imprimis Pharmaceuticals to develop a competing drug at $1 per pill. It is also difficult to believe profits go to innovation when pharmaceutical companies typically spend more money on lobbying and advertising than research and development.

In regards to the solvency of Medicare, any health economist will tell you what Medicare spends in one area means the fewer services it can provide overall. The federal government pays pharmaceutical companies $1,000 per American on Medicare per year, which is more than what France and Germany spend combined. Anything above $1,000 per American means that Medicare may start cutting services in other areas, which is why the Senate is investigating to see if costs can be contained on pharmaceuticals.

Most importantly, price gouging puts the health of Americans in jeopardy in order to make a profit. The human right to health means that if a drug is developed that can help save someone, that person should have access to that drug. Under the current U.S. health-care system, that means making drugs affordable enough so Americans who need the drug can access it, and the drug companies can still make a profit. Raising the price of any drug means fewer Americans with cancer can access it.

In the short term, if the Senate were serious about creating policy through this investigation, it would conclude that the FDA drug-approval process needs restructuring. We can avoid price gouging in the future if the FDA requires pharmaceutical companies to provide a plan for the following: How the FDA approving the proposed drug will save the consumer money; and how the company plans to keep the drug accessible over the next 30 years.

This part of the approval process is something that is already done by most G20 countries and should be done in the U.S. Turing's price gouging has made one thing clear to us: Drug accessibility is just as important as drug development.