Milwaukee Brewers pitcher Tyler Thornburg (30) delivers during the eighth inning of a game against the Pittsburgh Pirates. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Phoenix — Thin in starting pitching this spring, the Brewers might stretch out right-hander Tyler Thornburg in camp if his elbow is up to it after missing much of last season.

That doesn't necessarily mean the Brewers are thinking about returning Thornburg to his previous role as a starting pitcher, however. He made the club last spring as a long reliever but worked his way into a setup role before injuring his elbow in early June and never returning.

"He was our long guy last year out of camp and then he pitched so well, he pitched into that seventh-inning, eighth-inning role," manager Ron Roenicke said Sunday before pitchers and catchers had their first official workout of the spring at Maryvale Baseball Park.

"We know he can do that but we want to make sure if we need a long man he's able to do that. We've talked about both (starting and long relief). That conversation will be in the next couple of days when we meet with all the guys. I don't want to say exactly what we're doing with him until we talk to him."

Thornburg and fellow reliever Jim Henderson (shoulder surgery) are doing well in their comebacks from injury and won't be restricted much if any in camp.

Asked if there were any qualms about stretching out a pitcher coming off an elbow injury, Roenicke said, "We're hoping he'll be OK. That's why the conversation needs to happen. We need some input from him.

"There's always the debate about what is truly easier on a guy physically. Is it physically easier to go an inning (in relief) but knowing you might have to do it the next day and the day after? Or is it being a starter when you have all the time off and everything is preparing for this one day? It's different with different people."

Beyond the starting five, the Brewers plan to stretch out Taylor Jungmann and Michael Blazek as starting pitchers this spring. They currently are Nos. 6 and 7 on the rotation depth chart.

Blazek hadn't been informed of that role but likely will be in the upcoming meeting Roenicke mentioned.

"I'm comfortable starting; I've done it before," said Blazek, who began his pro career in the role before moving to the bullpen. "So, it's not like a big surprise for me. The way they looked at it last year (when moved to starting) was just to get innings in and work on my stuff. But at the same time I was preparing myself that if I got called up I was going to be in the bullpen.

"Whatever they need me to do, I feel comfortable doing it."

The right outlook: Left-hander Dontrelle Willis hasn't had many things go his way in recent years but that hasn't dampened his enthusiasm for the game. Willis made it clear he plans to do everything within his power to make the pitching staff as a non-roster invitee after last appearing in the majors in 2011.

"They've welcomed me with open arms, all the way from the top to the bottom," an excited Willis said. "I'm enjoying every minute of it. I'm just thankful. This is a talented ballclub. They're not trying to rebuild anything. They have a lot of talented arms."

Asked how he maintained his ebullience despite tough, injury-riddled years and many setbacks, the 33-year-old former phenom laughed and said, "I live a great life. I'm just a (crummy) baseball player. I'm being very honest. I lead a very, very great life. I have beautiful children. God has a way of humbling people and seeing what's really important.

"At the same time, I'm very thankful for this situation and opportunity. I busted my tail to get to this position. It would be shame on me not to enjoy every minute of it. I told them I'm going to do the best I can every day. I'm ecstatic. God is good.

"I'm not scared of my next life. I'm not scared if this doesn't work out. But right now I feel healthy. I'm in better shape than I was in my 20s. I'm going to let it all hang out and be me."

Hellweg progressing: Pitching prospect Johnny Hellweg is progressing nicely from Tommy John elbow surgery less than 10 months ago. Hellweg has been throwing bullpen sessions and hopes to pitch in minor-league games before the end of camp but likely will be kept in extended spring training to be safe.

"It's good to get going in organized stuff," said the 6-foot-9 right-hander, who went down after four starts with Class AAA Nashville last season. "I'm going to continue my rehab and be on the field with everybody. I've taken all the steppingstones.

"It was a good feeling to get back on the mound. I feel good right now. I feel like I'm where I should be in the rehab process. I've got to continue that; I've got a little longer to go."

Hellweg said the toughest part was the nine-month rehab program here at the minor-league complex, where he often worked by himself.

"It was more the mental hurdles," he said. "As soon as I got over the fact I was going to be here for nine months, it was a little easier to deal with. Over the summer, there was nobody here so I had to pass time myself. It was a little better over the winter when more guys were here."