My wife and I are avid movie attendees — dinner and a movie every Friday for more than 50 years. This past Fourth of July was no exception.

In the movie guide that day, the PG listed “America: Imagine the World Without Her” (not reviewed). This seemed to be the perfect movie for us, so off we went to the Galleria theater. It started out pretty well, and then George Washington was shot by a sniper and the colonies supposedly lost the American Revolution. That is where the premise of the title ends and the growth of America was described. Slavery, Civil War, other wars — I took issue with leaving out the Korean War as I am a veteran of the Korean War, 1st Cavalry Division, 1951, and the United States stopped North Korea from overrunning a very prosperous democracy.

The movie continued with the Vietnam War and World War II, and it mentioned the disastrous Iraq War as a positive war with America restoring oil to the Iraqi people. We all know that the oil is controlled by the big international oil companies.

The rest of the movie seems to be about the rise of capitalism in the United States and copied by the rest of the world. This all made some sense until out of the clear blue sky came an attack on our current president, Barack Obama.

First, the movie portrayed him as a disciple of a well-known communist — then it started to describe the Affordable Care Act as a failure along with the charge that large insurance companies orchestrated it (total garbage). It is working very well and is very popular with the American people. The Republican House has voted more than 50 times to repeal all or part of it with no success.

At this point, I began to boo in the theater and make unkind comments about the movie. My wife and I got up and left. As we were leaving, the movie was attacking Hillary Clinton (how desperate is the right wing?).

We found the manager and demanded our money back. He promptly did so; it seems as if he was expecting more people to request a refund. This theater is no place for this kind of political propaganda. Shame on the Galleria management for injecting this kind of political attack alongside the theater’s legitimate offerings. The public deserves an apology.

RUDY M. KUCHTA

Baldwin Borough