As with so many other things in the “Affordable Care Act,” the law’s so-called Cadillac tax is grossly misleading.

Democrats who wrote the law claimed that the tax was meant only to discourage a small share of gold-plated health plans offered to high-priced executives. When it kicks in, it will impose a huge, non-deductible 40% surcharge on insurance premiums above $10,800 for individuals and $29,100 for families.

The tax effectively caps what is today an unlimited tax exemption offered to employer-provided insurance. MIT economist Jonathan Gruber, who helped design the tax, claimed that only “the top few percent of health plans” would be affected.

The implication of it all was that only the rich would notice any changes.

But a new study published in the International Journal of Health Services shows that middle class families — those with incomes between $38,000 and $100,000 — will bear the brunt of the Cadillac tax.

That’s because, as a share of income, these families benefit the most from the current tax exemption, which effectively lowers the cost of insurance provided through the workplace. But the exemption provides relatively little benefit to either the poor or the wealthy.

Gruber himself was caught on tape saying that Democrats were “mislabeling” the Cadillac tax, “calling it a tax on insurance plans rather than a tax on people when we all know it’s a tax on people who hold those insurance plans.”

“It’s shameful that economists have provided cover for this tax that will hit middle-class families and largely spare the wealthy,” said one of the study’s authors, Steffie Woolhandler.

To be sure, Woolhandler and her co-author, David Himmelstein, are proponents of a Bernie Sanders-style government-run health care system. But you don’t have to agree with their views on health reform to see that their analysis of ObamaCare’s Cadillac tax is spot on.

This is just one of many problems with the Cadillac tax. The other is that, while it initially affects only high-priced plans, the thresholds for the tax are indexed to overall inflation. Since health premiums have historically gone up faster, that means the tax will inevitably sweep up an increasing share of insurance plans.

The Kaiser Family Foundation figured that in just four years, almost half of all workplace insurance plans would be subject to the onerous tax.

And, as IBD has noted previously, because of the way the tax is designed, it would end up hampering, if not killing, increasingly popular Health Savings Account plans.

From the get-go, the Cadillac tax was hugely unpopular with unions, who’ve over the years managed to negotiate generous health benefits for their members. So Democrats delayed its implementation until 2018. The budget deal signed by Obama late last year put it off another two years. Everyone from Bernie Sanders to Ted Cruz promises to get rid of it entirely if elected president.

The current unlimited exemption for employer health plans is a problem. It has created huge distortions in the health care marketplace by punishing people who have to buy insurance on the individual market, since they have to do so with after-tax dollars.

But there are far better, less disruptive, and less punishing ways to deal with this tax distortion than the misbegotten, and shamefully mislabeled Cadillac tax.