A ‘Consumer Reports’ for the Common Core — Another Louisiana lawsuit due in court today — New app designed by Obama administration targets bullying

With help from Allie Grasgreen, Stephanie Simon and Seth Zweifler

A ‘CONSUMER REPORTS’ FOR THE COMMON CORE: A new nonprofit funded with $3 million from the Gates Foundation and the Helmsley Charitable Trust launches today with plans to review textbooks and other instructional material for fidelity to the Common Core. EdReports.org will start by bringing in teams of classroom teachers to evaluate K-8 math materials. The curricula will be judged by how well it matches the Common Core and assesses student learning and by whether it offers teachers guidance in reaching children at all levels.The group will post its ratings online and invite response from the publishers. Up first: Pearson’s enVision Math, McGraw-Hill’s Everyday Math, Houghton Mifflin’s Go Math and more than a dozen other widely used curricula. EdReports will turn to high-school math and language arts in future years.

Story Continued Below

— The project is led by Eric Hirsch, formerly of the New Teacher Center, and Maria Klawe, the president of Harvey Mudd College. They say they hope districts will turn to their ratings to guide purchases. “Hopefully with great materials, great teachers and great standards, we will be able to move the needle on student achievement,” Hirsch said. Incoming NEA President Lily Eskelsen Garcia supports the effort; she says curriculum ratings could improve Common Core implementation “by shining a light” on quality materials.

ANOTHER LOUISIANA LAWSUIT DUE IN COURT: A lawsuit filed in July by 17 Louisiana lawmakers will have its day in court today. They’re alleging that implementation of the Common Core violates state law. The group of lawmakers, who unsuccessfully tried to repeal the Common Core through legislation earlier this year, is suing the state Board of Elementary and Secondary Education and state chief John White. White and state school board president Chas Roemer have said there’s absolutely no legal basis for the lawmakers’ claim. And while Gov. Bobby Jindal isn’t a part of the lawsuit, he’s publicly backing it. A refresher of the case from The Times-Picayune: http://bit.ly/WyUbfX

— Meanwhile, Jindal is being sued by parents, teachers, a charter group and his own school board after he renounced the Common Core and aligned tests earlier this year. A judge ruled this week that the case will go forward, but Jindal can’t be deposed. That case will come up in court again on Monday.

THANK GOD IT’S FRIDAY, AUGUST 15. This American teacher living in Korea gave his students Warheads [ http://bit.ly/1nUoVgP] for the first time and filmed their reactions! [ http://bzfd.it/1uV6fDk] I personally could only tolerate the blue ones as a kid. Please send only sweet candy or tips and amusing GIFs to cemma@politico.com or @caitlinzemma. Events: educalendar@politicopro.com. And follow us on Twitter: @Morning_Edu and @POLITICOPro.

NEW APP TARGETS BULLYING: A new iPhone and Android app is encouraging parents to take a stand against bullying. The app, “KnowBullying,” will officially launch today at the Education Department-sponsored Federal Partners in Bullying Prevention Summit. Developed by HHS’s Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, the app is based on research showing that parents who spend at least 15 minutes a day with their children can help prevent bullying. The app features “conversation starters,” or recommended ways to talk about bullying with young children. It also includes information on how to spot warning signs and tips on how to prevent bullying before it happens. “It’s our way of stepping up the game and moving into this next wave of how parents use technology these days,” Ingrid Donato, chief of SAMHSA’s mental health promotion branch, tells Morning Education.

— The app’s launch comes at a time when the national rallying cry around bullying prevention, though still strong, may be somewhat calmer than it was years ago. “A lot of people remain very passionate about working on this, but the public attention has definitely died down a bit,” said Deborah Temkin, a bullying prevention consultant. Many current efforts tend to emphasize anti-bullying in schools, Temkin said. In the future, she hopes to see more programs focus on prevention. “Just saying ‘no’ doesn't help prevent behavior,” she said. “We have to start addressing some of the reasons why kids are bullying, instead of telling them just not to do it.” Download the app: http://1.usa.gov/1rLSnKO and more on the summit: http://bit.ly/1rxakv7

AFT: ‘PRAYERS AREN’T ENOUGH’ FOR FERGUSON: What’s happening in Ferguson, Mo., shows how polarization and power imbalances are “unraveling even the most basic dignity and respect,” American Federation of Teachers President Randi Weingarten said Thursday. Amid growing tensions and police-protester confrontations following the Saturday shooting of unarmed black teenager Michael Brown, the local school district said it would push the start of classes to next week. “Today is supposed to be the first day of school in Ferguson, but this would-be time of promise is instead filled with despair. At a time like this, when an unarmed student was gunned down, we must mourn and we must investigate,” Weingarten wrote. “We must come together and act, which starts with both healing and respecting peaceful protest. Ultimately, we must overcome the polarization and divisiveness — because every child deserves to grow up in a safe and welcoming community.”

STANDOUT SUPERINTENDENTS WANTED: On October 7, the Education Department will host a “Connected Superintendents Summit” to honor local leaders helping their schools and districts transition to digital learning. The summit will allow superintendents to share lessons learned and best practices with each other and the department. The agency also wants people to nominate exceptional district leaders doing this work. Those nominations are due today: http://bit.ly/1rcy2BA More on the summit: http://1.usa.gov/1uV186e

RELEASING ROSETTA STONE INTO CLASSROOMS: The software company is partnering up with Mooresville Graded School District in North Carolina to provide almost 3,000 students — about half the district — in grades K-6 with access to digital language learning programs in Spanish and French. Mooresville is no stranger to technology. In June 2013, President Barack Obama traveled there and delivered his first speech [ http://1.usa.gov/1l7A5o3] about overhauling the E-Rate program. At the time, Mooresville was already committed to digital learning. Every student was using a laptop and high-speed, wireless Internet starting in third grade. Now, the students will use Rosetta Stone software for a hour at least once a week. Judy Verses, president of enterprise and education for the company, tells Morning Education that the program is priced affordably for K-12 schools and districts. Rosetta Stone’s software has historically been used to help English-language learners, but the company sees a big opportunity in introducing students to a second language earlier in life. About 2,000 schools are teaching with Rosetta Stone in districts located in Alabama, Maryland, North Carolina, Oregon and Wisconsin.

REMEMBER YOUR PASSPORT: With the new school year approaching, the travel assistance company On Call International is out with updated tips for smooth and safe study abroad. The advice will become increasingly pertinent as the Institute of International Education moves forward with an initiative to double the number of students who study abroad by 2020 (more on that here: http://bit.ly/1hBGT8w). On Call contracts with colleges to help HR and risk management staff prepare for and get through study abroad and other kinds of academic travel, but the guidelines are available to anyone online: http://bit.ly/1sZFkab

REPORT ROLL CALL

— The National Center for Education Research breaks down how to design and analyze Partially Nested Randomized Controlled Trials, or when some students are placed in a unit like a tutoring group or class to test an education intervention while other students in the control group aren’t broken out into units. http://1.usa.gov/WZxz8r

— The National Alliance for Public Charter Schools says there’s no significant difference in the percentage of English language learners served by traditional and public charter schools: http://bit.ly/VcZUa1

SYLLABUS

— New York State United Teachers union decides against endorsing Gov. Andrew Cuomo. Capital New York: http://bit.ly/XkI9Hp

— LAUSD says it's not subject to state's “parent trigger” law this year. Los Angeles Times: http://lat.ms/1oUqEIa

— One-third of Virginia’s schools could lack full accreditation as standards toughen. The Washington Post: http://wapo.st/1rcYCug

— Unlike the University of Texas at Austin, Texas A&M University isn’t bothered by recommendation letters written by elected officials. The Texas Tribune: http://bit.ly/1yDBROe

— Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Corbett defends education adviser who resigned amid questions about duties. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette: http://bit.ly/1qbGz19

— South Carolina education board OKs quick timeline for new standards. The Associated Press: http://bit.ly/1pu2XGC

— Some colleges embrace, tepidly, federal scrutiny on campus sexual assaults. Inside Higher Ed: http://bit.ly/1yDAWxa

— 28 Washington state superintendents stress to parents that their schools aren’t failing. The News Tribune: http://bit.ly/1yBFeFr

— UCLA is under investigation for its handling of sexual misconduct cases. Los Angeles Times: http://lat.ms/1l7LQef

It was all a dream [ http://bit.ly/1iilvSE] With the Pro Education team: @ CaitlinZEmma or cemma@politico.com, @ alliegrasgreen or agrasgreen@politico.com, @ mbmarklein or mbmarklein@politico.com, @ MaggieSeverns or mseverns@politico.com, @ NirviShah or nshah@politico.com, @ StephanieSimon_ or ssimon@politico.com and szweifler@politico.com or @szweifler.