Photo

The “split screen” convergence of important news this summer — from Russia, Ukraine, Israel, Gaza, Syria, Iraq and Ferguson, Mo. — recalls an astonishing day 50 years ago next month. On Thursday, Oct. 15, 1964, the Yankees played the Cardinals at Busch Stadium in St. Louis. It was the deciding game of that year’s World Series, and, off the field, it seemed that all hell was breaking loose.

Before NBC broadcast (“in living color”) the first pitch of Game 7, by the Cardinals’ Bob Gibson, the competing dramas had already begun. President Lyndon Johnson’s longtime chief aide, Walter Jenkins, had been jailed in what The New York Times, on its front page, called a “morals case.” It was just three weeks before a presidential election, and L.B.J.'s campaign was doing damage control.

When Johnson’s recordings of his private conversations were released decades later, they revealed the president’s first telephone briefing by his then-consigliere, the Washington lawyer (later a Supreme Court justice) Abe Fortas, about Jenkins’s liaison with another man at a Washington Y.M.C.A. “I just can’t believe this!” Johnson told Fortas. He asked, “Was a fee involved?” Until the day he died, L.B.J. was privately certain that Jenkins had been “framed” by the Republicans.

Capitalizing on Jenkins’s arrest, Johnson’s opponent, Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, fulminated that Americans required “clear and constant evidence of the highest morality” in their government. One Goldwater aide told a reporter that the Jenkins case could have a “terrific impact” on the campaign. Others in Goldwater’s campaign warned that the presidential assistant’s secrets had made him susceptible to blackmail by a foreign power.

Luckily for Johnson’s candidacy, Jenkins turned out — by amazing coincidence — to have served in an Air Force Reserve squadron on Capitol Hill under Goldwater, whose glowing reports to the Pentagon on Jenkins’s good character were hastily photocopied at L.B.J.'s behest.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Lady Bird Johnson told her husband that she wanted to make a statement of sympathy and support for their friend Walter. The anxious L.B.J. tried to restrain her, but the first lady spoke out anyway.

Johnson then boasted to reporters that he had treated Jenkins with compassion. Reflecting widely held attitudes toward homosexuality in 1964, he said, “We Democrats felt sorry for him, and thought it was a case of sickness and disease, and didn’t try to capitalize on a man’s misfortune.”

That Thursday afternoon, as the Cardinals-Yankees game wore on, no one scored for the first three innings. NBC’s play-by-play coverage, provided by Harry Caray and Curt Gowdy, was interrupted by a news bulletin: The Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had been ousted in a Kremlin coup the day before.

It was only two years after Khrushchev had backed down in the Cuban missile crisis, removing offensive weaponry under ultimatum from President John Kennedy. With Khrushchev’s exit, some American officials were now expressing worry that the new Soviet government — whose just-announced leaders were Leonid Brezhnev and Alexei Kosygin — might try to avenge the Cuba episode by encouraging a new confrontation with the United States that could conceivably risk a third world war.

But with the relatively primitive communications technology available in 1964, a White House scandal or Kremlin reshuffling could not distract a World Series fan for long. Before cable television news or widespread all-news radio, let alone the Internet, Americans had to wait to learn more about such stories from that now-extinct species called the evening newspaper, or perhaps from the CBS Evening News or Huntley-Brinkley Report. (ABC television news was not yet fully competitive in 1964.)

Therefore, after NBC’s brief interruption on Khrushchev’s ouster, many millions of baseball viewers continued to watch or listen to the Cardinals face the Yankees without distraction. Had they turned to one of the two other national networks, they might have found soap operas. Such dominance of the airwaves in 1964 helped to buttress baseball’s place in American life.

Moscow was not the only place where tectonic plates were shifting that Thursday. At a testing site called Lop Nur, the government of what was still called Red China performed its first successful nuclear explosion. At the time, many American strategists regarded the danger of Chinese nuclear weapons with maximum alarm; China’s leader, Mao Zedong, had publicly expressed nonchalance about using them.

“So what if we lose 300 million people,” Mao had once bragged to Khrushchev. “Our women will make it up in a generation.” (There had even been low-level, confidential feelers between Washington and Moscow about a joint military effort to destroy some of China’s nuclear installations.)

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Underscoring the melodramatic sense that the world was being rearranged in a single day, British voters rejected their longtime Conservative government, then led by Prime Minister Alec Douglas-Home. It would be the first time America’s chief ally had been led by a Labor government since 1951.

Coping, inside the White House, with these harrowing developments, President Johnson sought comfort from the evangelist Billy Graham by telephone, and bemoaned his fate to Lady Bird, saying to her, “I’ve got the Russians on one side of me” and “the Chinese are dropping bombs around, contaminating the atmosphere,” and “disease hit” Walter Jenkins, “the best man I ever knew.”

Now we take you back to St. Louis. In Busch Stadium that afternoon, the home team was closely matched by the Yankees, who benefited from home runs by Mickey Mantle, Phil Linz and Clete Boyer. But the Cards, propelled by homers by Boyer’s brother Ken and another by Lou Brock, won by 7-5, which gave them the 1964 Series.

After the Yankees left the field in defeat, their organization added one more geopolitical shock to the day’s convulsions: They fired their manager, Yogi Berra.