The Hill newspaper speculated this week that another potential D.C. law may soon stoke the ongoing conflict between the nation's capital and the U.S. Congress. The Washington, D.C. city council recently passed legislation that would require insurance companies to allow women to have access to up to a year's worth of birth control at a time. Currently, women typically only have access to one to three months of birth control.

The council's rationale behind the change is that increased access to birth control would help prevent unwanted pregnancies. If the city's mayor signs the legislation, the new law must first pass through Congressional review before it can be implemented. That's where the law "is likely to draw fire from Republicans who have already tried to block a D.C. statute offering legal protections to women who have had abortions or use contraception," The Hill said.



[SEE: Republican Party Cartoons]

The relationship between Congressional Republicans and the city of Washington has certanly been sticky lately. Earlier this year, House Oversight and Government Reform Committee Chairman Jason Chaffetz, R-Utah, and Washington Mayor Muriel Bowser clashed over implementation of the district's new law that legalized the possession of marijuana. There have been similar skirmishes over city policies related to gun control and abortion rights.

However, in this case, I think The Hill is mistaken. If the bill is signed by the mayor, Congressional Republicans are likely to let it quietly pass by.

The GOP tends to try to interfere with certain Washington laws because doing so gives lawmakers an opportunity to score points with their base on hot button issues. However, trying to block this particular law isn't likely to do that as effectively as some of their other efforts have.

As The Hill also pointed out, the party has been vocal about coverage of contraception under the Affordable Care Act. However, that issue is a bit different than what the proposed Washington law would address. D.C. isn't trying to require insurers to cover birth control, but rather to ensure that a reasonable amount of it can be dispensed to those who depend on it. Also, this proposed law does not address abortion, which was likely the draw for the most recent debate.



[SEE: Congress Cartoons]