The health and life insurance industry news roundup for this week.

HealthMarkets Insurance Agency announced that it has acquired Benefitter Insurance Solutions, Inc., a San Francisco-based technology company providing employee benefit decision support tools to small businesses and their employees. Small and mid-sized business owners continuously struggle with providing and maintaining employee benefits due to rising costs and an inability to provide the range of options available to America’s bigger businesses. The demand for alternatives to major medical group plans and the broader access available through the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) have accelerated the migration from small group coverage to individual market insurance tailored to each employee. Benefitter’s proprietary technology, software and services will equip HealthMarkets and its agents to better help employers make a positive, profitable and deliberate transition to the new era of health benefits.

Jackson National Life Insurance Company announced the launch of LifePay, the company’s first lifetime income benefit option within the Jackson AscenderPlus Select fixed index annuity (FIA). The new feature, available for an additional charge, offers contract-holders the flexibility to start or stop income payments as needed, as well as the opportunity to manage longevity risk and increase growth potential. Jackson AscenderPlus Select with LifePay will replace the current Jackson AscenderPlus Select contract.

Legal & General America’s (LGA) level term product just got more affordable. A rate reduction across all non-tobacco underwriting classes puts LGA back among the brokerage carriers with the three lowest premiums. “Without compromising our discipline, we stepped outside the algorithms and reached farther and deeper than we had before,” says Troy Thompson, vice president of product management at LGA. “We intentionally focused on top three positioning. And if No. 1 was in reach, we grabbed it.”

LIMRA launched Recruit2Go™, an online and mobile-friendly tool designed to help candidates learn about insurance selling opportunities and help recruiters connect with candidates. The quiz is designed using the latest LIMRA research on effective recruiting practices. Recruit2Go can be completed on mobile devices and computers alike, including cell phones and tablets. When a candidate takes the recruiting quiz, managers or recruiters can gain insight into what motivates the candidate and at the same time receive a snapshot of the candidate’s talent. Recruit2Go serves a dual-purpose by capturing a candidate’s interest, and helping recruiters focus on messages that will resonate.

In other LIMRA news, the LIMRA LOMA 2015 Greater China Life Insurance Symposium will take place Sept. 23–24 in Shanghai. The conference, which has the theme “Profitability through Innovation,” comes as new research shows that four in 10 Chinese with investable assets of at least $1.6 million are not covered by life insurance. Executives and professionals in Greater China in strategic planning, recruiting, training and distribution channel management will attend the event at the Marriott Shanghai Hongqiao. The conference will be in Mandarin and English. For more information and to register, please visit: LIMRA LOMA 2015 Greater China Life Insurance Symposium.

Lion Street announced that executive benefits company Pen-Cal has become a Lion Street Owner-Firm in an effort to broaden Pen-Cal’s benefit plan offerings and expand its client base. Advisor-owners of Lion Street, a national financial services distribution company, operate independent firms that provide life insurance, business insurance and wealth management solutions to high-net-worth individuals, small business owners and corporations. Based in Pleasanton, Calif., Pen-Cal has a national footprint, and serves the needs of large and mid-size corporations and businesses. It is ranked among the top five U.S. executive benefit consulting firms by Plansponsor.

Sapiens International Corporation, (NASDAQ and TASE: SPNS), a global provider of software solutions for the insurance industry, announced that FNB – a financial institution providing personal, private, business and commercial banking services to millions of customers across South Africa and Africa – has selected Sapiens ALIS for the launch of its new life insurance company. Sapiens ALIS supports any combination of life, pension, annuity and medical products for the individual and group markets, enabling carriers to explore new product offerings and hybrid designs. FNB recently secured a license to launch a new life insurance company, prompting the financial institution to find and implement a new policy administration system.