By Jayne Carroll

It was the year of the Georges with a new royal baby, Mr. Zimmerman being acquitted in the race trial of the year, and one of the best legislative leaders in Salem, state Sen. Larry George of Sherwood announcing he will not be seeking re-election in 2014.

It is now time to turn our thoughts and predictions to 2014 where only one thing seems certain: Obamacare will continue to be a national nightmare for most and those who supported it will pay a high political price for having done so. The big question is whether the Republicans have the political talent and discernment to put aside internal feuding and unite to take on the Left on a state and national level?





With the Portland Trail Blazers, the Oregon Ducks, and the Portland Timbers and Winter Hawks continuing to garner national attention, will 2014 be their their year to bring the big trophies home? The Winter Olympics, already shrouded in fears of terrorism attacks and political incorrectness for Russian disapproval of gay displays of public affection, should still brighten our dark winter months with exceptional feats of athleticism.

As businesses become leaner and meaner to adjust to the poor economy and fears over the impact of Obamacare and high taxes and regulations, the stock market should remain strong. High unemployment will remain steady, but the media will report government-orchestrated numbers to make the jobless rate appear better than reality.

Nationally, Republicans should pick up seats in the U.S. Senate and retain control of the U.S. House. However, Democrats could retain the majority in the Senate if the Republicans fail to field a stronger team of candidates than they did in 2012.

In Oregon, Gov. John Kitzhaber, despite his ownership of the Cover Oregon debacle and his fights with labor union bosses, seems to have a lock on a fourth term. Freshman Sen. Jeff Merkley seems vulnerable but unless the Republican nominee can muster an $8 million to $10 million war chest, the lackluster left-winger Merkley should be able to generate enough votes out of the liberal population centers of Portland and Eugene win re-election.



Liberals will also maintain a stronghold on Portland and Multnomah County with the most competitive race being for Multnomah County Chair between County Commissioner Deborah Kafoury and former Portland mayoral candidate Jim Francesconi. Kafoury should defeat the politically-ungifted Francesconi.

Must of the political heat will be found in the ballot measures where everything from making Oregon a right-to-work state to legalizing gay marriage and pot is expected to be on the ballot. Labor unions are expected to pour millions into trying to defeat "right to work" which could drain some monies from the coffers of Democrat candidates. Most political observers are predicting that the Democrats will retain control of the Oregon House and Senate, but if Cover Oregon remains the laughingstock of the nation, anything could happen.

On a national level, full amnesty for those illegally in America will not be achieved. if the Republicans and the Tea Party do not mend fences and the Republicans retain control of the U.S. House, John Boehner's speakership could end in 2014. Republicans will make political inroads with minority voting blocs, but will continue to fare poorly with women voters. Young voters, who turned out in record numbers for President Obama, will sit out election year 2014 in big numbers.

Oprah Winfrey will not win her obligatory Oscar for her role in the politically acclaimed movie "Lee Daniels' The Butler" and the Oregon Ducks will play in the first-ever four-team playoff system for the college football national championship. Miley Cyrus will soon join the ranks of Paris Hilton and Lindsay Lohan, and Alec Baldwin will continue making millions of dollars while offending almost everyone.

FOX News will pick up even more viewers in the cable television news wars and MSNBC may soon join its Air America radio counterpart in extinction.

The Portland Trail Blazers will make the playoffs for the first time in many years and will move past the first round. LaMarcus Aldridge will be named league MVP. Oregon's Marcus Mariota, if he remains healthy, will win the Heisman Trophy and Oregon State football will have its best win-loss record in years. The Portland Timbers will continue to generate sell-out crowds and the Hillsboro Hops baseball team will be the hottest new sports franchise in the state.

Happy New Year!

Jayne Carroll hosts The Jayne Carroll Radio Talk Show weekdays from 3 to 6 p.m. on KUIK-AM 1360. Reach her at RadioJayne@comcast.net or call her at 503-648-0101 or 503-640-1360 during show hours.