If you go Highlights: Birds and other wildlife, views, fishing, art and interpretive signs Distance: 1.2 miles Difficulty: Easy Access: From the Diagonal Highway between Boulder and Longmont, turn west on North 63rd Street. In 1.5 miles there's a small parking lot on the left. Another larger parking area is to the right.

Coots, mallards and other ducks paddle about this small lake that may serenely reflect blue sky and white clouds or be roiled by white-caps.

If you go on a cold, foggy morning, every cattail and teasel head may be encased in hoar frost.

A great blue heron may suddenly arise out of the marshy grasses. While staring into the reeds, you may realize that one of the upright stalks is actually an American bittern. A coyote may pounce on a prairie dog. We have enjoyed all of these encounters at Coot Lake.

Winter sunsets are glorious here. The water turns rose-gold as hundreds of geese fill the sky. And — maybe — a great-horned owl will call as the stars come out.

An art walk features paintings by local artist Sue Wise who was inspired by the sunset colors. Her vivid images enliven the tans, sepias, blues and grays of the winter landscape.

Advertisement

Quotations from poets and nature writers accompany the paintings. We especially liked Wendell Berry's thoughts: "When despair for the world grows in me ... I go and lie down where the wood drake rests in his beauty on the water, and the great heron feeds. I come into the peace of wild things who do not tax their lives with forethought of grief. I come into the presence of still water. ..."

A robin, looking perky in spite of the cold, sits on a hoar-frosted picnic table on the shore of Coot Lake. (Courtesy photo/Glenn Cushman)

From the parking area, you can circle Coot Lake in either direction on a dirt path. Numerous benches along the way invite you to stop and contemplate nature. Cottonwoods are bare now, but sap rising in the willows adds an orange-gold accent to the scene.

Heading west along the south side of the lake, you soon leave the open water and join a service road leading to Boulder Reservoir. In a short distance, the Coot Lake Trail veers northwest with views of snow-capped mountains peaking through gaps in the foothills.

A protected wetland, closed to the public and to dogs, spreads out on the right hand side of the trail. If you're extremely lucky, you might spot a northern harrier, the most threatened nesting bird species in Boulder County. Since 2004, only six successful nests have been documented in the county, and five of those were in wetlands surrounding Boulder Reservoir, including the Coot Lake marsh. These beautiful ground-nesting hawks are especially vulnerable to loose dogs and other predators.

Ground-nesting burrowing owls and American bitterns also nest in the vicinity, and an osprey pair have happily occupied a human-built nesting platform about a mile west of Coot Lake.

Agricultural land abuts the north side of the trail as it circles back to the parking area. In 1902, an oil boom (called the "Haystack Field" because of its proximity to nearby Haystack Mountain) inspired a prediction that a "sea of derricks" would stretch to the Wyoming border. But production peaked in 1909 and virtually ended in the 1920s.

Forty years ago, Coot Lake was popular with nude swimmers, who called themselves "cooties." Eventually the city closed the area to swimming because of liability problems. Now the lake is chiefly a haven for water birds such as the coots for which it is named.

You can extend this hike by following the Boulder Reservoir Trail past the reservoir where bald eagles often perch on the ice in winter and ending on 51st Street. Or, you can veer off to the south on the Prairie Dog Interpretive Trail that follows an old maintenance road.

Ruth Carol and Glenn Cushman are the authors of "Boulder Hiking Trails," published by Graphic Arts Books.