U. SAUCON TWP., Pa. -

The Affordable Care Act has made tremendous strides in providing medical coverage for the previously uninsured, according to healthcare strategist and consultant Robert Laszewski.

But the lingering problem facing “Obamacare” since its passage six years ago is the failure to get enough people signed up to sustain the risk, he said.

Laszewski, president of Virginia-based Health Policy and Strategy Associates, offered the Lehigh Valley Business Coalition on Healthcare a political snapshot of the healthcare landscape during the group’s 36th annual conference Thursday at DeSales University.

State exchanges have managed to sign up about 40 percent of those eligible for Obamacare, but that number is well below the 75 percent figure traditionally seen as necessary to manage the risk pool, according to Laszewski. This marks the first time since the 1980s that Blue Cross and Blue Shield affiliates have lost money, he said.

Recent figures show that 76 percent of those with income between 100 and 150 percent of the poverty level are enrolled through the Affordable Care Act, Laszewski said. Those numbers start to plummet as income levels rise.

A family of four earning $65,000 a year would need to pay $400 a month with a $3,000 per person deductible. Only 20 percent of those families are signing up for coverage through Obamacare and that’s because they’re sick and will benefit under the plan, according to Laszewski.

The Affordable Care Act is working well for the poor, who are paying little in co-pays and deductibles, but it needs a larger, healthier population to remain sustainable, he said. And it’s the middle class, not the poor, which traditionally votes.

“This tells you all about whether this is politically sustainable,” Laszewski said.

Laszewski doesn’t believe the Affordable Care Act will be repealed as Republicans simply won’t be able to garner enough support. But Democratic supporters need to realize it has plenty of flaws that must be fixed, he said.

Once President Barrack Obama leaves office, Medicaid expansion will likely happen, regardless of who wins in November, because the next administration will be more amendable to an expansion, according to Laszewski. And Pennsylvania employers will eventually have greater flexibility to manage it, he said.

Not surprisingly, healthcare has been a major issue during the presidential primaries. Although it’s unlikely Sen. Bernie Sanders will receive his party’s nomination, he’s started a national discussion on a single-payer healthcare system, Laszewski said.

Millennials have not seen a healthcare system that works for them, Laszewski said. Since the dot.com bubble burst of 2000 and the recession, they’ve only seen co-pays and deductibles rising, he said.

But a single-payer system simply isn’t in the cards. The gap between Medicare and Medicaid payments and private health insurance had widened dramatically since 2001 and making such a system work would mean getting hospital administrators, for instance, on the same page by dropping payments to healthcare providers, Laszewski said.

He told the group that Hillary Clinton is a taking a “moderated, cautious approach” to healthcare reform by at least acknowledging there are problems and suggesting fixes like allowing Medicare to negotiate drug prices, tax credits for some out-of-pocket costs and providing three sick visits that aren’t subject to deductibles.

Being sure to note that he was not taking a partisan stance, Laszewski said the proposals being floated by presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump “just don’t make any sense.” If Trump were to take the White House look for Congress to drive changes in the healthcare law, he said.

Laszewski also touched upon the potential impact of a pair of proposed health insurer mergers. Anthem and Cigna, the second and fifth largest companies, respectively, based on 2014 revenue, want to merge as do Aetna and Humana, the third and fourth largest insurers.

He argues the marketplace doesn’t need “big musclebound insurers,” but rather nimble, smaller companies that can adapt quickly.

Insurance companies have been arguing mergers are necessary to keep pace and to compete in the landscape of merging healthcare providers, according to Laszewski. He specifically opposes the Anthem and Cigna merger, which regulators are supposed to rule on this summer.

“We don’t need companies that are fat and slow with no incentive to compete,” he said. “They can have all the data in the world, but it won’t do any good if don’t compete.”

One proposal that Laszewski doesn’t believe will help control costs is opening insurance markets across state lines.

“I don’t think Nebraska Blue Cross has any interest in coming into Pennsylvania, and it wouldn’t make a difference,” he said.