Syracuse, N.Y. - John LaVine thought he could still use St. Joseph's Hospital Health Center when he enrolled in Obamacare through the state's health insurance exchange.

LaVine signed up in November for coverage offered by Health Republic, a new health insurance cooperative offering the lowest rates in Syracuse and most parts of the state. At the time, Health Republic's website showed St. Joe's was participating in the network of hospitals, doctors and other providers it uses.

LaVine, who had open heart surgery at St. Joe's in 2002, recently learned the hospital will not accept his new insurance card. That's because St. Joe's dropped out of the network used by Health Republic March 1. That means LaVine's insurance is no good at St. Joe's for anything other than emergency services.

"For people like me who've been going to St. Joe's for years, it seems to me to be unconscionable," LaVine said.

LaVine isn't the only one frustrated. There's been plenty of confusion about which hospitals and doctors are participating in the new Obamacare health plans offered through the state's health insurance exchange. Figuring out who takes each plan is puzzling not only consumers, but also doctors and hospitals.



St. Joe's did not initially realize it was participating in the Health Republic plan, said hospital spokeswoman Kerri Howell. Health Republic never told the hospital it was included, she said. Health Republic does not have its own network of doctors and other providers. It uses a network run by another company, MagnaCare. St. Joe's was a member of MagnaCare, but severed ties with it March 1.

Health Republic did not respond to a reporter's telephone and email inquiries.

Howell said St. Joe's decided to wait and see how Health Republic and some of the other new exchange plans operate before making any commitments to them.



Fewer than a dozen patients were affected by St. Joe's decision to drop Health Republic, she said.

There are five health insurance exchange plans available to individuals in Onondaga County. St. Joe's accepts only one, the plan offered by Excellus BlueCross BlueShield. Excellus is the dominant health insurer in the Syracuse market. It requires providers who participate in its commercial products to also participate in its exchange plan.

Crouse Hospital accepts all five exchange plans. Upstate University Hospital accepts four of the plans, including Health Republic.

Syracuse hospitals participate in the following Obamacare plans offered in Onondaga County. St. Joseph's: Excellus

Upstate: Excellus, MVP, Health Republic, American Progressive (Today's Options)

Crouse: Excellus, MVP, Health Republic, Fidelis, American Progressive (Today's Options)

Hospitals and doctors have always occasionally dropped out of insurance plans if they didn't like contracts offered by insurers. But there may be more of that happening now because the health insurance exchange and many of its plans are new, according to Lynn Quincy, associate director of health reform at Consumers Union, the policy and action arm of Consumer Reports magazine. "There's been a lot of turmoil, new products and uncertainty," she said. Quincy expects the situation to settle down as the exchange works out its kinks.

The Medical Society of the State of New York, a doctors' group, has been complaining for months that many of its members have been incorrectly listed as providers by some of the new health plans or told they will be automatically included unless they opt out.

In response to concerns raised by the doctors and other groups, the state exchange recently announced it is considering making insurers report changes in their provider networks as soon as they occur or at least once a month. Health insurers currently only have to report these changes every 90 days.

The state exchange also may require insurers to more clearly identify on their websites participating doctors, hospitals and other providers. It also may force insurers to offer out-of-network coverage for services by providers that do not contract with a consumer's health plan.

Consumers who buy policies through the exchange can go to any hospital emergency room for treatment of an emergency condition, even if the hospital does not participate in the consumer's health plan. A health plan cannot charge a consumer more for getting emergency services at an "out-of-network" hospital.

Quincy of Consumers Union said consumers should always call their doctors, hospitals and other providers to see which plans they accept before enrolling. Doing that, however, will not protect the consumer if a provider decides to withdraw from a plan after the consumer enrolls, she said.

Consumers who sign up for a plan through the exchange only to discover their doctor or hospital is not in the plan's network can switch to another plan during the open enrollment period which ends March 31. After March 31, consumers cannot change plans until the next open enrollment period which starts Nov. 15.

John LaVine said he decided not to switch plans because he will become eligible for Medicare, the federal health insurance program, when he turns 65 in November.

"Come the fall I can sign up for Medicare, then St. Joe's will take me," he said.

You can contact health writer James T. Mulder at jmulder@syracuse.com or (315) 470-2245. Follow him on Twitter @JamesTMulder.