With Rep. Michele Bachmann (R-MN) leaving Congress at the end of this session — and delivering her final speech from the House floor earlier today — we thought it might just be the right time to revisit this retrospective, originally published last spring when the congresswoman and former GOP presidential candidate announced her plans to retire.

—

Rep. Michele Bachmann (R-MN) announced last night that, after four terms in the U.S. House of Representatives, she will not be seeking reelection in 2014. While it’s unlikely that the outspoken conservative, and former GOP presidential candidate will completely disappear from view, her always-entertaining voice will no doubt be missed in Congress.

Below, in chronological order, are the craziest things that came out of Bachmann’s mouth over the last few years.

You are seeing this message because you have javascript disabled. To use our slideshows you need to enable javascript. There's no cross domain hackery or tracking voodoo, it's just some sweet jQuery animations. Please, think of the animations. In the meantime, enjoy the html version below. I guess. If that's your thing.

America’s Founders ‘Worked Tirelessly Until Slavery Was No More’ George Stephanopoulos, clarifying that the "founding father" she was talking about was John Quincy Adams. Read more...



In the earliest stages of her as-yet-unannounced presidential campaign, Bachmann told the crowd at an Iowan’s for Tax Relief Event that "the very founders that wrote those documents worked tirelessly until slavery was no more in the United States." She later doubled-down on her claim to Good Morning America's, clarifying that the "founding father" she was talking about was Accidentally Praising Serial Killer John Wayne Gacy John Wayne. Unfortunately, it was John Wayne Gacy, the serial killer who dressed up as a clown for children’s events and is responsible for raping and murdering at least 33 young boys throughout the 1970s, who grew up in Waterloo.



Speaking to Fox News in her (original) hometown of Waterloo, Iowa, Bachmann said she wanted to channel the "spirit" of fellow Waterloo native. Unfortunately, it was, the serial killer who dressed up as a clown for children’s events and is responsible for raping and murdering at least 33 young boys throughout the 1970s, who grew up in Waterloo. Read more... 'Choot-spa' If you're going to use Yiddish to criticize President Obama, at least get the pronunciation right... "The president doesn't want to be confronted with priorities in spending, because he has a lot of choot-spa."



God Is Trying To Get Politicians’ Attention Via Natural Disasters



After a week of campaigning in the summer of 2011 that included Hurricane Irene and a freak earthquake in Virginia, Bachmann told a crowd in Florida what was really going on. "I don’t know how much God has to do to get the attention of the politicians. We’ve had an earthquake; we’ve had a hurricane. He said, ‘Are you going to start listening to me here?’" Read more... HPV Vaccine Causes 'Mental Retardation'



If Bachmann had been quoting some sort of medical study when she told the Today Show that the HPV vaccine causes "mental retardation," perhaps her comments wouldn't have raised so many eyebrows. But instead, she cited a random mother who approached her after a debate. Read more... Running Away From CNN's Dana Bash Dana Bash. Bachmann was outraged that Bash would ask her about the content of her speech and not the tragedy in Benghazi.



It's more what Bachmann didn't say than what she did as she raced down a hall following her 2013 CPAC speech to escape CNN's. Bachmann was outraged that Bash would ask her about the content of her speech and not the tragedy in Benghazi. Read more... Repeal Obamacare ‘Before It Literally Kills Children, Kills Women, Kills Senior Citizens’



When Bachmann steps aside next year, Congress will lose one of its most vocal and persistent opponents of Obamacare. In a recent speech on the House floor, Bachmann warned that the law must be repealed "before it literally kills women, kills children, kills senior citizens.” Instead, Bachmann said, “let’s love people. Let’s care about people.” Read more... ‘Thou Protestest Too Much' President Obama who signed the sequestration bill, Bachmann was reminded of one of her favorite Shakespeare quotes. If only she could have gotten it right...



After Democrats were “extremely passionate” about losses to programs like Head Start and others that benefit children under sequestration when it waswho signed the sequestration bill, Bachmann was reminded of one of her favorite Shakespeare quotes. If only she could have gotten it right... Read more...

—

>> Follow Matt Wilstein (@TheMattWilstein) on Twitter