As controversy still swirls around the Affordable Care Act in the halls of Congress, the U.S. Census today provided the clearest picture of its impact across the country.

If a measure of the legislation's effectiveness is that it decreases the number of uninsured Americans, it's clearly having an impact in New Jersey.

County-level data from the Census' American Community Survey shows that in the Garden State, the number of uninsured residents fell by nearly 16 percent statewide and by more than a quarter in five counties from 2013 to 2014. The change reflects New Jersey's expansion of Medicaid and the first year the Affordable Care Act, the federal law that mandates healthcare coverage, went into effect.

In the five previous years, the number of uninsured generally fluctuated by less than 5 percent.

"It's really unprecedented, there's no question," said Raymond Castro, a senior policy analyst at New Jersey Policy Perspective, a think tank that supports the ACA. "Critics said it would actually lead to higher uninsured rates because it would be too expensive and business owners would start dropping their policies. In fact, it's been just the opposite of that."

The changes appear to have benefited black residents and the state's poorest citizens most, the data show. The number of uninsured black New Jersey residents fell by more than 43,000 from 2013 to 2014, to a rate of 12.2 percent.

Meanwhile, 67,000 fewer people earning less than $25,000 a year were uninsured in 2014 compared to the previous year. The number of uninsured residents also fell by more than 15 percent across all age groups and among both sexes.

"It's a great step forward, certainly, as predicted," said Melville D. Miller, president of New Jersey Legal Services.

The figures are lower than some had hoped, however, and Miller said the true impact of the ACA may not be known for several years.

The Census data also shows that the uninsured rate among Hispanics remains very high at 24.3 percent, and did not show the same progress that other cross-sections of New Jersey did. Language barriers are seen as the most significant roadblock to engaging the Hispanic population, and funding shortfalls for outreach have been persistent.

Castro said the American Community Survey, an annual Census product that delves into a laundry list of demographics, will likely show public and private officials alike where the legislation was most successful and what gaps remain.

"Even just skimming through some of the data, there's a lot of need throughout the state," Castro said. "That's why I really want to dig into the numbers ... This is the most comprehensive snapshot we've gotten of where the uninsured are. It's great."

County-by-County Map of ACA's impact

Hover or tap on a county for more information.

Stephen Stirling may be reached at sstirling@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @sstirling. Find him on Facebook.