For players on struggling teams — Exhibit A, the 2014 Rockies — September performances can leave impressions that last until spring training.

September games aren’t tryouts, per se, but they carry some weight.

Thursday night at Coors Field, that was good news for Rockies left-handed pitcher Yohan Flande and not so good news for reliever Tommy Kahnle.

And it was great news for Wilin Rosario. The catcher who has struggled for most of the season came up with a mighty blast onto the concourse in left field, a walk-off, two-out, two-run homer in the bottom of the ninth inning that gave the Rockies a 7-6 victory over the Arizona Diamondbacks in the battle for the National League basement.

BOX SCORE: Colorado 7, Arizona 6

“To show what I can do feels really good,” Rosario said. “This is my first walk-off homer — that feels good too.”

The Rockies moved into a tie with the Diamondbacks as both teams now stand 61-92, with three more games in the series.

Rosario finished 4-for-5, including his 12th home run, connecting on the first pitch from Addison Reed. Corey Dickerson led off the ninth inning with a single. Justin Morneau and Michael Cuddyer both lined out, setting up Rosario’s heroics.

“He’s fought through a challenging year, but he’s worked hard and he’s got a great attitude,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said of Rosario. “He brings positive energy every day. He’s been grinding through a tough year. It happens to just about everybody in this league. He’s showing up well now.”

Kahnle has shown promise, limiting opposing hitters to a .198 average. But he can also be erratic, and that trait reared its head in the sixth when he helped turn a 2-1 Arizona lead into a 6-1 lead. He gave up a bunt single, a walk, a single to right and another walk to Aaron Hill, forcing in a run. Weiss had seen enough and gave Kahnle the hook with the bases loaded.

Matt Belisle couldn’t put out the fire Kahnle started, and those three runners also scored.

Flande put together an impressive five-inning audition. He gave up two runs on just two hits and walked only one.

As for the veteran outfielder/first baseman Cuddyer, it was another game that solidified his reputation. He went 3-for-5, coming up a triple short of the cycle and boosting his average to .327.

Cuddyer is already a proven star, but he’s 35 and at the end of his three-year, $31.5 million contract with the Rockies.

PHOTOS: D-backs-Rockies game Thursday at Coors Field

But, finally healthy, Cuddyer is playing well as the season winds down, showing the Rockies, or another suitor, that he’s got some magic left in his bat.

Cuddyer’s homer extended the Rockies’ streak to 19 consecutive home games in which they’ve hit a home run. That’s the longest streak since they hit 19 at Coors from May 23 to July 3, 2002.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp

Looking ahead

D-backs’ Chase Anderson (9-6, 3.70 ERA) at Rockies’ Jordan Lyles (6-3, 4.21), 6:10 p.m. Friday, ROOT; 850 AM

Lyles, 23, figures to be a key part of the Rockies’ rotation next season, so it would be nice to see him finish up the current season on a high note. He did not pitch well in his last start at St. Louis, giving up three runs on nine hits in six innings. The right-hander, proficient at getting groundball outs, has shown some promise this season. In 14 of his 20 starts, he has limited opponents to three or fewer runs and pitched five or more innings. In those 14 starts, he’s 4-2 with a 2.84 ERA. Trouble arrives when he doesn’t keep the ball down.

— Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post

Saturday: D-backs’ Trevor Cahill (3-11, 5.38 ERA) at Rockies’ Eddie Butler (0-1, 10.13), 2:10 p.m., ROOT

Sunday: D-backs’ Wade Miley (8-11, 4.17) at Rockies’ Christian Bergman (2-4, 5.56), 2:10 p.m., ROOT

Monday: Rockies’ Tyler Matzek (6-10, 4.19) at Padres’ Eric Stults (7-17, 4.59), 8:10 p.m., ROOT