Mary and George Dmyterko look at the "Family in Auto" drawing Saturday at the Norman Rockwell and the American Family exhibition put on by Fremont Center for the Arts. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Whether someone lived through that time or not, Norman Rockwell takes people back in time with his drawings.

The Fremont Center for the Arts is presenting the Norman Rockwell and the American Family exhibit until Aug. 31 at 505 Macon Ave. Featured are 80 prints depicting the American family in every stage of life.

"I just like the style," said Tyson Lateer, a volunteer for the FCA at the exhibit on Saturday. "It's old time America, you know Americana. It kind of reminds you of the (TV series) Happy Days, that kind of stuff."

The Rockwell exhibit was enough to make George and Mary Dmyterko's first visit to the FCA building a pleasant one. They were visiting Cañon City from Cotopaxi for breakfast and a stroll on the Riverwalk when they decided to check out the building they'd never been in before.

Norman Rockwell and the American Family exhibition put on by Fremont Center for the Arts. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

"It's been four years," George Dmyterko said. "We've never been in here, so we thought, 'why don't we go see?'

"I love Rockwell, and I wish I could draw that well."

Both are into the arts, they said. George paints, and Mary quilts.

The two said they remember growing up and seeing Rockwell's drawings appear on the cover of the Saturday Evening Post, which they said they were awfully fond of.

"He uses the most simple lines to capture the story," Mary Dmyterko said. "He doesn't embellish."

The background isn't something Rockwell's prints feature a lot of — he drew what he needed to in order to get the point across of the art piece.

"The one that struck me most closely was this one right here," George Dmyterko said as he walked to and pointed at the drawing "Family in Auto" which hung near the middle of the exhibit. "I can't tell you exactly what it invoked, but what I told my wife is, 'It reminds me of Edward Hopper, who did the painting called The Diner (Nighthawks). There was a mood to it.' This, too, has a kind of a (mood). Not quite sure what's happening with this family. It's not exactly foreboding, but I'm asking myself what's going on."

The print features a father driving a car with the mother and their two kids sleeping in the front passenger seat and the family dog riding along. Mary Dmyterko said it seemed to her like the family was tired after a long day.

Hours for the FCA exhibit are 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Tuesday through Saturday and from noon to 4 p.m. Sundays. General admission is $8, admission for Fremont County residents is $5, admission for FCA members is $3, and children under age 12 are admitted free of charge.