Florence — The inaugural Southern Colorado Community Music Festival will be from 8:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. Saturday at Florence High School, 2006 Colo. 67.

"We're going to have four community bands represented," said organizer Sharon Campbell.

The four bands are Southern Colorado Community Band of Cañon City, Pueblo West Community Band, La Junta Smile Hi Band and Sangre de Cristo Community Band of Westcliffe.

"We're also encouraging musicians who are not affiliated with community bands to come because at the end of the day, we're having an impromptu concert," Campbell said. "George Hammersmith is going will rehearse the musicians on four pieces of graduated difficulty."

After a short break, the concert will take place for a variety of musicians to participate.

During the day, a caterer will provide food, along with vendors and advertisers, including Affordable Accessories, the Cup and Cone and First stitches, of Cañon City, Prim and Proper Creations and Stampin' Up, of Pueblo West, and Heartland Antiques and Gifts, of Florence. In addition, there is room for more vendors at the festival.

"Any community musical organizations who want to perform for about 30 to 45 minutes should contact (me) to schedule a performance," a release said. "In future years, the community choirs also will be invited."

Advertisement

Sponsored by Eric J. Richardson, DPM, of Pueblo, and Faricy Ford, of Cañon City, the idea began when Campbell said she realized she was a member of seven bands in Southern Colorado. After she Googled the number of musicians in the area, she said she realized how much they have in common.

"I thought I'd like to get these people to meet each other," she said.

The Southern Colorado Community Band attended a band festival in Edgewood in 2011. However, when the organizer died, the festivals were discontinued.

But Campbell did not want it to disband so she contacted the association and slowly began organizing the event again.

"I finally took the plunge," she said.

Campbell said minors who want to participate should have permission slips from their parents or guardians.

The event is free for audiences. Vendor table fees are $25. Unaffiliated musicians who wish to play in the concert will pay a $10 fee. If more than five people wish to play as a group, the fee is capped at $50, a release said.

For more information, call Campbell at 561-0648 or visit http://SCCMF.org">SCCMF.org.