Faulkton, SD

With cases of the virus within the United States’ borders, hospitals across the country are preparing to deal with Ebola in case it comes to them.

In South Dakota, a lot of hospitals are in rural areas. The Faulkton Area Medical Center is a hospital that's rural, independent and, according to its staff, ready for any disease that comes.

You don't even need to walk beyond the front door at the Faulk County hospital to see it is taking steps to catch diseases as quickly as possible. It has signs educating the public and patients are screened immediately.

The hospital may never see a patient with the Ebola virus, but staff members don't want to take chances.

"We have a lot of pheasant hunters coming from all around the United States," Dr. Sylvia Anderson said. “We don't know what's going to be coming through the door so we do want to try to be as proactive as we can.”

The hospital is also prepared to react if needed. It has a room that can be completely shut off from the rest of the hospital and staff members are preparing for other potential diseases as well.

"Ebola is a concern. Of course we think about it but EV-D68 for those pediatric patients that are having respiratory issues. We've got flu season coming up and we're attached to a nursing home," said Tom Hericks, director of patient care services.

"We are ready to handle any infectious disease that comes in the door," administrator Jay Jahnig said.

Still, sitting in a rural community can have its challenges.

"We don't have some of the specialties we can rely on, in house anyway," physician assistant Chris Ogle said.

"If they're sicker than the care we can provide, then we have to send them either by ground ambulance or by air ambulance and in a case like Ebola, that could become an issue," Anderson said.

Still, Doctor Sylvia Anderson says the hospital is prepared to treat patients here in rural South Dakota if the disease comes.

In addition to using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the South Dakota Department of Health as a resource, Faulkton Area Medical Center, even though it is independent, is in contact with other hospitals around the state.