STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- While kids in the Mid-Island are breathing easy, their parents are not.

Children there have one of the lowest rates of asthma hospitalizations in the city, tied with Borough Park in Brooklyn with 6 each per 10,000 children ages 5 to 14.

COMING TOMORROW: A look at the South Shore

Simultaneously, adults in the mid-Island have one of the highest rates of cigarette smoking in the city.

The city Department of Health and Mental Hygiene recently released its Community Health Profiles for 2015, highlighting health statistics for designated community districts.

The mid-Island — Staten Island Community District 2: South Beach and Willowbrook, including Bloomfield, Midland Beach, New Springville, Todt Hill and Travis-Chelsea — had a child asthma hospitalization rate less than half that for the rest of the Island.

It's one of only a few categories in the community health profiles that addressed children's health.

Compare the mid-Island rate to Staten Island as a whole, which is more than twice the number — 15.

Citywide, 36 kids per 10,000 are hospitalized with asthma issues.

Among mid-Island adults, 21 percent are smokers, compared to 20 percent Island wide and 15 percent citywide.

The best performing community district is East Flatbush, with 10 percent of adults lighting up.

All the statistics from the community health profile are based on numbers collected between 2011 and 2013, although some stats rely on a single year, while others rely on data collected from two or more years.

See below for how health in the mid-Island compares to Staten Island as a whole, the citywide rate and the best performing community district in each category.





I'LL HAVE A COKE

The mid-Island is on par with Staten Island as a whole and the rest of the city, with 27 percent of adults having one or more 12-ounce sugary drinks per day. The Island has 28 percent; citywide has 27 percent.

Compare that to the best performing community district of Stuyvesant Town and Turtle Bay at 12 percent.

WORK UP A SWEAT

Mid-Island adults seem to enjoy working out more so than the rest of the Island and city, with 81 percent of adults having had physical activity in the last 30 days.

Compare that to Island wide — 78 percent — and citywide — 77 percent.

In the active community district of Clinton and Chelsea & Midtown, the best performing community district, 90 percent of adults said they have activity in the last 30 days.

OBESITY IS HIGH, DIABETES IS LOW





LOW RATE OF UNINSURED

With a citywide rate of uninsured adults at 20 percent, the South Shore is much better off, with 12 percent of adults having no health insurance, the same rate as Staten Island as a whole.

The South Shore is the best performing community district, with only 8 percent of people uninsured.

These numbers are from years before most major provisions of the Affordable Care Act went into effect in 2014. After, the percentage of people without health insurance declined to 14 percent citywide.

GETTING DIAGNOSED FOR HIV

While the mid-Island has had significantly fewer cases of HIV diagnoses than the rest of Staten Island and New York City, the data provided should be interpreted with caution due to a small number of events, the report said.

In the mid-Island, for every 100,000 population, there were 6.8 new cases, as compared to 11.8 Island wide and 30.4 citywide.

LOW RATE OF STROKES





TOP CAUSES OF DEATH

Like the rest of America, heart disease and cancer are the leading causes of death in the mid-Island, Staten Island as a whole and citywide.

However, death rates due to heart disease, lower respiratory diseases, drug use and accidents are higher than the city rates.

Life expectancy is 80.3 years in mid-Island.