Sanya Richards-Ross at the 86th Clyde Littlefield Texas Relays at Mike A. Myers Stadium. (Photo: Kirby Lee, USA TODAY Sports)

WASHINGTON — A group of athletes who say access to health care saved their lives have volunteered to help young people understand that insurance needs to be part of their life "game plan."

"Sometimes, when you're young, you don't think about the importance of having [insurance] until it's too late," Sanya Richards-Ross told USA TODAY. "I think I'm the same way, perhaps even more as an athlete. I eat well, I train really well, I rest well. I think, like most people, I thought I would never get sick."

Richards-Ross has won five Olympic gold medals, including in the 4 x 400 meters relay in 2004, 2008 and 2012. But in 2007 she was diagnosed with Bechet's Disease, an autoimmune disorder.

"When you don't have health insurance it becomes a real burden on your family to keep you well," said Richards-Ross. Which is why she's a fan of the Affordable Care Act and the subsidies that help young people afford insurance. "I know there have been glitches, and I know there have been complaints," she said, "but I think it's an important law."

While not affiliated with the government, the new website, Gameplan4me.com, places a special focus on linking young people to HealthCare.gov. The site, which also covers topics such as careers and relationships, additionally helps connect young people to the federal and state health exchanges, where most people who make less than 400% of the federal poverty level — or $45,960 for a single person — are eligible for subsidies to help pay for insurance.

This week, Gameplan4me.com launched a series of videos and interviews with athletes including Tamika Catchings, Victor Cruz, Keyshawn Johnson and Dikembe Mutombo explaining why insurance is important.

George Pyne, president of IMG Worldwide's global sports and entertainment business, David Kristal, founder of marketing firm Augeo and Juan Sabater, co-chair of Augeo, started the venture as a non-political website that could help people make decisions.

"Taking personal responsibility for one's actions is the goal that GamePlan4Me hopes to instill in visitors," Pyne said. "To hear Mark Herzlich talk about overcoming cancer, or Keyshawn Johnson explain that, as a young man, he 'was going to be successful no matter what,' can give people the courage to stay focused and move forward."

"Honestly, if I wasn't a professional athlete, I don't think I would know much about" health insurance, said Michelle Wie, who, at the age of 10, became the youngest player to qualify for a USGA amateur championship. "It's not something that we really think about as a young adult."

Other adult decisions, such as paying the rent or auto insurance, are more obvious, she said. But parents rarely talk about how health insurance works, and unless an employer offers it, a young person may not think to look for it.

"Injuries come with playing sports," Wie said. "I've had MRIs and X-rays, and when I got sick overseas, my insurance crossed over. Being prepared is probably the most important thing."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1eyTR5P