Vanessa Gonzalez-Plumhoff is the director of Latino leadership and engagement at Planned Parenthood. She was bitten by the political bug in college, but it was her experience as a social worker working with immigrant families and their young children that made her want to fight for those who often feel like they have no voice.

Gonzalez-Plumhoff was named a 2015 Latino Trendsetter by Latin TRENDS magazine, and she was instrumental in Planned Parenthood's campaign to encourage Latinos to enroll in the Affordable Care Act. Gonzalez-Plumhoff talked to Cosmopolitan.com about growing up in Texas, discovering the power of political organizing, and why she wants young Latinas to care about reproductive rights.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

I grew up in Fort Stockton, Texas, which is a small West Texas town. Both of my parents worked hard, so my younger siblings and I spent a lot of time with our grandparents. My grandfather is from Mexico, and my grandmother was born in the U.S. Growing up, I'd say there was an equal mix of Latinos and white, non-Latino families, or at least it seemed that way, and it was interesting to see how the cultures mixed. I think my mom often cradled that line between the new generation and the old-world traditions, and so did I. I took on a caretaker role for my siblings early: I was expected to grow up, and learned to cook and clean and take care of my siblings at a very young age.

Because I always felt like more of an adult than I actually was, I made some questionable decisions and decided to run away from home during my senior year of high school with my-then boyfriend. I was gone for a few months and in a very unhealthy relationship until the nagging voice in my head told me this wasn't right for me and not the life I wanted, so I went home to my parents.

Eventually, I enrolled at Sul Ross State University. It's in Alpine, Texas, which is a town even smaller than Fort Stockton, and the school itself is also very small, but I loved it. It's where I started to feel like my voice really mattered. I became really active — I was a cheerleader, got involved in student government, worked a few jobs — and I really started to feel like I was with my people. It's also where I got my first real taste of the power of organizing after hosting a town-hall meeting with students and faculty to talk about some of the issues we saw at school (such as a lack of child care options and resources for students with kids). We invited faculty and staff but wouldn't let them speak and and allowed the student voices to lead and provided a space for students to advocate for themselves. Looking back, I might do things a little differently now, but that was a pivotal moment for me.

From there, I was selected to be an intern with then State Representative Pete Gallego, acting as one of his community liaisons. I took a brief break from his office in Texas and came to D.C. for the first time as an intern with the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities (HACU) program. I loved it all and loved D.C., vowing to be back one day. I stayed with Pete for about two years and eventually moved to work for him in Austin doing press and policy. He was one of the hardest people I've ever worked for — I still had that streak of "I know what I'm doing," and he was one of the first people to take me down a notch, but I needed it and learned an immense amount.

While I was still in Austin, I got a call from the Democratic National Committee. They needed an administrative assistant for their Hispanic outreach program, and so I applied and got the job. I spent a little over a year doing that — making copies of things, making sure my bosses had everything they needed — and then I really wanted to move back into a press role, so I applied for a communications director position at the Congressional Hispanic Caucus. I was nervous that I wouldn't get the job, especially because my Spanish isn't the best, but I did, and I'd like to think it's because I know my community, I knew Texas — which is where the chair and many members were from — and that I showed I was able to put in the work to get the job done and create the career I wanted.

After a series of campaigns for various Democratic candidates and going back and forth to different states and D.C., I ended up doing three different campaigns, in different roles, in Arizona. I loved being on the ground and working with the community, and I fell in love with Arizona. So when I was deciding what I wanted to do next, instead of going back to D.C., I stayed in Arizona and spent two years with then-Governor Janet Napolitano in her administration. Obviously, the president then called her up to do Homeland Security. Initially, I really wanted to go with her, but she didn't tap me to go to D.C., and now I thank God for unanswered prayers, because that's when I decided to go to grad school. I applied to and enrolled at Arizona State University and graduated with a master's in social work. A lot of people have this idea of social workers all working for CPS and coming to take your child away, which is so far from the truth. I specialized in children's mental health for kids from infants to 5 years old. I started interning and then got hired at what was essentially a migrant community center, where we offered daycare for the kids and individual and group counseling for the mothers.