Amanda Scott, 21, made waves in 2014 when she stood in front of the Mobile County Commission to oppose signage bearing the phrase "In God We Trust."

While the measure was approved, Scott's efforts to make the atheist voice heard have continued.

After speaking out, Scott received dozens of messages calling for her torture or death as well as insulting her personally. "Shoot her for treason," a local Mobile citizen wrote. "I think she will burn in Hell," said another.

Since then, she advocated for inclusion of atheism in veteran's memorials and helped coordinate a billboard uniting local atheists with the Gulf Coast Coalition of Reason.

Scott has also been a part of protests in favor of legalizing gay marriage in Alabama as well as advocating for greater access to contraception.

For her activism, Scott was awarded "Atheist Activist of the Year" by the American Atheists organization at their national convention in Memphis, Tennessee last weekend.

"Scott has received hate mail and death threats for speaking out, yet she not only stands by her convictions, but continues fighting for even more equality and freedom from religious oppression by speaking out on causes such as LGBT equality and the contraceptive mandate within the Affordable Care Act," American Atheists communication director Danielle Muscato told AL.com.

"Scott is doing great work and American Atheists can't wait to see what she'll do next."

Scott broke down in tears when she received the award.

She said she never could have anticipated that standing up for what she believes in would earn her any awards.

"When I went before the Mobile County Commission to testify against the proposal to display the motto 'In God We Trust,' I was just doing what I felt I had to do, which was stand up for the separation of church and state and the equal rights of atheists and non-Christians in our community," said Scott.

Scott has received recognition in online forums and talk shows nationally as well.

"The national secular community welcomed me whenever my own local government and community made me feel like an outsider," said Scott.

Scott studies at Faulkner State Community College.

American Atheists also honored Huntsville's Chuck Miller, who is the volunteer state director for the organization, as the "Regional Director of the Year."