Topics: creativity, dishonesty, Pacific Standard, Psychology, study, Life News

This piece originally appeared on Pacific Standard.

Want to be more creative? As we have noted, there are many ways to achieve that laudable goal, ranging from dimming the lights to sitting at a disorderly desk.

Or you could just lie and cheat.

After Harvard Business School researcher Francesa Gino reported in 2011 that that highly creative people are more likely to engage in unethical activities, she began to wonder whether dishonesty could actually enhance creativity. Her latest paper suggests the answer is yes.

“This research shows that the sentiment expressed in the common saying ‘rules are meant to be broken’ is at the root of both creative performance and dishonest behavior,” Gino and co-author Scott Wiltermuth write in the journal Psychological Science. “It also provides new evidence that dishonesty may therefore lead people to become more creative in their subsequent behaviors.”

Gino and Wiltermuth provide evidence for this thesis in the form of five experiments. In one, 153 people recruited online were instructed to quickly scan a series of numbers to find combinations that added up to 10. Afterwards, they reported how well they did, aware that if they were randomly selected to receive a bonus, they would earn $1 for each correct solution.

They then completed the Remote Association Task, a well-known test of creative thinking in which participants are presented with three words and instructed to find a fourth that logically links to all three. (One example: The words are sore, shoulder, and sweat, and the fourth word is cold.)

Nearly 59 percent of participants overstated the number of problems they had solved on the numbers test. These cheaters performed better than their honest counterparts on the subsequent creativity task. What’s more, their advantage remained even after researchers took into account their performance on an earlier, different test of creative thinking.