Luverne, MN

It's been a tough year at Blue Mounds State Park near Luverne, Minnesota.

Last May, E. coli turned up in the drinking water at Blue Mounds. A month later, heavy rain flooded a dam, forcing the park to close for part of the summer. Just last week, tests confirmed that E. coli has returned to the park. But campers are also returning in spite of the challenges over the past twelve months.

E. coli contamination has campers at Blue Mounds State Park "roughing it" a little more than a typical Memorial Day holiday outing.

"It sure would have made breakfast easier, washing dishes, to have water, but they've made it doable," Amy Ramsay of La Crosse, WI said.

Since the water's been turned off, the park is supplying campers with free gallon jugs of fresh drinking water from the grocery store. The park also offered holiday campers a $4 per night discount.

"It's disappointing for everybody, especially to us, that this has occurred again, but we're trying to stay positive about it," Blue Mounds State Park Assistant Park Manager Tom Sawtelle said.

The E. coli contamination is just one more setback that Blue Mounds has had to deal with over the past year. This is the site where flooding caused the park's dam to collapse during a storm last June, closing the park for a few weeks last summer. The park is still hoping that a new spillway will be built. But in the meantime, that natural disaster from nearly a year ago hasn't seemed discourage visitors from coming here.

"I still think we're a pretty popular park. People like the trails and we get a lot of rock-climbers of course and we do have the visitors center open now, so I think people still enjoy the facilities that we have," Sawtelle said.

"We like the park for the day we've been here," Ramsay said.

After the holiday crowds leave, crews will begin flushing out the water system with bleach. They hope to have the park de-contaminated by week's end, just in time for the next wave of campers to arrive.

Because of the E. coli outbreak, the Luverne Aquatic Center has been allowing Blue Mounds campers to shower there for free. Most Blue Mounds campsites were full for the holiday.

News

Outdoors {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.