Topics: 30 Rock, Bobby Jindal, Election 2016, eliana johnson, kenneth parcell, kenneth the page, National Review, Tea Party, The Washington Post, News, Politics News

About a week from today, after the polls close and the final tallies are announced, the 2014 midterm campaign will mercifully end and the 2016 presidential campaign will unofficially begin. And judging by the previews, it looks like the next White House race will be just as inane and annoying as the last one. But as unpleasant as being forced to witness another battle in the endless war of attrition between Hillary Clinton and the press may sound, we have at least one thing to look forward to: The presidential campaign of Louisiana’s Republican governor, Bobby Jindal, which is quite likely to happen and absolutely certain to fail.

I’m a congenital pessimist, so don’t give me too much credit for drawing attention to this pending debacle-cum-comic-relief. Instead, all praise should go to National Review’s Eliana Johnson, who reported Monday evening that a source “close to” Jindal was willing to confirm that the “slight” governor “has gained 13 pounds over the past few months” because he’s “looking to beef up” now that the 2016 campaign is “on the horizon.” Yes indeed, the guy whose political future began to unravel as soon as people noticed he sounded like Kenneth from “30 Rock” seems to think he can revive his flatlining career by reminding everyone that he doesn’t exactly reflect the Republican Party base’s particular vision of rugged masculinity.

Before reading the National Review piece, I assumed Jindal would run, fare poorly and then lobby the ultimate GOP nominee to pick him as vice president. There’s nothing wrong with that; it can often lead to a cabinet position in a future administration, and is a very traditional course for a second- or third-tier presidential aspirant to take. But now that I know Team Jindal is oblivious enough to think his career can be salvaged by cultivating mass? Well, I think it’s time we ready ourselves for a campaign that’s so lost in the Tea Party twilight zone that anything could happen.

To understand why the Jindal camp’s decision to share this little scooplet is so phenomenally bizarre and foreboding, rather than simply silly and weird, you need to keep in mind just how much of a disaster his tenure as Louisiana governor has been. If you understandably don’t pay especially close attention to goings on in the Bayou State, this should give you a sense of Jindal’s severe lack of political acumen: In a state that went for John McCain and Mitt Romney by nearly 20 points in ’08 and ’12, respectively, only 34 percent of Louisianans approve of the job the extremely conservative Jindal is doing. He even loses a hypothetical matchup with former Gov. Edwin Edwards, who is not only a convicted felon but a Democrat to boot!

As to how Jindal managed to get himself into this situation, there’s no one single answer. But as Rachel Weiner of the Washington Post discovered last year (Jindal’s been underwater for a while now), the governor’s troubles can’t be explained without noting his proposal to eliminate income taxes in the state while raising sales taxes to make up for lost revenue. In addition to being extremely regressive, due to poor people being less likely to pay income taxes but certain to pay sales taxes, Jindal’s plan was also extremely unpopular — at one point, as many as two-out-of-three Louisianans opposed it outright. Recognizing political reality, Jindal ultimately surrendered. But many voters — who already were unhappy with Jindal’s cuts to education and healthcare, as well as his refusal to accept Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion — never looked at him the same.