SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

California’s 2015-implemented illegal alien driver license law (AB 60) has already granted legal driver status to 147,000 non-U.S. citizens. One result: a surge in the number of of organ donors in the state.

Donate Life California reports a 30% increase in the rate of organ and tissue donation signups this year, from January 2 through February 20, as compared with the same time in 2014. Donate Life is attributing the increase to new illegal alien drivers, “with the implementation of AB 60, a law that allows anyone who can prove their identity and California residence to apply for a driver license. We have no doubt that new law is going to help us achieve our biggest year yet!”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

During the January 2 to February 20, 2014 window, KTVU reported 110,000 people have applied for the AB 60 license and 50,000 had signed on as organ donors. Donate Life California Board President Cindy Siljestrom was quoted in the report as saying, “”We’d be delighted if it continues. It means we have more people who are potential organ and tissue donors.”

Breitbart News previously reported that the state Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) expectation that 1.4 million illegal aliens would apply for one of the new AB 60 licenses in the state.

Of the 810,000 exams (written and behind-the-wheel) administered since AB 60 took effect in January, 147,000 illegal alien driver licenses have been issued as of March 6, reports the California Department of Motor Vehicles.

California joins ten other states issuing licenses to illegal aliens, according to Fox News Latino.

Controversy has surrounded the new California law, especially given the high estimates of illegal aliens present in the state. While still a sitting Assemblyman, Tim Donnelly brought attention to the potentially unreliable Mexican Consular ID that can be used to obtain one of the new California licenses. Donnelly referenced FBI concerns over use of that form of ID.

Democrat Don Rosenberg spoke out against AB 60 during legislative debate over whether to pass it, Breitbart previously reported. Rosenberg’s son Drew was killed as a result of actions taken by an illegal alien.

In late 2014, Oregonians voted overwhelmingly to overturn similar state legislation, SB 833. The bill allowed issuance of driver licenses to illegal immigrants. Voting results for proposition 88 show 66.2% of voting Oregonians voted to overturn SB 833 in an election that, in Oregon, favored Democrat politicians.

Follow Michelle Moons on Twitter @MichelleDiana