State renegotiating public-private hospital contracts

State renegotiating public-private hospital contracts

Louisiana leaders are in the process of renegotiating contracts with the private partners that have taken over the state’s safety net health care services for the poor.

Gov. John Bel Edwards and members of his administration say the process is necessary to make the system more efficient and maintain the public hospitals that for several decades have been central to the state’s ability to provide health care for those who cannot afford it.

“We are negotiating to keep them in place but at a savings. That’s hard to do,” Edwards said. “We have to achieve savings.”

The focus is sharpening on the value of the public-private partner contracts as the Legislature cobbles together a spending plan for the budget year that begins July 1 — while facing an estimated $600 million shortfall.

Louisiana shifted three years ago to the privatized model for nearly all of the old charity hospital system that was previously run by LSU.

With mounting stress on the state budget, lawmakers this year are loudly voicing concerns over whether the deals made are benefiting the state.

During the House floor debate on the coming year’s budget, Rep. Lance Harris, R-Alexandria, questioned whether the state Department of Health and Hospitals has adequately reviewed how favorable the hospital deals are to the private partners and accused the DHH leaders of “nonsensical management.”

The hospital at Alexandria was one on the list that would not have been funded under Edwards’ budget proposal, which covered five of the nine contracts.

“If people want more in the public-private partnerships, then find the money. You can find it,” said Rep. Jay Morris, R-Monroe.

The partnerships were eventually funded at the level Edwards wanted — lower than the partners themselves had asked for — after a late-night amendment on the House floor, in a close vote, shifted $72 million from the popular Taylor Opportunity Program for Students college scholarships to save the hospitals.

Legislators, who have been loathe to pare back TOPS, which provides tuition to Louisiana high schoolers who meet certain average benchmarks and go to college in state, found themselves faced with the choice of funding their local hospitals or cutting TOPS.

“This is life or death in my district and every one of your districts,” said Rep. Malinda White, D-Bogalusa.

Key to the debate is that several of the safety net hospitals also serve as training grounds for future doctors through the LSU medical school.

Edwards said he also has questions about whether the state is getting the most out of what it spends to keep the health care services in operation. “Nobody likes to sit at the table to negotiate a reduced amount of money,” he said. But he said he believes there is room for savings to the state.

The hospitals, meanwhile, maintain they are making no money off their arrangements with the state and have repeatedly threatened to walk away if their budgets are slashed too deeply.

During a recent meeting of the Senate Finance Committee, the hospital partners defended their contracts and denied that they are making money off of the state.

“Public-private partnerships should transcend politics,” said Tyrone Picard, who represents the Alliance of Public-Private Partnership Hospitals, which includes most of the partners.

But legislators remain skeptical.

“I’ve heard people say that they’ve borrowed money and expanded, all in an effort to break even. That’s just makes no sense to me,” said Senate Finance Committee Chairman Eric LaFleur, D-Ville Platte. “It’ s ridiculous. It’s just not credible.”

The privatization process, which was pushed by Edwards’ Republican predecessor Bobby Jindal and approved by an LSU governing board made up of his appointees, allowed contracts to be approved “with dozens of blank pages,” Edwards said.

“It’s true that they were too hastily put together,” said Edwards, whose mother worked for years as a nurse at Lallie Kemp Charity Hospital in Independence — the only state-run hospital remaining from the old system. “It’s not the approach you would ever want to take on something so serious as our safety net hospitals.”

Edwards said that the hospital partners need to tweak their business model to offer better savings to the state. “They are engaging with us in good faith,” he added.

The administration’s plan includes stressing to the hospitals the need to encourage patients to sign up for Medicaid. Starting in July, qualifications will be rolled back to allow an estimated 375,000 people onto the state Medicaid rolls, with the federal government picking up most of the tab, thanks to the federal Affordable Care Act.

The health care law, frequently referred to as “Obamacare,” was once thought to be a threat to the state’s unique charity hospital system that had offered health care for the poor and uninsured for decades in Louisiana. The health care law scales back federal funding for hospitals that provide care for the indigent. That funding model helped fuel the privatized charity system.

The public-private partnership contracts allow the partners to walk away if the state doesn’t adequately fund them. Hospital operators also can scale back services if they aren’t paid at the rate they demand.

The public-private partners now run the former LSU hospitals in Baton Rouge, New Orleans, Lafayette, Alexandria, Lake Charles, Bogalusa, Houma, Monroe and Shreveport

The partners also have begun offering care through clinics and other services they operate.

Jindal touted the privatized model as a chance for the state to save money while improving care.

Nearly everyone agrees that health care services have improved under the new model — there have not been the long waits and rationing of care that were seen under the old charity system — but the claim of saving money continues to be questioned.

Harris, who is the chairman of the GOP delegation in the House, said he thinks the state should be questioning the profit margin for hospitals.

“You didn’t review financials of the partners to know if we’re getting a good deal on profit margins?” Harris asked DHH leaders on the House floor.

Department of Health and Hospitals Secretary Dr. Rebekah Gee, who took on that role shortly after Edwards took office in January, spent nearly two hours defending the contracts during the budget debate.

She said there are concerns about the contracts and that’s what the administration is trying to fix in the renegotiations.

“With less dollars and less physicians, longer wait times and rationing of care would ensue,” she said.

Follow Elizabeth Crisp on Twitter, @elizabethcrisp. For more coverage of Louisiana state government and politics, follow our Politics Blog at http://blogs.theadvocate.com/politicsblog.