Section A: General News

Leetter: The government is a terrible investor



Tweet



| 458 views | Post a comment

Editor:



Getting a business loan is hard. Banks and investors don’t deliberately invest in failing ventures. Contrary to all the hay made about Donald Trump’s corporate bankruptcies, he’s better than average at bringing home the bacon for his investors and never has a problem getting more. Even the average person, if approached by a friend with this pitch, “I have no past record of success, and no real business plan, but I am wondering if you’d give me $1,000 for my business.” The answer would be no.



The government, however, seems to seek out bad investments while ignoring lucrative ones. Look at the trillion dollars in stimulus of which much was flushed down the drain in ventures like Solyndra. One trillion dollars later and we’re still told how our infrastructure is crumbling ... where did it go?



The bottom line is that the government actually punishes success. As a general rule, successful people come from successful parents. It’s no mystery, they learn values and habits from their parents that they then employ to make themselves successful. They then pass those values on to their children and the cycle continues.



As I write this, thousands of college-bound high school students are staring at their FAFSA aid statements, or more appropriately, lack-of-aid statements (when did a loan become aid?). Some are excited, most are not. You see, in this area the government has reached perfection in its upside-down investment scheme. The less successful your parents were, the less successful you’re likely to be, and the more likely you are to get a full ride at a prestigious state university.



As I sat at the National Honor Society ceremony, I was struck by the irony that everything we tell our kids is upside-down. “Work hard,” “get good grades.” In reality, those things rarely lead to a scholarship and the more likely you are to be productive, the more likely to yield a return on investment, the less likely that the government is going to invest in you. What does it matter to graduate with distinction? What does that golden cord get you?



If the government were concerned about productivity, it would tie its support to degrees that the country actually needs and stop funding fuzzy disciplines with no future like social justice majors! If the government isn’t investing to gain greater yield in the future, then why is it investing at all? What good does it do to invest $200k in a kid who graduates to be a “social justice warrior” who works as a barista at Starbucks to pay his bills (well, not all his bills because his Obamacare is being subsidized by those actually paying taxes).



This failure was just underscored this week by our governor. Less than 25 percent of kids who attend a state university graduate within four years! It would be illuminating to see statistics about how many of those lavished with government aid actually make that 25 percent. I suspect few.



But chin up, bucky, once you’ve done it on your own, worked hard, and been successful, the government will remember to bring you the bill and harvest where it has not sown.



RUSSELL DICKERSON



Floresville