Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, takes part in a committee hearing on July 8, 2015, on Capitol Hill. (Photo: GettyImages)

Editor's note: This article was published in the Register on Dec. 22, 1992. It is referenced in Kathie Obradovich's column, "Grassley was right on court hearings -- in '92"

Grassley: Overhaul `circus' of hearings

U.S. Sen. Charles Grassley said confirmation hearings for U.S. Supreme Court justices should be overhauled to avoid what he called the "circus" of the Judge Clarence Thomas hearings.

Speaking to members of the Iowa State Bar Association Friday at the Marriott Hotel in Des Moines, Grassley said the proceedings must focus more on long-term qualifications of candidates than on their views on current issues. "Somewhere, in my mind, there's got to be a happy medium between no hearing and the circus atmosphere of the Thomas hearings," the senator said. "We have put too much emphasis on litmus test-type questions on current political issues as if a Supreme Court justice were running a campaign to be elected."

The Iowa Republican and member of the Judiciary Committee that conducted last year's Thomas hearings said, "We ought to concentrate entirely upon (the nominees') integrity, their qualifications and background.

"We're not dealing with the broad issues but the narrow issues, and we're really not doing the country good."

Freedom of Speech

Of the barrage of questions from the panel at the Thomas hearing, including on the issue of abortion, Grassley said, "If the senator wants to ask that, there's nothing to keep him from asking. Our freedom of speech even goes beyond yours."

Grassley's comments came during questions that followed his observations on court reform at the bar-sponsored seminar on the federal legal system. Some 200 lawyers and judges attended.

The workshop is an annual event in which the bar attempts to bring the lawyers up to date on federal procedures and developments.

About tort reform, Grassley told the lawyers, "It is one we have to fight for no matter how entrenched the vested interest opposition is because we can't go on getting further and further and deeper and deeper in the hole."

Added Grassley, "The most recent election was all about the irresistible need for change in so many areas of American government."

Impact Statements

On another subject, Grassley said federal lawmakers should develop "judicial impact statements" when new laws are expected to increase the workload of courts.

"Frankly, too many in Congress see every problem solved by resorting to the courts. As kids used to say on the playground when a petty argument broke out, `Don't make a federal case of it.' "

A recent bill, the Access to Justice Act of 1992, which Grassley helped sponsor, promises to ease the civil caseload, he said.

"Contrary to what its opponents said then, and say today, it is not a bill to shut the courthouse door on people. It is not a bill to bash lawyers. It is rather a recognition of the fact that no other nation in the world makes it as easy to sue as the U.S. does."

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1oQmcNC