Giants youngster Paul Ahern.

Canberra's ambulance service was kept busy on Sunday as a Greater Western Sydney draftee was taken to hospital with a sore neck on a day in which two Sydney Swans stars were ferried to the emergency department.

Young Paul Ahern was hip-and-shouldered off the ball in the Giants reserves trial against an ACT representative side at Ainslie's Alan Ray Oval, causing the game to be called off in the last quarter with GWS leading the ACT 12.7 (79) to 7.4 (46).

Ahern was taken to hospital, where he was cleared of injury, while Canberra product Jack Steele was taken off in the second quarter as a precautionary measure after he was on the wrong end of a Damian Bowles bump. He will be assessed in the coming days.

Giants midfielder Zac Williams injured his elbow but continued the game to clearly be his team's best.

Advertisement

ACT coach Brendan Read said the Giants got off to a flying start, using their pace to get out to an early lead, but Read felt the ACT was working its way back into the game when it was called off.

"I think we were coming at them at the right time ... we had a bit of momentum coming our way," Read said.

"We knew that the pace of the game had to come back to us. It was always going to start frantically and the longer the game went on the more our durable, older bodies would be able to wear them down."

Read had a NEAFL-strength side at his disposal, with a raft of Ainslie and Belconnen players making up the side.

The Giants struggled to find a match for ACT forward Chris York (five goals), while Queanbeyan playing coach Kade Klemke was "clinical" in defence.

Ainslie midfield general Ian Lawless was a "warrior" and was one of several of the Tricolours' NEAFL players.

Read said the ACT side would be relying on NEAFL-quality players like the Bennett brothers and Klemke when they take on an AFL Sydney representative side on June 6.

"Ainslie were fantastic, they used it as a practice match for their players, they want to get the most out of it," he said.

"The feeling was really good ... it was a representative match intensity.

"We'll have some of [the Ainslie players against Sydney] ... there's no NEAFL game that weekend either, so potentially there will just be some qualification issues around them playing."

Read said Steele had shown the damage he can do from minimal touches of the footy.

"Jack was OK, kicked a couple of goals. He's not an accumulator, he's not going to have 40 possessions, but he always gets a couple of goals and what he does with the footy is very clean," Read said.