At the risk of offending my more aesthetically evolved friends, I have to say that the proposed Lucas Museum of Narrative Art is growing on me.

The widely reviled design? Yeah, it's audacious, weird, outsized and unconventional to the point of otherworldliness.

Kinda perfect, in other words, for a temple to modern popular culture.

Some will always consider it a hideous blob, and I admit that's what I thought at first. But the more I see the drawings, the more I believe the Lucas museum is destined to become as iconic as the Picasso sculpture in Daley Plaza, which was roundly criticized at its 1967 unveiling — Mike Royko called it "a big, homely metal thing" — but eventually adopted as a postcard-worthy landmark.

The controversial location? Yes, the lakefront is the glory and the crown of Chicago and should remain as free from commercial encroachments as possible.

Ideally the 17-acre proposed site between Soldier Field and McCormick Place along the south lakefront would be and always remain a green and gracious esplanade tucked along the shore, forever open, clear and free for hikers, bikers, picnickers, Frisbee-tossers and other lovers of the outdoors.

In reality, though, it's mostly parking lots. And if I thought there were a chance even as slim as a Wallenda high wire that someday the city will move those parking lots underground to create a veritable nature preserve, I'd be cheering for the lawsuit filed last week by Friends of the Parks trying to force the museum to relocate.

But I know that such a park will never rise from the asphalt. The book-ending blots of Soldier Field and McCormick Place — not even interestingly ugly! — and exorbitant costs of subterranean parking will forestall that fantasy forever.

And I suspect that if Chicago denies Lucas the prime lakefront spot he desires, he'll take his $300 million project, with the jobs and tourists that will come with it, to another city.

What's so chewy about Commissioner Garcia?

Most stories about Chicago's upcoming mayoral race refer to challenger "Jesus 'Chuy' Garcia," a member of the Cook County Board of Commissioners.

Perhaps you've been wondering where he got that nickname. Or perhaps you know that "Chuy" is a very common nickname for "Jesus" in Garcia's native Mexico, but you can't figure how they make the leap from one to the other.

Sometimes, of course, common nicknames don't seem to have a lot of logic behind them. We have "Jack" for "John" in Anglo-Saxon culture, for instance, and "Peggy" for "Margaret."

Nevertheless, I decided to ask a Mexican, specifically Gustavo Arellano, whose syndicated column, "Ask A Mexican," tackled the subject of "seemingly wacky Mexican apodos (nicknames)" in 2007.

"Mexican and Spanish nicknames always come from lopping off syllables and letters, either in the front or the back," he said in an email response to my query.

He noted that his father's side of the family calls him "Guti" instead of "Gustavo," while his mother's side calls him "Tavo."

"For any name with an 's' sound, the 's' turns into a ch," Arellano wrote. So to get "Chuy" or the also common "Chucho" out of "Jesus," "lop off the Je-, drop the 's' and voila!"

In other words, "Chuy" is derived from the letters "su" in the middle of "Jesus," which is no more wacky than "Hank" being based on the first letter of "Henry."

But now you know.

The real problem with voters

MIT economist Jonathan Gruber was wrong when he referred on several occasions to the American electorate as "stupid."

Gruber was one of the architects of Obamacare, and his ill-advised remarks from 2012 and 2013 have come to light recently as the law heads into challenging legal waters. The implication of the quotes is that those behind the overhaul of the health insurance system willfully misled the American people about the actual impacts — the costs some of them would have to bear and the changes some of them would see — in order to preserve support for the legislation.

But they weren't playing on the stupidity of the public. They were playing on the immaturity of the public.

Not to justify this kind of deception in any way, but politicians and their operatives have long known that voters are what commentator Michael Kinsley calls "big babies" — easily enchanted by the baubles of promises and prone to tantrums at the suggestion of sacrifice.

In the introduction to his 1995 book "Big Babies," Kinsley wrote that voters "make flagrantly incompatible demands — cut my taxes, preserve my benefits, balance the budget — and then explode in self-righteous outrage when politicians fail to deliver."

But of course by then, the politicians have been elected or the laws have been passed, and the big babies are back to their dreams of something for nothing.

This does not excuse telling lies or keeping critical information from voters, but it certainly explains why it's so common.

Update Rudolph (or Frosty, if you must)

Metro columnist Mary Schmich and I are conducting a contest asking readers to rewrite all or part of the lyrics to the catchy, heartwarming and inspiring Christmas classic "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer," or to "Frosty the Snowman."

Put these characters in some contemporary setting, keep it clean and send entries by Dec. 1 to ericzorn@gmail.com or to Mary Schmich, Chicago Tribune, 435 N. Michigan Ave., Chicago, IL 60611.

Winners will receive a pair of tickets to our "Songs of Good Cheer" caroling spectacular Dec. 11 through 14 at the Old Town School of Folk Music (773-728-6000; oldtownschool.org and, in their small way, like plucky Rudolph will go down in his-to-ry.

Re: Tweets

The winner of the Change of Subject online poll for funniest tweet of the week was @hippieswordfish for this one-liner:

"I accidentally bought Hamburger Enabler instead of Hamburger Helper, and now my beef is drunk and yelling at the TV."

Read all the finalists at chicagotribune.com/zorn, where we bring the funny every Wednesday morning.