Anthem (Photo: John Bragg)

In the latest sign that the health-insurance industry is on the verge of major consolidation, Indianapolis-based Anthem Inc. is rumored for the second time in a month to be shopping for a big rival.

This time, Anthem is interested in Cigna, based in Bloomfield, Conn., according to a report Monday in the Wall Street Journal, citing unnamed sources.

Such a move could give Anthem even more leverage in an industry that is undergoing huge change and watching enrollments grow under the Affordable Care Act.

Getting bigger gives insurers more leverage to negotiate rates with hospitals and other providers. In turn, large hospital systems around the country are buying smaller, struggling hospitals, as a way to maintain leverage with health insurers.

But mergers could also cut down on the number of providers, and therefore on choices for consumers.

Shares of Cigna soared as much as 15 percent Monday after the report that Anthem offered about $45 billion, or $175 a share. It was the second bid Anthem made for Cigna in the past 10 days, the report said.

Cigna, however, appears not to be interested. The company rebuffed the offer, the report said.

Shares in Cigna closed at $153.43 Monday, up about 12 percent.

Anthem, with corporate headquarters on Monument Circle, declined to comment to the IndyStar today on the rumors. Its shares rose 2.3 percent on Monday, closing at $164.46.

Anthem is the nation's second-largest health insurer, with annual revenues of $73.8 billion. Cigna is the nation's fifth-largest health insurer, with annual revenues of $34.9 billion, making it about half of Anthem's size.

Anthem is no stranger to deal-making. It was built by stitching together Blue Cross plans in other states, then gobbling up one of the nation's largest insurers, WellPoint Health Networks of California.

The company's last major acquisition was Amerigroup, a government health care provider, in 2012 for $4.5 billion.

Anthem has plenty of cash on hand to make a deal. It recorded more than $1.4 billion in cash and cash equivalents on its March 31 balance sheet.

And its chief financial officer told investors last month that low interest rates make it a good time to do acquisitions, according to Reuters.

"I like the pricing environment a lot, and we have a lot of capacity to work with to do a cash transaction of meaningful size — and it would be transformative," Wayne DeVeydt, Anthem's CFO, said during the UBS Global Healthcare Conference in New York on May 19, Reuters reported.

Last month, Anthem was one of several companies reported to be interested in buying rival Humana of Louisville, Ky. Other possible buyers included Aetna and Cigna, analysts said in reports to clients in recent weeks.

Humana has declined to confirm talks, saying it was in a "quiet period."

Several analysts have said Anthem has plenty of cash and an appetite for growth. And analysts have said that a deal involving Humana could be just the first step in a wave of consolidations.

Ana Gupte, a healthcare analyst with Leerink Partners in New York, said a Humana deal could be a "trigger event for further strategic actions by other players," in a research note issued June 1.

Anthem has kept a low profile on deal-making since then.

Call Star reporter John Russell at (317) 444-6283. Follow him on Twitter: @johnrussell99.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1Sim1V3