Veterans kicked off the Avalanche’s three-session training camp Saturday, and Jack Skille — who is on a professional tryout contract — was among the most impressive.

Skille played right wing on a line with center Nathan MacKinnon and Alex Tanguay, and used his size and speed to generate multiple offensive opportunities.

“I feel good. Just getting a little bit of the rust off. There’s only so much you can do in the offseason,” sid Skille, who played two years at the University of Wisconsin before turning pro. “Those first two practices are always really hard. But I like the practices so far and I’m ready to play some games.”

Skille, 28, is 6-foot-1 and 215 pounds. He was Chicago’s first-round selection (seventh overall) in 2005. He played for the Blackhawks, Florida Panthers and Columbus Blue Jackets, but was unable to find a guaranteed contract in the off-season. Skille had six goals and eight points in 45 games for Columbus last season.

He is among a dozen or so NHL veterans on PTO contracts throughout the league during training camp. Among the others are former Avs defenseman Jan Hejda, who is trying out for the Blackhawks.

“I think the younger players coming up are closer to being ready sooner,” Skille said. “But I don’t know. I really don’t know. I’ve been confused about it myself the last couple years, especially. But in the situation I’m in right now I can’t really think about that stuff. I’ve just decided that these are the cards I’ve been given and I have to deal with them and power through them. I just have to work hard and get it done.”

Andrej Meszaros is also on a PTO with the Avalanche. The 29-year-old defenseman made $4.125 million with the Buffalo Sabres last season. Meszaros does not look as good as Skille. In fact, Meszaros was a distant last in his group during every practice-ending conditioning session.

Gabe Landeskog did not participate in conditioning drill.

Avs captain Gabe Landeskog did not participate in the conditioning drill, saying it was just a precaution. The left wing said he plans on playing in Sunday’s Burgundy/White scrimmage at the University of Denver (1 p.m.). Landeskog has skated on a line with center Carl Soderberg in the two-day training camp. Both are from Sweden.

In the second session, Borna Rendulic was struck in the face by a stick or puck and returned to the ice in a full face cage.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers