PARK CITY, Utah, Dec. 3, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Boston-area residents can lay claim to living in one of the country's best locations for the delivery of healthcare services and affording professionals top-level healthcare jobs.

Supplemental Health Care, a national leading healthcare workforce solutions company, announced today two significant milestones in supporting Boston's leading healthcare industry:

Brigham and Women's Hospital recently selected the company to recruit and hire over 200 nurses to support its EPIC conversion.

The company has opened a second office in the Boston area to meet the city's burgeoning healthcare staffing needs.

"Boston is a thriving healthcare market and we are pleased to be at the forefront of supplying patient-centered, qualified clinicians necessary to meet the growing demand in the area," said Janet Elkin, Supplemental Health Care CEO and president. "We are excited to be working with Brigham and Women's Hospital, one of the most well respected medical facilities in the country."

The Boston area has for the last several years consistently ranked in the top five cities nationally for employing registered nurses, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The need for highly-trained and professional talent in this realm isn't expected to diminish anytime soon. The U.S. Department of Labor estimates that two key industry drivers in the city – physician offices and ambulatory care centers – have grown by 41.6 and 119 percent, respectively, in the last year.

Numerous studies published in 2014 attribute the Boston area's record expansion in the healthcare market of late to the Massachusetts healthcare reform law, the Affordable Care Act and an aging population. The result is a significant uptick in demand to fill new positions in a city that already is home to nearly 30 hospitals and numerous clinics.

Supplemental Health Care has a rich history with healthcare providers in the city and is well-positioned to meet these increased needs. The firm has provided thousands of professional healthcare staff for dozens of the area's hospitals and healthcare facilities.

Through its first office, located in Woburn, and now with its second office in downtown Boston, the firm provides a diversity of skilled healthcare professionals including: registered nurses; licensed practical nurses; certified nurse assistants; physical and occupational therapists; speech language pathologists; physicians; physician assistants and nurse practitioners.

About Supplemental Health Care

Since its inception in 1984, Supplemental Health Care has served as a comprehensive workforce solutions provider that delivers customized strategies to address staffing challenges faced by healthcare organizations nationwide. Leveraging a selection of business solutions such as Recruitment Process Outsourcing, Managed Services, PRN Pool Management and Contingent Staffing, Supplemental Health Care utilizes its deep staffing expertise to deliver wide ranging and creative workforce strategies that afford organizations better access to skilled clinical and non-clinical healthcare professionals.

Headquartered in Park City, Utah, Supplemental Health Care maintains an extensive local office network of more than 58 offices in major U.S. markets and four fully-integrated national divisions: Travel Nursing, Travel Therapy, Supplemental Physicians and Advanced Practice. Visit www.SupplementalHealthCare.com to learn more.

SOURCE Supplemental Health Care