There was a moment during Wednesday night's Republican undercard debate when Lindsey Graham briefly shifted from sitting United States Senator to exasperated social studies teacher.

It came as Gov. Bobby Jindal of Louisiana pitched the mother of all fits over the fact that, despite controlling both chambers of Congress, Republicans had still not been able to move the entirety of their legislative agenda.

"If you want to repeal Obamacare, get a new president," Graham said. "If you want to defund Planned Parenthood, elect a pro-life president because that's the only way ... Sixty-seven votes are required to override the veto. ... I don't want to take off the table the ability to slow down Obama in his last 13 or 14 months because I want 60 votes to stop what I think he's going to do between now and January 2017."

As a sitting governor, you'd think that Jindal would be familiar with the concept of an executive veto. After all, he exercised that very power as recently as last June.

But Jindal apparently couldn't -- or wouldn't -- wrap his head around that very simple concept:

"Now is the time for the Senate Republicans to stand up and fight," Jindal said in preface to Graham's mini-lecture. "We are tired of the establishment saying there's nothing we can do. ... We won the Senate and the House. What was the point of winning those chambers?"

The exchange between the two men was specifically over the Iran nuclear deal, but it served the broader purpose of laying bare the vast gulf that separates establishment Republicans from Tea Party insurgents.

One side recognizes the Realpolitik involved in winning elections. The other operates under blind rage and the disturbingly naive belief that ideological purity, above all else, leads to victory.

"So, folks, the world really is the way it is. President Obama is president. The goal is to get him out of there and pick somebody who would actually do something to repeal Obamacare, who would get you a better agreement," Graham further schooled Jindal. "Bobby, he would veto the bill. We don't have 67 votes, and you have given away a defense against Obama for the rest of his presidency. No, I'm not going to do that."

Here's the key part of Graham's answer:

"I'm not going to tell you things I can't do. I'm not going to tell you by shutting the government down we're going to defund Obamacare as long as he's president," he concluded. "That hurts us. I'm trying to lead this party to winning."

The thing is, Jindal is hardly an outlier. You saw some of the same rhetoric at the grown-up debate that followed the undercard on CNN on Wedesday night.

You need look no further than Donald Trump, who boasts the uncanny ability to vocalize the fever dreams of that section of the GOP base that believes Washington to be wholly populated by snake-charmers who put self-interest above that of the Republic.

The "central characteristic" of that wing of the GOP is "an ever-tightening spiral of self-reinforcing and self-referential purity tests that makes communicating with anyone beyond the febrile and furious a nearly impossible task," Republican consultant Rick Wilson wrote for The Daily Beast on Wednesday. "The people pushing for this transformation aren't a majority yet, but when a virus infects the body politic, its minuscule size belies its massive impact."

As Wilson writes, both Trump and Jindal (and that faction of the GOP which supports them), operate in a universe that denies the fundamental realities of Washington politics.

That is, they are fundamentally transactional: Things are given in order to be received. And wasting time and energy on meaningless votes, while perhaps symbolically important, does not win elections.

"Their rage is usually in inverse proportion to their knowledge of politics and history, but why let ignorance get in the way of a good screech on Twitter or a talk radio sermon that leaves the listeners frothing?" Wilson writes.

Neither Graham nor Jindal have a prayer of winning the nomination. And Thursday's undercard debate may well have been the last time they stood on the same stage together.

But Donald Trump, the varsity player for the team on which Jindal currently rides the bench, could end up capturing the nomination.

And Republicans would be well-served to keep the lesson of the Graham/Jindal exchange in the forefront of their minds as the election season progresses: Undirected rage and simple ideological purity rarely wins elections.

But getting stuff done, which requires an adult ability to make concessions and compromise, does.