Buy Photo James Passikoff, Managing Parter at Passikoff & Scott Certified Public Accountants answers a call to the Poughkeepsie Journal's Tax Counsel Clinic on Wednesday in the City of Poughkeepsie. (Photo: Patrick Oehler/Poughkeepsie Journal)Buy Photo

Area CPAs answered some taxing questions as they helped callers navigate their annual income tax forms Wednesday night.

Questions on the annual Dial-A-CPA night ranged from deducting medical expenses and retirement contributions to whether taxpayers qualify for exemptions under the guidelines of the Affordable Care Act.

This annual service to readers of the Poughkeepsie Journal is provided through the Mid-Hudson Chapter of the New York State Society of Certified Public Accountants. Six area accountants were on hand to answer more than 40 of your calls.

Tax returns for the state and federal levels are due to be filed on or before April 18. James Passikoff, a managing partner of Passikoff & Scott, located in Poughkeepsie, said the biggest piece of advice he can give to taxpayers is to start planning to file one year in advance.

“If you are going to file your 2015 taxes, make sure to start planning in January 2015,” Passikoff said. “Keep a record of what you have. If you get a letter from a charity you donated to, keep that letter. Don’t wait until you file.”

Passikoff said that another popular question was about taxable IRA and 401Ks withdrawals for medical expenses.

“If you take money out of a retirement savings account for medical expenses, the first $10,000 is not penalized,” Passikoff said. “Although, you still have to pay income tax on that money.”

Buy Photo Tracey Niemotko, Professor of Accounting and School of Business Chairperson, Mount Saint Mary College, answers a call to the Poughkeepsie Journal's Tax Counsel Clinic on Wednesday in the City of Poughkeepsie. (Photo: Patrick Oehler/Poughkeepsie Journal)

However, Passikoff said, those medical expenses may be tax deductible elsewhere on your itemized tax form and you should consult a tax professional to see what you qualify for.

Steve Shinder of Shinder & Shinder CPAs in Nanuet, Rockland County, said he received a few calls on the Affordable Care Act.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Tax expert talks most asked questions this tax season Amanda J Purcell/ Poughkeepsie Journal

“Many people don’t know that there are dozens of exemptions out there for those who qualify,” Shinder said. “Last year, it was difficult for many people to figure out because the 1095 forms were not released yet. This year those forms will be released for the first time, so it is a bit easier to see if you comply. I would say only about three or four of the people I've talked with don't qualify for one or more of the exemptions.”

Shinder said forms like the 1095-A, 1095-B and 1095-C help determine if you need to comply with the new shared responsibility payment, the fee you might have to pay if you don't have health insurance.

Editors’ note: The experts assisting the Poughkeepsie Journal’s Dial-A-CPA Night offer general advice and are not a substitute for individualized counsel from a professional hired by you who has full knowledge of your finances and tax and income patterns. The Poughkeepsie Journal and Gannett Co. Inc. make no representation or warranties of any kind as to information given by the experts, and will not be liable for any damages, costs or legal complications of any nature arising from the information and data discussed.

Amanda J. Purcell: apurcell@poughkeepsejournal.com; 845-437-4807; Twitter: @amandajpurcell

THE EXPERTS

Tracey J. Niemotko, JD, CPA, is a professor of accounting at Mount St. Mary College and has been teaching for nearly 30 years.

Glenn A. Noakes, CPA, is a tax supervisor for Sedore & Company, which has locations in Poughkeepsie, Port Jervis and Fishkill.

James Passikoff, CPA and managing partner with Passikoff & Scott Public Accounts, in Passikoff in Poughkeepsie.

Michael Marcus, C.P.A. with M.S. Taxation.

Video

For video of experts talking about tax tips, visit www.PoughkeepsieJournal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://pojonews.co/1MmIFg0