WASHINGTON (CBSDC/AP) — The government reportedly knew that millions of Americans would lose their employee health insurance due to Obamacare.

CBS News reports that the federal government originally estimated that millions of workers would be dropped from their health plans that employers provide because the policies did not meet the minimum standards of the Affordable Care Act.

An increasing number of small businesses are now beginning to feel the pinch are starting to cancel insurance coverage for their employees.

Increased rates and ongoing technical difficulties have also played a part in the decision by multiple business owners to discontinue offering insurance for those who work at their companies, CBS News is reporting.

One such business owner, Betsy Atkinson of Virginia Beach, said that it was a perfect storm of present plans being canceled under the terms of Obamacare and an inability to afford the plans that pass muster under the ACA.

“They’re going to have to go find their own insurance. I’m sorry,” she told CBS News.

The HealthCare.gov website will still be a work in progress beyond the end of the month, Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said recently, appearing to soften a promise that the site will be working by then for the vast majority of users.

“The 30th of November is not a magic go, no go date. It is a work of constant improvement. We have some very specific things we know we need to complete by the 30th and that punch list is getting knocked out every week,” Sebelius told The Associated Press.

Federal health officials also revealed that just 26,794 people enrolled for health insurance through the federal website during the first, flawed month of operations, and a total of 106,000 nationwide — a small fraction of what they had projected.

Days later, the House voted to weaken a core component of “Obamacare” and permit the sale of individual health coverage that falls short of requirements in the law. More than three dozen Democrats broke ranks and supported the legislation, a total that underscored the growing importance of the issue in the weeks since millions of cancellation notices went out to consumers covered by plans deemed inadequate under government rules.

(TM and © Copyright 2013 CBS Radio Inc. and its relevant subsidiaries. CBS RADIO and EYE Logo TM and Copyright 2013 CBS Broadcasting Inc. Used under license. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. The Associated Press contributed to this report.)