Highmark executives and allies dominated a hearing before the state's top insurance regulator Monday, seeking a green light for the insurer to transfer $175 million into its western Pennsylvania hospital network to help it compete against rival University of Pittsburgh Medical Center.

At the four-hour session, state lawmakers, local elected leaders and a health care workers' union were among those urging acting Insurance Commissioner Teresa Miller to approve the plan to tap Highmark's $5.5 billion insurance reserve and use the money for grants to the eight-hospital Allegheny Health Network.



Planned capital improvements include modernizing Highmark's two flagship hospitals in Pittsburgh, building outpatient service centers in areas where Highmark customers lack in-network options and expanding access to emergency and trauma services in some areas.



Residents of the region "need a viable competitor to the UPMC health system," said state Sen. Randy Vulakovich, R-Allegheny, asserting that complaints about UPMC are "the No. 1 thing that comes up" when constituents call him.



Said Rich Fitzgerald, the elected Allegheny County executive, "Obviously we should do everything we can to encourage the two systems to share this space."



The executives stressed that Highmark Health - comprising Highmark Inc., which administers the health insurance plan, and the Allegheny Health Network, which oversees the hospitals - is financially solid and well diversified.



Karen Hanlon, the executive vice president and chief financial officer, said Highmark Health's total revenues grew by $1 billion to $16.8 billion last year, but was vague when Miller and her staff pressed for details about the longer-term cost of capital improvements and other specifics.



Several critics, including UPMC and the Insurance Federation of Pennsylvania, also said Highmark's plans lacks transparency.



UPMC Executive Vice President Tal Heppenstall pointedly criticized Highmark's public disclosures as "sporadic, fragmented and murky."



Heppenstall suggested that Highmark used accounting gimmicks to paint an unrealistically positive picture of its finances.



"Highmark's lack of financial transparency - indeed, its unapologetic efforts to spin its financial performance for maximum positive PR effect - make it difficult for anyone to respond to the (insurance) department's important questions," Heppenstall said.



Hanlon said Highmark is committed to transparency and recently made public its first consolidated financial report.



"I have full clarity of our consolidated financial positon, and I can assure you that our position is strong and stable," she said.



Miller, asked about Heppenstall's criticism, declined to comment.



"That's why we have really good consultants because they help us get to the bottom of that," she said.



Gov. Tom Wolf and state Attorney General Kathleen Kane petitioned Commonwealth Court last month to force the companies into arbitration after UPMC threatened to deny in-network access to its hospitals and doctors for 180,000 seniors in western Pennsylvania.