It's no return to the glory days of massive herds rumbling past Denver on the Goodnight-Loving Trail. But in the coming days, Boulder reckons to see the closest approximation of a cattle drive the 21st century is likely to offer in these parts.

This won't be about getting beef to market, as was the case with the famous historical longhorn route north from Belknap, Texas, and along the Front Range to Cheyenne, Wyo.

Instead, livestock will be put to work on the terrain south of the National Center for Atmospheric Research as a novel solution to a complex invasive species management challenge.

They'll be chowing down on tall oatgrass, which forms dense stands that shade and out-compete native species for light, moisture and nutrients.

The two management areas to be targeted by grazing to combat tall oatgrass, and invasive species that have taken hold south of the National Center for Atmospheric Research. (Daily Camera)

Recent wet conditions have delayed the start of the project, but more than 100 head of black and red angus could be deployed as early as this coming week, weather depending.

Although the city has employed both goats and cattle for invasive species management in the past, this effort stands out.

"I guess from a scale standpoint, this one is pretty unique," said Josh Bilbao, an agricultural resources specialist for Boulder's Open Space and Mountain Parks department.

The management area targeted for the project is actually two neighboring plots of land, the most significant being a roughly 72-acre spread just south of the Bear Canyon Trail and west of the Devil's Thumb neighborhood.

Advertisement

And there will be something of a cattle drive to get 75 cows plus their calves to the larger of the two targeted areas, which has now been fenced in — without requiring closure of any public trails.

Once the livestock are established there, another 25 to 30 cattle will be assigned to a second, smaller management area just west of the Bluestem Connector Trail.

Suggesting this might be more of a cattle shuttle than a full-on drive, Bilbao estimated the length of the distance that cattle will be spurred along by four or five cowboys on horseback — and perhaps a couple of herding dogs — as "maybe a mile, or three-quarters of a mile."

Cattle are being used rather than goats because of the size of the area involved.

City staffers are strongly urging members of the public not turn out to witness the operation due to public safety considerations.

"The reason is that it's a large herd that's going to be moving through, and it could be crossing trails at some point," Bilbao said. "If there are too many people, cows can be pretty unpredictable. They can spook easily.

"The less bodies hiding or jumping out from the trees, could make it much more easy to get them from point A to point B."

Problem grasses introduced in '50s

Once on site, the cattle (which typically split their time between Teller Farm in Boulder County and open space near Steamboat Springs) will remain there for several weeks of strategic feeding.

They'll repeat the exercise at this same time of year in 2016, and in years beyond, until the tall oatgrass has been defeated.

Tall oatgrass is a short-lived perennial bunchgrass from northern Europe that is believed to have been introduced to the Shanahan/National Center for Atmospheric Research area during ranching operations in the 1950s.

According to the city of Boulder's website, tall oatgrass typically becomes invasive after a number of decades without any grazing. Mapping by the city in 2007 and 2013 confirmed that the NCAR/Shanahan area offers the highest densities of its occurrence on any Open Space and Mountain Parks property.

Brian Anacker is a research and data specialist for Open Space and Mountain Parks. He is tasked with monitoring the success of the project's success in reducing the abundance and density of the tall oatgrass.

He has supervised assembly of about 20 small circular cages, a couple of meters in diameter, distributed within the larger management area, where cattle won't be able to graze. Each of those will be paired with a "treatment plot" about 8 meters away, to then make comparisons and draw conclusions about the effectiveness of the grazing.

"What we want to do is isolate the effect of the cattle, all else being equal," Ackerman said. "After the cattle come through, we'll come through and measure the abundance of tall oatgrass inside the exclosures, and the paired areas.

"What we hope to see is that the height of the tall oatgrass and its abundance is reduced by cattle grazing. And then our perennial, native grass can recover and increase in its abundance."

Grazing strategy to be repeated in coming years

The project is being launched at this specific time in order to attack the tall oatgrass at the right point in its reproduction cycle — before new seeds are produced that could render the effort moot.

Anacker said maintaining 20 small enclosed areas that won't be grazed shouldn't defeat the program's effectiveness.

"That's definitely a concern," he admitted. "But what we realized is that there's quite a bit of oatgrass around the outer, fenced area, and so there is going to be pressure in terms of seed dispersal back into the area. Seed dispersal is going to be present, regardless of whether we have our 20 exclosures there, or not.

"We're expecting the treatment to take a while in order to be effective. And we're hoping dispersal of seeds from these cages to be minimal. If we detect that our exclosures are really creating a problem, then of course we could remove our internal monitoring exclosures and effectively mow down the oat grass that is inside of them."

City officials have conducted informational sessions about the upcoming cattle deployment for those living in neighborhoods adjoining the areas involved.

"Overall it was pretty positive," Bilbao said of homeowners' feedback. "I think people were pretty excited to see them (going) up there being used for what we're using them for, not just grazing."

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan