DUBLIN and LAGOS, Nigeria, Oct 05, 2015 (PR Newswire Europe via COMTEX) -- DUBLIN and LAGOS, Nigeria, October 5, 2015 /PRNewswire/ --

Access Bank, one of the top 5 banks in Nigeria and CR2, Ireland's leading self-service banking software provider are pleased to announce that the bank has selected CR2's BankWorld omnichannel suite to manage their self-service channels including ATM, Internet, and Mobile. This strategic alliance was celebrated at Access Bank's London headquarters.

Access Bank, issued with its first banking licence in 1988, is currently ranked as one of Africa's top 20 banks. With 5 million retail customers and over 1,500 ATMs, Access Bank understands the importance of the self-service channels in supporting Nigeria's retail banking growth. As such, they sought a solution which would allow them to launch the right product, in the right place, at the right time which can only be achieved through a true omnichannel approach. By selecting BankWorld and holding CR2's self-service platform at the core of their strategy, Access Bank now have the tools to stay competitive and highly flexible to market changes as well as personalising each interaction with their customers at every touch point.

With CR2, Access Bank will be empowered to reduce their operational costs by managing all channels from a single point while also having the opportunity to generate revenue through the launch of targeted and personalised services. In addition, Access Bank will also be able to offer a range of innovative and convenient payment facilities new to the Nigerian market.

"Herbert Wigwe Group Managing Director, Access Bank mentioned: We aim to become the leading bank in Nigeria and provide new services that will change the way people bank. Having a best of breed self-service offering, providing convenient banking and managing all our client's relationship from a single place are at the heart of our strategy and we believe that BankWorld will help us to achieve our vision."

"Franky Van Damme, Chief Executive Officer at CR2 said "I welcome Access Bank as a new client of CR2 in Nigeria. We believe that CR2 can help Access Bank in offering their customers innovative and unique services across their entire electronic self-service network. We are committed to innovation and look forward to working with Access Bank to deliver cutting-edge banking and enhanced customer experiences"

CR2 is cementing its experience in the Nigerian financial market, the signing ceremony between Access Bank and CR2 follows a strategic alliance with Global InfoSwift, CR2's local partner in the country.

Solomon Edun, General Manager, Global InfoSwift mentioned "Global InfoSwift has joined forces with CR2 to bring the latest banking technologies to the Nigerian market and make banking easy and accessible to all. This alliance and the agreement with Access Bank is a first step towards the banking revolution that Nigeria will go through. We are very proud to take part in Access Bank's journey and help them achieve their vision using cutting edge technologies."

Photo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20151005/767434

CONTACT: Nadia Benaissa, nadia.benaissa@cr2.com, Tel +971-4-331-5414

Copyright (C) 2015 PR Newswire Europe

More from MarketWatch