Event combines fitness, food, art and literacy

Guests stop to try some chips and salsa at one of the stations along the interactive fitness trail during Merino School District's South American Adventure Thursday evening. The event combined the fitness trail with South American themed food, art and literacy. ( Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Merino students hand out a salad at one of the stations that was part of the district's South American Adventure. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

MERINO — Merino students, families and community members were invited to take a trip to another continent Thursday evening, as the district hosted a South American Adventure night.

The event, which tied in physical activity with South American-themed food, art and literature, was put on by Merino High School's Wellness Committee, FFA, FCCLA, student council and the elementary school.

Students and staff have been holding meetings for the past few months to plan the event.

According to Gus Gill, a member of the Wellness Committee, the event came about when the elementary art teacher was trying to think of something to do to attract people to the elementary art show. Usually the art show is held in combination with the school concert, but the music teacher was expecting to be on maternity leave around the time both events were to be held.

Children were able to take a bookmark and listen to Merino Elementary students read stories at the "Readers Theater" station that was part of the district's South American Adventure. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Gill said the Wellness Committee had been talking for awhile about doing a walking dinner "to encourage health and wellness in the community" and knowing that the elementary school also has a literacy night every year, they decided to combine the art show, the walking dinner and the literacy night into one event. South America was chosen as the theme because that was the theme for the elementary art show.

As guests arrived at the event they were given a slip of paper listing all the stations, which they got signed at each station. To get to some of the stations participants had to make their way around the district's interactive fitness trail, making use of the fitness equipment along the trail if they wanted to.

Advertisement

Along the trail, there was a station set up where participants were treated to some South American food, chips and salsa, and they were also able to read over some facts about South America.

After winding their way along the rest of the trail, guests were invited into the ag shop, where they were invited to try a South American salad. Then they headed to the cafeteria, where they could enjoy the main course, chicken, rice and pilaf and listen to some South American music.

South American themed art could be found throughout the building during Merino School's South American Adventure. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Inside the elementary school, the guests were also able to look over a variety of exhibits in the elementary art show and be entertained by a "Readers Theater," which featured elementary students "performing" by reading grade level books or stories. The goal of this activity is to have students enhance their reading skills and confidence by having them practice reading with a purpose.

Ultimately the event seemed to be a hit. Gill said they had a good turnout and they heard "lots of positive feedback" from those who came.

Callie Jones: 970-526-9286, cjones@journal-advocate.com