Montgomery County Circuit Judge Truman Hobbs said he would release a decision "very shortly" on the lawsuit by former U.S. Rep. Artur Davis challenging the state Democratic Party's denial of his petition to run on the party's ticket.

Hobbs held a hearing in the dispute today.

Davis wants to run for the Montgomery County Commission as a Democrat in the March 1 primary.

But Davis, who served in Congress as a Democrat from 2003 to 2011, switched to the Republican Party in 2012 and supported Mitt Romney and other GOP candidates until 2014.

A Democratic Party bylaw known as the Radney rule prohibits anyone who did not support Democratic nominees the previous four years from running as a Democrat.

Davis requested a waiver from the Radney rule.

The Democratic Party executive board held a hearing Oct. 16 and rejected the waiver request.

Davis claims he is the only candidate who has been turned down for a request for a waiver during the 33 years that the rule has been in existence.

He cited eight or nine examples of candidates who have received waivers, including former U.S. Rep. Parker Griffith, who switched to the Republican Party but was allowed to return as a Democratic candidate for governor last year.

Davis claims the denial of his waiver request is a violation of his due process rights.

"We were in court for about three hours today," Davis said. "At no point in three hours did a lawyer for the Alabama Democratic Party or any single witness for the Alabama Democratic Party offer a principled distinction between myself and other people who have gone before the executive board to get a waiver."

James Anderson, an attorney for the Democratic Party, said Davis filed a lawsuit because he lost the vote for the waiver.

Anderson said Davis is trying to get the court to supersede the decision of the executive board, which heard Davis' waiver request but did not accept it.

To receive a waiver, a candidate needs approval of two-thirds of those voting on the executive board. Anderson said Davis got one vote out of 24.

Anderson said Davis has not provided any reason for the court to override the board's decision.

Davis' attorney, Bryan Taylor, a former Republican state senator from Prattville, called five witnesses today, including three members of the executive board – party Chairwoman Nancy Worley, former Chairman Redding Pitt and Montgomery County Chairwoman Tyna Davis.

Worley said she had encouraged Davis to return to the party when they spoke at a mayoral candidate forum this year.

She said she did not vote on his request for a waiver.

"I have stated to him privately and publicly that I hope he remains in the party and does good work for the party," Worley said.

Pitt testified that he had known Davis since 1992. When Pitt was U.S. Attorney for the Middle District of Alabama in the 1990s, he hired Davis as an assistant U.S. attorney and later thought Davis did a good job in Congress.

But he said Davis did not make a persuasive argument for the waiver from the Radney rule when he spoke to the executive board in October.

Pitt said Davis failed to provide enough assurance that he would be a loyal Democrat.

"I was frustrated, because I was hoping he would do better," Pitt said.

Pitt said he voted to grant Davis the waiver, but said he could understand why others did not.

Davis was elected to four terms in Congress as a Democrat but opted to run for governor instead of returning to Congress in 2010. He lost the race for the Democratic nomination to Ron Sparks.

Davis was living in Virginia when he announced his switch to the Republican Party in 2012. He spoke at the Republican National Convention in Tampa that year.

Davis returned to Alabama in 2014 and lost a nonpartisan race for mayor of Montgomery this year.

Davis said that during that campaign he realized his supporters were Democrats and his campaign reflected Democratic values.

He said that since returning to Alabama he has been concerned about the state's direction under Republican leadership, including what he said was the failure to address issues like poverty, tax reform, stagnation in the Black Belt, funding for public education and failure to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

Davis opposed the Affordable Care Act while in Congress.

On cross examination, Democratic attorney Anderson asked Davis about receiving an honorarium from the state Republican Party for a speech in 2014.

Davis said he was planning to run for mayor at the time and welcomed a chance to speak to a group.

Davis said he intends to remain in politics no matter how the case turns out.