'Ratios are specific, the coloring is right'

If you go What: CU Hit the Bricks exhibition opening When: 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Saturday, Dec. 6, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Where: CU Heritage center Cost: Free

In the summer of 2012, Allyson Smith went to the History Colorado Center in Denver to see LEGO-rado, a 700-foot homage to the state's past and future built entirely out of LEGO bricks, and said to herself, "I got to have that."

Two years later, Smith, director of the University of Colorado's CU Heritage Center, gets to see her wish come true. The museum's newest exhibit, Hit the Bricks, opens on Dec. 6 and is a 12-foot-by-17-foot rendering of the university's campus, built from LEGO bricks.

"The concept was a whimsical display of iconic buildings. . .and we would show CU achievements," Smith said.

To celebrate the exhibit, the Heritage Center will host an hourly raffle for CU prizes, LEGO demonstrations from the CU College of Engineering and Applied Science and a Q-and-A session with the LEGO builders.

Visitors will also be able to purchase a limited number of CU Buffaloes built from 86 LEGO bricks each.

Hit the Bricks will feature campus buildings, including Old Main (which houses the Heritage Center on the third floor), Macky Auditorium, the Mary Rippon Theatre and Folsom Field. Hanging above the campus are Voyager and Apollo spacecrafts. CU contributed photo polarimeters to measure surface matter on planets to Voyager and three CU alumni were astronauts on Apollo spacecrafts, Smith said.

Builders said a very rough estimate of 500,000 bricks will be used in the finished product.

When completed, the football stadium will account for approximately 250,000 pieces and weigh several hundred pounds. The stands will be fitted with thousands of LEGO Microfigures watching a showdown between the Buffs and Rams, representing the annual Rocky Mountain Showdown between CU and Colorado State University, and will include a Jumbotron streaming video.

In addition, 250 bicycles, 300 trees and hundreds of LEGO Minifigures will be added to represent campus life.

The exhibit replaces architect Charles Klauder's concept for a master plan of the campus from 1919. The Klauder gallery was on display for 30 years and the wear and tear from such a lengthy exhibition required it to be put into storage.

The museum started talks about the project in January and hired LEGO builders with the Colorado and Wyoming LEGO User Group to design and construct the campus replica. CoWLUG members started designing in March and the exhibit was expected to open in September. But, due to the size of the bulk order, the LEGO brick order was delayed until October.

Derek Madina works to build a replica of the University of Colorado campus out of Legos on Friday in the Old Main building on the CU campus in Boulder. (Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera)

The team of nine builders started construction around Oct. 13, said Jessica Rigney, CoWLUG builder and project manager.

CU's computer-aided design office provided the Heritage Center with architectural drawings of campus buildings so CoWLUG builders could get the footprints and exterior elevations to conceptualize their building designs to scale.

"The ratios are specific, the coloring is right," said Heritage Center museum assistant Luc Polglaze. "It's effectively small LEGO models of actual campus buildings."

The distances between buildings are not to scale in order to condense the display to a reasonable size.

Hit the Bricks "has required the most line item purchases (by far) for any project ordered previously in the world," according to a CU news release. Smith and Rigney said the order had to be fulfilled with bricks from eight countries: the US, Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Austria, Denmark, Mexico and China.

The Heritage Center is a program of the CU Alumni Association, which is sponsoring the exhibit. The project carries a $45,000 price tag, between the LEGO brick orders and labor, said CU spokesman Ryan Huff.

The Alumni Association expects the anticipated popularity of the exhibit will help them make the money back through increased rentals of the Heritage Center, Huff said.

The funds came from the association's endowment earnings, money that goes towards programs focused on engagement with alumni and the community, which are key goal for this exhibit.

"One of the driving forces for doing the exhibit was that we're doing our strategic plan and we want to engage more people," Smith said. "We want to have more involvement with the alumni, with students and with the community coming in to actually engage a new audience for us."

The Alumni Association's strategic plan is expected to be announced and launched within six months, Smith said.

The Heritage Center welcomes 27,000 visitors annually, the bulk of which are prospective students and families on admissions tours. Hit the Bricks is expected to double that number or even increase it further.

"We're a little bit of a hidden gem on campus, but we know History Colorado (Center) who had one of these exhibits in Denver, they had more people visit than in any other exhibit they've ever had," Smith said.

Visitor numbers for the History Colorado Center 2012 LEGO-rado exhibit could not be obtained, but spokeswoman Deborah Radman said, "It was huge. It was really popular and well-attended. So much so, that is has also impacted our decision to have an exhibit here in the summer of 2015 called Toys of the '50s, '60s and '70s."

There is no end date planned for the exhibit, as the museum expects to keep adding to it. Fiske Planetarium and the main street of University Hill are expected to be the next additions.

"We're very excited because it was just this really fresh approach to see how many people we could engage and have discover us," Smith said.