Los Angeles County Supervisor Michael D. Antonovich has tapped his chief of staff, Kathryn Barger-Leibrich, as his preferred successor when he retires from public office in 2016 after 36 years in the job.

“She has a long history and knowledge and would be able to hit the ground running without any on-the-job training,” Antonovich said in an interview.

Leibrich, one of the most seasoned aides at the County Hall of Administration with 25 years working for Antonovich, said she was seriously considering the race and would make a final decision in December or January.

Leibrich, a 54-year-old Republican living in San Marino, said she was politically less conservative than her boss but was not ready to identify specific issues where she would take a different stand. She joined his office as an intern and rose to become his health and children’s services deputy before assuming the role of chief of staff.

“Mike has allowed me to be who I am,” Leibrich said. “I am different and my style is different. At a later date, those differences will come out.”

But she said her priorities would include building a new jail, revamping the troubled foster care system, implementing the Affordable Care Act and welfare reform.

Mike has allowed me to be who I am. I am different and my style is different. At a later date, those differences will come out. — Kathryn Barger-Leibrich, chief of staff

The supervisors oversee the largest county government in the nation, and Antonovich’s district is the largest in the county, stretching from South Pasadena to the borders with Ventura, Kern and San Bernardino counties.

Over Antonovich’s long tenure, the area has become significantly more ethnically and racially diverse, and Democrats now outnumber Republicans in party registration. Antonovich is considered the most conservative member of the five-member board, promoting tough-on-crime initiatives and vocally opposing illegal immigration.

“There is no sure bet that someone of his political persuasion would win, much less someone without a [well-known] name,” said Jaime Regalado, emeritus professor of political science at Cal State Los Angeles. “Chief of staff is one thing, but she is not Mike.”

No one else has declared an intention to run, and fundraising can’t begin until March under county rules, but Regalado said he expected the opening to soon draw a large and diverse field of candidates.

“I think the race is going to be very competitive. I think there’s a lot of pent-up angst, a lot of yearning and a lot of ‘good riddance’ among the younger guard,” he said.

Antonovich, 75, is being forced out by term limits. He recently tried to gain board support to allow him to run for another term, but a majority of supervisors said the matter was already settled and he was not successful.

“At this time, I don’t know what the future holds when I leave office in 2016,” he said.

Follow @gtherolf for news about L.A. County government