The Care Act, trailed by the government as the “most significant reform of care and support in more than 60 years”, holds a mirror up to the society we have become. In setting out our rights and entitlements, clearly and in one place, it bears witness to the fact that we are less deferential and more demanding than our forebears.

Its remit is restricted to England but similar principles of person-centred care, enabling more people who are elderly, disabled or have mental health problems to live independently for longer, are being adopted across the UK as governments seek to provide affordable 21st-century services.

Related: The Care Act heralds a new era for social care

Nearly all the Care Act reforms were implemented on 1 April this year, although the controversial cap on care costs also included won’t start until the same time next year. They cover the broad sweep of council responsibilities like assessments of need, deciding who’s eligible for a service and safeguarding adults.

Local councils have exacting new duties, including the formidable duty to promote wellbeing. This goes beyond health and protection from harm to stress the importance of individuals flourishing through social and economic wellbeing.

That contribution will be vital. How can the strengths of communities, the talents, expertise and assets of the people who live in them, be harnessed for the benefit of all? It may be the elderly ex-teacher, socially isolated and falling into depression, who finds she can teach English to a migrant group in return for assistance with the garden or the shopkeeper who turns the person with dementia into a satisfied customer by offering a helping hand.

These informal sources of support will become more important as council budgets tighten. A national eligibility threshold for local authority services has been introduced, replacing the despised “postcode lottery” under which entitlement to help could vary markedly from council to council. But the new threshold has been set at the high level previously used by 90% of councils, so it is questionable what difference it will make.

The big question everyone is asking is whether the Care Act will be adequately funded. Extra demand for assessments from carers and people who pay for their own care has been budgeted for, the government insists, but it has done little to close the £4.3bn funding gap the Association of Directors of Adult Social Services (Adass) has predicted for social care by 2020.

“We’ve got serious concerns about the funding for social care,” says immediate past Adass president David Pearson. “The Care Act enshrines what we have long regarded as good practice, but it’s only going to be realised if we have the capacity to deliver it. If we carry on like we are, there will not be enough money to provide the care and support we aspire to.”

Related: 'A long time coming': Social workers have their say on the Care Act

Estimates suggest that at least 400,000 fewer people are getting publicly funded help, as councils concentrate on the most urgent cases. Yet demand is rising fast with the numbers of over-85s expected to double in 20 years and dementia figures forecast to increase by a third to more than 1.1 million by 2025.

Much depends on a change of culture. The idea is that health and social care, by jointly investing in early help to prevent or delay debilitating need, can break their expensive dependence on crisis services and enable more people to live independently at home. Families will be better supported to care for loved ones and advice on local resources will be more readily available.

Gerry Nosowska, who chairs the adults faculty at the College of Social Work, says social care assessments will look for strengths as much as needs, and help people help themselves.

“When we consulted older people and carers they told us they would like to be given time to discuss where they wanted to get to with professionals with the knowledge and skills to get them there,” Nosowska adds.

“We think social workers should always lead and advise in cases where people’s needs are complex. This is where their skills in relationship-building, advocacy and empowerment really come into their own.”