More snow eyed for Monday, along with bitter cold

A winter storm that blew into Longmont Thursday afternoon dropped more than 7 inches of snow and is being blamed for a power outage that affected 300 Longmont Power and Communications customers Thursday evening and a plow-on-plow accident early Friday morning.

Kevin Rademacher, construction coordinator for Longmont Power and Communications, said a driver slipped on icy roads and struck a guy wire near Ken Pratt Boulevard and Nelson Road at about 6:20 p.m. Thursday night. The car broke overhead conductors, knocking power out for a little more than an hour to about 300 customers in between Boston and Nelson Roads and Price Road west to Hover Road.

Longmont Police Cmdr. Jeff Satur said a city snow plow was involved in a crash with a privately-owned snow plow at Ken Pratt Boulevard and South Ken Pratt Parkway at about 3 a.m. Friday morning. The Longmont Fire Department had to cut into the private snow plow open to free the driver, who refused medical treatment at the scene. The driver of the city snow plow was not injured.

Jared Fiel, a spokesman for the Colorado Department of Transportation Region 4, said two snow plows were struck on Interstate 76 on Friday, one near Brush and the other in between Hudson and Wiggins. There were no reported injuries but Fiel urged motorists to use caution because snow plows drive much more slowly than other traffic.

Fiel said snow crews were out on Interstate 25 along with state highways 119, 287 and 66 and would be until midnight Friday when the situation would be reassessed.

The Longmont Public Works Department began clearing city streets on Thursday afternoon with 13-man crews working 12-hour shifts overnight into Friday. It's efforts are expected to continue into the weekend. The city plows main and collector streets but not most residential streets.

Bob Allen, Operations Division Manager for Public Works and Natural Resources, said snowfall remained light during the day Friday and city roads were in "pretty good shape," with conditions varying from wet and slushy to snow-packed. He added that icy conditions would be unavoidable after dark.

Allen said crews would focus on scraping melted snow and removing ice today. He added that crews would also conduct touch-up work and ice removal on sidewalks and begin clearing greenways.

"We will continue with a partial deployment on Sunday to address problem spots," Allen said. "Another storm is forecast for Monday, so we'll need to pace ourselves in the event that snow accumulation is significant."

Howard Horner, the operations manager for General Services Corporation Professional Snow Removal, said his company often hires people staying at the Boulder Homeless Shelter to work on snow removal. Three homeless men he worked with early Friday morning were all from the east coast and not bothered by the cold at all.

"They were like 'Where's the cold? Where's the snow?'" Horner said. "They were great guys. I enjoyed their company."

Horner said his company — which provides plowing, shoveling and de-icing services to businesses and private residences in Longmont, Boulder and west of Boulder, along with Broomfield, Lafayette and Louisville — had serviced 221 businesses and 86 residences as of about noon on Friday.

Cindy Koenck was scraping ice off her car near Gay Street and 4th Avenue Friday morning, getting ready to drive to a friend's house and basically, "just chilling, keeping the holiday spirit."

She said she wasn't concerned about driving on Longmont streets Friday as she didn't have to go, but added that she drove into town from Boulder last night and the streets "were horrendous." Koenck has lived in Colorado since 1971, having moved here from Iowa and said the winter is "much nicer here."

"Once it snows there, it stays all year," she said.

A break in snow is expected today, but the National Weather Service is predicting more beginning Sunday night coupled with low temperatures in the single digits. Monday night could see low temperatures of 4 degrees below zero and the high expected to reach 8 degrees on Tuesday with a slight chance of snow.

About 7.1 inches inches of snow had fallen on Longmont by 5:30 p.m. on Friday, according to Times-Call weather consultant Dave Larison. He said the city has seen 7.3 inches for December and 13.8 inches for the season, which is more than 4 inches below normal for the season.

Larison said Friday wouldn't break any records because 27 inches of snow hit the city on Dec. 24 in 1982, which is the all-time record. Sixteen inches of snow remained on the ground on Christmas of 2006 following a snow storm that hit the area Dec. 20 to 22.

Tim Underwood, a custodian at Central Elementary School, said at about noon Friday that he had been shoveling snow since 7 a.m. — with a little help from some snow plows — and planned on using de-icer as soon as the snow stopped falling.

He said he is from Alabama originally, but has lived in Colorado for about 15 years, so working outdoors on Friday wasn't bothering him at all.

"The sun's coming out," he said, looking up at the sky. "The snow is stopping so maybe that will keep people's spirits up."

John Bear: 303-684-5212, bearj@timescall.com or twitter.com/johnbearwithme