7 things for ASC leaders to know for Monday — March 7, 2016

Here are seven updates.

Westchester Medical Center plans $230M medical pavilion with ASC

Valhalla, N.Y.-based Westchester Medical Center plans to build a $230 million Ambulatory Care Pavilion. The 280,000-square-foot facility has 185,000 square feet allotted for ambulatory care space.

CMS finalizes changes to ACA marketplace

CMS released a final rule featuring standards for health insurers selling coverage through the Affordable Care Act exchanges in 2017. The standards address areas such as surprise bills, network transparency, risk-adjustment, standardized options, patient safety and annual open enrollment period.

Florida House approves free-market healthcare reform proposals

Florida House passed various free-market healthcare reform proposals, which aim to cut regulations to incite competition, lower costs and increase healthcare access. One proposal enables the creation of new recovery centers able to care for patients for up to 72 hours post-surgery. The bill extended the time patients can recover at an ASC for up to 24 hours.

Northeast Missouri Surgery Center elects Dr. Bhagirath Katbamna board president

Board-certified in internal medicine and a diplomate in gastroenterology, Bhagirath Katbamna, MD, will serve as Northeast Missouri Surgery Center's board president. He has served on the board since 2009.

Donald Trump releases 7-point healthcare reform plan

Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump released his healthcare reform plan, centering on repealing the Affordable Care Act and increasing healthcare access. Donald Trump said his reforms are "simply a place to start" and also aim to get rid of state barriers inhibiting payers from selling insurance across state lines.

TriStar Greenview Regional Hospital plans to build new ASC

TriStar Greenview Regional Hospital in Bowling Green, Ky., is building a 13,000-square-foot surgery center in Warren County, Ky. The center costs $9.1 million.

Fort Sutter Surgery Center hosts Medical Board of California members

In February, Sacramento-based Fort Sutter Surgery Center hosted the Medical Board of California, who saw ASC operations, peer viewing and adverse events reporting process.

More healthcare news:

2015 healthcare provider placements: 8 things to know

5 GI physicians in the news — March 4, 2016

6 essential physician leader skills

© Copyright ASC COMMUNICATIONS 2016. Interested in LINKING to or REPRINTING this content? View our policies by clicking here.