U.S. Rep. Kurt Schrader easily bested Clackamas County Commissioner Tootie Smith in Tuesday's election in Oregon's 5th Congressional District.

In partial returns, Schrader had received more than 56 percent of the vote.

Watching the national results, which showed Republicans retaining control of they U.S. House on Tuesday night, Schrader, a Democrat from Canby, said he's eager to see what materializes over the next several months.

"This might be a weird blessing in disguise," he said. "It's time for them to govern. They can no longer just blame the president for things not getting done."

Schrader said he was especially interested in moving forward with bipartisan proposals to support the Highway Trust Fund as well as reforming immigration and rewriting tax law to make it more fair.

"We'll see how much they can control the far right-wing members of their party, some of whom squeaked to victory tonight," Schrader said. "If they can't control them, things will go in the opposite direction in the next election."

Smith, a Republican and a former legislator, started the race with relatively high name recognition in the district but was unable to raise much money and never mounted a serious challenge to the three-term incumbent.

This is not the first time Schrader has dispatched a potentially tough challenger. The former veterinarian from Canby has managed to cement his hold on the politically divided district -- Oregon's newest -- in which Democrats have a registration edge of just 2 percentage points over Republicans.

Schrader generally aligns with his party on big votes, including Obamacare, but has defected on issues such as weakening the Endangered Species Act. He has taken pains to highlight his bipartisanship, joining such groups as No Labels, which aims to get lawmakers from both parties to collaborate on congressional priorities.

"I'm probably one of the most bipartisan and moderate Democrats in the House, and that's what my folks in the 5th want," Schrader, 63, said in a recent interview. Schrader was first elected to his seat in 2007 after 12 years in the Oregon Legislature.

He's a member of the House Agriculture Committee, a useful perch given that his district takes in much of the rich farmland of the Willamette Valley. The district, created in 1982, includes a small sliver of Portland, most of the population of Clackamas County, part of Benton County and all of Marion, Polk, Lincoln and Tillamook counties.

Smith, who built a conservative record during two terms as a legislator and who joined a conservative takeover of the Clackamas County Board of Commissioners in 2012, hoped to take advantage of anti-incumbent anger.

Her agenda included opposition to Obamacare, tighter controls at the border, and a desire to loosen federal controls on logging in Oregon.

"I see what the federal government is doing to our state, and I don't like it very much," she said in a recent interview. "I grew up in an Oregon where you could get a high school education and get a family-wage job, and now not even the college graduates can make it."

-- Jeff Mapes and Joseph Rose