Sen. Tammy Baldwin listens during during a joint hearing by the House Veterans Affairs Committee and the Senate's Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee last month in Tomah. Credit: Mark Hoffman

A number of Democrats are returning campaign money they have received from New Jersey Sen. Robert Menendez in the wake of his federal bribery indictment.

Not U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin.

A spokesman for the Wisconsin Democrat said Baldwin will wait to see the outcome of the Menendez case.

"Senator Baldwin believes the charges against Senator Menendez are serious but that everyone is innocent until proven guilty and he is entitled to his day in court," said John Kraus, communications director for Baldwin.

"If he is found guilty and convicted, the campaign will donate the same amount it received three years ago."

Menendez's leadership PAC, New Millennium, gave $5,000 to Baldwin's campaign in October 2012, when she was in a tight race with former Gov. Tommy Thompson.

New Millenium also gave $5,000 to then-Sen. Russ Feingold, a Wisconsin Democrat, during his failed 2010 re-election campaign. He is expected to take on U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, a Wisconsin Republican, next year in a rematch of the 2010 race.

Feingold could not be reached to see what he will do with the cash his campaign received from Menendez's leadership fund.

Earlier this month, federal prosecutors indicted the New Jersey Democrat for allegedly using his Senate office to push the business interests of a friend and donor in exchange for luxury vacations, golf outings and pricey flights.

Menendez is contesting the charges.

Other Democratic senators have decided to return donations from Menendez's political action committee or give the money to other causes.

For instance, Indiana Democratic Sen. Joe Donnelly is giving the $7,500 he received from Menendez's PAC in 2012 to 10 charities in Indiana. Sen. Claire McCaskill of Missouri is returning the $10,000 she received from the PAC in 2010.

Joe Fadness, executive director of the Wisconsin Republican Party, suggested that Baldwin and Feingold follow the lead of the other Democrats.

"They should have returned the money long ago, and their refusal to act raises troubling questions on their judgment," Fadness said.

Gender politics

Milwaukee County Supervisor Deanna Alexander earned a little national attention for dismissively referring to former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton as "Ovary."

Alexander also sparked a war of emails between three female County Board members.

"With disbelief and disappointment, I read the comments of one of my colleagues who has chosen to address former United States first lady, senator, secretary of state and presidential candidate Hillary Clinton as a female reproductive organ," said board Chairwoman Marina Dimitrijevic in an email to No Quarter.

Alexander, however, defended her decision to use the derisive nickname for Clinton, who announced recently that she is running for the Democratic nomination for president in 2016.

"When I refer to Ovary's campaign — I am not addressing Mrs. Clinton as first lady or senator or mother or dog owner — I am nicknaming her as a presidential candidate," Alexander countered. "I am not reducing her to a womanly body part; she did that herself by making her gender the campaign's only message."

Last week, Alexander posted a couple of tweets on her personal Twitter page using the "Ovary" nickname in response to Clinton's announcement of her presidential bid. Alexander likened the move to those who had once referred to Clinton's husband, former President Bill Clinton, as "Slick Willie."

Alexander is now using #OperationOvary to refer to Hillary Clinton's campaign.

A local resident sent an email last week to the entire County Board with a link to a blog item on the dust-up, saying it "reflects badly on our county."

Supervisor Patricia Jursik went on the attack in an email to Alexander, the citizen and other County Board members.

"I'm embarrassed just to read this. Please stop using talk radio lingo, it is hurting our local government and our country," Jursik wrote to Alexander.

"Deanna, like you, I have two daughters! I would not refer to the men on our board by their sex organs, nor do I want any of our women referred to in this way," Jursik continued. "This is why tweeting is such a bad idea for politicians. I'm sure if you could take it back now, you would."

Actually, Alexander has no intention of taking it back.

She said she is rearing her two daughters to believe "that neither their gender, nor their religion, nor the color of their skin, should ever be used as a sole reason and method for advancement of their selves." She said Clinton, the favorite for the Democratic nomination, should do the same.

"So, no, my ovaries and I don't for a single minute regret speaking up against Mrs. Clinton's fem-gender-centric campaign and the unrealized bias the American people seem to be letting run them into a very sexist election decision," Alexander countered via county email.

"But as someone who respects you as my elder, and is open-mindedly, non-fanatically, glad to listen to your opinions; I thank you for your concern."

Jursik then tried to get the last word.

"Please don't put words in my mouth," Jursik countered. "You embarrassed this board, an apology might be a more reasoned response."

Yeah, not going to happen.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice or on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.