Topics: Dream City, mass transit, streetcars, Urban design, urban planning, Washington, Innovation News, Sustainability News, News

Rest in peace, Arlington streetcars. We hardly knew ye.

The longtime plan to build rail transit on two of the major roads in this Washington, D.C., suburb officially died on Tuesday, thanks to a gradual but decisive shift in the political control of the county.

It was money, more than the fine points of planning, that derailed the streetcars. But it’s not only fiscal conservatives who have celebrated the decision to stop the projects. Many transit advocates, too, have expressed relief, arguing that the project’s shortcomings were sufficient to commend — from a pro-transit perspective — its cancellation.

In this respect, the scuttling of the Arlington streetcars highlights the deepening rift in the American transit movement. Though nominally a disagreement about the purpose of transit infrastructure (moving people vs. spurring development) and the value of a streetcar that shares a lane with cars (is it better than a bus?), it’s more broadly a contest between pragmatists who laud transit investment despite flaws and idealists who hold out for something better.

In the fight against car culture, where the victories are small and infrequent, should transit supporters entertain the idea of solidarity? Or, on the contrary, does a flawed project jeopardize future projects?

What was lost, this week, was a plan that had been taking shape since 2003, securing funding in the Virginia statehouse and the backing of local officials and businesses along the way. In neighboring Fairfax County, where a small segment of one line was to run, the political establishment was also in favor. But a series of elections to the Arlington County Board in which pro-streetcar candidates lost convinced the board that the project had lost popular support.

Arlington has historically been a transit-friendly place. Proactive planning and the growth of Washington, D.C., have helped the county, once a bedroom community for federal bureaucrats, morph into a city in all but name. Mixed-use corridors, two central business districts, the largest office building in the United States, and a handful of Metro stations have contributed to a sense of newfangled suburban hybridity.

But though its 25 square miles contain more residents (224,000) than Providence, Birmingham, Salt Lake City, Charleston or New Haven, Arlington is notably deficient in public spaces and great streets. Arlington, writes Ben Adler in the Washington Post, was “designed to serve the enormous spatial needs of cars, not the psychic needs of human beings.”

The Columbia Pike Streetcar, in a neighborhood with commercial vacancy over 20 percent, was intended in part to address that problem. Its supporters touted its ability to attract pedestrians, businesses and new development. The real estate company Vornado is planning to build one of the largest new developments in the D.C. area between the two streetcar corridors, and had offered to donate land for a streetcar maintenance facility.

For opponents of streetcars, that kind of talk sums up the problem: The streetcar is designed for real estate, or in architectural terms, “placemaking.” It is not necessarily a superior way to get people quickly from place to place. Its value as pure transit is questionable.

The fracture over Arlington is bigger than the great streetcar debate. It extends to projects like Austin Light Rail, a $1.4 billion proposal endorsed by the Austin City Council but rejected by voters in a referendum earlier this month. That project had earned the opposition of both anti-transit groups and pro-transit groups who thought its route was the wrong one.