It's time to file your taxes. Starting Tuesday, January 19, the IRS is accepting 2015 returns, and experts say you want to file quickly.

The longer you wait to file - the greater the likelihood scammers could get a hold of your information.

"Tax identity theft is an ongoing issue and it's happening more and more every year. If you file early, there's less of a chance of you're going to have your identity stolen," H&R Block Manager Carl Scott explained. "If you don't file early, then there's a chance somebody can get your number and your information and file a return."

Fraud specialists with the Lee County Sheriff's Office say on Tuesday alone, their fraud line received more than three dozen calls reporting tax scams.

If that's any indication scammers are out there, it's also an indication they're not wasting any time going after your return.

Get More: Treasury Dept. Warns of New Tax Scam

Your best defense is filing early, but what if you don't have all your forms yet?

"We don't get any of our statements until the end of March," Punta Gorda resident Ellen Felsheim said. "How could you do your taxes?"

You'll have more to keep track of this year, and you may have to wait for new 1095 forms. Everyone should receive a new 1095-A, B, or C form to document how - and if - you have health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

"Some people think it's an easy return, but when you add that in, it's a little more difficult," H&R Block manager Carl Scott said.

So how do you speed up the process and protect your return?

Scott says depending on your employer, you might be able to access your documents early online or with a tax prep service. If so, you can file early, without the worry.

Florida residents have another option available to them. Because the Sunshine State is one of the states with the highest per-capita percentage of tax-related identity theft, anyone can apply for an IP PIN number from the IRS, regardless of whether you've been a victim before.

Get More: Typo Troubles on New PIN Forms

The IP PIN is a six digit number that you must have to file your return. It's designed to give you an extra layer of security in case a scammer gets a hold of your personal information. Scott says H&R Block offers a similar program as well if you file taxes with them.

Get More: How To Report Scammers

You can report tax scams to the Lee County Sheriff's Office Fraud Alert Line at (239) 258-3292. You can also file a complaint with the Federal Trade Commission.

If someone has filed a tax return in your name, contact the IRS.