Democrat Jack Conway went up on the air Thursday night with a new 60-second television ad that criticizes Republican Matt Bevin for making statements about policy issues only to deny later that he ever made the previous statement.

Screen grab from Jack Conway's latest ad attacking Matt Bevin. (Photo: Screen grab)

In the ad, called "Liar," the Conway camp uses video clips to back up its case.

In one clip, Bevin said that the federal farm bill is "an insult to farmers," but in another clip, he said that to claim he ever said the farm bill was "n insult to farmers "is an absolute misrepresentation of what I said."

In another clip he says he would immediately "reverse" the Medicaid expansion that Gov. Steve Beshear pushed through as part of Obamacare, but then in another clip, he said, "I said I would address it. I didn't say I would end it."

In a third clip, Bevin said he would oppose public private partnerships to build roads but then in another says, "I'm not opposed to P3, I've never, ever, said that."

One clip shows him saying that the Headstart early education program "serves no purpose" after a child reaches the age of nine, while the next clip shows him saying, "The comment that I'm not a proponent of early childhood education is absolute bunk."

Finally, it ends with him denying he has ever had problems paying taxes and follows it up with a clip from a television news story about his being late on paying property taxes. Some of those delinquencies came after his mortgage was sold and his new loan company never received the tax bill.

The ad is similar to a web ad introduced by the Democratic Party several weeks ago, albeit more professionally produced than the internet ad.

The ad is playing on broadcast television around the state. The campaign has bought airtime for the ad through September 7. The campaign is spending at least $97,190 to air the ad in the Louisville, Lexington, Ashland and Paducah markets and that number could be higher because the the Federal Communications Commission website that tracks political ads was taken down on Wednesday for maintenance perhaps before some stations were able to upload copies of contracts.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1Uw2Iqk