Topics: Chemical weapon, MIT Technology Review, sarin, Science, technology, Technology News, Business News, Politics News

New research indicates that chemical fingerprints can make positive matches between batches of sarin.

Sarin sleuths: A United Nations expert, wearing a gas mask, holds a plastic bag containing samples from one of the sites of an alleged chemical weapons attack in Damascus.

U.S. researchers say the same methods used to confirm the presence of the deadly nerve agent sarin could eventually find matches between different samples of the chemical.

Just a few years ago, this wasn’t possible. But research advancing at two U.S. labs is finding that a key ingredient of sarin carries subtle hydrocarbon impurities that vary from sample to sample, forming a telltale and persistent fingerprint.

This means that if sarin was used again in a war or terror attack, investigators could determine, say, whether it was from the same batch as the chemical used in Syria or matched evidence found in the home of a suspect.

“Once you know it’s sarin—the next question is where did it come from?” says Carlos Fraga, a chemist at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Richland, Washington, who coauthored a 2011 paper on the method with colleagues at Battelle Memorial Institute in Columbus, Ohio. “The U.S. government wants to be ready when there might be a chemical attack.” If there is, it could now be possible to figure out who might be responsible.

The work isn’t of immediate relevance in attributing the August 21 attack in Syria. The United States says substantial evidence implicates the Syrian regime in the attack, in which the United States says 1,429 people were killed, including 426 children.

But in the future, the technology could be important, says Ralf Trapp, a chemist and technical consultant to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, in The Hague. “In the Cold War context, identifying batches wasn’t the issue; if one side used it, the other side knows where it came from,” he says. “In the context of terrorism, now it could be of interest.”