Hey. it’s always fun to write about good news on the Salem front. This just went out a few minutes ago, announcing that our flagship radio station in Washington DC will add Sean Hannity to its lineup:

CAMARILLO, CA–(Marketwired – December 17, 2013) – Salem Communications Corporation (NASDAQ:SALM), a leading U.S. radio broadcaster, Internet content provider, and magazine and book publisher targeting audiences interested in Christian and conservative opinion content, announced today that it is adding iconic talk radio super star show host Sean Hannity to its lineup at 1260 WWRC in Washington DC, effective January 1st, 2014. Hannity, who began his national broadcast the day before 9/11 on WMAL quickly, grew to become the fastest-growing syndicated talk rollout in history. Eventually Hannity reached the 500 station level, second only to Rush Limbaugh. Today, Hannity is the second most-listened-to radio talk show host in America with nearly 13 million weekly listeners and more than 500 affiliates. Hannity will air weekday afternoons live in the 3-6pm daypart.

“Sean Hannity is a perfect fit on 1260 WRC,” said Salem Operations VP and market manager David Ruleman. “He is poised, informed and intelligent like the rest of the Salem lineup. In a city where opinion often trumps knowledge and irrational talk reigns, Washington DC radio listeners have a choice,” said Ruleman: “Intelligent Talk. 1260 WRC.”

“We are thrilled to partner with Salem and 1260 WRC,” said Eric Stanger, VP of Operations for The Sean Hannity Show. “WRC is one of the premier news-talk destinations in Washington DC, and we couldn’t be happier to join their leading lineup of intelligent talkers.”

Hannity, who also hosts the nightly top rated TV program “Hannity” on the Fox News Channel, has frequently been one of the top talk radio hosts in the Washington DC market on WMAL. He is expected to bring a large portion of his audience over to 1260 WWRC, and will visit the market in the coming months to help promote the show. Details will be announced at a later date.