Protesters walked along West Broadway Sunday to object to a proposed methane plant. (Photo: Deborah Yetter)

A spirited group of protesters marched more than 20 blocks along West Broadway Sunday afternoon to show their opposition to a proposed plant in the area that would produce methane by composting spent grain used to produce whiskey at a nearby distillery.

"To put a methane gas plant in West Louisville without getting the approval of the residents of West Louisville is disrespectful," shouted Ray Barker, an activist and retired Louisville police officer who helped lead the event.

"They don't really care about us," he added, echoing the refrain of a Michael Jackson song that blasted from the rolling sound system on a pick-up that accompanied the march.

Organized by the group calling itself STOMP or Standing Together Opposing Methane Plant, the participants — most clad in day-glow green T-shirts — started the march at Cecil Avenue and West Broadway, traveling east toward 17th and Broadway, near the site of the proposed plant. As they walked, the protesters picked up more participants waiting at intersections along the route until the crowd numbered nearly 100 people.

The object of the protest is a plant in West Louisville's California neighborhood proposed by Nature's Methane, which is seeking zoning approval for a $40 million biodigester on eight acres at 15th and Maple streets that would harvest methane from spent grain from Heaven Hill distillery.

Already, community protests have caused developers to drop plans for a similar, food-composting plant at the West Louisville Food Port at 30th and Muhammad Ali Boulevard.

Louisville Mayor Greg Fischer supports the methane technology, which can divert greenhouse gases from landfills into renewable energy. Heaven Hill also supports the technology as one that would more efficiently and safely dispose of the spent grain which is now hauled away by truck or put into the local sewer system.

"We strongly believe this is a proposal that solves problems for the California neighborhood community rather than, as has been suggested, creates new ones," Heaven Hill said in a statement last week.

Still protesters yesterday said they remain worried about possible noxious smells and pollution in the area that includes residences, businesses and several schools.

"it's just unfair," said retiree and community activist Donnie Morris Sr. "They haven't had many community meetings to find out how the public feels about it."

Protesters ended the march Sunday with a rally, pizza and cold drinks where speakers urged participants to remain active in the effort to seek improvements for West Louisville.

"If anybody brings anything to West Louisville, we want to make sure it raises property values," said Jerry Stephenson, pastor of Midwest Church of Christ. "We no longer need anything that is going to bring the value of our property down."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1JevFE1