C-J file photo of Jeremy Mull, Clark County’s chief deputy prosecutor who is running in November for county prosecutor. (Photo: Harold J. Adams) Story Highlights Bob Bottorff faces Jeremy Mull in November prosecutor's race

Clark County voters will elect a new prosecutor for first time since 1986

After Clark County Democratic Party chairman Bob Bottorff officially resigned during a caucus meeting Saturday in Clarksville, precinct leaders chose a familiar face in local politics to serve as the new party head.

Former Jeffersonville Mayor Tom Galligan replaces Bottorff, who is running for county prosecutor in the November general election against Republican Jeremy Mull, the county's current chief deputy prosecutor.

The change in Democratic party leadership comes about a month before Indiana's May 6 primaries. Many other prominent county positions are up for grabs around the state this year, such as judges, sheriffs, commissioners, council members, clerks, auditors, treasurers, recorders, assessors and surveyors.

Bottorff, who led the party for more than a year, said afterward he believes Galligan will do a "fine job," continuing to advocate for all party candidates as campaign season heats up.

"This decision was not an easy one for me to make as, philosophically, I am a believer in the Clark County Democratic Party values," said Bottorff, a private-practice lawyer who also previously argued cases for Prosecutor Steve Stewart's office.

Bottorff feels he can better serve the party in other ways.

"Since I'm going to be working hard as a candidate, I would be selling short what I consider the proper way to lead as chairman," he said.

Out of 86 votes cast by precinct chairs and vice-chairs Saturday at Clarksville Town Hall, Galligan received 57 of them. Attorney Dustin White, who also was nominated, garnered the other 29 votes.

This year marks the first since 1986 that Clark County voters will elect a new prosecutor as Stewart isn't seeking re-election. Former Indiana Gov. Evan Bayh appointed Democrat Stewart to the position in 1989 and voters have chosen him in each election since.

Reporter Charlie White can be reached at (812) 949-4026 and on Twitter @c_write.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/PxBN3l