Devastation at Pullman Ave. in the Elberon section of Long Branch on Nov. 13, 2012. (Photo: Coastal Research Center at Richard Stockton College of New Jersey)

Some people don't like dunes because they block their beloved ocean view.

Some fear that allowing the government to build huge dunes and wider beaches will trample their private property rights.

But a scientific study of the Jersey Shore before and after superstorm Sandy showed that the highest and widest beaches and dunes — designed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers — helped prevent coastal damages.

Mantoloking — "the poster child for devastation" — had dunes, said Stewart C. Farrell, study coauthor and director of the Coastal Research Center at Richard Stockton College of New Jersey in Port Republic. But "they just didn't have much in the way of beach. Dunes in and by themselves are not sufficient because if the dune is the only thing, then it's just a pile of sand."

Blog: Sandy's severe impact on beaches, dunes in Ocean County

The study, "Hurricane Sandy: Beach-dune performance at New Jersey Beach Profile Network sites," was recently published in the journal Shore and Beach.

Sandy caused the greatest damage in communities with nonexistent dunes, low beaches and dunes or narrow beaches. Setbacks for new structures landward of secondary dunes, or adhering to elevation standards for homes, also averted damages.

However, some 300 oceanfront property owners are still resisting government requests to sign easements to allow Army Corps beach and dune projects to be built in Sandy-hammered areas of Long Beach Island, northern Ocean County and the Elberon section of Long Branch through Loch Arbour. Owners have said they're concerned that the government will gain permanent access through their properties or jeopardize property rights. Officials say that's not the case, but a federal lawsuit by Jenkinson's Pavilion is pending.

Story: N.J. still seeks dune deal with Bay Head owners

Easement holdouts as of Friday included 123 in Bay Head, 67 in Point Pleasant Beach, 42 in Brick, 38 in Mantoloking, 16 in Seaside Heights, 9 in Berkeley, 5 in Toms River, 4 in Deal and 2 in both Seaside Park and Elberon section of Long Branch, according to Larry Hajna, spokesman for the state Department of Environmental Protection. Bay Head homeowners are covering the costs of expanding a rock revetment, or seawall, for protection.

The state has threatened to wield its Disaster Control Act to get easements and compensate homeowners later if they don't volunteer to sign the documents.

Story: Jenkinson's sues to stop dune project

The Coastal Research Center, founded by Farrell, has monitored beaches and dunes since 1986 at 105 locations along the Atlantic Ocean and Raritan and Delaware bays. Its New Jersey Beach Profile Network is state-sponsored.

When Sandy came ashore near Brigantine on Oct. 29, 2012, wave run-up on the shoreline reached heights ranging from 14.5 feet above sea level in Atlantic City to 24.6 feet in Long Branch, according to the study coauthored by Daniel A. Barone and Kimberly K. McKenna.

In general, beaches in Ocean and Monmouth counties "fared far worse than those to the south," the study says.

Story: Sandy's punch rearranged the shape of the Shore

On Long Beach Island, federal shore protection projects were completed in Surf City in 2007, Harvey Cedars in 2009 and the Brant Beach section of Long Beach Township in 2012. The wider beaches allowed Sandy's waves to break farther from the higher dunes — 22 feet above sea level — and protected landward properties from the storm surge, according to the study.

Farrell said Sandy eroded about a third to half of those beaches and between one-third and one-half of the dunes. The corps has since restored them.

"There was basically zero wave damage to the homes and public infrastructure landward of the dune," he said. "That was dramatically different when you contrast it with" Holgate to the south.

Dunes there were lower and thinner and the beach was too narrow to buffer the storm surge, the study says. Sandy pushed 3- to 4-feet of sand well beyond the first two blocks from the ocean.

Farther north in Seaside Park, a concerted effort by citizens to build dunes after Hurricane Gloria in 1985 "worked and they survived," Farrell said. But Sandy "totally annihilated" the Ortley Beach section of Toms River.

In Elberon, Sandy destroyed two homes with foundations 28 feet above sea level and removed a third of their lots, the study says. The storm also decimated the Long Branch boardwalk.

In Sea Bright, a gap in the rock seawall allowed the ocean to severely damage the municipal offices, fire department and police headquarters.

"The biggest thing is the dunes have to be physically rebuilt because natural growth in dunes is a 20-year process," he said. "It takes a long time to build a 20-foot dune."

Todd B. Bates: 732-643-4237; tbates@app.com

Beach and dune performance

Here are some facts on how beaches and dunes in the New Jersey Beach Profile Network performed during superstorm Sandy:

- Overall, one third of the dunes failed. Three-quarters of dunes in Monmouth County failed, 54 percent of dunes in Ocean County failed, about 14 percent of dunes in Atlantic County failed and 11.5 percent of dunes in Cape May County failed.

- On average, dunes less than 17.4 feet above sea level failed and those at least 17.8 feet above survived. Dunes less than 127.2 feet wide failed while 248-foot-wide dunes survived.

Source: "Hurricane Sandy: Beach-dune performance at New Jersey Beach Profile Network sites"

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1BtClfY