Even though Tuesday is his last day on the job, Assistant Police Chief John Bennett has barely had time to think about what he’ll do next.

He still had to perform his regular duties while coordinating security for his last Gasparilla parade and filling in his successors before he can take off the uniform.

“I can’t even prepare to leave until I’m actually gone,” Bennett, 51, joked during an interview Thursday afternoon. “I can’t empty my car, I can’t clear out my office. I’m going to have to come in as a guest.”

Bennett is handing in his badge after exactly 30 years with the Tampa Police department.

They were a busy three decades. He worked his way up from a street cop — doing stints on homicide and as a field training officer — to supervisor of the SWAT team, the chief’s executive officer and major overseeing District II. In 2009, when Jane Castor became the police chief, she appointed Bennett as her second-in-command.

He is credited with changing the way the department handles security at large events like Gasparilla and Super Bowl games, and he was praised nationally for his efforts in keeping the peace during the Republican National Convention in 2012, during which there were only a handful of convention-related arrests.

“There’s probably not a job in the department that he hasn’t done and done superbly well,” Mayor Bob Buckhorn said. “He looks at policing in a non-traditional way. He has helped modernize the Tampa Police Department in a way nobody else could.”

Bennett never campaigned for a promotion or praise, he said. Just like he always told the people he worked with, he tried to keep his “eye on the ball” and do the best he could for crime victims and the community. Focusing on a rank, he said, would have been a distraction.

“I understand that in anything you do, you want to achieve more opportunity, and that’s reasonable,” Bennett said. “But I never really believed in the campaign. Just do your job well and if the department wants to give you more responsibility, they will. I never dreamed that I would be assistant chief. Never. I came in and I would have been excited to be here 30 years as an officer.”

Castor, who is also retiring later this year, called Bennett one of the kindest, smartest and most ethical people she has ever met.

“Those are some big shoes to fill,” she said. “But I believe the community can take comfort in the fact that a lot of his strategies and initiatives will continue.”

Police work is his passion, although Bennett said he didn’t know it at first.

He was playing baseball and pursuing a degree in architecture when he realized he needed a way to make some more money. Bennett worked three jobs, one of them as a park ranger in Pinellas County during summer breaks. Eventually, that became a full-time gig.

While attending night school at the University of South Florida, he met a Tampa Police Department recruiter.

“He was the epitome of a police officer,” Bennett said. “He had that stoic physique and everything. I said, ‘This is me. This is what I need to do.’”

In November 1985, when Bennett was 21, he enrolled in the police academy.

“I was in love with this place from day one,” he said. “It was me. They couldn’t even get me to go home at night when I started riding the street.”

Several years later, he tried out for the SWAT team. He later wound up commanding it. He was named executive officer to the chief and served in the homicide division. In 2005, he was named major overseeing District II, which spans north Tampa. Under his leadership, crime in that area declined by about 34 percent in 2009, according to the department.

After the events of 9/11, Castor, who was a captain at the time, asked Bennett to help the department find a new balance between daily police work and the new demands of homeland security, he said. He started the Special Incident Management Unit in 2002 and re-tooled how the department handles big special events.

Bennett said his strategy was to figure out a way — using technology and smarter officer deployments — to make security efforts and crime fighting more efficient. In 2009, when Tampa hosted the Super Bowl, the police department spent 88 percent less than the two cities that hosted the event before, he said.

He turned that same strategy to Tampa’s crime around that same time, he said. Under his leadership, officers identified 133 “crime hotspots” on a grid of the city.

“We’re down to seven now,” Bennett said.

The Sulphur Springs neighborhood, once a haven of crime, was taken off the grid shortly after the department opened the RICH House, which provides a safe place for the neighborhood kids to go after school, get a snack and work on their homework.

Bennett encouraged the department to open another RICH House in Robles Park — another particularly troubled area — a little more than a year ago. It has been a great success, he said, and Robles Park was recently taken off the hot list.

“That’s kind of my going-away present,” Bennett said.

His methods were also praised after the RNC two years ago, when he was seen kneeling in the streets negotiating with protesters who were blocking the roads. The department took some criticism for the number of police officers that were seen during the convention, but Bennett said he is proud of his plan, which kept everyone — protesters, delegates and police officers — hydrated, safe and calm.

He was prepared for the worst if a protest or rally got out of control, but he figured it would be worthwhile to try to address potential problems beforehand, he said.

“I think all the front-end work everybody did allowed the back end to go as well as it did,” Bennett said.

Thirty years after he first put on a uniform, Bennett still loves the job, he said. He has no immediate plans for what he’ll do in his retirement, although he hopes to continue working in the criminal justice field.

“I plan on being a part of the department for as long as I can because it’s done well for me and my family,” Bennett said. “This is my love.”

Bennett will collect about $8,200 a month on his pension, city records show.

He’ll spend a little bit more time with his four children and his wife of almost 20 years. He doesn’t think his morning schedule — up around 4 to be at the gym by 5, drop the kids off at school and then church by 7:30 — will change all that much. He’ll continue to coach his kids’ football and baseball teams.

But not showing up at work every day will be a strange sensation.

“That’s just weird,” Bennett said. “There’s no other way to explain it.”

Bennett is one of several high-level police officials retiring this year, “passing the torch” onto the next generation of police officers, the mayor said.

It’s almost poetic that a new batch of officers will be sworn in on the same day he is retiring, Bennett said.

“Maybe somebody will get my badge number,” he said.

Ebehrman@Tampatrib.com

(813)259-7691

Twitter: @LizBehrmanTBO