Jackson McCarthy, 9, left, and Celeste Garcia, 11, compete with others Saturday in a corn-eating contest during the Old Fashion Corn Roast Festival in downtown Loveland. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Corn-eating contest winners 4-7 years: Mark Andreski, first; Marie Bridgeman, second 8-11 years: Jennifer Andreski, first; Sydney Hall, Jordan Null and Jaz'A Rodriguez, tied for second 12-15 years: Cameron Carter, first; Maddi Rozeski, second 16-25 years: Samantha Buening, first; Stetson Hendrick, second 26-49 years: Scott Duran, first; Jamie Weero, second 50-plus years: Rudy Duran, first; Mary Otte, second

Scott Duran of Loveland knows how to eat corn and fast.

An eight-time champion of the corn-eating contest at the Old Fashioned Corn Roast Festival, the 43-year-old has his corn consumption methods down to a science.

His is the typewriter method, where he eats back-and-forth across the cob.

"I could go around the corn three times as opposed to going around in circles like everybody else does," Duran said.

Duran ate off the kernels of eight ears of corn Saturday in three minutes, a record for this year's contest. Corn eaters competed in six age groups at a long, white tablecloth-covered table in the middle of the blocked-off intersection of Fourth Street and Railroad Avenue.

"I could go around the corn three times as opposed to going around in circles like everybody else does," Duran said.

Advertisement

The Loveland Chamber of Commerce, host of the contest, divided corn eaters into the following age groups: 4-7, 8-11, 12-15, 16-25, 26-49 and 50-plus. A dozen people ate corn at one time and, before each round, were given the directions that they had to eat all the kernels, as in entirely clean off the cob.

"When it comes to eating your corn, you have to eat all your corn or it won't count," said Bill Bond, chamber ambassador and a member of the corn-eating contest committee. "It has to be in your stomach and not in your mouth."

The corny contestants ate their corn off of paper plates, receiving three for the first round and getting additional ears as they ate their way toward the 10-second countdown.

"You just have to chew and swallow really, really fast," said 7-year-old Marie Bridgeman, who won second place in the 4-7-year-old age group.

Corn eaters used two main methods, twisting the cob and eating in a spiral fashion or going at it typewriter style.

Fifteen-year-old Cameron Carter, who won first place in his age category, tried both.

"At first, I tried going down the middle. That didn't work, so I just spun it," the Loveland boy said. "It's fun and you get free food."

Jennifer Andrewski, 10, took first in her age group for her method.

"I do it around, not typewriter. It's just easier," the Loveland girl said. "This is my third year of winning, so I had a lot of practice."

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com