Transcript for Shire Snags NPS Pharmaceuticals for $5.2 Billion

Okay. It is Monday January 12 the market to new Yorker open and are big number this morning five point two billion dollars. Familiar refrain. And NA Monday. All of this time. It is Ireland's Shire Pharmaceuticals snagging New Jersey based and PS pharmaceuticals for five point two billion. This latest move in the pharma and NA buying games that hasn't stopped from last year everyone I'm Dan Cutler in New York you can details on this latest move. Mike sent to look at Yahoo! finance on Monday morning some like this a pretty hefty deal right in char is issues we Shire is paying a premium for and he has. Why does make sense for them. While yet it's bigger I mean only 10% premium verses what the stock and gives trading at last week but MPS has been up in anticipation of a possible deal up about 50% a few months so yes they are making a big bet more than five billion dollars. On a handful of treatments than PS house. For relatively rare disease is rare diseases are very attractive to pharmaceutical companies because often you have pricing power you can charge a lot. For the drugs that treat them that's the kind of strategic rationale bigger picture what's going on with a lot of these pharmaceutical companies and even brought more broadly and health care. Is they have very very strong cash flows their stocks are under are very high level they have. Easy access to cheap debt so basically they are confident they want to try to grow through buying other companies. And in fact it's usually in these areas that have. Some kind of innovation innovative new treatment that has growth potential down the road because if you're a big mature drug company that doesn't have anything new in the pipeline. You have to go out and find some some other company that is hit gold. In the lab we'll talk about charters for rent or because it had an interest in another company advised well that was a deal that stalled though what happened. You're right so they were planning to merge with advisor to US based company used to be part of another bigger US pharmaceutical based company essentially. The US government essentially quashed that deal. They didn't want these so called tax and versions two go ahead this is when he US based company emerges within nine US company and essentially. B calms a foreign company for tax purposes and it shields all their profits. From US corporate taxes and so when the US treasury came out with new guidelines on these rules essentially both partners in that merger deal. Basically decided she'd get rid of the deal and go go their separate ways. Now Scheyer though still had a big appetite to try to do something here and of course it's a big advantage in a way if you're in Ireland based company that has the ability to buy another company and you can sort of go out and pick and choose other other companies did you have that low tax rate you have the high profitability. So rude and mean what is that and the big driver of improvised as so many and NA is in big pharma this year and last year really kind of sort of the binge fest why now why as a continuing. It did it you know all the ingredients for NM many boomers there in general and also and in pharmaceuticals. There were very generally very mature companies. We're very strong cash flows but you had things like you know obamacare threat of obamacare coming in I think cost a little bit of uncertainty for a period of time about exactly had to be compensated. Through you know Medicare and other insurance plans and once the rules were set. I think a lot of these companies that okay now we're about the future about trying to grow and try to find those areas within pharmaceuticals will we can get paid a well we actually. Can have some pricing power because there really is. Obviously a lot of efforts on insurance companies. Parts to try and limit the inflation of drug costs and all medical cost so that's one of the main things driving it to get high stock prices high cash flows. And cheap access to debt. All those things usually mean a pretty strong merger market. And not just in big pharma as well be his deal logic its research firm. It says that the NA buying last year the highest. On record. In fact may second to continue on to 2015 and we generally speaking than as a so bullish sign. Most of the drivers of that boom and emanate are in place stale and it really does depend on whether the global markets remain relatively common specially the US market which has been. The outperformer for a while now. If the markets remain calm and all those things are mentioned are still in place and there's one other one. Which is the big companies have very very high profit margins and have for years it's very hard to see how they can raise those profit margins on their own they probably going to be in the mode of looking to again by that growth. So I do think that trend generally remains a place now as to whether it's a good sign or not it's good until it's bad it's good until people get so aggressive. In paying too much for companies and essentially start doing. Deals that have a very suspect rationale strategically. That I think you have a problem and every. Big bull market does usually end when MNA starts to get a little bit silly. I've been until now that Revere ride that very high much that's up from Yahoo! finance Mike thanks so much have a good Monday to thank you. You can keep up the latest headlines right here on abcnews.com. You've been watching the big number I'm Dan that's our New York.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.