Wes Welker owns race horses. He stars in commercials, pitching cars and diamonds. He capitalizes on his breathtaking career.

At his locker on Sunday, away from the cameras, he provided a glimpse of his essence, of why he’s still playing at age 33 after a battery of concussions and multiple Super Bowl heartbreaks.

His arms featured abrasions. His back looked like it survived a pterodactyl attack. Yet as he pulled on his trucker-style, mesh-back cap and Old Spice T-shirt, Welker seemed again the teenage kid with eager eyes and enormous dreams. In a season delayed by a head injury, interrupted by a two-game suspension for using Adderall, Welker struggled to gain traction. A month ago, he referred to himself as a weak link.

In a sleeves-rolled up, work-boots required 24-17 victory over Buffalo on Sunday, Welker resurfaced as the top receiver and punt returner. He accumulated a season-high 82 receiving yards, emerging as Peyton Manning’s favorite target on the rare occasion that the Broncos strayed from the ground game.

“I felt like my old self,” Welker said. “I wasn’t frustrated. I just kept focusing on what I had to do, and to be ready when my opportunity came. Sometimes it happens that way when you get more chances.”

He became the surprise return man on punts after the Broncos waived Isaiah Burse on Saturday to make room for kickoff specialist Brandon McManus. Welker received one punt, gaining 7 yards.

“That’s what they needed, so you always have to be ready,” Welker said.

The slot receiver has spent a career compiling big numbers. What made Sunday pop was the importance of his catches. He set up the Broncos’ first three touchdowns with grabs.

On Denver’s second possession, he raced down the middle of the field, diving for a 38-yard catch that brought the crowd to its feet.

“I thought that really jump started us,” Manning said.

A 7-yarder followed near the north goal line. Perhaps his best catch — and veteran move — came on a leaping snare when he nudged the defender before falling out of bounds at the 3-yard line. It provided the platform for C.J. Anderson’s plunge into the end zone.

“I am really pleased with Wes,” Manning said. “He’s played hard all year. I know all those guys want their numbers to be called every single play. But it doesn’t always happen that way. This was not a good game for receivers to have a lot of big numbers. Wes played well.”

Even before the first snap on the sun-bleached afternoon, Welker figured to fill a significant role. Tight end Julius Thomas avoided the inactive list with his injured left ankle, but accomplished nothing else. He spent the day watching from the sideline.

Demaryius Thomas played through a bruised right ankle, suffered when he was cleated during a team drill last week. He caught two passes, his lowest total since Oct. 15, 2012 at San Diego. His 11 receiving yards were the fourth fewest of his career in games when he has recorded a reception.

“My ankle is good. It was just how it turned out,” Thomas said. “We ran the ball a lot.”

So much so history became a casualty. The Bills snapped Manning’s streak of 51 consecutive games with a touchdown pass. In the old aerial attack, circa 2013, such a statistic would have doomed the Broncos. Sunday it showed the ongoing commitment to Anderson (21 carries, 58 yards) and Juwan Thompson (four attempts, 63 yards).

“Every game is different,” Anderson said. “Today we were on the ground, next week it could be the air.”

The coverages dictated the play calling.

“Obviously we have a balanced attack. We have a wide receiving corps where everybody can make plays,” said Emmanuel Sanders, who absorbed a crushing hit from Bills cornerback Stephon Gilmore that drew a penalty. “You want everybody happy. And I think right now everybody is happy.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck