Urging a GOP presidential campaign based on substance rather than personality, House Speaker Paul Ryan says Congress must confront Donald Trump’s polarizing populism if it wants to win the White House.

WASHINGTON — Concerned about the harshly negative presidential campaign dominated by Donald Trump, the nation’s highest-ranking Republican says Congress must confront Trump’s polarizing populism by promoting an “inclusive,” policy-focused agenda to counter any personality-driven run sure to cost his party the White House.

That Republican, House Speaker Paul Ryan of Wisconsin, said he felt professionally obligated to support whoever wins the party’s presidential nomination next year. Yet he said he believed that congressional Republicans must set a policy agenda that offers a clear contrast to the angry insurgent refrain blasting into the winter primaries.

“If we try to play our own version of identity politics and try to fuel ourselves based on darker emotions, that’s not productive,” Ryan said in a wide-ranging interview Friday. “I don’t think it will be successful, and I don’t think it is the right thing to do. I believe in an agenda that’s inspirational, that’s inclusive, that’s optimistic.”

Ryan, the Republican nominee for vice president in 2012, added his powerful voice to a growing line of leaders of his party’s establishment sounding an alarm about the tenor of the race just weeks before the first votes are cast in the nominating contests.

“This isn’t about Trump,” Ryan said. “This is about do we run on substance or do we run on personality? If we run on personality, we lose those elections.”

Ryan, drafted by his party for his job and popular across a wide spectrum of his fractured party, clearly intends to have a voice in the nominating process, which he said could drag into the summer.

“I will use this bully pulpit as effectively as I can,” Ryan said. “For now, it’s the bully pulpit we have.”

Ryan said the divisions between an exclusionary strain of hard-right conservatism and one focused on broad-based economic growth are neither new nor insurmountable, recalling his work as a young aide to his mentor, Rep. Jack Kemp of New York.

“I remember working for Jack fighting the Buchanan wing of the party on similar issues,” Ryan said. He was referring to Kemp’s efforts to combat Patrick Buchanan’s campaign for president in 1992, which was rooted in a fight over America’s “culture wars” and anti-immigration sensibilities.

“These are not new discussions,” Ryan said. “These are not new frictions.”

The move to insert himself — and his Republican colleagues — into the presidential campaign is an abrupt detour from the road taken by his immediate predecessor, John Boehner, who stayed largely out of the 2012 campaign and had limited contact with the Republican nominee, Mitt Romney.

It also sets him apart from Sen. Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, who tends to focus on internal congressional business.

Ryan, who as speaker will also serve as chairman of the Republican National Convention in Cleveland next July, said he would strongly support any Republican nominee. Still, he said, “I am going to speak my mind.”

He wants to begin now, he said, because “what I realized was that in 2012, by the time we got to that conversation it was already too late.”

“The narratives of these campaigns start earlier, and the trajectory of these campaigns get fixed into place,” he added.

Ryan, 45, has built credibility since he became speaker in October with bipartisan legislation on education, highway funding and a budget agreement.

But he acknowledged that a presidential campaign year was unlikely to yield major legislation, and said he would, instead, use it to frame the choice between the parties.

“We’re not going to solve these big problems with this president in the next year,” he said. “I don’t see the parties close together on these issues. I see the need to offer a bold alternative” to eight years of the Obama administration’s agenda.

“To me it isn’t ‘Let’s split the difference on these issues,’ because our differences are so far apart,” Ryan said. “It’s ‘Let’s give an alternative agenda and bring it to the country and let the country decide.’ ”

Trump condemns chief justice’s votes

AIKEN, S.C. — Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts is “disgraceful” and a “disappointment” to conservatives, Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump said Saturday, while praising Associate Justice Clarence Thomas as his favorite member of the high court.

“Justice Roberts really let us down. What he did with Obamacare was disgraceful, and I think he did that because he wanted to be popular inside the Beltway,” Trump told about 4,000 supporters.

The celebrity billionaire was referring to the chief justice twice voting to uphold key provisions of President Obama’s 2010 health-care law and to the expressway around the District of Columbia, an area regarded as the center of U.S. government and politics.

Thomas, arguably one of the court’s most conservative members, is “very strong and consistent,” Trump said.

The GOP front-runner offered his assessment during an hourlong question-and-answer session with state Attorney General Alan Wilson.

The South Carolina Republican is hosting a series of forums in this early voting state to query GOP hopefuls about their theories on constitutional law and the role of the federal government.

Trump pledged to gut executive actions taken by Obama, but the only policy area he mentioned was immigration. “He signed an executive order where people can just pour in,” Trump said, a reference to executive orders intended to forestall deportation for certain immigrants already in the country illegally.

Prompted by Wilson, Trump also blasted government regulations. He focused his ire on water regulations that he says flood the market with bad faucets, toilets and shower heads.

“There’s no water pressure,” he complained. “The problem is you stand under the shower five times as long wasting more water than if you used the other one. So people are flushing seven, eight, 10 times. The end result is that it’s no good and you end up wasting more water.

“I could name hundreds like that,” Trump concluded about the regulations.