Have you heard?

Jeb Bush is about to take a high dive into a small box. At the Republican debate, the tall man managed to keep his head above water but it was a lukewarm show at best. Now Bush is booked as a guest for the opening night of Stephen Colbert's tenure on "The Late Show," on September 8th.

Is it an act of political suicide? You tell me.

Sorry, but the staid, beige Bush doesn't have the chops to keep up with Colbert's electric repartee in a national glare – unless the host is kinder and gentler on his new show, as he takes over from David Letterman. In style and in substance, Jeb Bush drones on charter schools and taking human rights away from women. He does not know his last name is running against him, so we hear way too much about "my brother."

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

That brings us to the gaping hole we're all pretending not to see in the former Florida governor: his utterly drab personality. Carl Hiaasen, the Miami-based columnist, has suggested adding another exclamation point to his Jeb! bumper stickers. Also, Hiaasen added: play cooler music at your rallies and work on your wardrobe: "Lose the baby-blue Brooks Brothers shirt, OK?"

I'm for that, since the fundamental fact is that the Brooks Brothers shirt is a symbol for much else about Jeb Bush and his inheritance of privilege. His brother, President George W. Bush, wore it more lightly, covering up Kennebunkport and Yale with his Texas hat, boots and swagger. Compared to his lackluster brother, the 43rd president is a barrel of fun.

Call me shallow, but one "Huge" reason why the Donald-come-lately Trump is beating Bush as the front-runner is simple: He's an amusing showman. The circus-meister P.T. Barnum – who is popularly thought to have said "There's a sucker born every minute" – might be his spiritual uncle.

[READ: Jeb Bush Can't Play It Safe]

Grumpy Trump is cutting through a lot of the guff – give him that. He is forcing other Republicans to come clear and clean on where they stand on immigration and it's not pretty. Wealthy as he is, he is exposing the codependence some candidates like Gov. Scott Walker have on their shadowy, rich benefactors like Koch Brothers. Trump is nothing but out in the open.

A confession: I kind of enjoyed Trump on his reality show, "The Apprentice." I thought he had a peasant cunning that made him a good judge of character in the bitter end. He seemed so transparent in his lust for power in this day and age of irony. As long as his power was inside the box, it was fun to watch. Now he's out of the box and lots of people still like to watch. Who knows where this hit show goes?

One thing seems sure: Jeb is not running for all of us. He's running for a few of them – starting with "Poppy." That is, of course, George H.W. Bush the old father he adores and the 41st president. Jeb is his father's son, they say, while his brother George is his mother's sharper personality.

Trump jumped out of the box. The question is, can Jeb Bush jump in? Can he stand up to late-night Colbert comedy scrutiny and shine? His political life might depend on it.



Corrected on Aug. 26, 2015: An earlier version of this blog post incorrectly listed George H.W. Bush as the 42nd president; he was the 41st president.