News 12 at 6 o'clock / January 13, 2015

AIKEN COUNTY, S.C. (WRDW) -- Having health insurance is not an option for Delane Terrell. "I did not want the federal penalty they were going to give me, and I wanted my tax break," said Terrell. He works for a company that does not provide health insurance coverage.

Last May he started shopping for coverage on Healthcare.gov, signing up with Consumers' Choice Health Plan. "A guy came out to my job," said Terrell.

Terrell said he was enrolled in a plan that cost about $45 a month. He even signed up for automatic monthly withdrawals from his checking account. Everything was going smoothly, until early December when he received a phone call.

"You have to send us some more information. We need your birth certificate and photo ID of your drivers license," said Terrell. He said the call came from Healthcare.gov and that it needed to verify his citizenship.

He was worried his personal information may fall in the wrong hands, so Terrell did nothing. But in late December her received a letter from Consumers' Choice. The company informed him he had lost his tax credit and now owes more than $1,200 this month, or his policy would be canceled.

"I really don't have any answers for it, and I'm trying to get some answers. That's why I called you Jerome, and 12 On Your Side. We contacted Consumers Choice. It said, "this is not an oversight on our part. It is standard for Healthcare.gov to verify information such as citizenship and identity." According to Consumers' Choice, Terrell should have received a letter from Healthcare.gov, in addition to a phone call.

He said nothing came in the mail, except the letter from Consumers' Choice. "It just blew me out of the water. After all these months of paying into this insurance, and then I get this notice," said Terrell.

News 12 has been told, if Terrell provides the requested documents to Healthcare.gov, it could make his subsidy retroactive so he will not be stuck footing that $1,200 bill.