Baci Grill shows us how to make Cider Glazed Chicken with Braised Cabbage and Roasted Butternut Squash (WFSB)

Baci Grill is preparing for their annual wine fest coming up this week and they shared a fall inspired recipe for cider glazed chicken with braised cabbage and roasted butternut squash.

Here is the recipe for the cider glazed chicken with braised cabbage and roasted butternut squash:

Braised Cabbage (Makes 5 Cups)

Ingredients:

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil

6 slices bacon, cut into 1-inch strips

1 small onion, sliced

2 bay leaves

Salt and freshly ground black pepper

1 large head cabbage, cored and thinly sliced or shredded

1 bottle beer

Directions:

In a large pot, add the oil and cook the bacon until browned and crispy. Add the onion and the bay leaves and season with salt and pepper. Add the cabbage, stirring to mix. Add the beer, season and cover. Braise until the cabbage has wilted, stirring occasionally, about 30 minutes.

Roasted Butternut Squash (Serves 4)

Ingredients

1 large butternut squash (about 3 pounds), peeled and seeded and cut in 1-inch chunks

3 tablespoons good olive oil

2 teaspoons kosher salt

1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper

Directions:

Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F.

Place the squash on a sheet pan and drizzle with the olive oil, salt, and pepper and toss well. Arrange the squash in one layer and roast for 25 to 30 minutes, until the squash is tender, turning once with a metal spatula.

Cider Glazed Chicken (Serves 4)

Ingredients

8 bone-in, skin-on chicken thighs, trimmed

1 Tbs. extra-virgin olive oil

Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper

3/4 cup apple cider

1 Tbs. honey

1-1/2 Tbs. cold unsalted butter, cut into 1/4-inch pieces

Directions:

Season chicken thighs with kosher salt and freshly grounded black pepper. Coat the bottom of a large skillet with extra virgin olive oil Heat over medium high heat. Brown chicken thighs skin side down first browning both sides. (Chicken does not need to cook all the way through since it will be finished in the oven.)

Put a rack on the baking sheet and arrange the chicken thighs skin side up on the rack. Roast at 350 degrees until an instant-read thermometer inserted in the thickest part of thigh (without touching the bone) registers 165 degrees, about 20 minutes depending on size of thighs.

Meanwhile, in a small saucepan, bring the cider and honey to a boil over high heat. Reduce the heat to medium and simmer vigorously until the mixture has reduced to 1/2 cup, 8 to 10 minutes. Remove from the heat and whisk in the butter.

Turn the broiler to high, brush the chicken thighs with the cider glaze, and broil for 1 minute. Brush with more glaze and broil again until deep golden-brown, 2 to 3 minutes. Remove the chicken from the oven, brush with more of the glaze, and serve.

*This Recipe can easily be made with chicken breasts. Preferably bone-in and shin on. Chicken breasts may need more time in oven again depending on size. Brown and bake at same temperatures as the thighs and internal temperature should also read 165 degrees.

Baci Grill Fall Wine Fest is Friday, Nov. 6 from 7 to 9:30 p.m. For more information, click here.

Copyright 2015 WFSB (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved.