wallacea@dailycamera.com

A selection of women's undergarments sits on a shelf at Pact Apparel in Boulder on Tuesday. ( Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera )

In the five years since its founding, Boulder-based Pact has landed its clothing items in 800 stores nationwide, consistently logged double- and triple-digit sales growth and also scored a deal to sell to Canada's largest cooperative-owned outdoor retailer.

Pact officials attribute that growth to a combination of factors including a mission-based approach, transparent practices, the involvement of Boulder's Revelry Brands and a "disruptive distribution" strategy that includes a unique go-to-market effort: selling the company's line of certified fair-trade and organic socks and underwear in natural grocery stores such as Whole Foods.

The Austin, Texas-based Whole Foods has put a greater focus on lifestyle items such as clothing, said Seth Lantz, Whole Body associate coordinator for Whole Foods' Rocky Mountain region.

"It's all about trying to speak to what our customers are asking for," he said. "It's almost like a one-stop shopping opportunity."

Pact, which brands its business as PACT, sells to about 300 Whole Foods in the United States in addition to other natural grocery chains such as Sprouts Farmers Markets and boutiques such as Hailee Grace in downtown Denver. Pact has ramped up its distribution and sales efforts since being acquired by Boulder-based Revelry Brands in 2011.

Advertisement

"I actually love this channel because when you walk into Whole Foods or other healthy grocery stores, you've got the exact consumer we want to sell our product to," said Jeff Denby, co-founder and chief creative officer of Pact. "(The customers) care about organic, (they) care about health, that's why they're attracted to Whole Foods. ... They want everything they purchase to be reflective of these values."

So it made sense for Pact to have its products on shelves and sold via temporary "pop-up stores" within its retailers, Denby said, noting that altruistic values are deeply ingrained in his firm.

"We are going to change the apparel industry for good and make clothes that actually improve the lives of workers and farmers," he said.

Denby said he and Pact officials work directly with farmer cooperatives and have established a supply chain certified according to the Global Organic Textile Standards.

Denby's "seed-to-shelf" approach in establishing a transparent, environmentally and socially sustainable production cycle was a key factor in grabbing the attention of Brendan Synnott, entrepreneur and founder of Revelry Brands. Revelry Brands has invested in firms such as Evol Foods and Siggi's, which have since been acquired by Boulder Brands and Emmi, respectively.

"We're going to fix the industry by shining a light on how things are made," Synnott said.

Pact hopes to take a big step in that direction via a newly formed coalition with companies such as prAna and Loomstate to agree to purchase large quantities of organic cotton at harvest, Denby said.

"Last year (the farmers) sold off 50 percent of organic cotton as conventional cotton because they couldn't find buyers fast enough," he said. "It's a total, heartbreaking shame to not have organic farmers reap the benefits."

In addition to continuing discussions about the ingredient-purchasing coalition, Pact's focus for the coming months will include a launch into Mountain Equipment Co-op stores in Canada, the expansion of the product line to include dresses and the addition of more clothing in existing retailers.

Alicia Wallace: 303-473-1332, wallacea@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/dc_alicia