Honorees Dudley Dudley, left, and Katrina Sweet, talk as former Rep. Dick Swett looks on during the New Hampshire Democratic Party's annual McIntyre-Shaheen Dinner at the Radisson in Manchester Sunday. (Mark Bolton/Union Leader)





MANCHESTER — New Hampshire Democrats welcomed Democratic House leader Nancy Pelosi Sunday night, using the annual McIntyre-Shaheen 100 Club dinner to honor Granite State women who have run for Congress...Pelosi, a California Democrat who was House Speaker for four years, was the scheduled keynote speaker at the event.Sen. Jeanne Shaheen touted a higher minimum wage, equal pay for women, marriage equality and reproductive rights...She praised Pelosi as tough and relentless.“Make no mistake about it; we would never have passed the Affordable Care Act without her leadership,” Shaheen said.The dinner was held at the Radisson Hotel in downtown Manchester...It was the first big gathering of Democrats since the 2014 election.Pelosi was the first woman House Speaker. She took over as speaker in the final two years of the Bush administration.“Thank you for stepping forward to serve, and thank you for inspiring generations of women leaders,” Gov. Maggie Hassan said in opening remarks...Eight women who ran for the U.S. House from New Hampshire — Helen Bliss, Dudley Dudley, Arnie Arnesen, Mary Rauh, Martha Fuller Clark, Katrina Swett, Carol Shea-Porter and U.S. Rep. Annie Kuster — were scheduled to be honored...“We stand on your shoulders and we are so thankful you have gone before us,” Shaheen said.The $100-a-plate event drew an estimated 600 people. Party leaders were confident they would top the $200,000 that the Republicans raised last month in their First in The Nation event...Hassan asked Democrats to contact Republican state senators and support a responsible budget.“Senate Republicans cannot follow their House counterparts and simply cater to the most extreme members of their party,” she said...“I almost feel sorry for Scott Brown,” said Shaheen, calling the former Senate candidate a historic footnote — the only man to be defeated in two different states by two different women.Pelosi appeared just days after Vermont congressman Bernie Sanders announced he will seek the Democratic nomination for President, giving a challenge to Hillary Clinton...mhayward@unionleader.com..