Topics: amc, better call saul, Breaking Bad, jonathan banks, Mike Ehrmentraut, TV, Entertainment News

Jonathan Banks was nominated for an Emmy for his role as Saul’s no-nonsense fixer Mike Ehrmantraut on “Breaking Bad.” And after the sixth episode (“Five-O”) of “Better Call Saul,” when Mike’s tragic past was revealed to viewers in flashbacks — in a stunning, tour-de-force monologue where Mike tearily declares “I broke my boy” — we have little doubt that Banks has secured his place on the ballot once again.

Mike was always a fan favorite on “Breaking Bad,” but now we’re truly seeing him come into his own on “Saul,” as we learn more about what makes him tick, his relationship with Jimmy McGill, what kind of piece he packs (pimento sandwich, obviously). We caught up with the veteran actor on the phone from California to chat about the season and his character’s arc going forward.

How much of Mike’s back story were you aware of when you went into the project?

I didn’t have any of it going in, when I said I’d come back and do it. In season 3, maybe, when I give my granddaughter the Mylar balloons and send her off to her mother and then I go and shoot people… Vince was directing that show and I turned to him and said, that’s my granddaughter; that’s not my daughter. I said that my opinion is, whatever happened to Mike has something to do with his son. Fast-forward a few years, when Peter called me and asked if I would be interested, he asked, do you remember when you said something about your son? And then on episode 6, Gordon [Smith] wrote me a love letter of a script and that’s when we did the back story.

When you got the script for that, did that sort of gel with the assumptions you had been operating under so far about the character?

I had made up my mind, certainly, about what it was that had happened to his son, but when I saw the script I thought, great, this works just fine.

Have you envisioned a history for Mike before his time in the police force?

I don’t have a pen in my hand, so I’m not going to be the one who decides that, but I will be doing Mike’s back story probably for the rest of my life; I’ll never be satisfied with it. I’ll have ideas that will never be in cement because I’m not the writer, and I have to be flexible enough to do what I’m given.

What sort of ideas?

I think there’s a love somewhere, I think there’s a broken heart somewhere along the way and I hope that comes about.

I hope so too. You had another great episode this season refusing to carry a gun and packing a pimento sandwich instead, which I know was a throwback to “Breaking Bad.” What is it about Mike that gives him the confidence to show up unarmed to a job like that?

Well, he had done his homework about where this money was going to go and what these guys were doing, because they were doing it without the knowledge of their bosses. They’re not going to give him any trouble.

I guess it speaks to a sort of boldness and understanding of the trade.

Yeah, and a lot of dramatic license.

And the scene with Mike disarming the other guys was great.

Oh, it was delightful to shoot, and those guys are such good guys, and they were good actors. All the guys you saw were such good actors! That was a lot of fun. Practicing the takeaway and dumping the clip out… I love doing that kind of stuff.

That always helps. The speech he gives to the drug dealer when he talks about good criminals and bad criminals, that seems very much to sum up some of the larger themes of the show as a whole.

I have my problems with that, in that— I can only speak for myself— that there are no good criminals. That’s what Jonathan thinks; if you’re a criminal, you’re a criminal, and you’re not going to be forgiving yourself, and you’re certainly not good. But that’s me. Now, as far as dialogue goes, I thought it was great.

And from the character’s perspective it seems to really reflect his worldview.

Oh yeah, it sums up Mike a lot, about what Mike has gone through. Also, within that, if you adhere to that philosophy, there is a certain reason why his son was killed, you know? The point being, maybe it’s not such a great philosophy.

One thing that I’ve noticed about “Better Call Saul” versus “Breaking Bad” is that the show seems to treat Mike and Jimmy really tenderly, whereas “Breaking Bad” was more unflinching with its main characters. Do you feel that there’s a different approach to characterization on the show?

[Interruption] I just walked into the kitchen and my son has just come back from Albuquerque, where’s he’s been working forever, it seems like. I got my boy with me; I’m very happy!

Anyway, now let me answer your question: no. The show, because our crew, our producers, our writers… I have that sense of feeling very lucky and very much at home. Your point about them treating those characters more gently, I think there’s a lot of truth in that, although I will say to you that there’s no way Jesse wasn’t sympathetic. You really wanted him to straighten up and fly right, you know? The feeling was that what was written when Jesse was concerned… there was compassion. Walt? Walt was just so wonderful to turn into a complete villain. Yeah.