All of the current contenders for the Republican presidential nomination want to dismantle Obamacare, but Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) may have inflicted a fatal blow to the ACA with a stealth provision that targets risk corridors. (The New York Times)

"Good news for the grumpy:" study finds happiness doesn't bring good health. (The New York Times)

With trial protocols averaging 200 pages per trial, is it too difficult to do transformative biomedical research? (Sarah Constantin)

The argument for a Medicare 'Part Q' to help pay for quality end of life care. (The New York Times)

Orthopods release new practice guideline for surgical management of knee osteoarthritis.

Norovirus, not E. coli, sickened dozens of college students who ate at a Chipotle in Boston. (Reuters)

More than 1 million new customers have signed up for health insurance through the federal Healthcare.gov website, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services reported.

Compounding pharmacies beware: baclofen from Chinese supplier Taizhou Xinyou may contain particulate matter, the FDA warned.

Mexico is the first nation in the world to approve the dengue fever vaccine. (BBC)

Fines for Americans who "go bare" on health insurance will take a bigger bite in 2016. (The New York Times)

Are doctors moving beyond the "patient centered medical home" and into patients' homes? House calls are back.

California health plans buck national trend and show profit from Obamacare. How? "Federal data show California had the healthiest risk pool of all 50 states." (Los Angeles Times)

Steve Novella, MD asks: Is it ever OK to prescribe sham procedures?

Medical students are depressed and also taking the wrong drugs. (via KevinMD)

Healthcare is nearly 20% of the U.S. economy, but only seven healthcare organizations made Glassdoor.com's 100 best places to work (50 large and 50 small-medium). Does this tell you something?

Make these three smart financial moves before the end of the year.

Supreme Court Justice Scalia on black scientists and academically rigorous schools: "Most of the black scientists in this country don't come from schools like the University of Texas."

An inside look at how Pfizer set the price of a new oncology drug at $9,850 a month.

Republican presidential candidate Ben Carson, MD, has issued his Obamacare replacement plan, which includes privatizing Medicare and increases the age of Medicare eligibility to 70.

Morning Break is a daily guide to what's new and interesting on the Web for healthcare professionals, powered by the MedPage Today community. Got a tip? Send it to us: MPT_editorial@everydayhealthinc.com.