A new local documentary, “The Gap” profiles several local residents stuck in the health care coverage gap. They don’t qualify for Medicaid in a state where lawmakers did not implement the expansion included in the Affordable Care Act and make too little to qualify for the tax credits that help people purchase health insurance through the ACA.

The 20 minute documentary was filmed in Alachua County and includes interviews with several residents who cannot access the health care coverage they need, proponents of the Medicaid expansion like Dr. Nancy Hardt with the University of Florida College of Medicine and the UF Mobile Outreach Clinic and an opponent, of the expansion State Rep. Keith Perry R- Gainesville.

The film was directed by Jordana Goldmann, a visual anthropologist and filmmaker at the UF College of Medicine, and produced by Dr. Christopher Cogle, a cancer doctor at UF Health and an advocate for the Medicaid expansion.

Goldmann went to events where health care navigators helped people sign up for coverage through the ACA and interviewed several residents who found out that they fell in the gap and could not get covered.

There was a cook named Travis Davis, who had health care for his children but no coverage for himself. There was William Comuzie, a who worked in building construction but no longer had a job including benefits. He said he finds it difficult to work when he cannot afford the pain medication he needs for his back and arthritis. Olivia Wilson is a retired hotel housekeeper who no longer has health insurgence and is still a couple of years away from qualifying for Medicare.

Gainesville resident Sarah Pesto said she works several jobs but does not have the income to qualify for subsidies to buy insurance through the ACA. Pesto said she has Tourette syndrome and cannot see a specialist without coverage.

There was a watch party for the documentary at the Civic Media Center last week and advocacy group Florida CHAIN is having similar watch parties in other areas of the state. A watch party and discussion is also scheduled at the Alachua Public Library, 14913 NW 140th St., in Alachua on Thursday, May 28.

You can also view the documentary online at www.cinemed.org