TOWIE WOWIE! Superfit Maria Fowler goes daring in stripes and checks as she debuts her sexy new fringe cut



Former TOWIE star Maria Fowler stepped out on Saturday night in London with a hot new fringe hairdo and a daringly bold outfit that managed to combine both checks and stripes.

Looking every inch a superfit star, Maria's shimmery top not only featured an array of black sequinned stripes against a blue bodice and nude net arms, but was daringly cut off at her midriff to display plenty of her taut figure and bellybutton.

Rather than playing it safe, Maria chose a pair of bright red and blue check skinny pants with double zip pockets on either side. While the outfit may have looked like it came direct from a top designer, and priced accordingly, it was actually affordable gear available from Zara.

Busy girl, busy outfit! Maria was all stripes and checks when she headed out to dinner with her mother in London

The 27-year-old went for a pre-Christmas dinner with her mother to STK restaurant in London.

She tweeted: 'Getting ready to party with mum! #london' and two hours later posted a photo of her dinner with the tweet: 'Mum just treated me to a lovely dinner at stk'.

Maria clearly doesn't starve herself either to keep her good figure as the photo showed a hearty service of steak and chips, with a serving of spinach on the side, which is not all that surprising given that STK, as the name suggests, is a chain of steak restaurants.

Daring and bold! Maria's outfit from Zara was a real showstopper

Covered from all angles! Not only did Maria's figure look great from the front but it showed off all her curves



Looking svelte and trim, Maria also show off her curvy behind too in the figure-hugging check pants.



Clearly one of the secrets for her super figure is all of the dancing, especially twerking, that she has been doing of late.

Last month she posted a video of herself twerking in a pair of paper pants whilst on a relaxing spa break with a friend to her Instagram page.



Dinner for two! Maria's mum obviously shares her love for bold prints and designs

It's obvious as well that Maria has inherited her mother's love for bold designs and patterns too when it comes to outfits for going out on the town.

While Maria was splashy and flashy in her stripes and checks, her mother opted instead for a black dress featuring white leaves, which she teamed with a hefty choker piece of jewellery around her neck and a gold band around one of her arms.

The two seemed inseparable as they left the restaurant holding hands and all smiles after their family meal.