Ilya Somin is a professor at the George Mason University School of Law. He is the author of "The Grasping Hand: Kelo v. City of New London and the Limits of Eminent Domain."

This is far from the first time that the court has been a campaign issue. But this year is unusual because Justice Scalia’s death occurred while the court is considering many major cases on high-profile issues that closely divide the court along ideological lines, like abortion, affirmative action, immigration, freedom of speech and religious liberty.

Simplistic rhetoric may reinforce the impression that constitutional arguments are smokescreens for partisan agendas.

There is also a deep divide over legal philosophy. Conservative judges tend to support Scalia's originalist view that the meaning of the Constitution was set at the time it was first enacted. By contrast, most liberal ones advocate living constitutionalism, the idea that the meaning of the Constitution can and should change over time.

But unfortunately, much of the debate over the court may be far from edifying, as simplistic partisan appeals obscure deeper issues. Most voters know very little about the court and constitutional issues. For example, a poll conducted during the 2012 election found that only 34 percent of Americans knew that John Roberts is the chief justice – despite the fact that he had just been at the center of the court’s well-publicized decision on the Affordable Care Act.

Crude rhetoric aimed at relatively ignorant voters might well reinforce the already widespread impression that constitutional arguments are just smokescreens for partisan agendas. Sometimes, this is actually true.

It is worth recalling, though, that Justice Scalia’s commitment to originalism sometimes led him to endorse liberal conclusions, such as protecting flag burning and strengthening Fourth and Sixth Amendment protections for criminal defendants. Liberal living-constitutionalist judges have also sometimes cast important votes that went against their policy preferences.

Ideological divisions and political controversies sometimes obscure deeper questions about constitutional interpretation -- which should be the key to selecting justices who may be on the court decades after today’s political controversies have passed. While constitutional law cannot be completely separated from politics, a healthy legal culture should resist attempts to reduce constitutional issues to the pursuit of short-term political agendas. We would do well to remember that – even in the midst of a divisive political struggle over the future of the Supreme Court.



Join Opinion on Facebook and follow updates on twitter.com/roomfordebate.