by John Gibson

Follow on Twitter, Facebook and listen free and live on the foxnewsradio app

President Obama is busy chiseling his legacy, hoping the stonework will hold up long enough for historians to take the bait and pass on to future junior high munchkins what a great figure he really was. Better to be a face on Rushmore, of course, and don’t be so foolish as to think he’s not working that as well.

But for now it’s a matter of recasting defeat in last week’s election as a failure on the part of Democrats and some sour voters what a great figure he has been, and well, what a great figure he is and will continue to be.

I don’t think we will ever escape Obama, because is legacy project is his life’s work. When he’s out of office he will continue to fly around giving speeches and conducting his patented campaign style events–a multicultural background of smiling faces, sleeves rolled up as if he’s ready to get at the work of the future, pounding his opponents as knuckledragging subhumans–all in an effort to cement his place in history and caution future historians that stepping out of line will threaten careers and reputations.

But back to today.

Last week, after the devastating election in which the Obama brand wiped out rank upon rank of the Democrats’ future, the President told the American public that he heard those who voted and he also heard the two thirds of eligible voters who did not vote.

Head scratching ensued. What did he hear from the silent stay-at-homes? The implication was that he knew how they wanted to vote and he was taking their support for his policies by declaration even if he wasn’t allowed to actually count their votes.

That interpretation was somewhere around the plate but not in the strike zone.

Sunday, speaking to Bob Schieffer of Face The Nation, Obama sharpened his aim. What about the election? Obama answered that “we” need to be better salesmen. “We have got to sell it,” Obama said. “We have got to reach out to the other side and, where possible, persuade.” That’s directed to you hard headed Republians.

But the next bit was about his fellow Democrats, who ones who pretended they didn’t know him, who didn’t vote with him even if their records said they had, and wouldn’t even admit they had voted Obama in two Presidential elections. (Bad Dems! Bad Dems!). “And I think there are times, there’s no doubt about it, where I think we have not been successful in going out there and letting people know what it is that we’re trying to do and why this is the right direction. So there is a failure of politics that we have got to improve on.”

In other words, y’all should have stood with me. Those voters who didn’t show up were my voters, who support my policies, and you betrayed them when you tried to distance yourself from me.

I am what you should be selling. This is about me. Barack Obama. That’s your sales pitch. You were dopes when you didn’t understand how great I am.

Obama doesn’t have another chance to test his theory of self regard with the voters, unless he were to crowbar his way into the Hillary campaign–and every sign from Clinton World says they are not buying his pitch, and will start putting mega daylight between Hillary and Obama The Great.

So this is a theory that won’t be put to the correct test, an election. Instead, this is a pitch to history and to those who write it. It’s a pitch that says, “Hey, if you write the right stuff, there’s a huge audience to buy your books. If you write the wrong stuff, you’ll be stuck with a minuscule audience of retrograde Repubs, and your royalty checks will suffer.”

However, there will historians who don’t mind swimming upstream,and they will likely focus on the deception of the Obama years.

To be sure, the issue of Presidential deception–lies, if we are to be frank– must be laid out in future history books or the historian will risk irrelevancy. The list of Obama Administration deception is long–Benghazi, Fast and Furious, IRS–but the inevitable focus will be Obama’s signature piece of legacy legislation: Obamacare.

The President sold it by saying you would save $2,500 a year. You didn’t. The President said if you like your doctor you can keep your doctor, if you like your health insurance policy, you can keep it. You couldn’t keep either.

But the biggest lie, as it turns out, was simply the way the President and his people concealed from the public basic fact of the legislation: transparency was the first casualty, specifically targeted by the White House.

Obamacare architect Jonathan Gruber admitted it–no, he boasted about it–in a conference in late 2013, the video of which has just come to light.

Obamacare, he said, “was written in a tortured way to make sure [the Congressional Budget Office] did not score the mandate as taxes. If CBO scored the mandate as taxes, the bill dies.” Remember SCOTUS ruled Obamacare constitutional because the mandate is a tax, which a legitimate Congressional power. So we lie to the public about the tax, but use the taxing authority as a constitutional shelter.

Gruber continued. “In terms of risk-rated subsidies, if you had a law which said that healthy people are going to pay in – you made explicit healthy people pay in and sick people get money, it would not have passed. Lack of transparency is a huge political advantage.” In other words, if you lie you have the edge. “And basically, call it the stupidity of the American voter or whatever, but basically that was really really critical for the thing to pass. Look, I wish we could make it all transparent – but I’d rather have this law than not.”

We had to hoodwink people to get it passed. We had to lie. We were happy to lie to get it passed. We believe we were doing the best thing for people no matter what they thought.

That, in a thimble, is the legacy of President Obama.

Watch him try to escape it. He has to try.