This wasn’t a war started on a lie about weapons of mass destruction the way Iraq was for George W. Bush and Dick Cheney. Affordable health care for all Americans was Barack Obama’s war, one started with noble intent, the way so many big ideas all the way back to Social Security have started.

Only now Obamacare, the way it will always be known, for better or worse, has become Obama’s Iraq. It is something that dominates his second term now, dominates and threatens to suffocate the rest of his presidency, the way Iraq did with Bush, at least until the stock market caved in on Bush and on the candidacy of John McCain at the same time.

You want to know why our senators, Charles Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand, are running toward Hillary Clinton so swiftly, three years before an election? Because they think it is a graceful way to get away from the current President on the dead run, that’s why.

Even crackpot Republicans — who have all the qualities of a good dog except loyalty — weren’t nearly as shameless with their buyer’s remorse before George W. Bush was halfway through his second term.

Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has been endorsed by Democratic Sens. Chuck Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand, eager to distance themselves gracefully from President Obama, for a 2016 presdential run. (Lisa Lake/Getty Images)

Here was Gillibrand on ABC’s “This Week” on Sunday, talking to guest host Martha Raddatz:

“I am on the bandwagon for Hillary Clinton in 2016,” Gillibrand said, as if wanting to make sure she was right there at the front of the line with Schumer, New York’s senior Democratic senator.

Then Gillibrand, who didn’t seem to have pulled any muscles as she raced away from Obama, was telling Raddatz that it wasn’t as if she was shocked when Americans who already had health care began to get letters saying their policies had been shot out of a cannon.

U.S. Sens. Kirsten Gillibrand and Charles Schumer have endorsed Hillary Clinton for President in 2016, even though the election is three years away. Some believe their support for Clinton is a way of distancing themselves from President Obama and his bothed health care rollout. (Alex Wong/Getty Images)

“We all knew,” was the money quote from Gillibrand, referring not just to herself and a small army of fellow politicians, including ones from Obama’s own party, apparently aware that the Affordable Care Act would result in cancellations.

She was really saying that the President DIDN’T know when he told everybody that if they were happy with their current plans they could keep them, a quote that he is wearing like a bonnet now. It is the way George H.W. Bush had to wear the same hat because he had told the country to read his lips about “no new taxes.”

This is where Barack Obama is five years from that night when he stood in Grant Park, when the amazing crowd and so much of the country cheered the fact that we had elected the first African-American President of the United States. With three years left in his second term, his presidency seems to work about as well as his Obamacare website.

President George W. Bush paid a heavy political price for the Iraq War during his second term. President Obama faces a similar situatiion over the rollout of his Affordable Care Act. (PABLO MARTINEZ MONSIVAIS/AP)

Of course there are those who have compared the whole current mess with Obamacare to Hurricane Katrina for George W. Bush, that storm seeming to swallow him up the way the water tried to swallow up New Orleans after the levees broke.

So all this time after Obama really ran against the Bush years for President, he is the one who looks weak and ineffective, and watches his approval ratings drop as if they have blocks of cement attached to them.

On national television Sunday, Kirsten Gillibrand talked about how the President and his people had “fumbled” the rollout of Obamacare, making it sound like some small thing. Well, yeah, the way Mark Sanchez’s butt-fumble was a small thing against the Patriots one year ago this week.

Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand (D-N.Y.) said on national television that President Obama had 'fumbled' the rollout of the Affordable Care Act and expressed her support for Hillary Clinton as a potential presidential candidate.

The real result of all this is that somehow the story has become the President himself — and not the fringe elements of the Republican Party, all those who were out to destroy his presidency before he even took the oath of office, those who have never made a secret of their hatred for Barack Obama. You wonder if they will hate Hillary as much if she is the next Democrat in the White House, if they can’t stop her the way they couldn’t stop Obama, twice.

He ran on hope and change and a better country, won because he was so much better than his haters, was President when we took out Bin Laden. But for the moment, maybe for the rest of his time in the White House, a brave, honorable vision for health care for all Americans has turned him into a punch line, and a punching bag.

Barack Obama isn’t the face of hope or change now. He is the face of a website, one that should probably have a new name:

Lameduck.com.