Denver artist Susan Rubin regularly checks the inventory in the Little Free Library she stocks outside her Park Hill home and studio.

Sometimes it’s packed with donations.

Sometimes there are only five books, looking lonely.

“It’s like a living thing,” Rubin said. “Once a week, I photograph the contents, and I’m going to turn that into an art project to see how the collection morphs.

As the sharing economy became increasingly successful, from bike-, tool– and car-sharing programs to community– supported agriculture, Little Free Libraries went from one Wisconsin man’s novelty in 2009 to an international movement.

Six years on, Little Free Libraries offer an inventive way to share books. The Denver Public Library recently installed its own version of a Little Free Library in a new seating area on the 16th Street Mall downtown, following the example of book-loving renegades who prefer a DIY approach that doesn’t involve a kit and an official charter.

Little Free Libraries (and their charterless imitators) often are eye-catching, like the mini-Castle Marne Little Free Library, or the libraries evoking the Tardis from “Dr. Who,” or giving a nod to “Star Wars” and other pop-culture icons.

“A Little Free Library, in many ways, is a better-sized approach to globalization, a way to help connect your family with your community,” says Little Free Library founder Todd Bol.

“What we want to do is set the stage for empowering neighborhoods that are literary deserts, places where 75 percent of the kids aren’t proficient in reading. The key to fixing that is for all the neighborhood residents to feel responsible for the kids. We got rid of polio and measles; we can do this.”

Getting more books into impoverished neighborhoods is a laudable goal, says Dr. Adriann Wycoff, who teaches family literacy at Metro State.

“In the family literacy program, we spend a lot of time working with families and helping parents understand the value of reading together with their kids for information and pleasure,” she said.

Dawn Krebs, a former newspaper editor who lives in Alamosa, situated her Little Free Library in front of the local senior center. She deliberately stocks that particular Little Free Library with large-print books.

“Here in a rural community, we look to see where the need is, and then we fill that need,” Krebs said.

“In Denver, you can put a Little Free Library in your front yard and people can walk by and use it. Here, people have to drive to a destination. So we steward a Little Free Library together with the Alamosa public library, which provides us with large-print books and the box itself.”

About the same time that Krebs installed the senior center’s Little Free Library, a local women’s group posted another Little Free Library next to a local food bank. It’s stocked primarily with children’s books, perhaps the movement’s hottest commodity.

“Children’s books go right away,” said Jonathon Stalls, steward of a Little Free Library he installed a year ago at 28th Avenue and Forest Street in Denver’s Park Hill neighborhood.

When Stalls checked out the inventory last week, he found a Trixie Beldon novel next to “Emory’s Gift” by W. Bruce Cameron; a Nevada Barr mystery; a couple of cookbooks; a AAA map of New Zealand; and “Babayaga,” a novel about witches in Paris.

“About once a week, I filter through the books,” Stalls said. “Once, someone stacked this full of political stuff that blocked everything else.”

He monitors it not just for political motives but overall quality.

“I try to keep it diverse so it’s not all romance novels, because that’s what this one tends to default to.”

Most people who install Little Free Libraries are conscientious about keeping an eye on the contents. Denver artist Rubin, who inherited her brother’s Little Free Library in 2013, when he upgraded, purged a stack of “Really Gross Joke” books left by a donor with an offbeat sense of humor.

“I’ve actually been surprised at how respectfully most people treat the Little Free Library,” she said. “Most people tell me it’s the hot box, because it always has good stuff. We get a lot of children’s and young adult books, and a lot of brand-new books. Right now, I’m reading the new Anne Tyler novel that someone left.”

Not everyone is a fan of Little Free Libraries. Leawood, Kan., got unwanted international attention when the city sent a code-violation letter to Spencer Collins, age 9, after he put up a Little Free Library.

The city claimed that the dollhouse-sized box was “an accessory structure,” a term normally reserved for campers and carriage houses. The backlash was so vehement that the Leawood City Council passed an exemption specifically for Little Free Libraries. Other towns wound up following Leawood’s example.

Careful curating, combined with neighborhood residents’ enthusiasm, helps keep Little Free Libraries successful. Nat and Kathy Fay, who steward a Little Free Library in Congress Park, keep an eye on untoward and unlikely contributions. The most unusual title someone left was “Multi-Family Marketing,” which “is now in the bag to go to Goodwill,” Kathy Fay said.

The Fays’ Little Free Library was a 2013 Christmas gift that Nat Fay made for his wife. He first presented her with a box that contained a tiny model of what he planned to construct once the ground defrosted.

“The neighbors on the corner left us a thank-you note for putting it up,” Nat Fay said.

“They told us they see books they probably wouldn’t have known about. One morning, there was a boxed set of Beatrix Potter. It was gone in less than an hour. I was on the porch once when a guy in a Phillies shirt was looking in the library. I asked if he was from Philly, and he said ‘yes.’ I told him our daughter went to college there, and he said he’d graduated from the same school.

“It’s a great way to start conversations with people,” Nat Fay said.

Claire Martin: 303-954-1477, cmartin@denverpost.com or twitter.com/byclairemartin

Little Libraries by the numbers

28,000 Number of Little Free Libraries

40 million Number of books in circulation annually

Half a billion Projected number of Little Free Library books in circulation for 2016

150 Number of visits per month to average Little Free Library