People in Business for Nov. 8, 2015

People in Business for Nov. 8, 2015

BATON ROUGE AREA

Dr. Floyd J. “Flip” Roberts Jr. has been named vice president of clinical affairs at the Louisiana Hospital Association.

Roberts was the chief medical officer of Baton Rouge General Medical Center, where he was responsible for developing the Tulane University School of Medicine satellite campus in Baton Rouge and served as the first regional dean.

The Greater Baton Rouge Food Bank has named Jenna Schexnayder as chief financial officer, Bob Kanas as chief operations officer, Charlene Guarisco Montelaro as senior vice president, development and philanthropy, and James McGowan as director of development and philanthropy.

The moves come in an effort to grow the operation, increase efficiencies and better serve its mission of feeding the hungry across its 11-parish service area.

Schexnayder has eight years of experience in finance and accounting with KPMG.

Kanas was director of operations at Second Harvest Food Bank in New Orleans.

Montelaro has 10 years as Baton Rouge Food Bank’s vice president of development.

McGowan was special project manager of National Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster.

Naivasha Dunn has been named clinical liaison at Lane Rehabilitation Center, a 30-bed, in-patient acute rehabilitation center specializing in physical, occupational and speech therapy. It is an affiliate of Lane Regional Medical Center.

Dunn was the clinical liaison at Baton Rouge General Medical Center.

Ryan Finnan has been named executive vice president and consumer and business banking president at Investar Bank, overseeing consumer lending, mortgage, credit cards and the consumer and business branch teams.

Finnan was chief operating officer.

Teri Fontenot, president and chief executive officer of Woman’s Hospital, has been elected to the board of directors of Amerisafe Inc. in Deridder, a publicly traded specialty provider of high hazard worker’s compensation insurance, effective Jan. 1.

LAFAYETTE AREA

Alden Sonnier, of MI Swaco, has been elected president of the Lafayette chapter of the American Association of Drilling Engineers.

Other officers are Matt Hensgens, of Chevron, first vice president and programs; Taylor Brazzel, of Chalmers, Collins & Alwell Inc., second vice president and membership committee chairman; Jarrod Suire, of Cardno PPI Quality and Asset Management LLC, secretary; and Sharon Moore, of Halliburton Energy Services Inc., treasurer, national board at-large representative and website committee.

The 2015-16 steering committee includes Al Wambsgans, of DC International, chairman and director emeritus; Derrick Daigle, of Halliburton Energy Services Inc., chapter representative and finance committee; Lindsay Longman, of Phalanx Petroleum, also the joint industry committee; Rick Voth, of Blackhawk Specialty Tools LLC, also committee chairman; Jay Gallet, of Chevron; and Rick Farmer, of Stone Energy, also golf committee co-chairman.

Other committee leaders on the board are Jaime Crosby, of Chevron, LSU liaison; Jeffery Svendson, of Advanced Logistics LLC, sporting clays chairman and Nicholls State scholarship liaison; Kristy Bonner, of Foster Marketing, arrangements committee chairwoman, publicity committee chairwoman and website committee; Joe Bernard, of Pro-T, F5 committee chairman; Tim Mannon, of Stone Energy, golf committee co-chairman; Sid Breaux, of Breaux Engineering, Knowledge Box; Bryce Percle, of Baker Hughes, University of Louisiana at Lafayette student section liaison; Bruce Jordan, of Stokes & Spiehler, University of Louisiana at Lafayette fluid lab chairman; Doug Keller, of Knight Oil Tools, director emeritus; and Andre Arceneaux, director emeritus — Lafayette and national chapters.

NEW ORLEANS AREA

Cordell H. White has been named senior vice president at American Bank & Trust Co., of Covington.

He was Hammond regional president for Investar Bank, of Baton Rouge, where he served since it acquired First Community Bank of Hammond in 2013. He was chief executive officer of FCB for four years.