In the seasonal tradition that I invented some years ago, my first column of the year is devoted to anti-predictions: that is, things that will not happen in the following 12 months. Needless to say, the rules require that these must not be the easy, wildly unlikely options – an asteroid destroying the planet, the scientific community admitting that it was wrong on global warming, or England winning the World Cup. So here, at considerable personal risk, is my list of Things That Might Have Been Expected To Happen In 2014 But Won’t.

First, there will be no dramatic change in the opinion poll ratings of the major parties, or of their respective leaders. Labour will plateau at a six- to eight-point lead over the Conservatives, which will come to be recognised as a fatal stall rather than any sort of success, and the Tories will make no great leap in popularity, even if the economy recovers quite spectacularly. David Cameron will continue to score well above Ed Miliband – and everyone else – as a credible prime minister, but this will not remedy his most obvious electoral problem: that a large proportion of the population does not seem to like him, or, more important, to believe that he likes them.

In an attempt to redress this, George Osborne will not persist with at least one element in his economic strategy: the one that involves screwing over the aspiring middle classes who are fortunate (or unfortunate) enough to earn roughly one-and-a-half times the average national wage.

At some point later in the year, perhaps in his Autumn Statement, the Chancellor will crack under pressure from the Tory back benches and give these poor mugs a break, probably by making a small (very small) increase in the threshold for higher-rate tax – which won’t be enough to satisfy anybody.

Indeed, my one caveat on this overall anti-prediction is that, should Mr Osborne make a really significant move to reduce taxes on middle-class households, the Tories will make a breakthrough in the polls, much as they did in Opposition when they offered to cut inheritance tax and stamp duty.

Second, the eurozone will not collapse – at least, not as definitively as the Communist bloc did 20 years ago. But neither will it take any serious steps to resolve its internal contradictions. The euro will survive – however many democratic governments, constitutional arrangements and national institutions have to be trampled underfoot to preserve it. The pretence will be abandoned that the artificial life-support system on which the currency has been dependent is some temporary emergency measure, and it will come to be accepted as a permanent fixture.

With this, the euro will quite rapidly lose what connections it had with economic reality, becoming more and more like the East German Ostmark, whose value was decided by bureaucratic fiat and sustained by a political act of will. The social costs of this – particularly in southern Europe – will be devastating. But they are unlikely to lead to the sort of violent unrest that once seemed to be imminent. The peoples of the Mediterranean seem too exhausted by hardship to organise national rebellions. They will simply resign themselves to a future of economic dependency and occasional outbursts of neo-fascist disorder.

Third, Barack Obama’s popularity will not recover, even if Obamacare somehow staggers into viability. Unlike other failed reforms of the past – Hillarycare in the first Clinton administration, for example – this train wreck of a health-care programme has taken the Obama White House to a place from which there is no return.

The catastrophe of the launch might have been overcome with a technical overhaul of the comically inadequate website. But the real disaster was the outright deception that the president himself seemed to have engineered. Not only did he promise repeatedly that everybody who wanted to keep their present health insurance plan, and their present doctor, would be able to do so – which turned out to be demonstrably untrue in a way that could not conceivably have been unknown to the programme’s architects. But he also seemed to have deliberately falsified the whole nature of the plan.

The principle of the Affordable Care Act, as it was officially titled, was that it would do precisely what it said: it would make health insurance more affordable for the less well-off by making it compulsory for the young and healthy, who had previously taken the risk of being uninsured, and by charging the better-off more for their premiums.

So while it may have become more affordable for some, it became instantly (and startlingly) more expensive for many of those who were already insured. And, of course, for those who had once chosen not to buy insurance at all, it was a brand new addition to their cost of living. This was wealth redistribution under the guise of insurance reform – and the American electorate will not forget what seemed to them to be a systematic deception.

By European standards, this is scarcely socialised health care at all in its present form, relying as it does entirely on the private insurance market. But if not enough young, healthy people sign up, preferring to pay the small “fine” instead, the insurance companies will have to be bailed out by government funding. And then the government will effectively own the health insurance industry – which will be something like a real nationalised health system.

But, in any event, Obama’s credibility is finished. Unlike cynical Europeans, who always expect the worst of their politicians, American voters demand heroic leadership: presidents who tell calculated lies are not forgiven.

So, what else won’t happen? The Scots won’t vote for independence – but you knew that. This will not mean the end of Alex Salmond’s career: he is a man who would survive the Flood. Paradoxically, and sadly, it may be the last we will see of Alistair Darling, one of the quiet heroes of modern British political life, who may decide, after saving the Union, that he has had enough. The Liberal Democrats won’t make any official break with the Coalition – but you knew that, too. Nor will they remove their leader, not this year anyway.

There will be no major changes in the Cabinet. Ed Balls won’t be sacked. Ukip will not – I’m going right out on a limb here – do as stupendously well as predicted in the European elections, primarily because the Tories will see to it that expectations of their performance are pushed to absurd heights.

In short, none of the big problems of the past year will be resolved – or even properly addressed. Instead, they will be obscured by rhetoric, avoided by cowardice, or simply tolerated as the lesser of practical evils. Whether you see this as bad news or not will depend on your political temperament, or maybe your degree of resignation.