Don Oehlrich, a Florida Republican vying for Rep. John Mica’s seat, knew he needed something — anything — to stand out against the incumbent congressman and two other GOP hopefuls when voters head to the polls for Tuesday's primary. He, his wife and his campaign manager got to thinking and voila — they had an idea. “We need a pigs in a trough ad,” Oehlrich says. “That’s the one.” The pigs he’s referring to are the ones Iowa Senate candidate Joni Ernst talked about castrating in her viral campaign ad “Squeal," which debuted in March. (“I grew up castrating hogs on an Iowa farm, so when I get to Washington I’ll know how to cut pork,” Ernst said in the spot, which was viewed nearly 600,000 times on YouTube and is credited for paving her way through her primary.)

​Oehlrich went for an even bolder visual for his ad: fake human poop. “It was black beans, corn starch, coffee and coffee grounds and water, of course,” Oehlrich explains to Whispers.​ He stood before the camera and made his anti-incumbent pitch. “Politicians are a lot like dirty diapers — when they’re fresh they serve a purpose, but when you allow them to sit around too long, they’re a mess and you can’t get anyone to change them,” he said. Oehlrich then plopped the brown goo into the diaper and pitched it into the trash.

Oehlrich’s advertisement joins a rich tradition of weird, wacky and sometimes shocking campaign spots, the modern era of which began back in 1964.

“Everybody still operates off of Tony Schwartz’s daisy ad,” longtime Democratic consultant Hank Sheinkopf tells Whispers.​ That ad, depicting a young girl picking petals off a daisy before a nuclear bomb goes off, helped keep President Lyndon B. Johnson in the White House. And it was so eyebrow-raising that it only had to be aired once, Sheinkopf recalls. “The argument is so good and the population so prepared that you don’t have to air it much and it can cut right through,” Sheinkopf says​.

But not every attempt to shock and awe is a winning one. Allan Louden, a professor of communication and political advertising expert at Wake Forest University, points to an ad made for Roland Sledge, a candidate for Texas Railroad Commission in 2012. In it, Sledge butchers a quote from American cowboy Will Rogers. “There are three kinds of men — the one that learns by reading, the few that learn by observation and the rest have to pee on an electric fence,” Sledge said in the ad. An actor playing a politician (who looked a bit like convicted felon and former Illinois Gov. Rod Blagojevich) then gets electrocuted by doing exactly that. Sledge only captured about 10 percent of the primary vote. “They do get the name recognition part and introduce you, but with that comes baggage,” Louden warns. ​“There are a number of ads that backlashed.”

Another modern failure, according to Lara Brown, the program director of the Political Management Program at George Washington University’s Graduate School of Political Management, ​was former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina’s 2010 “Demon Sheep” advertisement.

The “Demon Sheep” ad was aimed at Fiorina's primary opponent Tom Campbell; it called him a FCINO — a fiscal conservative in name only — and a wolf in sheep’s clothing. “It was creepy and it was eerie and I never really understood the message,” Brown says.​ Fiorina did best Campbell in the primary, but the damage to her brand was already done, and she was unable to unseat Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif. “So I think she was seen as a very serious and credible candidate and I think the problem with that ad was that it undermined [that],” Brown says.​ “Because it seems like, you know, some strange nightmare of an ad.”

What works, though? Apparently, talking animals. "Because talking animals can say things you can't,” Louden says.​ That's what helped Montana Republican Sen. John Melcher get re-elected after he was targeted as being too liberal by the National Conservative Political Action Committee. The advertisement criticized the use of outside money in the race, using talking cows. “Montana isn’t buying it, especially those who know bull when they hear it,” a voiceover said before the cows began to speak. The spot got Melcher six more years in the U.S. Senate.

A more recent example was Rep. Roger Williams, R-Texas, cast as the “Donkey Whisperer” in a 2012 spot that earned Williams, Texas Gov. Rick Perry’s ex-Secretary of State, a freshman year in the House of Representatives. In it, Williams talked to a herd of donkeys ​about the Constitution, handouts, taxes, healthcare and more. “These donkeys don’t live in the United States of France, they live in the United States of America — they’re going to have to get with it,” Williams said in the ad.

The donkey ad works, in part, because it’s funny. “Humor let’s you do all kinds of things that other things don’t,” explains Louden. He also pointed to the successful long-shot campaign of the late Sen. Paul Wellstone, D-Minn., in 1990, whose ad had him zipping from frame to frame​ because the incumbent had so much more money. “Unlike my opponent I don’t have $6 million so I’m going to have to talk fast,” Wellstone said in the spot.

“Humor requires a little bit of truth for it to be humorous,” Louden says. And weird ads have to have a little legitimacy to work, the experts agreed. In Ernst’s hog castration case, the candidate is actually a farmer in Iowa. “Here she was trying to talk about being tough and understanding rural life, so as perhaps surprising and inappropriate as it was, it worked for her because it reinforced all the things that she was already trying to do,” says​ Brown of George Washington University.

Ernst’s race is also different from Oehlrich’s in that the dirty diaper candidate is trying to unseat an incumbent, while Ernst is vying to replace the retiring Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa. “You can only get rid of an incumbent if you’re going to attack the incumbent directly,” Democratic consultant Sheinkopf explains,​ adding that the diaper charge might be too vague. “Ads are valuable, but they’re only as valuable as local conditions permit them to be.”

Then again, an interesting spot gets Oehlrich’s name out there. “This may have been a smart move in the sense that it will certainly gain him some recognition in the district were John Mica to eventually retire down the road,” Brown says.

Though, thus far, the diaper ad on YouTube has only received about 2,300 views. (One commenter’s reaction: “This is as dumb as a sack of Sarah Palins.”)​