Devices deployed to personalize learning

Seventh grader Abi Watson uses her iPad in Jason Helmus' science class at Westview Middle School on Wednesday morning. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

Westview Middle School eighth-graders in a recent English class completed a capitalization assignment by writing notes using an app on their iPads.

Students at the school also are using iPads for individualized grammar lessons, to access tutorials if they get answers wrong on math homework and to blog about projects.

"We're really working to use the devices to personalize learning," said Westview Principal Mark Spencer. "For teachers, it just can't be, I'll pull out this worksheet or do the next section of the textbook. Kids need to think and apply and create."

Both Westview and Trail Ridge Middle School recently were recognized as Apple Distinguished Schools for innovating with Apple products. The designation is for two years.

The two Longmont schools are among five recognized in Colorado, about 200 in the nation and about 300 total worldwide.

St. Vrain's partnership with Apple is part of its four-year technology learning plan. The plan, funded through a 2012 mill levy override, allocates $2.2 million a year for all students in sixth through 12th grades to have their own iPad minis.

All middle school students received iPads starting last fall, while about half of high school students got the devices this fall. The rest of the high schools will get iPads next fall.

In the fourth year, each elementary classroom will get a set of six iPads for students to share

"The one-to-one iPad program is a huge piece of this," said Trail Ridge Principal Eddie Cloke. "It's been a starting point for us."

Advertisement

To be recognized as Apple Distinguished Schools, Trail Ridge and Westview created digital books with information on how the school meets five criteria: visionary leadership, innovative learning and teaching, ongoing professional learning, compelling evidence of success, and a flexible learning environment.

At Trail Ridge, Cloke said, the school is integrating the iPads in its STEM — science, technology, engineering and math — program, which emphasizes project-based learning and design thinking.

"Apple is looking at what we're doing differently than other schools," he said. "It's not just using technology. It's how we set up our classrooms and what skills we're teaching students. We want to give our students opportunities."

Instead of traditional desks in math, for example, classrooms have tables with white board surfaces so students can work together more easily.

"It's thinking differently," Cloke said.

He said technology and project-based learning also are getting students more engaged in school, increasing enrollment and reducing discipline issues.

"Students are genuinely excited to be here," he said.

Increased student engagement also is happening at Westview, Spencer said.

He said iPads make it easier to give students choices in how they learn and make it easier for students to learn at their own pace. Struggling students can take more time, while gifted students can do more.

"When this is done well, kids have a lot of choice in how they learn," he said. "What we're doing in schools is fundamentally different than it was five years ago. We really are giving kids what they need."

Along with receiving recognition, he said, Westview now will host educators from other schools to share what they're doing. Plus, he said, it connects schools working on the same issues worldwide.

"You become a network of schools," he said. "You can really learn a lot from each other."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa