Congress Reaches Deal on Funding Bill Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images Early Wednesday morning, congressional leaders rolled out legislation to fund the federal government through September and extend a bundle of tax breaks. The bulky $1.1 trillion measure, in addition to combining the 12 bills funding each program, agency and department of the federal government, also tackles a number of weighty issues that have been concerns for lawmakers for months, years – or even decades. The separate so-called “tax extenders” bill, which features $750 billion in tax breaks, will be considered at the same time as what's being called the "omnibus" funding bill, a tactical trade-off meant to encourage reluctant lawmakers and usher both bills to passage. As important as what’s in the bill is what, ultimately, was left on the negotiating room floor. Announcing the completion of the deal to his conference Tuesday night, House Speaker Paul Ryan told lawmakers that making some concessions to the other side is a reality of divided government, but that the final product boosts many Republican priorities. The Wisconsin Republican reiterated that sentiment to reporters Wednesday. "In divided government, no one gets exactly what they want. This is a bipartisan compromise; this is a bicameral compromise," he said, adding: "I do believe we will have bipartisan votes on both of these bills." The deal was finalized and made public late Tuesday, just over 24 hours before the latest short-term funding runs out. Congress will need to pass yet another short-term stopgap measure, through next Tuesday, in order to avoid a brief shutdown when the current extension expires Wednesday night. Ryan said the House would take up the tax bill Thursday, followed by the spending bill Friday. As in the past few years, Democrats are expected to provide the majority of the votes needed to get the spending bill through Congress, while the Republican majority will pass the tax measure largely without their help. Here’s some of what made it into the agreement – and what didn’t.

IN: Visa Waivers; OUT: Syrian Refugees

IN: Visa Waivers; OUT: Syrian Refugees Bulent Kilic/AFP/Getty Images Republicans made a major concession in backing off a push to include language from a bill that passed the House in response to last month’s deadly terrorist attacks in Paris that would restrict the resettlement of refugees from Syria. The bill initially earned the support of some Democrats, as well as most Republicans, in the House vote, but Democrats warned they would oppose its inclusion in the omnibus spending bill. Instead, the omnibus will include language tightening the visa waiver program, which allows citizens of 38 countries expedited entry to the U.S. The provision would place restrictions on those who have traveled to Syria and Iraq in the previous five years, require greater information sharing from participating countries, and authorize the Department of Homeland Security to remove a country from the program if it refuses to share data.

Leaving out the refugee language may be a deal-breaker for some Republicans who have expressed concerns that the vetting process is inadequate to keep individuals affiliated with the Islamic State group or other terrorist organizations from entering the country by posing as refugees. Hoping to keep their Republicans from defecting over that issue, Senate leaders promised to hold a debate on the House-passed refugee bill early next year.

IN: Lifting Oil Export Ban, Environment Tax Credits

IN: Lifting Oil Export Ban, Environment Tax Credits CHARLIE ARCHAMBAULT FOR USN&WR Energy-focused lawmakers scored a victory long in the making by striking a deal to lift the Cold War-era ban on exporting domestic oil. The ban, which turns 40 on Dec. 22, was meant to protect against oil-rich nations in the Middle East from cutting off supply, as they did after the U.S. supported Israel in the 1973 Yom Kippur War. But with the U.S. experiencing a boom in production and the world market saturated, opponents of the ban say it’s an outdated policy that doesn’t make sense to continue. Environmental groups oppose lifting the ban, which they say will accelerate damaging extraction and disadvantage clean energy. To that end, Democrats won a number of concessions, including five-year extensions on solar and wind energy tax credits and the reauthorization of the Land and Water Conservation Fund, which lapsed in September. Efforts to lift the ban prompted a veto threat as recently as October, but tucked inside a critical spending package and coupled with significant concessions on green energy and environmental protection, the ban is likely to fall at last. IN: Obamacare Tax Delays

IN: Obamacare Tax Delays (HealthDay) Two of the more maligned components of President Barack Obama’s health care law are slated to be delayed another two years under the tax extenders bill, putting their fate into the hands of the next president. The deal delays the so-called “Cadillac tax,” which imposes a 40-percent tax on some of the most expensive health benefits plans, and the medical device tax, both major targets to opponents of the Affordable Care Act. White House officials have signaled that the two-year hold would not draw a veto threat as repealing the two provisions has done in the past. But dropping the provisions, particularly the Cadillac tax, has bipartisan support among members of Congress.

IN: Cybersecurity Bill

IN: Cybersecurity Bill Getty Images/Cultura RF Language from a bill meant to encourage private companies to share data on hackers with the government is set to be included in the omnibus bill. The Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act, which passed the Senate this fall, is vehemently opposed by civil liberties advocates who say the legislation would violate the privacy rights of Americans while doing little to improve the security of Americans’ data. The Obama administration had pushed for language that would have explicitly prevented companies from sharing their customers’ data with the National Security Agency, but that provision was eventually stripped from the bill. Similar legislation prompted what was called the “Internet blackout,” a widespread online protest in 2012, but the current bill has made far less of a splash.

OUT: Pro-Life Riders

OUT: Pro-Life Riders The Associated Press After videos were released this summer purporting to show Planned Parenthood staff discussing the sale of fetal tissue, conservatives in Congress pushed to cut more than $500 million in federal funding to the reproductive health care provider. Using special a procedural tactic that prevents the minority from blocking a bill in the Senate, Republicans passed legislation earlier this month that would block funding to the organization. While Obama is certain to veto that measure, its passage helped keep the issue away from negotiations on the spending bill.

OUT: Cuba and Puerto Rico

OUT: Cuba and Puerto Rico Paul J. Richards/AFP/Getty Images Some wanted to aid Puerto Rico. Some hoped to block the Obama administration’s normalization efforts with Cuba. Neither made it into the final bill. Democrats and the White House had pushed to include relief to Puerto Rico, which has run out of cash to pay its creditors and has been asking Congress for help. The island territory does not have access to the same bankruptcy protections as states and had hoped Congress would allow it to restructure its debt before it defaults on $72 billion in loans. Republicans, who blamed fiscal mismanagement, said allowing Puerto Rico to enter bankruptcy would be tantamount to a taxpayer bailout. Meanwhile, lawmakers who oppose normalization of relations with Cuba hoped to used the spending bill to slow the administration’s progress. Since Obama announced the reopening of diplomatic ties with Havana, Cuban-American lawmakers both Democrat and Republican have looked for ways to block his efforts. But amid news that a deal to restore commercial flights between the island and the U.S. is close to completion, as well as the announcement that direct mail service would be reinstated between the two countries, Cuba-related language was left out.

OUT: Gun Violence Research

OUT: Gun Violence Research The Associated Press For nearly 20 years, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has been prohibited from using its resources to examine the causes of gun-related violence. House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi of California had hoped to leverage recent events that have pushed gun control to the forefront of the national conversation into legislative change, perhaps in exchange for Democrats’ support for lifting the oil export ban. The effort was ultimately unsuccessful.

IN: 9/11 First Responders Compensation