Republican gubernatorial candidate Charlie Baker Thursday said he suspected something foul when he heard former Rep. William Delahunt received three provisional medical marijuana licenses, more than any other applicant.

"How does that old joke go? One time is luck, twice is coincidence, three times I smell a rat," said Baker on WCVB's OTR political show. "Whatever the expression is. There’s definitely some of that in this.”

Baker called Delahunt "a good man," but questioned his relationship with the Public Health Commissioner who has raised money for Delahunt in the past.

"The whole thing needs to be rebooted," said Baker about the Department of Public Health's process for awarding the first medical marijuana licenses.

"I would hope that if I were in office it wouldn’t have ended up where it is currently," he said.

He also questioned why the selection committee did not include someone with medical, pain management experience.

Baker also was critical of Gov. Deval Patrick's administration for its handling of the transition of the Health Connector to Obamacare.

He accused the governor of not aggressively pushing hard enough for a federal waiver since the state's system was working well before the new mandates were approved.

"I worked in state government for six years -- eight years," said Baker. "If you want a waiver from the federal government, you have to ask more than once and you have to be aggressive and committed to getting it done."

On driver's licenses for illegal residents, Baker refused to comment on Democratic candidate Martha Coakley's recent switch to supporting the concept after years of opposing it.

"Martha's positions are Martha's positions," said Baker, who will need independent and Democratic women voters to win the election.

Baker said he opposes giving illegal immigrants Massachusetts drivers licenses because of our experience on 9/11 where many of the terrorists had multiple licenses.

"It’s a door opener in many respects to a lot of places in and around the commerce and civic activity of this nation," said Baker, who criticized Massachusetts for not joining the federal REAL ID program.

On GOP apathy, Baker was defensive on why so few Republicans have signed up for the convention now only a week away.

Less than half of the 3,000 delegates who have attended in the past have committed to attending the party's convention where candidates are endorsed for political office.

"People still have time to sign up," he said. "People show up late. I mean people buy movie tickets late ... they buy health insurance late."

He would not predict if Mark Fisher, his only GOP opponent, will get the support of 15 percent of the delegates, need to appear on the primary ballot this September.