ANNOUNCEMENT

Readers: Questions about the political and international scene? Washington Bureau Chief Jerry Seib would be happy to answer them in an upcoming Daybreak video. Send your questions to editor Kate Milani at kate.milani@wsj.com. We look forward to hearing from you.

HIGHLIGHTS

OBAMA ADMINISTRATION REJECTS KEYSTONE XL PIPELINE: The Obama administration rejected the Keystone XL pipeline Friday, capping a politically charged review of the oil project that lasted more than seven years and escalated into a broader debate on energy, climate change and the economy. “The State Department has decided that the Keystone XL Pipeline would not serve the national interest of the U.S.,” President Barack Obama said in brief remarks from the White House. “I agree with that decision.” Mr. Obama cited the urgency of climate change, and the need for American leadership on that problem, as key reasons for his decision.

Andrew Cullen/Reuters

Keystone became a symbol as much as a project, proving an unexpected rallying point for environmental activists, who portrayed it as epitomizing the U.S.’s reliance on fossil fuels. That prompted a backlash from conservatives, who said critics were opposing a valuable, job-creating project. The president said the pipeline had occupied an overinflated role in political discourse, adding that it was neither a silver bullet for the economy nor an express lane to climate disaster. The project would not have lowered gas prices, improved energy security or made a long-term contribution to the economy, Mr. Obama said. Amy Harder reports.

Plus: Republican presidential candidates condemned President Obama’s rejection of the Keystone XL Pipeline, while Democrats applauded the decision … The full text of the president’s remarks rejecting the pipeline.

WSJ STORIES YOU SHOULDN’T MISS

BRISK JOB GAINS LIKELY TO CHEER FED: U.S. employers hired at their strongest pace this year in October and wage growth showed signs of picking up, indications of labor-market vigor likely to reassure Federal Reserve officials as they weigh raising interest rates in December. Nonfarm payrolls rose a seasonally adjusted 271,000 in October, the Labor Department said Friday. The unemployment rate, which is obtained from a separate survey of U.S. households, fell slightly to 5.0% in October, the lowest reading since April 2008 and down from 5.1% the prior month. It’s also a notch closer to Fed officials’ 4.9% median projection for its normal long-run level. Anna Louie Sussman and Jeffrey Sparshott report.

Related: Jobs Report By the Numbers| Economists React | 12 Charts | Full-Time Employment | Interactive: National Job Gains, Losses

SUPREME COURT TO REVIEW OBAMA ADMINISTRATION’S CONTRACEPTION COMPROMISE: The Supreme Court on Friday accepted challenges to an Obama administration compromise for providing birth-control coverage to workers at religiously affiliated institutions, agreeing to decide whether it is at odds with a federal law on religious freedom. As part of the Affordable Care Act, most employers are required to include birth-control coverage in their health insurance plans, with no out-of-pocket costs for employees. The law fully exempted institutions like churches, but not religiously affiliated nonprofit employers such as Catholic universities or hospitals. Brent Kendall and Louise Radnofsky report.

HILLARY CLINTON BACKS SHORTER MANDATORY MINIMUM SENTENCES: Hillary Clinton spelled out more ideas for overhauling the criminal justice system, backing shorter mandatory minimum sentences and more discretion for judges. The new details, which expand on her promise to “end the era of mass incarceration,” add her support to bipartisan momentum for changes to the criminal justice system. Laura Meckler reports.

CARSON BACKS WHITE HOUSE’S TPP TRADE DEAL: Republican presidential candidate Ben Carson said Friday he supports the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement negotiated by the White House – aligning himself more with the GOP’s establishment wing than with the social conservatives who have powered his campaign. Reid J. Epstein reports. Plus: Mr. Carson’s statements that he was offered a spot at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point came under examination Friday, with his campaign saying that Mr. Carson believed he had an offer to attend but later decided not to formally apply. Rebecca Ballhaus reports.

More on Election 2016: Chris Christie’s supporters are attacking the poll selection process used to determine which Republican presidential candidates will make the main GOP debate stage Tuesday … Guide to the Fox Business Network/Wall Street Journal GOP debates Nov. 10.

ALSO IN THE NEWS

The Department of Homeland Security said Friday it was tightening security measures for international flights into the U.S. from the Middle East amid fears the terror group Islamic State may have brought down Russian Metrojet Flight 9268 … Russia suspended flights to Egypt amid mounting indications from the U.K. government that Islamic State was behind the downing of the Russian-operated Airbus last weekend … Here’s a look at the evolving intelligence about the crash.

The international organization that monitors chemical weapons use on Friday said a mustard gas agent was used in an attack on the Syrian town of Marea in August.

The Islamist-aligned political faction that controls much of western Libya accused the United Nations special envoy to Libya of bias as a mediator in his efforts to broker a unity government in the war-torn country.

France will bring back border controls with neighboring countries for the first time in years as a security measure during the two-week climate change conference that begins in Paris at the end of the month.

Brazilian authorities on Friday were racing to rescue victims and determining the death toll after a Brazil town was flooded by mine waste from a burst dam owned by two of the world’s largest mining companies, Vale and BHP Billiton.

The European Union published details of tough labor and environmental standards it wants included in a putative trans-Atlantic free-trade pact, amid fears from labor leaders and politicians on both sides of the Atlantic that the deal could bolster multinational corporations at the expense of consumers and workers.

Oil-field service companies are slashing costs amid an industry-rattling fall in crude prices, and no cut is too small—such as using white paint instead of yellow on underwater equipment.

TODAY’S VIDEO

VIDEO: HOW BLACK MILLENNIALS COULD IMPACT THE 2016 ELECTION

A new study from the Black Youth Project at the University of Chicago sheds light on the experiences and politics of black millennials. WSJ’s Shelby Holliday explains three key takeaways from the report and the potential impact on the 2016 election.

OTHER TOP STORIES OF THE WEEK



BEN CARSON VAULTS TO LEAD IN LATEST JOURNAL/NBC POLL: Retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson overtook businessman Donald Trump as the top pick of GOP presidential primary voters, a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News survey found, as Republicans continued to turn to nontraditional candidates who they believe can channel their anger with Washington. Patrick O’Connor reported.

ELECTION 2016 WEEKLY WRAP-UP: If there is a unifying 2016 theme, it is anger at the political system and insiders … Mr. Carson would be Hillary Clinton’s toughest opponent, poll numbers show … Republicans gave Jeb Bush high marks for being easygoing and likable and for possessing the experience and knowledge to handle the presidency but the numbers are pretty grim from there … Sen. Bernie Sanders, in a WSJ interview, drew sharper distinctions with Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton, casting her changes on policy as a character issue … Mrs. Clinton’s campaign fired back, saying Mr. Sanders was engaging in the sort of “personal attacks” he had disavowed … In New Hampshire, where overdose deaths are on track to break last year’s record, drug abuse has emerged as the top issue in the 2016 presidential campaign … New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee were bumped from next Tuesday’s 9 p.m. debate … Four GOP candidates descended on an Iowa hunting lodge this past weekend for an opportunity to show off their pheasant-hunting skills—and get some face time with Rep. Steve King, an important political power broker who hosts an annual pheasant-hunting fundraiser … The major Democratic presidential campaigns have been scrambling to lure Vice President Joe Biden’s network of supporters … Americans with no religious affiliation, so-called nones, have supplanted Catholics as the largest such group in the Democratic Party, a Pew Research study shows … Rep. Elijah Cummings (D., Md.) is a leading candidate in a U.S. Senate race that he hasn’t officially entered.

FUNDING SHORTFALL HOBBLES MASSIVE NUCLEAR CLEANUP: The Energy Department’s cleanup operation is wrestling with reduced budgets, tens of billions of dollars in ballooning cost estimates and 2,700 structures on its to-do list. Officials said more than 350 additional unneeded facilities controlled by other programs in the Energy Department are likely eligible for transfer to the cleanup operation. But that office said its funds are limited and it isn’t accepting any more projects for now, no matter their significance. John R. Emshwiller and Gary Fields reported.

HOUSE PASSES HIGHWAY BILL WITH EX-IM BANK RENEWAL: The House on Thursday approved a multiyear transportation funding bill that would also renew the Export-Import Bank, increasing the odds that the measure would be signed into law. The bill passed 363-64, setting up negotiations with the Senate, and if the two chambers can resolve their differences, the measure to fund road, bridge and mass-transit projects would provide the most certainty in a decade for transportation planners. Siobhan Hughes reported.

PACIFIC TRADE PACT IS RELEASED, FUELING DEBATE: The U.S. and 11 other nations in a sweeping Pacific trade agreement released the pact’s details Thursday, opening a battle over thousands of provisions that will help determine whether it wins congressional backing next year. William Mauldin reported.

SEN. BOB CORKER PROFITS ON QUICK STOCK TRADES: In the course of his Senate career, Republican Sen. Bob Corker of Tennessee has made many short-term trades in shares of a little-known Chattanooga real-estate company. Until recently, he hadn’t made public a dozen stock purchases in the firm, including several that resulted in his most profitable investments. In one previously unknown purchase, Mr. Corker purchased between $1 million and $5 million in shares of the firm, CBL & Associates Properties Inc., in late 2011 and sold them five months later for a 42% gain. Brody Mullins and Tom McGinty reported.

U.S. DETECTS FLURRY OF IRANIAN HACKING: Iran’s powerful Revolutionary Guard military force hacked email and social-media accounts of Obama administration officials in recent weeks in attacks believed to be tied to the arrest in Tehran of an Iranian-American businessman, U.S. officials said. Jay Solomon reported. Plus: The U.S. temporarily cut the flow of billions of dollars to Iraq’s central bank this summer amid concerns the currency was ending up at Iranian banks and possibly being funneled to ISIS. Emily Glazer, Nour Malas and Jon Hilsenrath reported.

CHINA, U.S. OFFICIALS TUSSLE OVER TERRITORIAL DISPUTES IN SOUTH CHINA SEA: Top U.S. defense officials took their concerns over territorial disputes in the South China Sea directly to their Chinese counterparts on Tuesday, sending a strong signal and calling for improved military cooperation. Adm. Harry Harris, the top American military officer in Asia, delivered an address in Beijing to defend recent U.S. patrols near islands claimed by China. And Defense Secretary Ash Carter met Gen. Chang Wanquan, the Chinese defense minister, during a gathering of the region’s leading military officials in Malaysia. Gordon Lubold and Jeremy Page reported.

HEALTH INSURERS STRUGGLE TO PROFIT FROM ACA PLANS: The Affordable Care Act’s third open enrollment season got under way, with a new array of health plans that show how the law’s influence is starting to transform the insurance industry. Under the ACA, insurers have seen an influx of new membership in individual plans and in Medicaid plans they administer for the government, expanding the industry’s total U.S. revenue to $743 billion in 2014, the year the law’s biggest changes took effect, from $641 billion the year before, according to McKinsey & Co. But much of that growth has been unprofitable. Anna Wilde Mathews reported.

THE DEATH RATE IS RISING FOR MIDDLE-AGED WHITES: White, middle-aged Americans are dying at a rising rate, a new study shows, a startling reversal that suggests addiction and mental-health issues are setting back decades of gains in longevity. Betsy McKay reported.

IRS AUDITS OF INDIVIDUALS DROP TO 11-YEAR LOW: The Internal Revenue Service’s audits of individual taxpayers fell to the lowest rate in 11 years, a revenue-sapping result that the agency’s commissioner blames on budget cuts. Richard Rubin reported.

REPUBLICAN MATT BEVIN WINS KENTUCKY GOVERNOR’S RACE: Republican Matt Bevin won a bitterly fought race for Kentucky governor Tuesday, handing the GOP a coveted seat that extends its hold on the South and imperiling the state’s closely watched implementation of the federal health law. Arian Campo-Flores reports.

RYAN RULES OUT IMMIGRATION PROSPECTS THROUGH 2016: Rep. Paul Ryan, just days into his tenure as House speaker, ruled out for now prospects for sweeping changes in U.S. immigration laws, making good on promises he made to conservatives while running for his new job. Mr. Ryan declared he would oppose advancing comprehensive immigration legislation until after next year’s presidential elections, putting to rest an issue that had been a chief concern of the most conservative Republicans in Congress. Siobhan Hughes reported.

MILESTONE

$25.20

The average hourly earnings of private-sector workers rose last month by 9 cents to $25.20, and are up 2.5% from a year earlier.

TWEET OF THE DAY

Leader McConnell @SenateMajLdr: Republicans will not give up on common-sense jobs ideas like #KeystoneXL. 1.usa.gov/1Pf93Zi

Rep. Peter Welch @PeterWelch: “Time to act on climate change is now. Not someday, not later. Right now.” Well said. @POTUS did the right thing in rejecting #KeystoneXL

FEEDBACK: This is the Friday afternoon newsletter from The Wall Street Journal’s Washington bureau. Send your tips, feedback and suggestions for recommended reading to editor Kate Milani at kate.milani@wsj.com.

SIGN UP: Capital Journal Daybreak, straight to your inbox http://on.wsj.com/CapitalJournalSignup