The president, his wife, and a third wheel. (Photo by Win McNamee/Getty Images)

There is an immediate and obvious downside to the release of what appear to be millions of account details from users of Ashley Madison, a Web site meant to facilitate infidelity. But there's also a plus side: It offers the unusual opportunity to analyze a huge set of data provided by millions of people around the world.

That includes politics.

Included in the data are little blurbs of text that appear to be the sort of thing someone might use to represent what they hoped to find on the site. "I need someone to listen," one reads. "HAY LADIES," shouts another. "Seeking fun - be upfront & honest," a third. There are millions of these, hopeful little valentines slid across the Internet, hoping to catch someone's eye.

[Don’t gloat about the Ashley Madison leak. It’s about way more than infidelity.]

And many of those little notes, which are generally up to about 40 characters long, involve politics. There are a number of people who use their character allotment to identify themselves as Democrats. (We've excluded descriptions which might make it easy to identify the user.)

"Arts Loving Democrat Seeks Same"

"liberal democrat" (This could be a user from another country (like Britain), we would note, as many have parties known as the "Liberal Democrats.")

"Democrat"

"Democratic affairs"

"im a conservative yung money democrat"

"A Democrat who loves to kiss"

"Must love democrats"

"Educated Professional Democrat"

"Democratic lover"

"Democrat who likes to kiss"

"democrat in utah"

"Not a Republican!"

Most of the people looking only for a member of a particular political party appeared to be Democrats. From the positive perspective:

"fluffy democrats preferred"

"democrat preferred"

"Looking for a good democrat"

And the negative:

"No republicans please"

"No republicans"

"Staunchly Non-Republican but otherwise very open-minded"

"Any Non-Republicans Out There?"

"Annoy a Republican"

"Republicans make me nervous"

"Republicans need not apply."

But contrary to their party-of-family-values image, there are plenty of self-identified Republicans in the mix, too.

"vote republican"

"Life is a blur of Republicans and meat"

"Republican Australian Kissers Only..."

"Republican gal into Chicago sports!"

"Refined Republican"

"Dirty republican"

"republicans are the best lovers"

"I'm a gun totin' Republican"

"Republican 2:16"

"One woman man and card carrying Republican"

"Republican with Liberal Tendancies"

Hackers say they have posted the personal details of millions of people registered with the adultery website Ashley Madison. But this massive data breach could have widespread implications on how we all use the Internet. The Post's Caitlin Dewey explains. (Jorge Ribas/The Washington Post)

That last joke exposes one of the weird things about the hack. The language we use for politics and for sex overlaps in weird ways. Search for "conservative" or "liberal," and you are about as likely to get a fetish suggestion as a political one.

That applies to the libertarians, too, who seem weirdly insistent on pointing out how smart they are.

"Liberty for libertarian libertines!"

"high integrity adventurous libertarian"

"Highly educated libertarian businessman seeks sexy lady"

"Libertarian seeking same"

"Libertarian academic seeks adventure"

"libertarian man"

"45 year old libertarian Athiest looking for like minded woman."

"Intelligent.Introverted.Chivalrous.Ultralibertarian.Atheist."

"Libertarian - fan of freedom"

"Frequent work travel...Any Libertarians?"

"Looking for a libertarian woman for conversion and fun!"

"Libertarian in mind and play"

"Libertarian men only"

"wellread-libertarian"

"Libertarian stuck in socialist hell."

Politics also appears in the e-mails people used to register for the site. There are a slew of "whitehouse.gov" e-mails, though all appear clearly bogus. Examples:

president@whitehouse.gov

billclinton@whitehouse.gov

gwb@whitehouse.gov

Bill@whitehouse.gov

orackbobama@whitehouse.gov

barack.obama@whitehouse.gov

georgebush@whitehouse.gov

billybob@whitehouse.gov

barack@whitehouse.gov

And so on.

Interest in President Obama, though, reveals something really interesting, about the data: The extent to which people use the political moment to try to appeal to potential partners.

The data released from Ashley Madison appears to be in roughly chronological order. It started in Canada, so many of the first users in the system are from that country -- particularly Toronto. You can also see when the site stopped requiring everyone to fill out all of the information; the data suddenly is awash with blank values.

That means that we can roughly trace political thought over time. As when you search for "Obama." What follows are people using the word (or, really, letters) "obama" in their profile blurbs over time. This is the order in which those blurbs appear in the data.

First, there's the 2008 election.

"Happy Halloween and Vote for Obama"

"OBAMA FOR PRESIDENT '08"

"Go Obama!"

"Obamaino8"

"Go Obama"

"Obama -08"

"I believe in affairs and Obama all at the same time ;)"

"Obamania"

"Obama is a long legged mack daddy"

Which Obama won. He was popular for a bit.

"Obama WON!"

"I didn't vote for Obama"

"obama 08!"

"Like Obama / You'll Love Me"

"Go Obama"

"Go Lakers! Welcome Obama!!"

"ObamaNation"

"President Obama is not the only one who can make you feel hope!"

But opinions of Obama quickly polarized.

"Must love dogs... and btw... fyi... I don't like obama"

"did not vote for obama"

"Obama wants change"

"Obama fans...Please move along!...lol"

"Bodacious in Obama's backyard"

"Obamamama Here!!!"

"Obama says ime for a change. So here I'am."

The first mentions of Obamacare and impeachment sit side-by-side.

"Obamacare won't help fix my situation..."

"12 Galaxies Impeach Obama"

"looking for real change not the obama type"

"Like Obama said..It's time for a change"

"Bust obama"

"Left of Obama"

"Knock Knock 'whos there' Obama 'obama who' O ba myself"

"Go Obama"

"Ready for a change.. just call me obama. Lol"

"Obamacare for your health"

"No games. No drama. Just fun and people cool with Obama"

"Wanna hear my imitation of Obama doing Al Green???"

"Leonardo DiCaprio + Obama = Me"

"Obama baby"

"Let's have fun before Obama starts WWIII"

"I've been told I look like a young Obama..."

Then Healthcare.gov launches.

"http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2013/12/1/obamacare-site-d" (This is a broken link to an article about the Obamacare site.)

"Hoping this site works better than Obamas"

"more fun than Obama"

"No Obama voters."

"I Luv obama.com"

"obamasaterrorist"

"nobama"

"He is my hero"-----Obama"

"YOLO! A cliche has never been so apt...it's good enoughfor Obama"

People on both sides of the spectrum, putting up political flags in the hopes of getting a little attention.

Obama wasn't the only presidential candidate to make it into people's blurbs. There are also mentions of Mitt Romney. One reads simply "romney." The other:

"go Romney"

The database does not suggest whether or not this enthusiastic endorsement was successful in luring a partner.