We still have well over 500 days to the 2016 presidential election. At this point, the campaign is largely just performance art for the press and the donor class. This is the silly season, where partisans can dream and pundits can speculate wildly.

Maybe this is the year, they theorize, that an independent billionaire enters the race and edges out the major-party nominees (even though nothing like it has ever happened, Ross Perot included), or that California goes Republican or Texas Democratic (even though there’s no evidence either state will change its partisan hue in 2016). These fallacies will be exposed once the contest shifts into high gear next year and the factual grounding for this pontificating dwindles from meager to nonexistent.

Story Continued Below

It’s the less outrageous assertions we’ve been hearing in Act I of the campaign, those that have congealed into conventional wisdom, that are in greater need of a debunking. Below we separate a few such myths from the underlying realities.

Myth #1: The giant Republican field is unpredictable, almost anybody’s game.

With 10 Republican presidential hats in the ring, and perhaps another 10 to come, we all know the GOP is going to have the largest field in living memory. Increasingly, surveys are showing 10 or more candidates bunched in the single or low double-digits. The most recent Quinnipiac poll headlined a finding that has no modern precedent: five contenders tied at 10 percent each.

But the closeness of the race is a mirage, a false projection of the reality that exists just below the surface. At this very early stage, when every week more candidates declare, the public is mainly not engaged—not even the select contingent of voters that will turn up to cast ballots in the caucuses and primaries.

Republicans are hungry to reoccupy the White House, and the realistic among them understand the party won’t win without pitching a bigger tent. There may be no single GOP frontrunner, but there are just a few politicians who have the resources, positioning and potential to expand the base. They are former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, not necessarily in that order.

Everyone can see that Jeb Bush is doing poorly so far. He’s in a much worse position than his father was in 1987 or his brother was in 1999. This Bush intimidates no one. His political skills are rusty, he’s a pedestrian speaker and some of his views (immigration reform, Common Core, etc.) have made him many enemies among party ideologues.

Yet Bush is still undeniably among the frontrunners. The GOP’s donor class is disproportionately for him, as his Super PAC fundraising total will soon reveal. The party’s organizational leaders who care only about winning argue for him. The largest share of top elected Republicans back him openly or covertly. Four Republican senators are running, but private talks with GOP senators lead us to believe more Republican senators are rooting for Bush than for the quartet of their Senate colleagues combined.

Then there’s the experience factor. Jeb may not have been on a ballot himself since 2002, but he has been at the heart of six prior national campaigns, his father’s four (1980, 1984, 1988 and 1992) and his brother’s recent two. No other Republican candidate can boast more than one such trial by fire.

At the same time, Bush isn’t a shoo-in for the nomination. Compared to earlier decades, today’s GOP is considerably less hierarchical and deferential to the leadership. Political money can’t be hoarded by the best-known name, nor by the candidates closest to the formal party leadership. Gobs of campaign cash are just a rich person away; so far there’s seemingly a billionaire backing just about every major candidate. Finally, Jeb Bush is the early favorite in none of the gateway states, that is, the first four to vote (Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina and Nevada).

On top of that, Bush has formidable company in the frontrunner’s circle. One of the first big surprises of this cycle has been Marco Rubio’s success. Few thought there would be a second Floridian in the race, or that Rubio could challenge Bush as an equal in the Sunshine State and elsewhere. There are many reasons for Rubio’s rise, including his potential ability to shrink the Democratic advantage among Hispanics and the generational contrast he can offer against Hillary Clinton. It is true that Rubio’s single term as U.S. senator presents a skimpy resume, but that didn’t stop Barack Obama.

While less charismatic than Rubio, Scott Walker undeniably makes the frontrunner list as well. He has strong domestic chops, plus the potential to create a Midwestern path to victory for both the nomination and the general election. Wisconsin is in Iowa’s Midwest neighborhood, and that’s part of why Walker is ahead in Iowa, but he also seems to be in the party’s sweet spot on a host of economic and social issues. Foreign policy is a major weakness, yet he’s drilling almost daily with his in-house experts to bone up. And Walker has already gone from an uninspiring orator to a competent and sometimes imposing stump speaker. There’s still much work to do: Walker doesn’t usually strike neutral observers as having the stature and bearing of a president (his lack of a college degree doesn’t help in that regard). But he should not be underestimated.

If you’re looking for a dark-horse entrant into the first tier, it might be John Kasich. Few would bet on him today, but no sensible party will easily dismiss a popular two-term governor of swing-state Ohio. And Kasich’s federal, state and private sector experiences comprise impressive preparation for the presidency. The primary obstacle for Kasich are his positions on Obamacare and Common Core, which have earned him the RINO label. He also has to generate interest in a hurry so he can get into the upcoming debates, for which he currently does not qualify. And Kasich must make a convincing case that he’s not just another Jon Huntsman, who won more plaudits from the media than votes from Republicans in 2012.

Kyle Kondik is managing editor of Sabato’s Crystal Ball, a nonpartisan political newsletter produced by the University of Virginia Center for Politics. He also directs the center’s Washington, D.C., office.

Geoffrey Skelley is associate editor at Sabato’s Crystal Ball.