ObamaCare's 1095-A nightmare

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Tax season is stressful enough. But for countless miserable Americans trapped in the ObamaCare 1095-A abyss, it's hell on stilts on a Segway teetering over the Grand Canyon.

The screw-ups and bureaucratic blame avoidance over the health insurance exchange tax forms make the healthcare.gov website fiasco look like a flawless product launch. How do I know? My family inexplicably got ensnared in the 1095-A paperwork pit.

In 2013, our private high-deductible PPO from Anthem Blue Cross got canceled because of “changes from health care reform.” Millions of others like us in the individual market for health insurance — including self-employed people, small-business owners, writers, artists and home-based entrepreneurs — suffered the same fate.

My husband reluctantly contacted Colorado's state health insurance exchange. Months later, we settled on purchasing a new non-ObamaCare plan directly from a different private insurer, Rocky Mountain Health. The provider network is much narrower than the Anthem plan we had before the feds intervened.

But wait, it gets worse.

Somewhere along the way, the worker bees at Connect for Health Colorado dragooned us into an ObamaCare exchange plan offered by Rocky Mountain Health without our knowledge or consent. (How else has the White House inflated ObamaCare enrollment figures?) Last month, we received an IRS 1095-A form, which, much to our shock, indicated that we had paid ObamaCare premiums every month during 2014.

It took hours of time on the phone and Internet to receive an explanation from Connect for Health Colorado on how exactly this happened.

This is just one little horror story. In Minnesota, thousands are still waiting for 1095-A forms that were supposed to arrive on Jan. 31. In California, at least 800,000 taxpayers received screwed-up 1095-A forms. As a result, some 50,000 people filed the wrong form. Another 750,000 are being told they'll get corrected forms this month. Hah. Good luck with that.

Where's the rest of the media — most of whom have been insulated from these problems because they get their health insurance through their employers?

At least one other journalist smacked into reality. Laura Krantz, a former NPR staffer, is now a Scripps fellow in environmental journalism at the University of Colorado, Boulder. Earlier this month, she found out that Connect for Health Colorado had mysteriously canceled her health and dental insurance. After four days and eight hours in ObamaCare phone hell, she learned she had lost her insurance coverage and her tax credit — and had to redo all of her paperwork.

San Francisco resident and former Obama supporter Melissa Klein recently exposed her ordeal with Covered California. The state exchange botched her 1095-A and then insisted she had never enrolled despite invoices she showed them documenting her premium payments.

Klein concluded, better late than never: “I no longer believe that the government should mandate health care. ... A great idea is just an idea if you can't execute. And the government has proved time and time again, it can't execute.” Feelin' your pain, sister. Is D.C. listening?

Michelle Malkin is the author of “Culture of Corruption: Obama and his Team of Tax Cheats, Crooks and Cronies” (Regnery 2009).