The Awakening! Let us hope President Obama’s belated arousal to the menace of resurgent terror in Syria and Iraq will be an awakening rewarded with the same success as the awakening of Sunni tribal groups against al-Qaida. That 2006-2007 revolt, reinforcing U.S. efforts against al-Qaida, was a brilliant success. It was squandered by the vindictiveness of Iraq’s Shiite prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki, and by Obama’s inability (or unwillingness) to bequeath a U.S. military presence to preserving the democratic integrity of the state we had done so much to secure.

Now we are not simply back where we started. We are more menaced than we were by Saddam Hussein. On the plus side, the Iraqis have dispatched the maligned Maliki in favor of a more bipartisan prime minister, Haider al-Abadi, with Kurdish and Sunni minorities in his cabinet. Very much on the downside, though, the destruction of the Middle East’s old Arab order has cast a dark shadow. Radical Sunni jihadist winds pervade the region. They seek to blow away the borders and take over various states. And hundreds of jihadists flock to the black banner.

All this comes at a time when the U.S. has diminished connections and sway. It almost lost credibility when Obama set a red line on chemical weapons and then backed off a year later when Syrian President Bashar Assad gassed more than a thousand of his own people. That lack of resolve undermined American power.

[CHECK OUT: U.S. News Weekly, the digital magazine from U.S. News editors.]

Out of the vacuum has emerged the monstrous Islamic State group, also known as ISIS or ISIL, claiming the authority of a new caliphate. Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi and his acolytes are simply barbarians who have to be degraded and destroyed – as the president thankfully recognized in his prime time address this week.

We seem to be stuck with the ISIS acronym, but the terrorists in what they call Daesh are not a state. Nor do they have any claim on Islam. They quote the Koran, but anyone can do that, and leading Islamic scholars have repudiated their assumption of Islamic authority. Of course, that doesn’t stop them. Their magazine Dabiq finds it useful to quote the Prophet Muhammad: “You will invade the Arabian Peninsula and Allah will enable you to conquer it. You will then invade Persia and Allah will enable you to conquer it. You will then invade Rome and Allah will enable you to conquer it.”

The president also acknowledged in his speech that there is a serious threat to America, as we did not do when Osama bin Laden first bragged about his hostile intentions. This is not scare talk. As serious a man as former CIA head Michael Hayden stated on CNN that he expects ISIS to attempt an attack on targets in the U.S. and Europe. ISIS, he says, “has global ambitions and it has the tools,” and he points out that the killing of two American journalists by ISIS radicals reveals in the most powerful way an expression of street credentials among the jihadist community and their intent to carry out attacks against the West.

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

Sadly, hundreds of jihadists are brainwashed nationals of the U.S., Britain and other European nations who presently can easily slip back home with entry documents and evil intent. Unthinkable? Alas, not so. These “primitive cultists who celebrate slaughter, glory in bloodlust and slit the throats of innocents as a kind of sacrament,” in the words of columnist Charles Krauthammer, have overtaken al-Qaida as the world’s most dangerous terror organization. Given their ability to channel money and advanced weapons while controlling territory, they offer a terror base much as Afghanistan’s Taliban did to enable al-Qaida to plot 9/11.

In a recent issue of The New Yorker, George Packer notes that ISIS controls 35,000 square miles, an area the size of Jordan, stretching from a town on the Turkish border and across the obliterated Iraqi border down to the farming towns south of Baghdad, roughly a third of the territory of both Iraq and Syria. “It is exploiting almost every oil and gas field in Syria; it has seized Iraq’s largest refinery,” said Packer. It also controlled the water and power supplies from the biggest dam north of Mosul until evicted by the Kurdish Peshmerga fighters with U.S. help. It has ample resources. It earns in excess of $2 million a day extorting the oil sectors in northern Iraq. And, said Packer, “emptying captured banks, and extorting money through kidnappings and taxation.” It runs protection rackets and bleeds the commercial and reconstruction sectors in Iraq’s economy.

Even more alarmingly, it now has “billions of dollars’ worth of stolen American- and Russian-made armored vehicles and heavy weapons,” said Packer. Those are resources and territory “unmatched in the history of extremist terrorist organizations,” notes former Pentagon official Janine Davidson in the same article.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Islamic State]

The fundamental danger of organizations like ISIS – and Hamas, too – is that they appeal to universal religious convictions rather than narrow nationalisms. This requires a gross distortion of religious principle, but what do they care when blind hatred has such emotive power? As such, the groups are completely willing to sanctify slaughter. While ISIS beheads journalists and adversaries, Hamas kidnaps and slaughters teenage yeshiva students, writes Israel’s minister of economy and chairman of the Jewish Home Party Naftali Bennett in the Chicago Tribune. Such crimes stem from their version of Sharia. They have been so violent in their actions towards religious minorities, including Christians, that even Pope Francis has endorsed military action against them. As long as the terrorists remain a force, “there will not be a chance to create long-lasting stability or peace in the Middle East,” said Bennett.

Like ISIS, the Hamas charter also calls for a worldwide caliphate wrought by violent jihad. As Alan Dershowitz points out in a recent essay for the Gatestone Institute: “If these terrorist groups were to lay down their arms, there might be peace, whereas if their enemies were to lay down their arms, there would be genocide.” The patrons of Hamas, notably Qatar and Turkey, are also in need of an awakening. On September 11 – ominous day – The New York Times published a thoroughly unconvincing protest of Qatar’s rectitude from its foreign minister, Khalid al-Attiyah. The Times had reported how Qatar had alienated others in the region by its support of extremists. “Our government,” wrote the foreign minister, “in no way supports the radical groups that are terrorizing innocent civilians and destabilizing the Middle East.” Hello? Qatar’s emir and his foreign minister clearly have not read Hamas’s charter pledging it to destroy all Jews. And they seem to have overlooked, or disregarded, the international identification of Hamas as a terror group by, among others, the U.S., the European Union, Canada, New Zealand and Australia.

Hamas is ISIS and ISIS is Hamas.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Iraq]

In a recent article in the Guardian, Joint Chiefs Chairman Martin Dempsey made it clear that ISIS cannot be contained in perpetuity and will have to be defeated. Now it is joined by Hamas, which also speaks of genocide – of a Palestine from the sea to the river, which would mean wiping out the Israelis. The Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh has said the gun “is our only response to the Zionist regime … no compromise should be made with the enemy.”

According to U.S. intelligence, ISIS has become so potent that traditional counterterrorism tactics aren’t enough. A new CIA assessment states that ISIS can muster 20,000 to 31,500 fanatics, two to three more times than previously estimated. It has become a global jihadist organization. Indeed, in an online posting months ago, its leader said, “America, we have not turned our gaze away from you.”

Obama did his best in his speech to prepare the American public for a lengthy operation. That was prudent. But who will rally to the flag, put boots on the ground, so that we can prepare for reconquest? The U.S. has alienated virtually every Arab country. Egypt is trying. Its leader, Abdel-Fattah el-Sissi, is seeking support from leaders like King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia and even Vladimir Putin of Russia. General Sissi understands that the terror threat must be eliminated to deal with a generation of radicals from the Muslim Brotherhood drawn to the slaughter of infidels and their notion of recreating an Islamic caliphate under Sharia law.

The radicals in ISIS have murdered Muslims – both Sunni and Shia – by the thousands, and targeted Christians and religious minorities for murder. The former head of the Defense Intelligence Agency, Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, pointed out in the online publication Breaking Defense last month that “in 2004, there were 21 total Islamic terrorist groups spread out in 18 countries. Today, there are 41 Islamic terrorist groups spread out in 24 countries.” Many, he adds, are committed to attacking the West. This means it is imperative to engage with moderate Arab countries like Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Jordan, Turkey, and our European allies. Turkey must surely awaken to the threat on its borders.

[MORE: Editorial Cartoons on Syria]

But what to do about Syria. The questions remain: Who and what are the moderates? What do they need? How feasible is it to rely on American air power? Again, it was good that Obama acknowledged that the Syrian civil war is a key. We cannot defeat ISIS in Iraq or limit its potential if it continues to enjoy sanctuary in Syria. ISIS opposes Assad, but he is a long-standing radical leader. If, in the end, Syria can be pacified only by ground forces, it will be very difficult for America to commit, certainly not alone.

Can we rally the Sunnis again to fight against ISIS as they did against al-Qaida? This can’t be seen as a religious war, one of Sunnis against Shiites.

It will be hard to align the moderate forces. American leadership, as always, is critical. And that must begin with the strongest support from Congress.