Updated: 11/23/2015 7:31 PM

Created: 11/23/2015 7:29 PM KSTP.com

Josh Rosenthal

The nation's largest health insurer—Minnetonka-based UnitedHealth Group—announced it may exit the Affordable Care Act altogether.

In an earnings update released late last week, UnitedHealth Group reported it is losing hundreds of millions of dollars on the program.

Some say this type of announcement regarding an already controversial program could affect the industry.

“If enough large companies like United were to get out of the Affordable Care Act altogether, what does that mean for the ACA itself? What could it mean? That's the $64,000 question," Jean Abraham, an associate professor in healthy policy and management at the University of Minnesota, said.

Abraham has served as a non-partisan senior economic advisor for both the George W. Bush and President Barack Obama administrations. She said it was surprising to hear UnitedHealth Group’s announcement.

She said that even though UnitedHealth Group is not a part of MNsure, this announcement will make policymakers and the industry—both locally and nationally—take a hard look at the Affordable Care Act, also referred to as “Obamacare.”

"I think we don't want to throw the baby out with the bathwater, but we do need to think about what are the core issues or concerns that insurers are having around either being able to provide the necessary coverage or how to price the plans,” Abraham said. “What are the pressures that are leading them to be more hesitant."

It’s important to point out, after UnitedHealth Group made its announcement, two other major insurance companies reaffirmed their 2015 forecasts, which do include insurance sold on the exchanges.

While those messages may be mixed at the moment, they are important nonetheless.

UnitedHealth Group representatives said the earliest the health care company would exit the Affordable Care Act would by 2017. In the meantime, representatives said it is scaling back its marketing plans for the program.