Topics: Abortion, abortion rights, GOP, mandatory counseling laws, mandatory waiting periods, Missouri, reproductive health, reproductive justice, Reproductive Rights, Republicans, TRAP laws, Politics News

Earlier this year, the Republican-led Missouri state legislature voted to enact a 72 hour waiting period for any person seeking an abortion. The measure tripled the state’s previous waiting period, and made Missouri the third state in the country to impose such a requirement, behind Utah and South Dakota. (Like South Dakota, Missouri’s waiting period law provides no exceptions for victims of rape or incest. Utah’s law includes these exceptions, which doesn’t actually make it any less punitive.)

Reproductive rights activists and state Democrats protested forcefully both before and after the measure passed, and Democratic Gov. Jay Nixon vetoed the bill at the time, calling it “extreme and disrespectful.” But on Wednesday, Republicans used a special veto session to resuscitate the measure, and voted to override the governor’s veto. Senate Democrats attempted to filibuster the bill, but Republicans cut off debate and forced a vote. The law will go into effect in 30 days.

Republicans called the new requirement a “reflection” period. “[If] you get couple of more days to think about this pregnancy, think about where it’s going, you may change your mind,” said Republican state Rep. Kathie Conway. (This is not correct.)

Now in addition to waiting three days before being able to access care, a person seeking an abortion must also receive mandatory counseling. This counseling is designed to misinform patients and discourage them from obtaining an abortion. The counseling must also take place before the waiting period begins, requiring at least two visits to the clinic. There is only one clinic left in the state, so for anyone traveling long distances, that means finding a place to stay. Which means taking time off work. And because many people seeking abortion already have children, it means finding childcare. Which means means finding the money to pay for all of it — including the abortion.

For people in the state who do have insurance through the state’s health exchange under the Affordable Cart Act, anti-choice laws prohibit that insurance from covering abortion except when the person’s life in endangered. Same goes for public employees, who can only use their insurance to pay for basic healthcare if they are more or less on the verge of death. (Missouri has not adopted the Medicaid expansion, but, even so, public funding for the procedure is only available in cases of life endangerment.)