Manufacturing and education partnership helps move economy forward

Buy Photo U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin, D-Madison, looks at a prototype log-grabbing tool during her tour of Bay Link Manufacturing. She said programs such as one at Green Bay West High School can fill Wisconsin’s skills gap. And the manufacturing sector must move forward at a stronger pace if middle class families are to get ahead, she said. (Photo: Mike Peters/for Press-Gazette Media)Buy Photo

In Wisconsin, we have a long and proud tradition of making things: paper, engines, tools, ships — and yes, beer, brats and cheese. We possess one of the largest manufacturing sectors in the nation, supporting a large share of our workforce and exporting goods all over America and the world.

This month, I visited the Bay Link Manufacturing program at Green Bay West High School and took part in something else being made in Wisconsin — pride.

I couldn't be more proud of the work programs like these are doing to help move our Made in Wisconsin economy forward and it reaffirmed my commitment to continue fighting for investments in education and workforce readiness programs.

Bay Link Manufacturing is a high-precision manufacturing learning lab equipped to complete projects for local companies in the areas of industrial welding, machine fabrication and metals. Students design systems to manage accounting, document control, bidding and purchase orders and production planning, shipping, marketing and communications. The program provides students with relevant, real-word experience. This is exactly what we need more of in the Badger State.

That is why I have made Career and Technical Education one of my top priorities in the U.S. Senate.

Even as the national economy continues to rebound, in Wisconsin, our economy lags. Wisconsin has added private-sector jobs at a lower rate than the national average since July 2011. What's more, Wisconsin ranked 40th in private sector job growth for the 12 months ending in September, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

We clearly need stronger economic growth to create shared prosperity. The manufacturing sector that sustained our economy for generations must move forward at a stronger pace if middle class families are to get ahead. And one of the most important things we can do to accomplish this is by investing in CTE partnership programs.

As the co-chair of the Senate CTE Caucus, I have worked to be a strong advocate for investing in Science, Technology, Education and Math education, making higher education more affordable and focusing our efforts on CTE and workforce readiness.

In February, I introduced a bipartisan bill to improve career readiness in schools. The Career Ready Act would help ensure students are college and career-ready by making sure students are offered courses that will help prepare them for our workforce.

I have also introduced legislation that would give CTE students more options to continue their manufacturing studies in higher education. My Manufacturing Universities Act will bolster universities' efforts to focus on manufacturing and help meet the growing demands of advanced manufacturing. The bipartisan bill would designate 25 universities as "Manufacturing Universities" and provide incentives to better align educational offerings with the needs of modern manufacturers.

This spring I will reintroduce two pieces of legislation to address student debt and college affordability. Currently, students who work while attending school often are eligible for less financial aid due to their work income. My Working Student Act will allow students who must work while in college to complete their degrees more quickly and with less debt. And the CTE Opportunity Act extends eligibility for federal student loans to short-term CTE programs which do not meet the current program length requirements. This extended eligibility for federal aid provides increased access to courses that provide students with the industry-recognized credentials.

Wisconsin manufacturing has long been an engine of our economy and a source of good jobs with high wages and solid benefits. Wisconsin's middle class families, small businesses and manufacturers that are working so hard to move our economy forward deserve to have both parties in Washington working together to invest in CTE, grow our manufacturing economy and create jobs.

One thing both parties should be able to agree on is the need to create economic growth by investing in workforce readiness and manufacturing — making us more competitive as a state and a nation.

Our Made in Wisconsin tradition and strong work ethic deserve nothing less.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1Gv78sO