While women may get the rap for being more interested in romantic celebrations like Valentine’s Day, men actually have higher expectations when it comes to receiving gifts.

A new study by Chase Blueprint finds that men expect their significant others to spend nearly $230 on them, while women expect gifts worth just under $200.

Related: Your 2014 Guide to Valentine’s Day Shopping

Both sexes may be in for a disappointing dose of reality, however: Women planned to spend about $70 on gifts this year, while men planned to spend about $100.

Men were almost twice as likely as women to prefer not to exchange gifts at all. “Setting expectations for Valentine’s Day spending is just one way to begin talking about finances with your significant other,” Chase senior vice president Tom O’Donnell said in a statement. “Having an open and honest conversation about your financial expectations and priorities is a key to successfully managing money in a relationship.”

Nearly 70 percent of those polled would prefer their significant other to surprise them, rather than pick out a gift, and almost two thirds of respondents would rather go out to dinner than make a meal at home.

Related: The 3 Biggest Money Mistakes Couples Make

The 2014 Chase Blueprint Valentine’s Day Survey was conducted on behalf of Chase Card Services via the OmniPulse Omnibus survey by Research Now, an independent research company. Interviews were conducted from January 6-8, 2014 among a nationally representative sample of 1,209 people age 18 and older.

Sixty percent of those polled would rather receive chocolate than wine, and the same percentage put new tech gifts higher on their wish list than jewelry items.

A separate study by the National Retail Federation found that 54 percent of Americans planned to celebrate Valentine’s Day this year, down from 60 percent in 2013. In that study nearly half of consumers said they planned to give someone candy; a third said they’d buy flowers.

Top Reads from The Fiscal Times: