It was good news for New Jersey taxpayers but bad news for whoever ends up being the Republican candidate for president in 2016.

Last week Chris Christie announced he'll be able to cut $148 million from charity care to hospitals in his new budget. The reason? His decision to have New Jersey participate in the expansion of Medicaid.

"Expanding Medicaid was the right decision for New Jersey," Christie said at a town hall meeting in Somerville Tuesday. "It's helping save us money, our state taxpayers, by taking more federal dollars."

The feds mandate that anyone who shows up at a hospital has to be treated. But till now they forced the state to pick up the tab. So Christie can hardly be faulted for sending the feds the bill.

But he has been attacked on the Medicaid issue by some national Republicans as he travels around the country on his undeclared campaign for the 2016 GOP presidential nomination.

The critics have a point as well, and it was made by none other than Mitt Romney back in 2012, when he made what was considered a gaffe but was actually the truth. That was the remark about the notorious "47 percent" of Americans who are likely to vote Democratic because they get back more from the federal government than they pay in taxes.

Can you say "60 percent?" Not unless you're smart enough to say it out of range of I-phones and video cameras.

That's about where that number's going to be in 2016 thanks to the expansion of federal programs. More than 10 million Americans have gotten health coverage under Obamacare, which included that Medicaid expansion. Meanwhile Medicare and Social Security are adding about 3.6 million new enrollees a year as the baby boomers reach retirement age.

Add them all up and you can see why Christie shouldn't be so upset if he doesn't win that 2016 nomination. The Republican nominee will be doomed by demographics. At least that's what Reid Holloway says.

Holloway is a financial advisor from Connecticut who's in the habit of putting together PowerPoint presentations designed to depress his fellow Republicans. In early 2012 he released an analysis predicting Romney would lose to Barack Obama by a 325-213 margin electoral-vote margin. (Read my September 2012 column carrying that prediction here.)

Pundits such as Karl Rove and Dick Morris were predicting a big Romney win right up until the polls closed on Election Day - at which point they found out that even Holloway wasn't quite pessimistic enough. The final margin was 332-206.

The GOP will be in even worse shape next year, Holloway predicted. One indication is yet another entitlement that's grown by leaps and bounds since 2012. That's food stamps, otherwise known as the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program. At least 5 million more Americans will be on food stamps by next year, he said.

Holloway put together a spreadsheet of the states with the highest growth in food-stamp enrollees. Many are states the GOP would need if it were to reverse the 2012 margin next year. That led him to this gloomy conclusion:

"The best I think the Republicans could do in 2016 is a 3.5-point average margin of loss," he said.

The problem, simply stated, is that "We're in the bread-and-circuses stage" of our history as a nation.

"It's better to be dealing with reality than to be a tone-deaf idiot kidding himself," he said.

And the reality is that the public doesn't care about key Republican issues such as reducing the federal deficits. That may be good economic policy, but it's not good politics. People who are getting free stuff from the government now don't really care about who will end up paying for it.

"We've reached the point that middle-class welfare has tipped the balance," he said. "At that point it's no longer conservative versus liberal. Everyone is on the take."

As with that Medicaid expansion, all of these giveaways create a ratcheting effect. Once such a program is in place, you'll never get elected by promising to get rid of it.

Holloway said he thinks highly of Scott Walker, the Wisconsin governor who's at the top of many presidential-primary polls. But that's just his opinion.

"When it comes to folks like you and me, he might be the most appealing type of person," he said. "But how many people like us are there?"

Not a lot. An NBC/WSJ poll released last week reported that only 19 percent of Americans say the Republican Party represents middle-class values, while 30 percent say the same for the Democrats. In a potential Hillary-Clinton/Jeb Bush matchup on middle-class values, the Democrats wins by a 33-15 margin.

What is to be done? One thing is to ignore the Pollyanna pundits who misread the electorate so badly in the 2012 elections. Another is to leave the country.

"I now basically look at myself and I'm like my grandpa and grandma in the old country," Holloway said. "They packed up and left when they saw what was coming."

Not me. I'm sticking around for the show.

As circuses go, it's always entertaining.

BELOW: Karl Rove denying reality on election night 2012.