ENLARGE Scott Ellis, the director of ‘On the Twentieth Century.’ Photo: Bryan Derballa for The Wall Street Journal

At a recent rehearsal for the Broadway show, “On the Twentieth Century,” director Scott Ellis was quietly watching stars Kristin Chenoweth and Andy Karl rehearse a scene in which the brawny Mr. Karl lifts the petite Ms. Chenoweth like he’s pumping iron; she inhales and exhales her cigarette as she goes up and down.

The scene had gotten a big laugh the night before, but Mr. Ellis wasn’t satisfied. “If you have a section with too much air in it, it affects the rhythm of the comedy,” he says.

They kept working.

Mr. Ellis isn’t the flashiest director around, but his collaborative nature and steady hand have made him one of the busiest. This year alone, he has directed three Broadway revivals: “The Elephant Man” with Bradley Cooper, “You Can’t Take it With You” with James Earl Jones—and now “On the Twentieth Century,” a Betty Comden and Adolph Green musical comedy from 1978 about a theater impresario (played by Peter Gallagher) on a train who has to convince a movie star, and his former lover (Ms. Chenoweth), to star in his next play before they arrive in New York.

Mr. Ellis spoke to the Journal about the tricky business of heading up revivals, the key to good directing and the difference between “good” and “bad” laughs.

ENLARGE Kristin Chenoweth and Peter Gallagher in a scene from the show. Photo: Joan Marcus

WSJ: What’s the secret to directing comedy?

SE: You have to base it in absolute truth and reality. In “You Can’t Take it With You,” you can’t be thinking that you are goofy, crazy people. You’re not. You are real people in this situation with real wants and real needs.

In “On the Twentieth Century,” the stakes can’t be any higher. You have a person whose career is on the line. By the end of the train ride he has to save himself and to get Lily back.

WSJ: Oscar Jaffee (Peter Gallagher) is based on David Belasco, the theater impresario who owned theaters, directed, produced and discovered Mary Pickford. Is there anyone on Broadway with that kind of influence now?

SE: No. The theater owners—Jujamcyn, the Shuberts, The Nederlanders, would be the closest. But Oscar also molds people, like Lily Garland, and says, “I am going to make you.”

WSJ: You and Kristen have a similar relationship, though, don’t you?

SE: I didn’t discover her, but I did cast her in her first Broadway show, “Steel Pier.” I saw this little petite girl come in and I literally said, “Who the hell was that?”

She was so tiny, and this voice—most people with those voices don’t have that kind of comedy. They’re not asked to do it because most of those roles that you sing in are ingenues, and ingenues are not written funny. They’re written virgins. That’s why she was so unique.

WSJ: When you’re directing a revival, how do you overcome the original production—especially when it is a beloved show?

SE: You have to try really hard to push that out of your head and say, ‘What is this role and who do I think can bring some special quality to it?’ That’s all you can do you.

WSJ: A few folks in one of the Broadway chat rooms are upset that you had the lyrics to the song “Legacy” changed. How do you decide what to change from the original versions?

SE: The way it was written, it wasn’t propelling action. It was a good song, but Phyllis Newman [Adolph Green’s widow] agreed we needed to make it a song that tells you a little bit more about Oscar. None of this could be changed without the estate agreeing.

WSJ: What’s your philosophy towards revivals? Are you curating a museum piece for a new generation or trying to rework them?

SE: I try to tell the story in a way that’s truthful to the piece but in a fresh way. I try to make them clearer.

With “Elephant Man,” in the second act there’s a whole moment where he steps out of character and has a role reversal with Treves [his doctor.] Every time I saw it, I thought, I’ve invested so much in John Merrick that once he steps out of it and he’s no longer John Merrick, it took me a long time to get back into the story. Bradley and I agreed on that immediately, but we had to get the permission of the writer [ Bernard Pomerance. ]

WSJ: What was that conversation like?

SE: We were at the Williamstown Theater Festival then, and [Mr. Pomerance] said as long as you’re not going to have the critics review it, I’m not going to see it, so you can do it.

WSJ: What happened when you told him you wanted to bring it to Broadway?

SE: It took a while for him to agree. He wanted us to do his production with no cuts whatsoever. I said, “Look, Bernard, if this is not successful, the critics aren’t going to blame you. They’ll go after me. Why not take the chance?” He’s very happy now. He called me after he saw it on opening night and said “I’m so grateful. Thank you.”

WSJ: How specifically do you make a scene funnier?

SE: Detail, detail, detail, detail. You have to work hard to make things look easy. You want to sharpen things. I say to the actors, ‘You have permission to do anything you want in this room.’ And then I’ll curate it.

WSJ: Who came up with the bit where he lifts her like a dumbbell while she’s smoking?

SE: That was mine. Andy’s big and she’s small and he came in one time carrying her and I said, ‘Do this’ [curling her like a dumbbell] and then I said ‘Smoke to the same rhythm,’ and it was funny.

WSJ: How do you keep the actors in a farce like this from going over the top, becoming too hammy?

SE: It’s really a question of how far can you go within the truth? Does the truth allow that moment? If not, that’s when it becomes not real. I always have to come back to shows to take out the improvements actors have put in. Laughs are addictive and sometimes they’re good laughs and sometimes they’re bad laughs.

WSJ: What makes a bad laugh?

SE: A bad laugh is a laugh for the sake of a laugh that’s out of character. We’ve had laughs in this show where we go, “I know it’s a laugh, but is it truthful? Is it what the character would do?” I have to say to the actor, you’re not going to like me right now, but I’m going to take that away from you.

Write to Stefanie Cohen at stefanie.cohen@dowjones.com