Your next released illegal immigrant murderer is in … Ohio

posted at 6:01 pm on July 29, 2015 by Jazz Shaw

Boy, that Trump guy was way off base, wasn’t he? It’s not like illegal aliens are running around the country, getting picked up by the cops and then released when immigration won’t touch them, only to go out on crime sprees, right? Unfortunately, we now need to stop by in Ohio and see yet another example of this phenomenon which doesn’t happen. (Fox News)

An illegal immigrant suspected of murdering one woman, wounding another and attempting to rape a 14-year-old girl was released earlier this month by Ohio sheriff’s deputies after U.S. Customs and Border Protection agents told them not to hold him, law enforcement officials said Tuesday. Juan Emmanuel Razo, 35, was arrested Monday after a shootout with police following a crime spree police say began with the attempted rape of a girl in a park in Painesville, about 30 miles northeast of Cleveland. He later shot a woman in front of her children and murdered a 60-year-old woman in nearby Concord Township, according to police. While Razo is being held on $10 million bond, authorities are trying to explain why he was allowed to remain in the U.S. illegally after local authorities questioned him just three weeks ago.

I was doing some quick checking and it doesn’t look like any of these places are even sanctuary cities. This was just a straight up case of the police getting hold of the guy, the feds telling them not to bother holding him or even knowing who he was, and his being cut loose because he wasn’t currently wanted for any crimes aside from being here illegally. We may later find out what he’d been up to prior to this, but the judge was obviously upset at the initial hearing.

“I have somebody who we don’t know who he is, why he is in this country, why he is here illegally and why he allegedly committed a murder,” Painesville Municipal Court Judge Michael Cicconetti thundered at Razo’s arraignment, noting the suspect has no green card, birth certificate or driver’s license. “I can’t set a bond high enough,” he continued. “How in the hell do I even know it’s him?” Cicconetti later told Fox News he did not understand how federal authorities could have ordered Razo released on July 7 when local deputies questioned him and contacted Border Protection officials, given that no one could even verify his identity.

Well, that answers the first of my questions. They couldn’t even verify who Razo was because he didn’t have any appropriate identification. (At least not accurate, legal identification.) But wait… weren’t we supposed to be issuing ID to all of the illegal immigrants? I’m sure somebody told me that that would help them come out of the shadows and be more productive citizens. Heck, they’ve been doing it in New York all year.

Here’s a free clue for legislators when it comes to these proposals. This discussion is an almost perfect parallel to the gun control argument, as strange as that may sound. When you pass laws restricting the rights of law abiding citizens regarding gun ownership, the only people you actually impact are those who tend to obey the law. When you say we should give ID to all the illegal aliens, the ones who are living lives of crime are not going to be all that interested in a document which will help identify them.

Razo is behind bars and, assuming we can manage to do anything that makes sense, is likely to stay there. That may come as small comfort to the family of his 60 year old murder victim, the children who saw their mother shot or the little girl he tried to rape. But you all keep on yelling at Trump. He clearly doesn’t know what he’s talking about.

Related Posts: