Moves you make before Dec. 31 can lower your tax bill. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

December’s an important month in your small business. You’re focused on year-end sales or throwing holiday parties or cleaning up the office. But it’s also time to take a few simple steps to save on your business taxes due April 15, 2016.

By focusing on just eight key steps, you’ll also be getting your business — and your finances — in better shape. (The steps below all assume your fiscal year is your calendar year, as it is for most small businesses.)

1. Talk to your CPA. If you don’t have a good tax adviser, find one. Last week, I had my year-end talk with my certified public accountant. He has been one of my most important advisers, saving my business money and increasing my personal financial security.

2. Accelerate expenses, delay income. That simple phrase is the basic rule each year. By making purchases now and delaying incoming payments, you lower your total 2015 profits and reduce your tax burden. Of course, you don’t want to spend wildly. Just prepay some expenses now, such as January rent, industry association dues and subscriptions. To delay income, wait to send invoices until after Jan. 1. Of course, if you need money to pay your bills, or your customer might flake, get those invoices in the mail NOW.

If you need a new vehicle -- and can afford one -- buy it by the end of the year for tax savings. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

3. Buy a vehicle. Or business equipment. If it’s getting time to replace that sport utility vehicle you use in your business, do so before Dec. 31. Under Section 179 of the IRS code, you can “expense” (write off completely rather than depreciate over a number of years) certain expensive business equipment, giving you a better tax deduction this year. The upper amount you can expense is $25,000 per purchase ($200,000 total), which includes vehicles over 6,000 pounds. If you buy a smaller passenger vehicle — used for business — the deduction limit is $11,160. Of course, don’t buy a new vehicle for your small business unless you actually need and can afford it.

4. Set up a qualified retirement plan. This is really important. It’s time to think about your personal long-term financial security. Small business owners typically imagine the business will be their retirement income, but that’s risky thinking. Start putting money aside. Most retirement plans must be established by Dec. 31, although you don’t have to put money in them until April 15 or whenever you file your 2015 taxes.

5. Check your health insurance. If you want to lower your premiums, increase your benefits, or tailor your plans to your changing needs, make those decisions now. Under the Affordable Care Act, you only have until Dec. 15 to enroll in or change plans for coverage to begin Jan. 1. And be sure to use your 2015 benefits before they expire, such as check-ups, dental visits or a new pair of eyeglasses.

Meet with your financial adviser to make sure you're doing all you can to launch a successful new year. (Photo: Thinkstock)

6. Update financial systems. The beginning of the year is the ideal time to update your financial systems. Record-keeping is far easier if you change when the calendar changes. For example, if you’re still using spreadsheets for your bookkeeping (and why are you?), Jan. 1 is the perfect time to switch to a cloud-based accounting program. That way you’ll have 2015 records in Excel and 2016 records in your new program — rather than splitting a year between two systems. This applies for all key operations, such as payroll, credit card processing merchant accounts, even backup and customer relationship management tools.

7. Change your bank. If you’ve been thinking about changing your banking relationship, the end of the year is a good time to switch over, for the same reason as above: it makes record-keeping easier.

Now's the time to donate to those causes you believe in. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

8. Donate to charities. Even with the economy doing well, 2015 has been a tough year for many people and non-profit organizations. They need your help. Write out checks or give your credit card number by Dec. 31. You’ll help other people, the planet, animals or whatever cause you support while lowering your taxes. Do well by doing good.

Among Rhonda Abrams' recent books is the 6th edition of Successful Business Plan: Secrets & Strategies. Register for her free newsletter at PlanningShop.com. Twitter: @RhondaAbrams.

RELATED:

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1Y7tDun