When Erskine Village was announced in 2003, then South Bend Mayor Stephen J. Luecke said it would be "on the forefront of mall development."

And as for the original renderings, according to a March 2003 South Bend Tribune report, "pedestrian walkways will be twisting and turning around stores. Park benches will allow shoppers to eat lunch or read a book outside, according to city officials working on the project."

"This will be a village so it's not an in-and-out transaction; you can enjoy your experience," Bill Schalliol, then economic development planner for South Bend, told The Tribune in 2003.

Village may be in its name, but looking at the site today, can you say the development looks like a village? Was Erskine Village built to its full potential?

It has been a little more than 10 years since the shopping center was completed, so this question could have been asked then. But the future of Erskine Village is now up in the air after its former owner, Ohio-based Schottenstein Property Group, defaulted on its 10-year loan.

The south-side South Bend shopping plaza was placed into receivership in August after Schottenstein continued to fall behind in payments, and on Thursday it was offered at a sheriff's sale in the County-City Building with a $26 million judgment against it.

As expected, there were no outside bidders and the loan provider, U.S. Bank, submitted a bid for a little more than $23 million. The bank now has full ownership and control of Erskine Village.

And that news sparked a lot of discussion about Erskine Village among readers. The shopping center had obvious problems with its former owner, and local experts saw some chain stores make misjudgments that forced them to close.

Erskine Village is still very popular with many south-side shoppers, but even those who frequent the center have complaints about its layout and design.

"The design is a disaster. I feel like I'm in a big maze driving in the lots. No green space at all except for little trees stuck in the middle of parking ... creating the maze," Buffy Morse Lowenhar wrote on Facebook. "No walkway from Panera, Hacienda or other shops. Just the one strip."

And those complaints are echoed by others.

There are sidewalks along all of the stores, but there's no good pathway to cross the parking lots from the main strip to the smaller buildings.

And Schalliol, who's now the executive director of the St. Joseph County Office of Economic Development, said there's no arguing whether it's laid out awkwardly.

"My biggest complaint was how badly the parking lots were laid out," he said.

Working for the city at the time, he said he worked with the developers on the parking lot and it could have been worse. There's wasn't a lot that could be done, though, with the type of stores Erskine Village would be attracting.

With big stores like Target, Kohl's and DSW, a large amount of parking is required, Schalliol said. It's a big site, he said, and that's part of the challenge. You're required to have parking for all of that.

"If you were going to build it again today, it probably wouldn't look that different," he said.

And for complaints that the center didn't turn out like the original renderings, Schalliol said, those were concepts. Plans change as a project progresses.

Indianapolis-based Kite Development, which built Erskine Village, could not be reached for comment.

"In large retail projects, things change over time. It's not unusual," said John Phair, president and CEO of Holladay Properties. Holladay developed Heritage Square in Granger.

Phair, though, said Erskine Village was not designed to be walkable. Again, with having the large stores you have to have parking, he said, but "the sidewalks are not inviting." It wasn't laid out that way, he said.

A different approach

Although Martin's Super Markets is Heritage Square's only large retailer, its requirements were considered from the beginning to keep the center inviting to pedestrians, said Manette Tepe, senior vice president of development for Holladay.

All of the parking is outlying, Phair said, with the stores pushed toward the center. Especially on busy days, it's hard to park right in front of a specific store. This encourages people to park their car once and walk the plaza.

"We had walkability in mind from the beginning," he said.

From the retailer's point of view, though, there have been no complaints about Erskine Village, said Joe DeCola, vice president of brokerage for Bradley Company. The local company manages Erskine Village.

The south side is a great market, he said, and there's always going to be potential. This means Erskine Village still has a future.

U.S. Bank could keep ownership and continue to employ Bradley Company to manage the property. The bank could not be reached for comment.

DeCola said there are many development companies that look for properties like Erskine Village -- properties that have had issues but still have potential.

He said he could see a company being creative and turning some of the parking space into small retail spaces.

Whether improvements are in the future for Erskine Village or not, DeCola said he expects someone will jump on the chance to buy the property.

"With the location and the quality of the property, it will be picked up," DeCola said. "It's a little optimistic, but I do think it will be picked up sooner rather than later."

Lincoln Wright's column runs on Wednesdays and Sundays. Contact him at LWright@sbtinfo.com or 574-235-6324. You can also talk retail at Facebook.com/thebasket and at Twitter.com/marketbasket.