Please consider disabling it for our site, or supporting our work in one of these ways

Many recurring health stories this year centered on tensions in our relationships with technology, from vaccines to phones to healthcare exchanges. It was a fascinating, terrible, and heartening year, as always. Here are some of the stories that commanded a lot of discussion and will continue to factor in the year, and years, ahead. Polio's Global Comeback (Wikimedia) Global conflicts risk bringing polio, an infection that causes paralysis, back from near-total eradication. In Pakistan, suspicion that polio vaccinators are somehow harming children has fueled several killings of polio workers throughout the country’s tribal areas. In Syria, a strain of polio originating in Pakistan has crippled more than a dozen children as the country's public health infrastructure has broken down after more than two years of civil war. Somalia, Afghanistan, and Nigeria have also seen periodic polio outbreaks. New Challenges to Reproductive Rights

The pro-life movement gained strength in 2013. Thirteen states have recently passed restrictions shortening the time frame in which women could receive abortions, though federal judges later blocked some of the states' laws. Meanwhile, other regulations passed this year have forced a third of Texas' abortion clinics to close, leaving 20 facilities open in a state of 26 million people. Mississippi has just one abortion clinic remaining. This summer, there were reports that women in Texas’ Rio Grande Valley were crossing the border to Mexico to purchase misoprostol, a drug that induces miscarriages. The Supreme Court is also hearing a case brought by Christian crafts purveyor Hobby Lobby, who says the Affordable Care Act’s mandate that the company cover contraception for employees would make them "morally complicit" in the "death of an embryo." The outcome could determine whether other businesses are required to offer birth control on their insurance plans. Rethinking the Left Brain/Right Brain Paradigm (Wikimedia) People who are brilliant artists but can't do long division may no longer have their brain structure to blame. A study of 1,011 people published in the journal PLOS ONE in August suggested that, contrary to the long-standing idea, there is no evidence that some people are either right-brained or left-brained. Though the authors did find that some brain functions occurred largely in one hemisphere or the other, they found no evidence that people used either hemisphere preferentially. What’s more, psychologist Stephen Kosslyn put forth a new theory that rather than left and right hemispheres, cognition is divvied up between "top" and "bottom" brain systems. Mind=blown. (Vertically). Obamacare’s Problematic Roll-Out The long-awaited exchanges, on which most uninsured Americans were intended to buy health insurance, landed with a thud in October in the form of the glitchy, barely functional healthcare.gov. Then, just when the tales of bureaucratic agony reached a fever pitch, thousands of people began receiving cancellation notices from their insurance providers because their plans didn't meet Obamacare’s minimum requirements. Meanwhile, Obamacare supporters are still hopeful that the law’s Medicaid expansion will improve health in low-income communities, and that some of the cancellees might qualify for subsidies on the exchange now that the website (mostly) works.