American Taylor Allen Force was murdered in Israel yesterday after being attacked by a terrorist, but based on a statement released by the State Department, you would never know the person who carried out the attack was a Palestinian.

"The United States condemns in the strongest possible terms today’s outrageous terrorist attacks in Jaffa, Petah Tikvah, and Jerusalem, which tragically claimed the life of U.S. citizen Taylor Allen Force and left many others severely injured. We offer our heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of Taylor and all those affected by these senseless attacks, and we wish a speedy recovery for the injured," State Department Press Secretary John Kirby As we have said many times, there is absolutely no justification for terrorism. We continue to encourage all parties to take affirmative steps to reduce tensions and restore calm."

The State Department's moral equivalence here is appalling. There are not two equal parties to this situation to "reduce tensions" and "restore calm." Palestinian terrorists are stabbing and killing Israelis. Yesterday, an American was their latest victim. Period. Over the past year, there have been hundreds of stabbing attacks carried out by Palestinian terrorists. Their targets have been pregnant women, mothers, the elderly, Israeli soldiers, law enforcement officers and others.



Yesterday during the White House press briefing, Secretary Josh Earnest also refused to acknowledge Palestinian responsibility.

"These kinds of attacks are outrageous and are worthy of world wide condemnation. Targeting innocent civilians is not at all appropriate, of course, and is entirely inconsistent with the recognition of the way that human beings relate to one another even if they have significant difference of opinion. We condemn this kind of attach in the strongest possible terms," Earnest said.



Vice President Joe Biden is currently in Israel and will meet with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu today in an attempt to restart peace talks.