PHOENIX — While the Zac Brown Band wowed ’em back home at Coors Field Friday night, the Rockies sang their same old sad song at Chase Field.

The Arizona Diamondbacks beat the Rockies 4-3 in 10 innings on a walkoff sacrifice fly to deep left field by Cliff Pennington off reliever Yohan Flande. Welington Castillo, who led off the 10th with a double off Flande, scored the winning run. He had advanced to third on a single by Chris Owings.

Rockies manager Walt Weiss said he never intended to walk Pennington to get to another D-Backs hitter.

In a game full of twists, turns and missed opportunities, one thing stands out about the foundering Rockies: five Diamondbacks pitchers held them to a not-so-grand total of four hits — just two coming after the first inning. It was another anemic road effort from Colorado’s offense, which has managed just 14 hits combined in the last three games.

The Rockies not only dropped their third straight game, but also fell to 2-6 on a road trip that could determine if they will become active sellers at the trade deadline at the end of July.

“It’s frustrating to go through it,” said second baseman DJ LeMahieu, who is 2-for-25 on the current road trip. “Every team goes through it, but at a time like this, it is frustrating.”

The Rockies took a nearly instant lead when Charlie Blackmon drilled Chase Anderson’s 1-2 pitch over the right-field wall for a 1-0 lead. It was the third time this season Blackmon led off a game with a homer, and the ninth time in his career.

Wilin Rosario’s two-run double to score LeMahieu and Troy Tulowitzki, both of whom walked, gave the Rockies a 3-0 lead after their first at-bat.

But it didn’t last beyond the first inning. Arizona quickly cut the lead to 3-2 on back-to-back doubles off Kyle Kendrick by David Peralta and Paul Goldschmidt, followed by a Jake Lamb triple.

“I felt like we let Anderson settle in after a big first inning and didn’t get much after that,” Weiss said.

The Rockies were on the verge of taking control in the top of the 10th when Rosario led off with a walk and Nick Hundley put down a perfect bunt for a single. Then pinch-hitter Michael McKenry lined a hard shot off reliever Andrew Chafin — straight into the glove of Pennington at short, who threw to second to double-up Rosario.

“We just have to think the tide is going to turn soon,” McKenry said. “We had some opportunities tonight to score some runs, and we battled and our pitching staff kept us in the game. We just have to capitalize more often. Sometimes the ball bounces your way, sometimes it doesn’t.”

Colorado managed to escape disaster in the ninth. Reliever Scott Oberg issued a leadoff walk to pinch-hitter Nick Ahmed , and then A.J. Pollock laid down a perfect bunt between the mound and third baseman Nolan Arenado. Arenado fielded the ball cleanly, but hesitated throwing the ball to first because the Rockies were late covering the bag.

A groundout to second by Peralta advanced Ahmed to third, and the Rockies intentionally walked the dangerous Goldschmidt to load the bases. But Oberg struck out Yasmany Tomas and induced Lamb to ground out to second, where LeMahieu made a beautiful sliding grab.

For just the fifth time in 17 starts, Colorado starter Kyle Kendrick did not give up a home run. Even though he squandered an early 3-0 lead, he at least kept the Rockies in the game. The right-hander departed with two outs in the sixth after the Diamondbacks tied the game, 3-3, on a bloop single to left by Lamb, and an RBI single by Pennington.

“Obviously things are clicking for us right now, but I like our team,” Kendrick said. “I think we have a good team, but we haven’t put it all together. Hopefully we do that soon and make a run at something.”

By drawing a first-inning walk, Tulowitzki reached base for the 31st consecutive game. His sixth-inning single extended his hitting streak to 16 games. Both streaks are career highs for Tulo, and are the longest active streaks in the majors.

Looking ahead

Rockies’ David Hale (2-3, 5.95 ERA) at Diamondbacks’ Patrick Corbin (season debut), 8:10 p.m. Saturday, ROOT; 850 AM

The Rockies acquired Hale in an offseason trade with Atlanta because they wanted a groundball pitcher who wasn’t afraid to pitch to contact. Unfortunately, the right-hander has been unable to keep the ball down in the zone on a consistent basis. The result has been a bushel of home runs allowed, including three at Oakland in the Rockies’ 7-1 loss to the A’s on Monday. Hale has allowed 11 homers in 42 innings, and his average of 2.34 homers per nine innings leads the majors among pitchers with at least 40 innings. Corbin, the D-backs’ ace left-hander, will make his first big-league start since having Tommy John surgery March 25, 2014. His last start was Sept. 27, 2013, against the Nationals.

Sunday: Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (5-3, 4.59 ERA) at Diamondbacks’ Rubby De La Rosa (6-3, 4.60), 2:10 p.m., ROOT

Monday: Off

Tuesday: Angels’ Andrew Heaney (1-0, 1.38) at Rockies’ Chad Bettis (4-3, 3.67), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Angels’ Matt Shoemaker (4-7, 4.91) at Rockies’ Chris Rusin (3-3, 4.27), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp