There’s supposed to be some deep mystery to Donald Trump’s appeal that the squares and elites in the media and politics can’t figure out.

Related Donald Trump quotes

It’s squishy, but it boils down to something about straight talk and screw political correctness and telling it like it is.

Sure. Okay. It’s really none of those things. Trump isn’t a straight-talker. He’s rude. Trump isn’t drawing the line against political correctness. He’s spewing racist and sexist bile.

Trundle on over to his website and try to tease out what the guy stands for. Policy positions are hard to find. You will find out a lot about how super awesome Donald Trump is.

Really, Trump’s rhetoric isn’t that fresh or original. You can get its image every day of the week in the comments section of any article dealing with politics. It comes in loud and clear from anonymous bloats who spend their days trolling the internet with their straight-talk on everything from immigration to Obamacare. Facts hardly matter. Debate will not focus on the issues. It’s “I’m right and you’re stupid” all day long.

The Donald is perfect for this sort. He’s a troll. Hostile, self-righteous, insulting, flexible with the truth, indifferent to reason.

Challenge Trump on ideas, and he’ll attack you as a human being. Perfect troll.

Political debate in this country has hardly been Lincoln v. Douglas for sometime now. But everyday political discourse on the internet is beyond rot now. And even the “high” debate of, for example, a Republican primary is more mudpit than rational exchange of ideas. The highlight reel of shouts and insults is shameful. Almost nothing resolves in serious question and response.

In such a world, the likes of Trump will thrive. There’s a shade of truth in the explanation that he is an answer to the stale sound bites of scripted politicians whose cliches are only eclipsed by those of professional athletes. But it’s entirely possible to be unscripted without being a jerk or a bully. That isn’t the Trump way, of course. And it apparently isn’t what Trump’s America hungers for. The more belittling and mean-spirited he is, the more he seems to gain popularity. The more cravenly he manipulates and twists his party, the more advantage he wins.

The columnist David Brooks recently said that Trump will hold steady at about 20 percent of the Republican vote – that this is his fortress and it will neither grow greatly nor shrink much. That may well be true. But what does it say of those 20 percent? What America are they living in? And how can the rest of us avoid it?