A jury pool of at least 600 people will be assembled for the death penalty case against the man accused of stabbing five people to death in a Denver bar.

Arguments on a slew of motions in the case against Dexter Lewis ended two days early Tuesday. Prosecutors and defense attorneys called witnesses for only a handful of the filings. Denver District Judge John W. Madden must rule on about 200 motions before summonses are sent out in January.

Lewis, 24, faces 16 counts — including first-degree murder, arson and robbery — in the attack at Fero’s Bar and Grill that left five people dead in October 2012. The case marks the first time since 2001 that Denver prosecutors have pursued the death penalty.

The last time a Denver jury sentenced a defendant to death was in 1986.

During a hearing Tuesday, attorneys discussed the timeline for jury selection and the trial.

Attorneys will begin questioning potential jurors in January.

Opening statements are scheduled to begin March 16, according to an order made public in July. Madden said he expects the trial, including the potential penalty phase, to take four weeks.

To be safe, he set aside six weeks.

On Tuesday, defense attorneys argued the cellphone Lewis allegedly used the night of the attack was obtained improperly by investigators. As a result, they say any information obtained from the phone should be excluded from trial.

Denver police Detective Mike Martinez said Lewis’ girlfriend — who was paying for the phone — gave the phone to police after Lewis was arrested Oct. 17, 2012.

Authorities say Lewis used the phone the night of the attack. He allegedly sent his co-defendants, brothers Joseph and Lynell Hill, a coded text message, “G-4,” which meant the plan to rob the bar was good to go.

The Hill brothers have accepted plea agreements in exchange for testifying against Lewis. Joseph Hill was sentenced to life in prison without parole, and Lynell was sentenced to 70 years.

Jordan Steffen: 303-954-1794, jsteffen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jsteffendp