CLEVELAND, Ohio — Greater Cleveland has had only one Level 1 trauma center to treat its roughly 2 million residents for almost 20 years, at MetroHealth Medical Center on the city's near West Side. That will soon change, as University Hospitals is set to launch a second of these high-level centers on the East Side as early as September.

Early reactions to UH's news, announced last week during MetroHealth's Annual Stakeholder's meeting, has ranged from praise and relief from East Side residents and public officials, to concern and criticism from MetroHealth executives and trauma doctors.

UH contends the East Side is underserved and the Greater Cleveland area can easily support a second high-level trauma center at its Case Medical Center campus. MetroHealth says its experienced team has driven down trauma deaths to unprecedented levels for residents on both sides of town, and competition between the hospitals will only hurt patients.

So which is it: Does a city Cleveland's size need two Level 1 trauma centers, or will more competition and less collaboration lead to more deaths and disability for the city's residents?

The frustrating answer for Clevelanders, national trauma experts say, is that only an unbiased outside evaluation of the city's existing trauma network and resident needs could tell. And UH didn't ask for one.

Now, experts say, only time will tell if the new Level 1 center is a good thing for the region. And then only if UH chooses to share its outcomes openly with the community.

A trauma center for each side of town?

Trauma, primarily caused by car accidents, falls and gun or stab wounds, is the leading cause of death for people under the age of 46 in the United States, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Victims who receive care in a trauma center have a 25 percent higher survival rate than those treated in hospitals without a dedicated trauma unit, a 2006 New England Journal of Medicine study found.

And in the treatment of severe trauma, as in all life-threatening emergencies, minutes matter.

A high-level trauma center to serve residents on each side of Cleveland therefore seems logical and fair, and many East Siders couldn't be happier about UH's plans.

East Cleveland Mayor Gary Norton, who was in office when the Cleveland Clinic's Huron Hospital closed its Level 2 trauma center in 2012, said the new center will "fill a void" left by Huron's departure.

"That geographic location needs to be served by a trauma center and it has not," he told The Plain Dealer. Not only does the increased transport time to MetroHealth from his city endanger injured residents, it also takes ambulances out of circulation for other emergencies for up to an hour, he said.

"That's huge," he said, both from a safety and budget standpoint. "It puts other cases that may occur simultaneously in jeopardy."

Other East Side public officials, including Shaker Heights and Warrensville Heights emergency personnel as well as Cleveland council members representing East Side neighborhoods, have echoed the argument. Having a Level 1 trauma center nearby will save lives and money, they say.

"Filling a gap" for underserved patients is UH's main selling point for its new trauma center. The only remaining Level 2 trauma center on the East Side is in Mayfield Heights at the Clinic's Hillcrest Hospital.

But providing good trauma care to residents is "not just an issue of geographic proximity," said Dr. Renee Hsia, an attending physician at San Francisco General Hospital & Trauma Center and professor of emergency medicine at the University of California, San Francisco. Hsia has written extensively on the topic of "trauma deserts" or areas nationally that are underserved for trauma care.

"You also have to consider volume, and the injury epidemiology of that location," meaning what types of injuries are common, she said. "I'm asked all the time to consult about whether or not to open a trauma center in a particular area. It's a difficult question."

Without an independent evaluation of the city's trauma needs, it's impossible to know what's best, said Dr. Brent Eastman, a retired trauma surgeon at UC San Diego and past president of the American College of Surgeons.

UH says it has consulted with experts on the feasibility of the new center, including a 2011 survey by a University of Pennsylvania trauma surgeon which concluded that there was "an enlarging demand" for trauma care and that implementing a trauma program at UH's main campus would raise the overall level of care at the hospital.

"The East Side region is thirsty for trauma care for injured adults," UH Chief Medical Officer Dr. Michael Anderson told The Plain Dealer.

The health system is confident its new Level 1 center will meet that need.

Trauma is a team sport

Getting to a trauma center quickly is only part of the equation, though. Behind any trauma patient's remarkable recovery story is a battalion of specialists, nurses, technicians, therapists and administrators who all knew exactly what to do, and when to do it.

"If you look at the care of that patient in the trauma center over the course of their hospital stay, it's in the hundreds," said Eastman. "A trauma nurse responds, a trauma surgeon responds. Anesthesia will often respond. It's a very highly choreographed team."

"The care of a trauma patient really depends on a well-oiled team," said Ellen MacKenzie, chair of the department of health policy and management at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health and an expert on the performance and financing of trauma systems. "It's incredibly important to the quality of care of the patient."

Research backs this up. In a comprehensive review of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center's Level 1 trauma center during its first eight years of operation, patient outcomes such as length of hospital stay, complications and deaths all improved with each year the trauma team logged together.

The 1999 review in the Annals of Surgery noted that "the experience of an individual trauma surgeon or volume of patients seen in a year by an individual surgeon did not affect the outcome variables."

In other words, in trauma, even star surgeons are only as good as their teams.

This may be one of the reasons that MetroHealth, which has been fine tuning its Level 1 trauma team for 20 years, bristles at the idea that a competitor can quickly replicate the same level of care for patients.

Speaking to an audience of about 700 employees and community members at last week's Annual Stakeholder's meeting, MetroHealth CEO Dr. Akram Boutros said that when patients need heart surgery, they go to the Clinic's Dr. Toby Cosgrove because of his vast experience and "because you know your survival depends on him and the team around him."

"I can understand ramp up time and I can understand a steep learning curve," Boutros said, as UH gets started. "But that, in trauma, means lives. And patients won't have a choice."

UH's new center will be staffed with some of the best trauma specialists in the country who have experience both in treating patients and launching similar centers in other areas, said Dr. Keith Clancy, UH's director of trauma services. The hospital is in the process of recruiting six new trauma surgeons, two orthopedic trauma surgeons, a neurosurgeon, hand surgeon, and an anesthesiologist with specialty in trauma.

One of these new recruits is trauma surgeon Vanessa Ho, who Clancy said was "instrumental" in setting up the trauma program at Jamaica Hospital Medical Center in New York. Ho completed her fellowship training in surgical critical care two years ago.

A good trauma center needs a combination of credentials and a depth of experience, though, MacKenzie and other experts say, and it may be hard for UH to attract such candidates to its program.

"When you're recruiting trauma surgeons to a hospital it's probably hard to recruit people with a lot of experience," she said. "You'd be tending to recruit the younger people."

Just how long it takes to establish the rhythms that make a team perform at the highest level is unknown.

Dr. Tom Collins, associate chief medical officer at MetroHealth, likened it to a symphony that has been playing together for years compared to a group of talented musicians who've just met and don't know the same pieces of music.

"It won't sound the same," he said.

How many is enough?

Figuring out the ideal number of trauma centers in a community is a balancing act, trauma experts say. There are no hard or fast rules to follow, and each community's demographic and geographic characteristics can influence how many centers serve patients best.

"It's a little like Goldilocks," said Hsia, the UCSF expert. "You need to have just enough; not too many or too few."

"If you have too few it takes too long to reach care," she said. "If you have too many you're spreading all of the trauma volume across many centers and you don't have the volume you need to maintain the center."

And like many other surgical specialties, research has shown that volume matters to the quality of trauma care. If doctors don't have enough cases to work on, their skills suffer. And so do the patients they treat.

Almost two thirds of studies on the topic have found a mortality benefit to patients in high-volume trauma centers, according to a 2014 review in the journal Injury.

Surgeons need a certain volume of patients to maintain their skills and provide good outcomes, but it's not certain just what volume is sufficient, MacKenzie said.

"Where's that tipping point," she said. "We don't know the answer to that."

The American College of Surgeons (ACS), which verifies trauma centers nationwide, requires a Level 1 center to treat at least 1,200 patients a year, and for at least 240 of those patients to be severe traumas. But some research has suggested that surgeons may need to treat as many as 600 severe trauma patients a year to stay sharp, MacKenzie said.

MetroHealth, which handles half of all the city's trauma cases and more than 80 percent of the most severely injured patients, treated about 3,000 traumas last year. Of these, about 700 were considered severe traumas.

UH believes there is more than enough severe trauma in the Greater Cleveland area to go around. The region once supported several additional trauma centers, the health system argues.

"I am absolutely comfortable, and I think most people in the American College of Surgeons would be comfortable, that a metropolitan population this large can utilize two adult level 1 trauma centers," UH's Clancy said.

Eastman, a past president of ACS, said the organization consults for regional trauma systems to determine if new centers are warranted. Two years ago, a 120-page ACS consultation for the state of Ohio noted that while trauma centers in the state generally behave collegially, "the evolving economics of health care in Ohio also place these trauma centers in a competitive relationship, one which has the potential to work against the best interests of the trauma patient."

This competitive stance is compounded, the report said, because Ohio designates trauma centers without regard to community need.

Collaboration, not competition

Competition is the enemy of good trauma care, experts say, because transporting patients quickly to the right trauma team can only happen if all the hospitals in a region work together.

"You need to have collaboration so that you can get your patient to the right place at the right time with minimal delay," Hsia said. "If you don't have cooperation or a protocol in place that says you can just ship your patients to a center automatically, then you've got huge delays."

"Not collaborating can't be an option," said Eastman. "You can't be about the economics of the hospital or the politics of the area; it's got to be about the patient."

Because cooperation is so important to good patient care, state and regional trauma systems have cropped up all over the country in an effort to encourage collaboration between health systems and streamline the trauma care process. From a 911 call to the patient's arrival at the ultimate destination, these systems help eliminate all the unnecessary delays that can cost lives.

In 2009, MetroHealth and the Cleveland Clinic launched a regional trauma system for Northeast Ohio residents, called the Northern Ohio Trauma System, or NOTS. At the time, each health system committed $300,000 to form the system, and the Clinic promised another $2.4 million to a foundation to help offset the costs of uncompensated care and support education and trauma research.

Since forming NOTS, the mortality rate of trauma victims in the region (which was already declining) has dropped by more than half, to 2.7 percent. The mortality rate for East Side patients also dropped by 40 percent, despite longer transport times. NOTS participants credit the standardization of treatment and transport protocols, which quickly directs patients to the appropriate hospitals.

When NOTS was launched, UH was operating its pediatric Level 1 trauma center at Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital and other Level 3 trauma centers in the area. Because these types of trauma centers were not included in the NOTS system at its launch, the health system was not approached about joining.

A couple years later, though, MetroHealth began looking for more collaboration with UH on trauma care. A series of conversations between the two health systems that UH Chief Medical Officer Dr. Michael Anderson described to The Plain Dealer as "intense and sometimes fruitful" ensued. These talks "unfortunately didn't land on any particular model that would be a shared model," he said.

UH currently has no plans to join NOTS, but the health system said it is "open to dialogue in the future."

Instead, while announcing its new Level 1 trauma center, UH said that it would also be creating its own "coordinated regional trauma network of UH hospitals." The UH network will include UH Rainbow's Level 1 pediatric center and the four Level 3 trauma centers at Geauga Medical Center, St. John Medical Center in Westlake, Southwest General Health Center in Middleburg Heights, and Robinson Memorial Hospital in Ravenna, which will officially join the health system later this year.

"MetroHealth doesn't put their data out there transparently," Clancy told The Plain Dealer. "They have used generic data in terms of overall mortality, which is not risk-adjusted or injury-adjusted, when they publish their data with NOTS. We'll be as transparent as MetroHealth will be."

UH's decision to go its own way has provoked some surprise and dismay locally.

"It seems very territorial," said MetroHealth's Collins. "It doesn't make a lot of sense to me. Trauma is totally not about competition. There are a lot of great things we could do together if we collaborated."

Cleveland City Councilman Joe Cimperman said he hopes UH will reconsider.

"When you look at our statistics related to trauma compared to other cities, we're doing remarkably well, and that has been the result of collaboration," he said.

Johns Hopkins' MacKenzie put it this way: "A [regional] system is obviously not going to survive if there's competition. If one hospital is trying to steal away the more major trauma patients for their hospital, that's going to undermine the whole system and is not going to serve anybody very well."

Trauma and the bottom line

Competition for patients may ultimately be at the root of UH's decision. The 2011 feasibility study the health system commissioned concluded that several of UH's affiliated Level 2 and 3 trauma centers had "no mechanism to consistently transfer emergent and or urgent patients except to competing hospitals."

Historically, trauma centers have been money losers. The main reason for the rash of trauma center closures in the 1990's was because the centers, with their expensive staffs and predominantly uninsured or Medicaid patients, were hemorrhaging money.

Today, profit all depends on location, says UCSF's Hsia. There's been a boom in for-profit Level 2 and 3 trauma centers in areas with self-pay and insured patients, where the centers can be lucrative.

"If you've got a 'good' patient payer mix, it tends to be the case that hospitals want to be trauma centers in those areas because they get a higher reimbursement," Hsia said. "There are financial factors at play."

MacKenzie, who has tracked the expansion and contraction of trauma centers since the 1980's, said opening a new center now may be more attractive because Obamacare has insured more Americans.

The sections of UH's 2011 trauma center feasibility study provided to The Plain Dealer make oblique and overt reference to the hospital's "broad diversification of payer mix" due to its healthy and growing suburban reach. "It appears the expense to modify the institution is moderate with relatively short and very positive return on investment," the report said.

Level 1 trauma centers are a big investment — UH wouldn't give an exact figure on how much, only saying it's "in the millions" — but it's clear the health system thinks the money will prove to be well spent.

It's not personal, it's business

Cleveland's ultra-competitive hospital landscape has spawned decades of territory battles. Ill will over slights, both perceived and real, lingers particularly long when it stems from incursions into a health system's niche area of expertise.

For the past 20 years, MetroHealth has had the lock on trauma in Cleveland. The public hospital has built its reputation, in large part, on its high-quality trauma care. In its fundraising efforts, MetroHealth delivers subtle reminders to suburban donors and taxpayers that they too might one day need the hospital's expertise, should tragedy strike.

So UH's decision, whatever the motivation, can't help but feel a bit personal.

At MetroHealth's stakeholder's meeting, ER physician Sara Laskey posed the only audience question to CEO Boutros: "What I want to know is, we do it so well, so why in the world is UH opening a trauma center?"

Clancy, hired a year ago by UH to lead up the new trauma effort, seemed almost equally bewildered by the strength of some of the opposition to the new trauma center.

"I know there's angst," he said this week. "I think when all the hand-wringing over there is said and done, we're going to provide high-quality care and the patients on the East Side of Cleveland will benefit from that."

There will be no shortage of interested parties across town watching closely to see if that's the case.