America’s midterm elections take place on Tuesday and even though Barack Obama is not personally on the ballot, they will provide a natural moment for the voters to mark his presidency’s half-term report card. And for lots of valid reasons – an economic recovery that hasn’t trickled down, continued Middle East chaos, Ebola panic at home and the botched rollout of his signature healthcare reforms - Mr Obama will only just scrape a pass.

Whichever way the White House looks at the polls, the news is not good. It now looks very likely that Republicans will take back control of the Senate, further enfeebling an already troubled presidency, while Mr Obama’s own approval ratings are stuck permanently at periscope-depth.

The president’s remaining supporters will contend that much of this slough of despond is not of Mr Obama’s making, and that he is unfairly taking the blame for events and circumstances he cannot be expected to control.

There is an element of truth to this determinist view: American Presidents often take more credit than they deserve when things go well, and correspondingly accept unfair amounts of blame when they go badly.

After all, it’s hardly Mr Obama’s fault that global economic forces mean that GDP growth – up 8 per cent during his tenure – has translated into soaring stock markets and corporate profits but not healthier household incomes for the ordinary Joe.

On the plus side, it should be noted that Mr Obama has also announced some serious environmental reforms in his second term that make it impossible to burn coal in the US without carbon capture. That may not have made international headlines, but lays a legacy that will grow over time.

It is also true that while the initial rollout of the Obamacare health reforms was spectacularly inept, the exchange websites are now working and – something which no-one from either party would have predicted a year ago – Obamacare has hardly even been an issue on the campaign trail this Autumn.

But despite these admittedly modest achievements, Mr Obama’s numbers are still horrible, his support dwindling even among the Hispanics, women and young people who once idolised him. If Democrats fare as badly as the polls suggest, it will be because these voting blocs could not be bothered to turn out and vote.

And therein perhaps lies a clue as to Mr Obama’s real problem – the man who once seemed capable of moving an entire nation seems to have lost the confidence of an electorate who as recently as 2012 were prepared to give him the benefit of the doubt.

What happened? Mr Obama’s supporters will try to blame unforeseen events, second terms blues and Republican intransigence, but the truth is that a large part of the Obama confidence-crisis is of his own making.

It stems first from several terrible foreign policy decisions – or non-decisions – and then secondly from the absolutely baffling failure of Mr Obama, surely one of the most talented US politicians since Franklin Roosevelt, to rectify the situation.

The foundations for failure were laid in the first term, when Mr Obama apparently eschewed the need for American leadership in the world, but the cracks only began to appear in the second term. They began with the failure to enforce the 'red line’ over chemical weapons use in Syria, followed a year later by the fateful underestimation of the strength of the Islamic State movement – a “JV” or Junior Varsity team as he called them.

For a surprisingly long time the polls suggested that a war-weary nation was giving Mr Obama a free-pass on these failings, a silence that to some in the media-obsessed White House provided a cynical argument for the success of the long-standing non-strategy in Syria.

But that piece of cover was stripped away the instant that the American journalist James Foley was beheaded in front of Isil’s cameras, a moment that suddenly plunged Mr Obama’s weaknesses and failings into the American popular consciousness.

What has shocked even more, from a political perspective, is Mr Obama’s response: the goofing around on golf carts, the bungled press conference where he confessed there was 'no strategy’ on Syria, the diffident interviews and then the panicked and stroppy handling of the Ebola outbreak.

All this explains Mr Obama’s low-standing, but what it does not explain is why this president, of all presidents, has been so abject at the theatrical requirements of an office which, it now appears, he won largely on the basis of theatrics.

This is the president who filled the Strasse des 17 Juni in Berlin in 2008 and who, time and again during that topsy-turvy campaign, rescued his fortunes through the power of his speech – think of the great “More perfect union” speech on race, or his oration at the 2008 Jefferson-Jackson dinner in Iowa.

For historians to come, this will be the great imponderable of the Obama years: how was it that a leader with such obvious theatrical talents proved unable, or unwilling – it is not clear – to summon them when he needed them the most.