A time for the president and the liberals to hang their heads in shame



By Michael Bresciani (Ec 3: 1)Some say that we are caught between a rock and a hard place in this election season. Others conclude that since Ted Cruz is out of the running, we are left with only the lesser of two evils. It may be that what is relative is now being forced upon us, but regardless of how we view the dilemma we are faced with things that are readily apparent.Because of Donald Trump's obvious lack of class, savvy and statesmanship we will suffer a loss if he is elected president. Contrarily, the nation will be completely lost if we elect Hillary Clinton and the Godless liberalism that has eroded our morality and our freedom is allowed to continue under a Clintonian administration.It can be said in several ways, but the truth cannot be denied. We cannot possibly compare Donald Trump with Ronald Reagan, but we also dare not fail to compare Trump with Clinton. It is a good thing that Mr. Trump wants to "make America great" – but we would be better off if we had a great man to lead the charge. Making billions and blazoning your name across tall buildings is the poorest definition of greatness, but these are desperate times.This writer is satisfied to believe that a choice between good and evil is beyond what America can produce in today's climate of moral confusion. It may be a choice of "ism's" and nothing more. Even I would choose Mr. Trumps idea of "Americanism" over Hillary's view of America under full blown "liberalism."Those who know and disseminate sound biblical knowledge and doctrine struggle to make our citizens aware that it is God alone that gives greatness to a nation. He regards the choices we make and the leaders we choose and responds accordingly.(Da 2: 21)Since he became the presumptive nominee of the Republican Party it is now too late to call Mr. Trump an outsider. He is now a full-fledged politician. We should never cease to pray for this politician – our very future may depend on it.It is also too late for Mr. Obama to alter or change the "hope and change" he promised to our nation almost eight years ago. It is doubtful that Barack will ever understand that licentiousness is not a legacy. The amorality of his policies, executive orders and everything he has represented to us has reached an apex and will be recorded in history as one of the most decadent influences this nation has ever endured.Now, we may onlythat it– as quickly as possible, before the remnants of our nation are blown away like so much dust on a windy street.The only accomplishments of his administration that have gained full favor with anyone have to do with the decline of morality. All domestic and foreign policy from Obamacare to the Iran Treaty are national disasters on their face.Nothing illustrates Obama's failure more than the recent controversy surrounding the transgender bathroom rule that Obama would impose on a mostly unwilling nation.Not long after the entire matter began, reports came streaming in of encounters with men in bathrooms with little girls and womenIs this something our president can be proud of or should he hang his head in shame?A graphic picture has been circulating around the internet which I saw on a Facebook post – it says it all.It is a picture of a little girl and just behind her is a Target store. The caption on the picture says..."Just Think, One Year Ago, – A man would have been arrested for following a young girl into the Ladies Restroom. Today, you could be Arrested for Stopping Him!"The link on the picture is askdrbrown.org States have risen to resist the bathroom nonsense and Christian organizations like Family Research Council have collected thousands of signatures from those who are standing in protest. They don't care that Obama is threatening to stop federal funds to those school districts that do not comply with genderless bathroom policies.Mr. Obama may not lower his head in shame, but it is abundantly clear that millions of Americans are ashamed of him.© Michael Bresciani