The campaign for congressional candidate Roger Marshall raised a half-million dollars in 2015, funds that will allow the political novice to compete against the fundraising machine of U.S. Rep. Tim Huelskamp over the next seven months.

Marshall’s campaign filed its quarterly report with the Federal Election Commission on Friday, showing the campaign has raised $524,731 since Marshall launched his bid in May.

“Our early success, not only in fundraising, but with key endorsements like the Kansas Livestock Association and the Kansas Contractors Association, has been a humbling process and we are just getting started,” Marshall, a Republican, said in a statement.

Still, the Great Bend obstetrician’s $341,344 on hand is less than half of what Huelskamp’s campaign claims to have at its disposal.

Mark Kelly, the Republican congressman’s campaign spokesman, said it had $774,000 on hand at the end of December.

“After reviewing Roger Marshall’s report, it is clear the rich hospital CEO is desperate," Kelly said.

Marshall loaned his campaign $70,000 between October and December of 2015. Since his campaign began, Marshall has loaned it $149,000, according to FEC records.

Huelskamp, Marshall and student retention specialist Alan LaPolice will face off in a Republican primary Aug. 2. The race, which has grown contentious in recent weeks, will likely determine who represents the overwhelmingly conservative 1st Congressional District.

LaPolice, who lost to Huelskamp in 2014, has continued his strategy of raising very little money and decrying the role fundraising plays in modern elections. He raised $375 last quarter and had $10,408 on hand at the end of 2015, according to FEC records.

“In seven months, I’ll either be called a genius or a fool,” LaPolice said. “Either way, I’ll never be called a sellout and I’ll proudly tell my children I fought for what I believed in, I fought for the soul of my country.”

“Until someone has the guts to say no to the money, money will tear this nation apart,” he added.

Of the $111,612 raised by Marshall last quarter, $21,500 of it came from political action committees. Huelskamp’s campaign has been critical of one PAC donation in particular.

“Not only is Marshall trying to buy this seat by giving his campaign a massive $160,000, but now he is asking for and taking money from a Washington organization that is pro-abortion and pro-Obamacare expansion in Kansas — a group with which he has close ties,” Kelly said.

On Dec. 21, Marshall received a $2,500 donation from the American Congress of OB-GYNs PAC, which doled out more than a million dollars in 2014 to 137 candidates, a majority of whom were Democrats.

The American Congress of OB-GYNs supports a woman’s right to an abortion, according to its website, and has urged states to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, commonly called Obamacare. Marshall donated $1,000 to the group on Oct. 30, 2015, according to FEC records.

Brent Robertson, Marshall’s campaign spokesman, defended the candidate’s anti-abortion bona fides.

“Dr. Marshall is staunchly pro-life and lives it out every day, having delivered over 5,000 babies throughout our state. To even suggest Dr. Marshall is anything else is pure fable,” Robertson said.

“An attack with this level of absurdity proves once again that Tim Huelskamp is a career politician desperate to stay in Washington drawing his $174,000 salary and elite congressional subsidy for Obamacare,” he added.