FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE:

June 13, 2014

Contact:

AARP Media Relations

202-434-2560

media@aarp.org

@AARPMedia

Chelsea Sanders

Coburn Communication, Inc.

(212) 382-4451

chelsea.sanders@coburnww.com

AARP LAUNCHES SEARCH FOR AMERICA’S TOP BOOMER TALENT WITH BOOMER SUPERSTAR CONTEST

Powered by AMERICAN IDOL® LIVE!, Contest Will Search for

Undiscovered Baby Boomers with Star Quality and Amazing Voices

WASHINGTON, D.C. (June 13, 2014) – Calling all Baby Boomers looking to become America’s next big singing sensation! AARP is launching a national search to make one lucky person’s dream a reality while showing that talent is ageless. Powered by AMERICAN IDOL® LIVE!, AARP’s Boomer Superstar contest is open to anyone born between 1946 and 1964 and gives Boomers the chance to compete for a $5,000 prize and an audition with music label 19 Recordings.

“We are thrilled to be teaming up with AMERICAN IDOL® LIVE! to find talent and to show that dreams have no expiration date and there is a real possibility of reaching your goals later in life,” said Myrna Blyth, editorial director, AARP. AARP is also sponsoring the 41-city AMERICAN IDOL® LIVE! tour, which kicks off June 24th in Binghamton, NY at the Broome County Arena.

Contestants can submit video entries online and on AARP’s Facebook page through July 11th and a panel of judges will narrow the field to the top 30 semi-finalists. The general public will help to determine the top eight finalists via online voting from July 15 - August 11. Voting is open to all AARP.org registered users and each voter age 45+ (limit 1 vote per day) will be entered for a chance to win a $3,000 sweepstakes*. Finalists will be flown to San Diego to compete in a LIVE singing competition. On September 5th at AARP’s “Ideas@50” national event, the top five contestants will perform in front of a live audience of AARP members and a celebrity panel of judges, which include 19-time Grammy Award winning musician and producer Emilio Estefan and Grammy Award-winning R&B/jazz vocalist Patti Austin.

AMERICAN IDOL® LIVE! concert attendees will be able to get additional information about AARP’s Real Possibilities initiatives, as well as the Boomer Superstar contest. AARP kiosks will be located in the concert venue at up to 21 tour stops. The Boomer Superstar contest is part of AARP’s year-long Boomers@50+ initiative which celebrates the last of the Baby Boomers turning 50 in 2014.

*Complete contest information, rules and regulations can be found online at www.aarp.org/boomersuperstar.

# # #

About AARP

AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization, with a membership of nearly 38 million, that helps people turn their goals and dreams into real possibilities, strengthens communities and fights for the issues that matter most to families such as healthcare, employment and income security, retirement planning, affordable utilities and protection from financial abuse. We advocate for individuals in the marketplace by selecting products and services of high quality and value to carry the AARP name as well as help our members obtain discounts on a wide range of products, travel, and services. A trusted source for lifestyle tips, news and educational information, AARP produces AARP The Magazine, the world's largest circulation magazine; AARP Bulletin; www.aarp.org; AARP TV & Radio; AARP Books; and AARP en Español, a Spanish-language website addressing the interests and needs of Hispanics. AARP does not endorse candidates for public office or make contributions to political campaigns or candidates. The AARP Foundation is an affiliated charity that provides security, protection, and empowerment to older persons in need with support from thousands of volunteers, donors, and sponsors. AARP has staffed offices in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Learn more at www.aarp.org.