The following have been recognized with the Idaho State Bar Service Award for 2014.

Erika Birch of Strinberg & Scholnick, LLC, the main organizer of the Street Law Clinics, said a scarcity of free legal representation in the area motivated her to work with the Idaho Trial Lawyers Association, the University of Idaho College of Law, Concordia University School of Law and the Idaho Volunteer Lawyers Program. Volunteers help people resolve their legal issues at Street Law Clinics, which have already served 353 people in its first year and are continuing to operate.

Jamie Champion, a psychologist with the VA Medical Center, has worked to ensure the state bar exam is administered fairly to those with disabilities. A non-lawyer, she serves on the Bar’s Reasonable

Accommodations Committee, offering her expertise on neuropsychology

Judge Russell Comstock has been at the forefront of reforming the Idaho Rules of Family Procedure, a multiple-year project that demanded a tremendous amount of time, expertise and collaboration. The rules debuted in the Fourth District, and are on their way to being adopted state-wide. The changes are intended to reduce costs and provide more fairness to family law cases.

Peg Dougherty has been a leader in promoting women in the legal profession. She presided over rapid growth and activism by the Idaho Women Lawyers, having served on its board since 2003 and as past president. She chaired the IWL Judicial Recruitment Committee to clarify the process for judicial

selection and to encourage women to apply for open positions in the judiciary. Her other leadership

roles have included the steering committee for the Idaho Academy of Leadership for Lawyers, the University of Idaho College of Law Advisory Council and the Idaho Supreme Court Judicial Recruitment Committee.

Attorney Kari Campos has been directly involved in CASA, Court Appointed Special Advocates, for children as a pro bono attorney, guardian ad litem, and on the CASA board of directors. For the past five years she has served as president and other officer positions of the Seventh District Bar Association.

Judge Mick Hodges volunteers at a pet therapy group and serves on multiple committees such as Fifth

District Pro Bono committee and Child Protection Advisory Committee.

Attorney Kerry Michaelson serves on the Idaho state Bar Pro Bono Commission, is a member of the Access to Justice Idaho Campaign Committee and is a member of both the Nampa Rotary and the Women’s Business Center Advisory Council.

Deborah McCormick organized the Citizens’ Law Academy, serves on the Palouse Ice Rink board of directors and gives pro bono service to those who cannot afford a lawyer. She also serves on the Pro Bono Commission and is a public defender.

Susan Moss of Lukins and Annis, does pro bono work helping to clarify the Affordable Care Act for

Idaho’s lawyers. She worked with author and insurance attorney Terry Ackerman to publish important facts about the Affordable Care Act in the months before ObamaCare was rolled out. This helped Idaho lawyers advise their clients with up-to-date accurate information. She also service on the bar’s publication advisory board.