WASHINGTON — Senator Max Baucus of Montana, soon to be nominated as President Obama’s next ambassador to China, is the powerful — and, to many fellow Democrats, infuriating — chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. He is also the conflicted architect of Mr. Obama’s health care law.

Now, if he is confirmed, Mr. Baucus, who had already announced that he would not run for re-election in 2014, will join the administration whose bureaucratic ineptitude he foresaw in April when he warned of a “huge train wreck” if officials did not do a better job explaining the Affordable Care Act.

A Democratic official said Mr. Obama settled on Mr. Baucus to succeed Gary Locke, the current ambassador, for reasons that include his efforts to bring down trade barriers between China and the United States and his insistence that “China play by internationally accepted rules” regarding currency, intellectual property, labor and human rights.

The senator’s departure would also remove a Democrat who has been a thorn in his party’s side, and would clear the way for Gov. Steve Bullock of Montana to appoint a fellow Democrat, most likely Lt. Gov. John Walsh, as interim senator. Mr. Walsh, who has already declared for Mr. Baucus’s seat, would be a strong candidate next November in a race crucial to the party’s continued control of the chamber.

Mr. Baucus, Montana’s longest-serving senator, was also a strong advocate for a tax overhaul, and his leaving is likely to decrease any momentum for that initiative, pleasing Democrats who are unenthusiastic about it. But it is health care, more than any other issue, that has defined Mr. Baucus in recent years.

In a wide-ranging conversation on the health overhaul in his Capitol Hill office last week, before Wednesday’s news of his impending nomination, Mr. Baucus said he had a “flash of anger” over its bungled rollout. He also said that the law did not do enough to control costs and that Kathleen Sebelius, Mr. Obama’s health secretary, and her top aides delivered only “platitudes” when he asked them for specifics on how they would carry out the health overhaul.

“The more I asked,” he said, “the more concerned I became.”

But today the law is as much Mr. Baucus’s legacy as Mr. Obama’s. In 2009, it fell to Mr. Baucus to shepherd the health measure through the Senate by dint of his committee chairmanship and the death of the chamber’s leading voice on health care, Edward M. Kennedy. Although he remains a champion, and says Americans will ultimately embrace it, he expects it might take a decade.

“Max has always made some Democrats nervous — his fateful words about the Obamacare train wreck have turned out to be very true,” said John E. Sununu, the Republican former senator from New Hampshire.

The act is hugely unpopular in Montana, and some analysts say it could have cost Mr. Baucus, who has been in the Senate 35 years, his re-election in 2014. At 72 and newly remarried, he said last week that he was ready for “a whole new adventure, a whole new chapter.”

He continues to fret that the health care law had no Republican support in either the Senate or the House. “It is my belief that for major legislation to be durable, sustainable, it has to be bipartisan,” Mr. Baucus said. “I mean, one party can’t jam legislation down the other party’s throat. It leaves a bitter taste.”

Scion of a prominent and mostly Republican Montana ranching family, Mr. Baucus has always been an introvert, unusual for a politician. He is not one for big speeches or the Sunday talk shows — he stuttered as a child and still struggles with it slightly.

He settled on a career in public service after “an epiphany,” he said, while backpacking in the 1960s in what is now the Democratic Republic of Congo, during a break from his studies at Stanford University. He eventually graduated, and got a law degree there. One former Baucus chief of staff, Jon Selib, echoed the views of many when he said the senator “marches to the beat of his own drummer.”

In 2001 Mr. Baucus defied Tom Daschle, then the Senate Democratic leader, by co-writing President George W. Bush’s tax cuts, setting off screaming matches between the two Democrats. In 2003, Mr. Baucus broke ranks to support a Medicare prescription drug benefit that Democrats viewed as a giveaway to drug companies.

As Mr. Obama ran for president in 2008, with universal health care coverage as a major campaign theme, Mr. Baucus began preparing for the legislation. He held hearings, convened a bipartisan retreat and spent months pursuing Republicans on his committee, and eventually got one — Olympia J. Snowe of Maine — to vote for the measure. “He was relentless,” said Ms. Snowe, now retired. She ultimately rejected the more liberal bill fashioned by the Senate Democratic leader, Harry Reid.

The courtship frustrated Democrats, who said that Mr. Baucus was jeopardizing the bill’s chances. Among the critics was Jim Messina, a former Baucus aide who regards the senator as a second father and was then Mr. Obama’s deputy chief of staff.

“I thought the negotiations with Republicans went on too long and was very loud in my opinion about that,” Mr. Messina said.

But Republicans gave Mr. Baucus credit. “It was a very, very difficult assignment for him,” said Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah.

Mr. Baucus says the “train wreck” remark grew out of his frustration with administration officials whose testimony on the readiness of HealthCare.gov, the online insurance exchange, “didn’t pass the smell test.” He said that it was intended as a message to the White House and that he did not regret it.

“Got their attention,” he said.

The next day, Denis R. McDonough, the White House chief of staff, started biweekly meetings with Mr. Baucus and arranged for weekly phone calls with Ms. Sebelius. In the months before the exchange went live Oct. 1, Mr. Baucus said the two repeatedly assured him that HealthCare.gov would be ready.

Did they lie? “I don’t think so; I don’t know,” Mr. Baucus said.

Mr. McDonough declined to be interviewed, although he sent an email saying he valued Mr. Baucus’s guidance and counsel. “He knows the ins and outs of the policy and sees around the corners,” Mr. McDonough wrote.

A spokeswoman for Ms. Sebelius said much the same and that the health agency had adopted some of Mr. Baucus’s ideas, like a “one-stop shop” website for small businesses.

Looking ahead, Mr. Baucus said last week that he viewed himself as an “enabler in chief” who could help the administration put the law on stable footing before he retired. On Wednesday, after news of his impending nomination leaked out, he waved off reporters, saying simply, “It is not for me to discuss.”