The Eye

Brandi Glanville BULLYING Kenya Moore on 'Celebrity Apprentice?' New Report Claims RHOBH Mean Girl is Harassing Former Miss USA

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Facebook/Real Housewives of Beverly Hills) Brandi Glanville dishes on "Real Housewives of Beverly Hills" season five drama. Did she slap former bff Lisa Vanderpump?

When it comes to making reality TV friends "Real Housewives of Atlanta" star Kenya Moore just can't win.



The former Miss Universe recently joined the cast of "Celebrity Apprentice," along with "Real Housewives of Beverly Hills" mean girl Brandi Glanville, and rumor has it that the "Real Housewives" divas already aren't getting along!



Although Kenya is often viewed as the ringleader of drama on RHOA, 41-year old Brandi is the one reportedly stirring up trouble for Kenya, 43, during the show's production.



"Brandi is obsessed with Kenya, she's been attacking her looks, her attitude and she even said something nasty about Kenya's 'fat butt,'" a source close o the set revealed to RadarOnline. "Brandi hates Kenya and every chance she gets she rips into her."



It's pretty obvious Brandi is aiming to establish herself as the top mean girl of the "Real Housewives" franchise, however some her her latest antics towards her counterpart may have landed her in the hot seat with the creator, Donald Trump, after producers sent the reality star to her hotel room to get her act together.



"Everyone thinks Brandi is just starting fights to get better TV time but she's personally attacking Kenya and being really ugly to her," the source said.



Brandi's nasty attitude couldn't come at a worse time for Kenya, as she was also at the epicenter of a huge brawl during the reunion taping for her respective show.



As we previously reported, the "Twirl Queen" may have her position as ultimate instigator on RHOA revoked as many of her cast mates are vying for her to be fired after her recently physical altercation with co-star Porsha Williams.



NeNe Leakes and Phaedra Parks are allegedly rallying producers to kick Kenya off the show instead, claiming that she's to blame for the brawl among a ton of other drama she's caused on the show. The RHOA veterans have even reportedly threatened to leave the show themselves if Kenya was approved to return for season seven.



Rumors surfaced that Kenya pushed Porsha over the edge during the reunion after she pulled out adult toys, taking shots at Porsha's ex-husband Kordell Stewart's questionable sexuality.



Although NeNe didn't confirm the reason why allegedly Porsha attacked Kenya, the actress did say that Porsha was only reacting to being pushed past her limit.



"One was provoked; the other one knocked her out," she said.



During interview with Vh1's "The Morning Buzz," NeNe recently and said that it was Kenya's fault that the fight broke out in the first place.



Hopefully Kenya will manage to survive Brandi and the rest of her competitors during her time on "Celebrity Apprentice" as she may be looking for a new job once the show wraps up taping.



SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.