When President Obama made a deal with the Iranians in July over the terror sponsor's nuclear program, he left four Americans behind. One of those Americans is Washington Post reporter Jason Rezaian.

By the administration's own admission and standards Rezaian, who has been held in an Iranian prison for more than a year, is being held on trumped up, bogus charges. This morning, it is being reported Rezaian has been issued a verdict on those same charges after a closed door "trial."

An Iranian judiciary spokesman said Sunday that a verdict has been reached in the espionage case of Washington Post reporter Jason Rezaian, though he offered no details. It was uncertain what the verdict is and whether there is a sentence.



“The ruling on this case has been issued,” Gholam Hossein Mohseni Ejei said in his weekly televised news conference with Iranian journalists. “There is still the possibility of this ruling being appealed, and it is not final.”



The Post has vehemently disputed the allegation that Rezaian was a spy. Executive Editor Martin Baron has said that Rezaian was acting solely as a journalist, and he has called the trial a “sham” and “a sick brew of farce and tragedy.”

BREAKING: Iran state TV says Washington Post reporter Jason Rezaian convicted after closed-door trial on various charges — Fox News (@FoxNews) October 12, 2015

We'll have to wait and see whether Rezaian has been convicted on charges. Based on the talks from Iranian sources about an appeal, things aren't looking good.

In the meantime, Iran is still unjustly holding U.S. Pastor Saeed Abedini, U.S. Marine Amir Hekmati, FBI agent Robert Levinson and of course, Rezaian. No word yet from the White House on how the administration plans to help.

UPDATE: Rezaian convicted as guilty.

The Washington Post on Monday angrily denounced the conviction of one of its reporters in a secret Iranian court, calling the proceeding an "outrageous injustice."



Washington Post Executive Editor Martin Baron criticized Iran’s conviction of Post reporter Jason Rezaian in a closed-door trial on charges that are unclear, saying the verdict was unconscionable.



Rezaian was found guilty of various allegations by an Iranian court, the country's state TV reported late Sunday.



"Iran has behaved unconscionably throughout this case, but never more so than with this indefensible decision by a Revolutionary Court to convict an innocent journalist of serious crimes after a proceeding that unfolded in secret, with no evidence whatsoever of any wrongdoing. For now, no sentence has been announced," Baron said in a statement Monday.



It was not immediately clear of what exactly Rezaian had been convicted. He had faced multiple charges, including espionage, at his trial, which was widely criticized by the U.S. government and press freedom organizations.



Rezaian reportedly faces up to 20 years in prison if convicted on all charges.