Other homeowners with similar issues want Concierge Contractors owners Jim and Michelle Abramson stopped.

Homeowners in Moore come forward with complaints against Concierge Contractors out of Michigan.

Homeowners in Moore come forward with complaints against Concierge Contractors out of Michigan.

As News 9 reported Monday night, a tornado victim calls their work a "disaster". Now, we know another client is suing.

More than 13 months later, Becki Flood's home sits unfinished. Come to find out, Becki's neighbor, Shannon Wilson had the same problem with the same contractor, and she says her nightmare is far from over.

“I did not know that they had other issues with other clients, and I even looked them up on the internet, looked at their website, the Better Businesses Bureau,” said Wilson.

Wilson isn't happy with her new home. That's why she's suing the owners of Concierge Contractors out of Michigan.

“I think it is horrible to be victimized by the tornado, and then get victimized again by somebody that is supposed to do what they say they’re going to do,” said Wilson.

Wilson says there are multiple defects throughout her home and the lawsuit is a last resort.

“Our heat and air isn’t correct. You can see peaks and valleys in our roof. There are so many things that I have to fix,” said Wilson.

Other homeowners with similar issues want Concierge Contractors owners Jim and Michelle Abramson stopped.

7/21/2014 Related Story: Moore Tornado Victim Says She Is Dealing With A Rebuilding Nightmare

Moore homeowner Delilah Blair posted on the contractor's Facebook page, saying she's locating all the people the company has ripped off so they can file a class-action lawsuit.

“I wish he had never referred them,” said Wilson.

Shannon says Famers Insurance adjuster, Casey Fechter, recommended the company, the same adjuster who recommend the builder to Becki Flood.

“I’ve been with Farmers for at least 20 years if not more, and so I trusted them,” said Wilson.

“Let me look into this one,” said Farmers Insurance spokesperson, Luis Sahagun.

Sahagun sent the below statement as it relates to Becki Floods situation:

"Like most of the people who suffered damage as a result of the Moore Tornado, our customer, Ms. Flood was looking for some guidance on selecting a contractor to make repairs to her damaged home. She asked our claim representative for assistance in this area.

As a matter of policy, Farmers does not make any recommendations nor provides lists of recommended contractors to customers who have filed a claim. Customers always retain the right to select any contractor they wish to make the necessary repairs.

During their conversation, the claim representative advised Ms. Flood that he was familiar with Concierge Contractors but that Ms. Flood should consult with friends, neighbors and to do her own research to secure a contractor to make the repairs to her home.

Sometime after their conversation, Ms. Flood advised Farmers that she had chosen Concierge Contractors to complete the repair work and had entered into a contract with them.

We have reached out to both Ms. Flood and representatives of Concierge Contractors to provide whatever assistance we can to get this matter resolved to everyone’s satisfaction."

"I don't want him to victimize anyone else. I want people to know not to use his company," said Wilson.

We have tried numerous times to get in touch with Concierge Contractors.

The state Attorney General's office could not confirm an ongoing investigation with the company, but we're told the office has received a complaint.