Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | Dashcam look at new ramp from Liberty Street to I-65 North | 1:18 Ohio River Bridges Project video looks at newly opened ramp from Liberty Street to I-65 North. Ohio River Bridges Project 1 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | Dashcam look at closure of ramp from Muhammad Ali Boulevard to I-65 North | 2:10 Ohio River Bridges Project video takes a look at closure of ramp from Muhammad Ali Boulevard to I-65 North. Ohio River Bridges Project 2 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | Abraham Lincoln Bridge opens ahead of schedule | 1:00 After nearly 50,00 took to walk The Abraham Lincoln Bridge on Saturday, Dec. 5, traffic began rolling on Sunday night. (Marty Pearl/Special to The C-J) 3 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | Dashcam: Three approaches to Lincoln Bridge | 4:07 See three approaches to the Abraham Lincoln Bridge via dashcam video provided by the Ohio River Bridges Project. 4 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | 'Inspiring day' for those on Abraham Lincoln Bridge | 1:42 Kentucky and Indiana residents got a rare look at a new landmark as they walked the Abraham Lincoln Bridge. (Marty Pearl/Special To The C-J) 5 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | Thousands take part in walking Abraham Lincoln Bridge | 0:08 It was a cold and foggy Saturday morning, but that didn't stop a huge crowd from taking part in the opening of the Abraham Lincoln Bridge in Jeffersonville. Jeff Watkins/The C-J 6 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | Time Lapse of downtown Louisville bridge construction | 1:24 The Downtown Span of the Ohio River Bridges project took about three years to build and just over a minute to show it to you. Michael Clevenger, CJ 7 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | Meet the workers who built Louisville's downtown bridge | 8:04 Pat McDonogh photographs the workers who built the new downtown bridge, and they share their pride in the project. By Michael Clevenger, CJ 8 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | CJ staff photographers on making portraits of bridge workers | 5:38 CJ photographers Pat McDonogh and Michael Clevenger discuss how they created portraits of bridge workers who built the new downtown span. Pat McDonogh and Michael Clevenger, CJ 9 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | Lincoln Bridge open to traffic Monday morning | 2:12 The Abraham Lincoln Bridge walk is 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Saturday, Dec. 5 with access in Jeffersonville, Ind. The bridge opens to traffic Monday morning. Matt Stone, CJ 10 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | New downtown bridge progress | 2:13 A look at the progress of the new Interstate 65 bridge in downtown Louisville. 11 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | First concrete poured on Indiana approach on Downtown Bridge | 2:12 The first section of concrete has been poured on the Indiana approach to the new downtown bridge. 12 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | Downtown Crossing: Constructing piers | 1:59 The downtown bridge will have nine piers, four on land and five in the water. Video credit: The Ohio River Bridges Downtown Crossing 13 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | Downtown Crossing: Update on the new bridge sections | 2:22 This update video focuses on the three sections of the new downtown bridge over the Ohio River. Video credit: The Ohio River Bridges Downtown Crossing 14 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | Stay cables installed on the new downtown bridge span | 1:55 The first stay cable was installed today on the downtown bridge. The stay cables will hold up the deck on the new span. Michael Clevenger, The C-J 15 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Video | Downtown Crossing: Indiana approach to I-65 bridge | 2:36 A look at work to prepare the Indiana side of the river for bridge construction. Video credit: The Ohio River Bridges Downtown Crossing 16 of 17 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share VIDEOS | DOWNTOWN LOUISVILLE BRIDGE Bridges project rising from Ohio River | 2:18 The first visible construction work for the new downtown bridge recently began on the Ohio River. 17 of 17 Last VideoNext Video Video | Dashcam look at new ramp from Liberty Street to I-65 North

Video | Dashcam look at closure of ramp from Muhammad Ali Boulevard to I-65 North

Video | Abraham Lincoln Bridge opens ahead of schedule

Video | Dashcam: Three approaches to Lincoln Bridge

Video | 'Inspiring day' for those on Abraham Lincoln Bridge

Video | Thousands take part in walking Abraham Lincoln Bridge

Video | Time Lapse of downtown Louisville bridge construction

Video | Meet the workers who built Louisville's downtown bridge

Video | CJ staff photographers on making portraits of bridge workers

Video | Lincoln Bridge open to traffic Monday morning

Video | New downtown bridge progress

Video | First concrete poured on Indiana approach on Downtown Bridge

Video | Downtown Crossing: Constructing piers

Video | Downtown Crossing: Update on the new bridge sections

Video | Stay cables installed on the new downtown bridge span

Video | Downtown Crossing: Indiana approach to I-65 bridge

Bridges project rising from Ohio River

Buy Photo L. R. Kraus, 22, directs traffic in 1940 on the Louisville side of the Louisville Municipal/Clark Bridge going to Jeffersonville. Aug., 23, 1940, The Courier-Journal (Photo: The Courier-Journal archives)Buy Photo

Hugh Cochran, driving a classic 1940s black sedan, clasped his hands over his head in a celebratory handshake in November 1946 as he became the first person to cross the Louisville Municipal/Clark Memorial Bridge for free between Louisville and Jeffersonville, Ind.

Tolls had been removed the day before -- considered an obstruction to "free trade" between the two areas -- and The Courier-Journal photo recording the scene showed the difference a day makes.

The Clark Bridge, just west of I-65, remains free, along with the Sherman Minton Bridge/I-64 to New Albany, but tolls are making a comeback in the area -- and are expected to start later this year on other bridges to help pay for the Ohio River Bridges Project.

This time, an all-electronic tolling system called RiverLInk will be instituted on the new Abraham Lincoln Bridge, which will carry six lanes of I-65 traffic northbound from downtown Louisville; the improved Kennedy Bridge, which will carry six lanes of southbound traffic; and the new East End bridge, which will connect the Gene Snyder Freeway (I-265) in Prospect with the Lee Hamilton Highway/Ind. 265 in Utica, Ind.

RiverLink officials have held a series of community open houses in February and March in Louisville, Southern Indiana and Oldham County to explain the new system and give drivers a chance to ask questions. The last scheduled open house for now will be from 5:30 to 7 p.m. March 24 at the Sheraton Riverside Hotel, 700 W. Riverside Dr., in Jeffersonville. Transit Authority of River City (TARC) and the Kentuckiana Regional Planning & Development Agency (KIPDA) officials will be on hand to discuss the Ticket to Ride ride-share program.

Initial toll rates will range from $1 to $12, depending on the size of the vehicle, whether a transponder is used and how often a driver crosses a tolled bridge.

Buy Photo Thousands congregate on the Indiana side of the Louisville Municipal/Clark Memorial Bridge Nov. 1, 1946 near the toll plaza as the bridge is officially transferred to Kentucky. (Photo: The Courier-Journal archives)

Get more information at (502) ­891-­2529 or email

riverlinkopenhouses@gmail.com.

RiverLink requires no toll booths, no coin machines, no lines and no stopping, officials say. That wasn't the case when tolls were charged on the Municipal/Clark Bridge, after it opened in 1929.

For Whom the Bridge Tolls

In August 1940, a 22-year-old guard named L.R. Kraus, armed with a revolver, is shown at a small police station at Second and Main streets in Louisville at the entrance to the Municipal Bridge, later renamed for George Rogers Clark. He was there to direct drivers to pay a toll on the Indiana side. A sign warns: "No Reverse Turns."

Buy Photo Hugh Cochran becomes the first driver to cross the Louisville Municipal/Clark Bridge for free Nov. 1, 1946 after tolls were eliminated. Bridge Officer F. M. Bennett waves him on. (Photo: The Courier-Journal archives)

A toll plaza with stop signs and booths manned by "bridge officers" stretched across the bridge road on the Jeffersonville side. The toll was 35 cents in 1929 and was reduced later, according to the Louisville Times. Tolls were eliminated Nov. 1, 1946.

After that, one toll booth was remodeled and converted to a Kentucky & Louisville Information Center run by the Kentucky Highway Department. "Two loyal Kentuckians answer questions of thousands of motorists every year" at the center, the Louisville Times said.

Among them were Mary Bennett and Dorothy Dudley, identified in a 1950 CJ photo. In 1953, the driver of a car with a Kansas license plate is shown looking at a map with a center attendant, and a trucker confers with attendants in a 1950 CJ photo.

Buy Photo Attendants greet a driver in April of 1950 at the Kentucky & Louisville Information Center, which was created by remodeling a toll booth. (Photo: Whit Wootton, The Courier-Journal)

Something completely different

Kathleen Owen and I were pleased to have an opportunity to make a presentation about the history of Nunnlea historic home, 1940 S. Hurstbourne Pkwy., to genealogical aficionados at a Louisville Genealogical Society meeting March 6. Kathleen is president of the Beautification League of Louisville & Jefferson County, which owns and maintains the home.

We have been invited to talk again about Nunnlea, built by early settlers of the Jeffersontown area and saved from destruction by the league, at the next meeting of the Greater Jeffersontown Historical Society. The meeting, which is open to the public, will be at 7 p.m. Monday, April 4 at Nunnlea. Please join us.

Reporter Martha Elson can be reached at (502) 582-7061 and melson@courier-journal.com. Follow her on Twitter at @MarthaElson_cj.

Toll enforcers flank a motorist paying at a toll house on the Jeffersonville, Ind. side of the Louisville Municipal Bridge in an undated photo. R. G. Potter Collection. (Photo: R. G. Potter Collection/CJ archives)

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1pApLZk