The designation of Browns Canyon as a national monument is long overdue.

That was underscored in our minds with the recent news that two pending mining claims in the area could sully the beauty of the area.

Without delay, the federal Bureau of Land Management should challenge the claims in court. If these claims, which lie in the Arkansas River, were to be mined, there could be significant environmental impact.

“Mining on the river could destroy the pristine water quality and scenery that has made Browns Canyon one of the top rafting and fishing destinations in the country,” Colorado’s Sen. Mark Udall, a Democrat, said in a prepared statement.

“It also could be disastrous for Chaffee County, its economy and the businesses that count on the river,” Udall said.

Udall is the latest member of Colorado’s congressional delegation to push for protections for Browns Canyon. Recently, he introduced a bill to have the area designated a national monument.

Before Udall, then-Sens. Wayne Allard, a Republican, and Ken Salazar, a Democrat, teamed up to seek a wilderness designation for Browns. Republican Rep. Joel Hefley pushed the idea, which was ultimately unsuccessful, in the House.

For the past 18 months, Udall has been carefully building consensus among local interests for national monument designation.

Notably absent from the list of supporters at this point is Rep. Doug Lamborn, a Colorado Springs Republican who took Hefley’s seat and represents the area. We would hope he could find a way to support this idea.

The preferred route to the designation, which would encompass 22,000 acres between Salida and Buena Vista, would be congressional action.

If federal lawmakers can’t get their act together, then President Obama could use his power under the Antiquities Act to make the area a national monument.

Though the president would be well within his legal authority to take the action, there has been a history of tension between the executive and legislative branches over such designations.

That’s why congressional designation is preferable. If it has a stamp of approval from federal lawmakers, then there’s less chance a subsequent Congress would try to undo the designation.

Browns is a beautiful part of Colorado. It deserves the permanent protection that a national monument designation would confer upon this special place.