Republican state Sen. Jeff Stone announced his candidacy for Congress on Saturday, Jan. 9, setting up a heavyweight contest between a veteran Inland lawmaker and a well-financed Democratic incumbent.

Stone was expected to announce his bid for the 36th Congressional District during the grand opening of a GOP voter registration headquarters in La Quinta. He will take on Rep. Raul Ruiz, D-Palm Desert, who has represented the district since 2012.

“The serious problems our nation faces are the product of an administration that does not comprehend the threats and does not have the will or the plan to keep us safe and strong,” Stone said in a news release issued by his campaign.

Stone said he’s spent the past month or so listening to constituents in the district, which includes the Coachella Valley, Hemet, San Jacinto and the Pass.

“Unless I see or hear differently over the next several weeks, I will file to put my name before voters and give them a real choice in the 36th Congressional District,” he said.

Dwight Kealy, an attorney and former Marine with law offices in Murrieta, is the only Republican to have filed papers to run against Ruiz. The top two vote-getters in the June primary, regardless of party, will advance to the November general election.

Stone, 59, is a pharmacist who started his political career as a Temecula councilman. He was elected to the Riverside County Board of Supervisors in 2004 and served there until winning election in the 28th state Senate District in 2014.

In 2011, he suggested California be split in two after state lawmakers took vehicle license fee revenue from four fledgling cities in Riverside County. He has assigned catchy acronyms to his legislation and was the only Inland senator to vote for stricter childhood vaccination requirements for attending school.

The 28th state Senate District represents the Coachella Valley and southwest Riverside County. Stone’s term doesn’t expire until 2018. So he could run for Congress and if he loses, return to Sacramento.

His entry into the race is a relief to Republicans who until recently had struggled to find a challenger to Ruiz. Indio Councilwoman Lupe Ramos Watson announced her candidacy last year, only to withdraw citing a lack of GOP support.

Stone also poses a challenge to Ruiz, 43, a physician who upset Republican Rep. Mary Bono in 2012. He beat GOP Assemblyman Brian Nestande in 2014 to win another two-year term.

Ruiz, the son of migrant farmworkers, has cultivated an image of political moderation since going to Capitol Hill. He split with Democrats to vote in favor of a GOP delay on Obamacare penalties as well as tougher screening of Syrian refugees.

Until recently, Ruiz’s district had slightly more Republican voters than Democrats. That’s changed, but 19 percent of the district’s voters are independents who could decide the race.

Stone is an experienced campaigner and accomplished fundraiser who won a hotly contested Senate race in 2014 over Republican Bonnie Garcia.

He’ll need plenty of money to take on Ruiz, who has more than $1.2 million in his campaign funds and could benefit from independent spending from outside groups.

One factor in Ruiz’s favor is the fact that 2016 is a presidential election year. Democratic voter turnout tends to be higher in those contests.

Contact the writer: 951-368-9547 or jhorseman@pe.com