Former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina said there’s a very high chance she’ll enter the race for president.

“What are the chances that you’re going to run for president?” host Chris Wallace asked during an interview on “Fox News Sunday.”

“Very high,” responded Fiorina.

“You’re a former businesswoman, give me a number,” said Wallace.

“Higher than 90 percent,” Fiorina replied.

Fiorina added that she’s still making sure she has the team and financial resources in place “just as all the other potential candidates are doing” and said she would announce her final decision by “late April or early May.”

Wallace asked Fiorina why voters should choose her out of a crowded field of GOP candidates.

“Because I have a deep understanding of how the economy actually works, having started as a secretary and become the chief executive of the largest technology company in the world,” she said.

“Because I understand how the world works and know many of the world leaders on the stage today. Because I understand technology, a transformational tool. Because I understand bureaucracies, how they work and how you need to change them, and our government is a huge bureaucracy. And because I understand executive decision making, which is making tough calls in tough times, with high stakes for which you’re prepared to be held accountable.”

Fiorina said would bring experience as a business executive to the White House, and that she is uniquely qualified to address “fundamental structural problems” with our economy, namely that “we have tangled people up in a web of dependence” and “we are crushing small business.”

She suggested “zero-based budgeting” and a “pay for performance” policy toward civil employees as ways to address Washington bureaucracy.

Wallace asked Fiorina about layoffs during her time as CEO and how she was ultimately fired by the board of directors.

Fiorina defended her record as CEO. She said she lead Hewlett-Packard through the “worst technology recession in 25 years,” and though layoffs are a “last resort,” they are sometimes necessary for the “overall health of the enterprise.”

She said the company ultimately became more successful and added more jobs under her watch.

Wallace said Fiorina appears “to take special delight” in criticizing potential rival Hillary Clinton.

Fiorina said Clinton “lacks a track record of accomplishment” and is “not candid, which suggests her character is flawed.”

Fiorina added that she is also concerned about Clinton’s “competence.”

“Anyone who in 2015 says you can’t have two email accounts on a single device obviously doesn’t understand technology,” said Fiorina.

Wallace said that though it comes across as “sexist,” some have suggested that Fiorina is truly running as a potential running mate rather than as a serious candidate.

“If I run for president, it’s because I can win the job and it’s because I can do the job,” said Fiorina.

Wallace asked Fiorina if she’d consider becoming the nominee’s running mate after the primary.

“Well, when you start asking all of the other candidates that question, then maybe we’ll have that conversation,” said Fiorina.

“Fair enough,” said Wallace.