History teacher Dustin Rimmey has a big year ahead of him.

The Lansing native, now in his eighth year of teaching at Topeka High, is taking over his school’s debate team from longtime coach Pam McComas. At the same time, he will be teaching advanced courses in U.S. government, politics and comparative government.

But while helping his students learn, Rimmey hopes to be a student himself, too.

The 30-year-old graduate of Emporia State University has his sights set on a master’s degree in political science, a goal that will now be possible thanks in part to an award funded by Congress.

Rimmey is this year’s Kansas winner of the James Madison fellowship, a distinction that brings with it up to $24,000 for graduate studies and a one-month trip to Washington, D.C. There he will study the principles and history of the Constitution at Georgetown University.

“I think it will increase my depth in understanding some theories in political science,” Rimmey said this week.

The award comes from the James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation, an agency created by Congress in 1986, and is designed “to recognize promising and distinguished teachers,” to bolster their understanding of constitutional government, and to promote quality education on the topic in America’s middle and high schools.

Rimmey received news of the award in the form of a package delivered to his door. When he realized what the mail carrier had brought, he burst into a celebratory dance.

“I was ridiculously excited,” he said. “I made him high-five me.”

Rimmey first learned of the fellowships from a past James Madison fellow and now-retired Topeka High teacher, Mike Williams, who encouraged him to pursue a master’s degree.

This was the third year Rimmey applied to the foundation for help funding that, an effort that was clearly worthwhile.

“That shows perseverance,” said Linda Wiley, Topeka High’s principal, who called Rimmey “very deserving” of the fellowship.

Wiley said Rimmey has a talent for helping his students pose questions and consider different viewpoints.

“He’s very intelligent, very bright,” she said, “and knows his subject matter.”

But Rimmey would like to know his subject matter even better.

Though he has a bachelor’s in education and is certified to teach history, debate and forensics, he would like to dig deeper into political science, and hopes to start his graduate studies at Kansas State University this year.