Broncos outside linebacker DeMarcus Ware has had a whirlwind December, spending much of his time off the field giving back to the community. A look at his Santa-like month:

Dec. 1: The fitted sweater and perfectly pressed button shirt did little to hide Ware’s presence on the bottom floor of the J.C. Penney at Park Meadows Mall in Lone Tree. In he walked as 50 children from the Boys & Girls Clubs of Metro Denver leapt in shock. Their ear-to-ear grins mirrored his as they welcomed a player they had long idolized from afar.

Ware, an 11-year NFL veteran and nine-time Pro Bowl selection, was in his element. He stopped by to say hello to the kids who are in a position he once was as a Boys & Girls Club member in Alabama. He presented them all with $100 gift cardsto spend on presents for friends and family. And then they all went shopping, trying on shoes, picking out shirts, comparing new toys.

“I tell (the kids): ‘I came from just where you came from. I was in your shoes,'” Ware said. “For me now, this is like home away from home. I know what it felt like. It brings back those memories and makes me feels good.”

Dec. 8: Ware, all 258 pounds of him, squeezed into a Thomas Jefferson High School football jersey with the No. 66 pasted on the back. He was on a mission to surprise members of the team, acting as a new recruit from Dallas named “Marcus Sacksmore.” Hidden under his new yellow-and-maroon jersey was his usual No. 94 Broncos jersey — a fall-back, lest anyone forget who he really was.

Andrew Skari, the Spartans’ athletic director, corralled his players into a cramped room before welcoming War– eh, Sacksmore, who waltzed in with helmet and all. The deadpanned looks quickly turned to dropped jaws as Sacksmore threw off his Spartans jersey and reverted back to Ware.

Ware then presented the team, which has hit with budget cuts, with footballs and equipment on behalf of the Broncos and Sports Authority. Santa Ware came through yet again. But he had another two weeks to give more.

Dec. 18: For the second consecutive year, Ware treated a group of underprivileged children to an advanced movie screening. Last year, the children from the Boys & Girls Clubs of Metro Denver, many whom were orphans, were treated to a viewing of “Annie.”

This year’s screening was of “Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Road Chip.” The group was from the Boys & Girls Clubs and Warren Village, a program in Denver that helps low-income, single-parent families.

No media. No cameras. Just him and them.

Dec. 22: In a less-than-24-hour trip back home to Dallas following the Broncos’ loss to the Steelers in Pittsburgh, Ware made a pit-stop at a Chick-fil-A in Southlake, Texas, where he footed the bill for those waiting in line behind him. A gift of $200 covered them all.

The Thank Yous came rolling in on social media. So, too, did the Welcomes. Courtesy of Santa Ware.

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or @NickiJhabvala