SCOTTSDALE, Ariz. — Major-leaguers Zack Greinke, Joey Votto, Aubrey Huff, Chuck Knoblauch and Khalil Greene.

Former NFL stars Ricky Williams and Earl Campbell.

Former NBA player Royce White.

The PGA Tour’s Charlie Beljan.

Former Rockies pitcher Taylor Buchholz. Current Rockies pitcher Tyler Matzek.

Myself.

What do we all share in common? A battle against anxiety.

The National Institute of Mental Health describes anxiety disorder as an umbrella term for an array of emotional ailments that annually affect about 40 million American adults — filling them with uncertainty and fearfulness.

Why bring this up now?

Last week, Matzek, Colorado’s talented and thoughtful left-handed pitcher, was excused from spring training to deal with personal issues tied to his ongoing struggles with performance anxiety. The day after the story ran, I received an e-mail from a clueless baseball “fan.”

The e-mail read, in part: “I think the Rockies have to stop babying players like Matzek. He got his money and his signing bonus and got his chance. Time to cut him loose.”

Clearly, the reader has not spent sleepless nights wondering what was wrong with him.

Clearly, the reader doesn’t know the pain that comes when some of life’s simple joys disappear because of fear and dread that turns the mind and body against itself.

Matzek was blessed with a rare gift. He grew up able to throw a baseball at more than 90 mph with precision and confidence. Now, when he gets on the mound in the heat of competition, that precision and confidence had been replaced by nagging doubt.

I’m not going to delve deep into my own personal history, but I am acutely aware of how debilitating anxiety, and the subsequent depression, can be. There was a point in my life when I was afraid to ride a bike. Weird, huh? It took me a long time to get back on a bike, but I kept after it and learned how to cope with my condition. Eventually, I participated in The Denver Post’s Ride the Rockies. Finishing that bike tour stands as one of the proudest achievements of my life.

I have spent more than 20 years of dealing with anxiety, and my symptoms still creep up on me. When I’m stressed out and tired , I’m susceptible. But I’ve learned to cope with my condition and live a full life.

Greinke, the 2009 Cy Young Award winner with the Kansas City Royals, nearly quit baseball because of his struggles with social anxiety disorder. Now he’s pitching for the Arizona Diamondbacks in the first year of a six-year, $206.5 million contract.

When he left Royals spring training camp in 2006 to deal with his condition, he said he was “90 percent sure” he was finished with baseball. He returned only after getting counseling and taking the medication Zoloft.

In December, I flew to Southern California to interview Matzek for a story about his performance anxiety, and his goal to conquer the condition, return to the mound and compete for a spot in the Rockies’ starting rotation. I was surprised, and pleased, with how much he opened up to me.

So when his control issues returned early in spring training and he departed from camp, it saddened me. I still hope he can come back and fulfill his dream of being an accomplished big-league pitcher.

As for the reader who e-mailed me, curious about why the Rockies are holding onto Matzek, I can point to the compassionate answer general manager Jeff Bridich gave me.

“The first reason is an easy one. Everybody sees the talent he has,” Bridich told me. “The second answer is that I am one of many people in this organization who believe in this guy. We have seen him grow from a teenager into a solid young man. Together we are going to work to make sure that all of this is just one chapter of a very long career.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@ denverpost.com or @psaundersdp