We've said goodbye to 2014. And what's next for 2015? We've asked four of our CBS News correspondents to survey the landscape as the New Year gets up to speed. Here is Wyatt Andrews in Washington:

The dome of the United States Capitol is getting a $60 million makeover, to repair thousands of breaks, cracks and structural deficiencies. This facelift happening high above the Capitol will be soon matched by a political makeover in the hallways down below.

This week Republicans take over the Capitol, with majorities in both the House and Senate -- and with Congress itself in need of repair. Public approval has sunk to around 14 percent.

While parties shared in that failure, the voters put Republicans in control.

"We're looking at, back-to-back, the two least-productive Congresses in history," said Washington Post columnist Dana Milbank. "Basically we're down to naming post offices and keeping the government running for three months, six months at a time."

Milbank, a keen observer of Congressional inaction, says Republicans will have to show progress this year precisely because they're in charge.

He said the challenge facing Republicans is showing whether they can govern.

"The Republicans own the Congress now," said Milbank, "and they're going to own those approval ratings, so they have a powerful incentive. They need to look responsible; they need to look like grownups."

The Republican legislative agenda begins with immigration, tax reform, and -- almost certain -- clashes with the President.

But according to Milbank, the President has also changed, because now he leads the opposition.

"I see President Obama as being liberated by this election," Milbank said. "It's just him against the Republican Congress, mano a mano."

The president said as much in a December 19 press conference: "I think there are going to be some tough fights on areas where we disagree."

Andrews asked, "Does it help the President, as you've argued before, that Republicans are now afraid of failing?"

"I think it does," replied Milbank. "He has nothing to lose. He can be a happy warrior right now."

And then there's the war Republicans will wage with themselves to define the direction of the party -- with many of their members potential presidential candidates.

"Think about it: there really is no leader of the Republican Party right now," said Milbank. "Rand Paul, who thinks he's in charge, and Marco Rubio, who thinks he's in charge, and Ted Cruz, who thinks he's in charge -- I do think you're going to see quite a free-for-all -- both those vying for the conservative base of the party, and those vying for what's left of the Chamber of Commerce mainstream of the party."

One emerging political factor in 2015 is an economy now growing at 5 percent a year. Both parties will claim credit, but historically a growing economy helps the sitting President.

That means both sides bring strong negotiating hands to the central question in Washington: Will they work to fix the cracks, the breaks, and structural deficiencies in the hallways below the dome?