Dallas Mavericks owner Mark Cuban recently joined Norm Hitzges on KTCK-AM to talk about the Mavericks. Here are some highlights:

On Obamacare:

“They screwed it up but conceptually, it does the right thing. The reason why I’m pro-Obamacare, if you want to put it that way, is because we made the decision as a country that if you’re sick and you go into a hospital, they’ll take care of you whether you can pay for it or not. If someone said to me, ok Mark, we’ve got this problem. We’ve made this decision as a country that anybody can go into a hospital and they have to at least evaluate them and if it’s a medical emergency, they have to take care of them. The way we pay for that is the hospital will send them a bill that they know they won’t pay. Typically, they won’t have insurance so they’re just going into the emergency room for treatment or using our real estate taxes or local, state or federal taxes that pays for it. We don’t want to have to pay for these things one off at a time because that jacks up the price. I would have come back and said ok, you come up with a program that forces everybody to enroll because everybody is at risk to go to the hospital and pay for it as a traditional insurance program as opposed to all the one offs because that’s a more effective way to do it so I like that part about it.”

On helping produce Enron: The Smartest Guys in the Room:

“It was quick. It was easy. It was right. Then we started doing the same thing with other movies, and I was horrible. Now, I won’t green light any other movies because I realized I was the Antoine Walker of movies. I hit one three, and I kept on doing more. I should have missed my first three and stopped shooting.”

On how he’s changed over the years:

“It used to take me two or three days to get over a loss and now I can sleep it off, and I think a lot of that has to do with by the morning, I’ll see my kids. My focus is a lot more on my kids. My interest is a lot more on my kids so I think that takes away some. But other than that, I think more people have gotten used to me. When I came on the scene, I was kind of the aberration. We had a lot of old school owners in the NBA who if I did something they would call up David Stern and say that’s wrong or do this, things I got fined for are no big deal. It used to be that people want Mark Cuban to be quiet, sit in the owner’s box and shut up and write the checks. Now if there is a new owner or the team is for sale it’s is the new owner going to be like Mark Cuban.”