Planned Parenthood in Kissimmee opens clinic amid protests

The center won't actually be operational until late May or early June. But the fact that abortions will be available there has made it a flash point before it even opens.

With U.S. Rep Alan Grayson and other leaders inside and a crowd of vocal protesters outside, Planned Parenthood of Greater Orlando on Wednesday held a ceremonial opening for its Kissimmee clinic.

In recent weeks someone tried to break into the facility, and a suspicious package was left there that required a heavy police response.

On Wednesday, several dozen protesters, including some holding graphic signs of aborted fetuses, sang, prayed and chanted as visitors arrived for the opening ceremony.

"Go celebrate the killing of babies!", shouted a man in a white doctor's lab coat. Several Kissimmee police officers were on hand, and the doors were locked before the ceremonies began. Blinds and a banner blocked the protesters' view from the street.

Grayson, meanwhile, called the clinic an important step forward for health care in an area that's been historically underserved, noting that almost a quarter of the county's population has no health coverage.

He also took the opportunity to tout a provision of Obamacare that does away with a cost differential that had long made medical care more expensive for women.

"It's no longer a pre-existing condition to simply be a woman," Grayson said.

In addition to Grayson, state Reps. Ricardo Rangel and Joe Saunders, and Orange County Comptroller Martha Haynie, who's on the Planned Parenthood board, also took part in the ceremony.

No Osceola County or Kissimmee city officials attended.

Planned Parenthood CEO Jenna Tosh said about 1,600 Osceola residents had been traveling to the group's Orange facilities for care. She noted that the clinic will offer services including breast and cervical cancer screening, birth control, HIV and STD testing, and routine gynecological care.

"As this community has grown, so has the need for quality care," she said. "Planned Parenthood works every day to break down barriers to access."

Outside the clinic, many of the louder protesters had dispersed by the time the ceremonies ended. But a handful remained along Oak Boulevard, including four women who work for a counseling center for pregnant women that advises against abortion.

"We don't espouse the fire and brimstone," said Carrie Sargent of St. Cloud, adding that the group's members also counsel women who have had abortions and later regretted it. "We're all women and we've all been in situations that you don't always make great decisions."