This is the seventh and last construction camp along the Grand Ditch. These structures were removed in 1997 by the owners of the ditch, the Water Supply and Storage Co. of Fort Collins. ( Courtesy of Rocky Mountain National Park )

In 1891, the Water Supply and Storage Co. started work on the Skyline ditch, the first major source of water from west of the Continental Divide to flow into the Cache la Poudre basin. The Skyline Ditch intercepts water from the West Branch of the Laramie River bringing it around the north side of Cameron Peak into Chambers Lake.

What would eventually become the most ambitious project, the Grand River Ditch, started with a survey in 1890.

It began as the modest three quarters of a mile long Bennett Ditch dug from 1896 to 1904, and became known as the Grand River Ditch when it was extended five miles to Big Dutch Creek.

By 1911, it had reached Mosquito and Opposition Creeks. In 1934, well after Rocky Mountain National Park was established, the ditch was extended to Baker Gulch.

As a side note, the Colorado River was originally called the Grand River, thus the name for the ditch. After the name change in 1921, the Grand River Ditch became the Grand Ditch.

During the decades it took to complete the Grand Ditch, there were seven construction camps that varied in size according to the manpower required. Within each camp, there were bunkhouses, mess halls, powder magazines, blacksmith shops, garages, maintenance buildings and so forth.

The camps took the form of small communities. Horses and humans provided labor at the early camps, which were spaced about two miles apart.

At the last and seventh camp, the buildings remained until 1997 when the owners of the Grand Ditch had them removed.

Advertisement

In its 15.2-mile length, the Grand Ditch diverts water from a dozen creeks that would have otherwise flowed into the Colorado River. All but the very south end of the ditch is within Rocky Mountain National Park.

An estimated 50 percent of the water in the upper Colorado River Basin is sent over La Poudre Pass into the Cache la Poudre River basin. The starting point, La Poudre Pass, is at an elevation of 10,175 feet and the end of the ditch, Baker Gulch, is a at about 10,300 feet. The ditch maintains a constant grade. In 1927-29 and outside of the park, Long Draw Reservoir in the Cache la Poudre basin was constructed to hold back surplus water and allow for an even release throughout the year.

Although the Grand Ditch is a necessary element in the growth of agriculture and cities along the Front Range, it is a scar across the otherwise pristine Never Summer Mountains. For this reason, it has been a long-standing source of controversy.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years.