The sprawling 8th Congressional District has been in the very capable hands of Paul Cook, a retired Marine Corps colonel and former California state legislator, since 2012. Voters this November should return him to Washington for another two years.

In his freshman term in the House of Representatives, Cook has displayed the same practical perspective and forthright manner that won him The Sun editorial board’s endorsement and voters’ support in 2012 when he beat a crowded field in the then-newly redrawn district. As he did in Sacramento, Cook, a Republican who was elected to state Assembly in 2006, has committed himself in Washington to promoting sound policy and staying out of the political fray that is to blame for gridlock and Congress’ dismal approval ratings.

Cook’s miliary background — he retired after 26 years in the Marine Corps — makes him a natural fit on the House’s armed services, international affairs and veterans affairs committees.

He has supported the military response to ISIS, was among the chorus of lawmakers calling for full disclosure following allegations of gross mismanagement within the Veterans Administration, and was quick to co-sponsor the revamped Stolen Valor Act in 2013 to fight back against those who attempt to trade lies about their military service for political gain.

Meanwhile, the Republican lawmaker has little use for GOP-led efforts to shut down the government in an attempt to reverse the Affordable Care Act and instead focuses his energy on areas where he and colleagues on the other side of the aisle agree.

Cook is challenged this November by attorney Robert Conaway, a Democrat who has appeared on previous ballots seeking local and national office.

We prefer Cook’s legislative experience and find him a excellent voice for the 8th District, which stretches from the northern edge of the San Bernardino Valley to the desert and mountain communities of San Bernardino County and up into Inyo and Mono counties.

The district, home to two Marine Corps bases and an Army training facility, will continue to benefit from Cook’s military background and insight. And voters can count on Cook to work to balance environmental and economic interests as the deserts are explored for alternative energy projects.

Vote Paul Cook for the 8th Congressional District on Nov. 4.