Press Release

Alta Resources, a global provider of customer management business process outsourcing for Fortune 500 brands, recently announced plans to fill 1,200 seasonal positions in Fort Myers. Of the 1,200 open positions at its Fort Myers campus, approximately 700 are still available.

To assist with the hiring process, Alta Resources will host a casual, come as you are, two-day job fair, Aug. 15 and 16 from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m., at its Fort Myers campus, 12600 Gateway Blvd.

Last year, Wisconsin-based Alta Resources expanded into Fort Myers and immediately created more than 400 employment opportunities. Those jobs, like the ones being offered this year, were filled to serve the company’s health-insurance clients that experienced an increase in contact volumes in the wake of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The success of the Fort Myers team, together with Alta Resources’ companywide success, for those clients has prompted additional program expansion in 2014, as the number of jobs being filled at its Fort Myers campus has nearly tripled from 2013. In fact, Fort Myers is and will continue to be the hub of Alta Resources’ clients’ health-insurance programs.

“The Fort Myers community welcomed us with open arms. We continue to pursue bringing additional opportunities to Fort Myers, further solidifying Alta Resources as a permanent fixture in the area,” said Paul Makurat, managing director at Alta Resources’ Fort Myers campus. “Our transition to the area was largely seamless, thanks to the great performance of our Fort Myers team during the past year. In fact, our clients have taken notice of the results our staff has achieved here.”

The English and English-Spanish bilingual positions are primarily seasonal and range from full to part time. Positions are immediate, and qualified applicants will begin as soon as possible.

“Our positions feature flexibility, with schedules tailored to one’s lifestyle. That makes these seasonal roles especially ideal for students, busy parents and even retirees,” added Makurat.

Available opportunities include customer care; inbound, licensed health-insurance sales; and team leadership. Alta Resources offers paid training, competitive pay, a team-based culture, skills development and advancement potential for high performers. The company also pays for health-insurance sales licensing for qualified candidates; licensing will be specific to the state(s) a sales representative will service and is his or hers to retain for as long as the license is valid.

Makurat noted that the company is committed to Southwest Florida, “We’re excited to begin our second year in Fort Myers. Our clients are extremely happy with the quality of results that our people delivered over year one, thus driving the need for expansion in 2014. The team here did more than produce results; in fact, they helped further cement Alta Resources as a staple of this great community by getting actively involved with many programs, including our inaugural United Way of Lee, Hendry, Glades and Okeechobee Counties fundraising campaign.”

Interested candidates are encouraged to search jobs, create a profile and apply online at JoinAlta.com before attending the job fair, and then visit the Gateway location for immediate, on-site interviews with hiring professionals. While there, they will have an opportunity to ask questions and learn more about the growing company.

About Alta Resources

Formed in 1995, privately held Alta Resources is a leading provider of customer management business process outsourcing for many of the world’s best-known brands in a variety of industries, including consumer-packaged goods, health care and insurance, and entertainment. With its comprehensive service lines – care, sales, e-commerce, back office and fulfillment – working in tandem, clients can seamlessly integrate their core processes through a single partner. In turn, Alta Resources helps clients improve and better manage their customer experiences across every touch point, online and offline, ultimately delivering results that provide sales growth and/or cost savings.

With headquarters, a main campus and a fulfillment facility in Neenah, Wisconsin, Alta Resources has additional operations in Michigan, California, Florida and the Philippines. To learn more, visit AltaResources.com.