It was a beautiful May day in 2012, with white clouds floating in a brilliant blue sky. Fifteen-year-old Tyler Schwering just finished his school day at Centennial CVI in Guelph and was walking home. It was almost the weekend, and he was looking forward to going to the Waterloo Air Show.

As he crossed the busy Hanlon Parkway to get home, something caused him to turn around and head back toward school.

Like many teenagers, he had his earbuds in, listening to a favourite tune, and was texting his friends as he walked. But the electronic distractions meant the gangly, mop-haired teen didn't notice the tractor-trailer hurtling down the road.

He stepped off the curb.

. . .

Kim LeBlanc's phone rang at 5:22 p.m. that afternoon. She glanced down, and saw "Unknown caller" on the call display. To this day, she gets a flutter of panic whenever that label comes up on her phone.

That day, she simply took the call that changed her life forever.

Family and friends gathered in the intensive care unit in Hamilton over the next several hours, as surgeons worked to relieve pressure on Tyler's skull.

"He was broken, literally, from head to toe: he had a broken femur, facial bones, pelvis, collar bones," said LeBlanc, Tyler's mother.

The surgeons warned LeBlanc and Tyler's dad, Chris Schwering, to prepare for the worst. After the surgery, "I kissed his cheek, and said, 'Mom's going to be OK. If you need to go home, you go home.' "

Then the chief surgeon called LeBlanc and Schwering into a quiet room. With tears in his eyes he simply said, "Tyler's gone."

The family hoped against hope that there'd be a miracle, said LeBlanc's husband, Guy. "You wanted to wish him better. You figured you had that much love and support in the room, it was going to come," he said. "But it never did."

. . .

Seventy kilometres away, Dave Allingham was staring his own mortality in the face.

Allingham, 40, was lying in the cardiac intensive care unit at Toronto General Hospital. His heart was so badly damaged that a machine known as a BiVAD — a biventricular assist device — was making sure his body got the blood he needed.

He'd been living on the machine for two weeks. The doctors said he had about a 30-day window on the BiVAD before life-threatening complications — clots, infections, increased antibodies that would make a transplant riskier — set in.

When he'd first gone to hospital, he'd been worried about how much time he'd be off from his job at Babcock & Wilcox in Cambridge, about how his wife Paula would cope with upkeep to the house.

As he got sicker and became bedridden, priorities shifted: he worried about his family and how to make sure his kids would be taken care of.

"Time just stood still," he said.

. . .

He'd always known heart disease ran in his family: his grandfather died of a heart attack, and he still remembers, as a five-year-old, seeing the paramedics rush into his home in a futile effort to save his own father.

In his early 30s, Allingham started suffering dizzy spells, until one was so bad it sent him to the emergency room in Hamilton, where he was diagnosed with a potentially fatal heart arrhythmia.

Over the next few years, doctors prescribed a cocktail of medications to keep his heart stable, implanted different types of defibrillators to jolt his heart back into a normal rhythm, and conducted surgeries to stop the heart's abnormal electrical impulses.

His heart was covered in scar tissue, his blood pressure was unstable, and he'd suffered an "electrical storm," with his heart erratically and ineffectively firing off impulses. That's when his doctors began talking about a new heart.

. . .

Before Tyler's death, LeBlanc admits, "I honestly really didn't think about organ donation. I was not a registered donor. It wasn't really something we had talked about as a family. But I knew my son, and I knew that's a decision he would have wanted to make."

But it seemed so miraculous to her that the organs in Tyler's battered and broken body were undamaged, and able to give life and hope to others. The family consented to organ donation, and Tyler's organs were given to seven different recipients.

"We prayed for a miracle. We got seven," she said.

. . .

Allingham was awake when the phone rang in the ICU at 3 a.m. He knew immediately from the tone in the nurse's voice that this call was different.

The nurse came to him and said, "I have to get you ready for surgery. They have a heart for you."

. . .

Allingham's first thought was that a family lost someone they loved. "The first thing I did was to pray for that family," he said.

There was no time for his kids — a son now 14, and two daughters, now 15 and 16 — to come to the hospital before the transplant surgery, so he called them to tell them he loved them and that he was going to get through this. But everyone knew the gravity behind the brave words. "You have no idea if you are ever going to see them again," he said.

He felt overwhelmed by the generosity of the act of a family deciding to give their loved one's organs. "It really is an unconditional gift of love. You are giving the gift of life to a total stranger, to someone you have never met."

His eyes fill with tears even today at the enormity of that gift. "They gave me the chance to see my kids grow up. I get to see my kids grow up."

That morning, he made himself a promise: he would pay such an incredible gift forward, for the rest of his life.

. . .

In Canada, the identities of the recipient, the donor and both their families are kept confidential to respect everyone's right to privacy. But Trillium Gift of Life Network, the Ontario agency charged with promoting and co-ordinating transplants in Ontario, will pass on a recipient's letter anonymously to the donor's family or from the donor family to the recipient. Both Allingham and LeBlanc sent letters to Trillium.

Then, last September, a close friend of LeBlanc's became convinced that a man she had worked with at Babcock & Wilcox was likely the man who received Tyler's heart.

Allingham was doubtful at first that the friend was correct, but then one day the friend sent him a video of LeBlanc reading the letter he'd sent to Trillium.

"I saw this woman was reading this letter, and it was mine," he recalls. "The tears just starting rolling down my face and I said, 'I've got to meet this woman. This was the woman who saved my life.' "

When they realized that the two families were only about an hour's drive away from each other — the LeBlancs are in Fergus, and Allingham and his family in Ancaster — the two families met.

An extraordinary bond developed between the two families, who have each suffered and come out the other side. The two families shared Christmas dinner together.

"They heal each other," said Allingham's wife, Paula. "There's this unique bond, I believe. It's beautiful."

LeBlanc said the friendship has been a gift. "I always tease Dave: 'I made that heart. I know it's full of love,' " she said.

"Losing someone is horrible in itself. Nothing will take away my pain for my son, nothing," she added. But seeing how her son's donation has made such an impact on Allingham's life has brought some meaning and comfort. "It's just brought a lot more peace to my life. It's trying to make the best out of something, out of something awful."

"We had a tragedy happen to us," said Guy. "One of the things that makes it bearable is the fact we have Dave here, who has his life. Would we love to have Tyler back? Absolutely. But that's not an option."

Both families are working hard to promote organ donation and eager to spread the word about how significant a gift it can be, and what an enormous comfort it can be, even for those who've suffered tremendous loss.

"There are not going to be these wonderful stories if we don't get people comfortable and educate them on organ donation," LeBlanc said.

The statistics are grim: although 85 per cent of Ontarians are in favour of organ donation, only 24 per cent are registered as donors. In 2012, 97 people in Ontario died waiting for a transplant. Allingham knows six people who've died while waiting for a donor.

They believe their work promoting organ donation helps keep Tyler's memory and legacy alive.

LeBlanc, who has two daughters aged 26 and 22, and two stepsons, wears a special necklace she had designed of a circle within a circle to hold a portion of Tyler's ashes. The pendant sits just over her heart.

At Christmas, Allingham's mother gave her a second symbolic gift to try and express her deep gratitude, from one mom to another, for what LeBlanc did. The bracelet has a charm with the initial D, for her son who lived, and a second charm with the initial T, for the son LeBlanc lost. Between the two, of course, is a heart.