In an interview at the UNH School of Law Monday night, 2nd Congressional District Republican candidate Marilinda Garcia defended her record on hot-button social issues.

During the discussion with NHPR’s Laura Knoy, Garcia reiterated her opposition to gay marriage.

“I don’t think the state and the government should be there to be forcing religious denominations and institutions to redefine what is a sacrament.”

And on abortion, she says her record has been mischaracterized.

While pro-life, Garcia says any legislation she supported in the New Hampshire House allowed for exceptions in cases of rape or incest.

But she called the abortion issue a "debate on the margins."

But she called the issue a quote-debate on the margins.

“Most pro-choice women don’t for example support partial-birth abortion and not all pro-life women support banning contraception. So amongst the average Americans, there’s in fact so much consensus in between within what has become a marginal discussion.”

The Salem state representative is seeking to unseat first-term Democrat Ann McLane Kuster.

Garcia said she opposes Obamacare, though says there are aspects she supports, such as allowing young people to stay on their parent’s plans and requiring coverage for preexisting conditions.

“So there are bound to be some good things that didn’t need to be included in this massive comprehensive overhaul that I don’t agree with.”

Garcia also said she opposes the Common Core, saying it will reduce standards to the lowest common denominator.

On climate change, Garcia appeared skeptical of any man-made involvement, but says if there is, changes solely to American policy won't solve the problem.

“If it really is the man-made emissions that are causing the greatest change, then we really do need some of the biggest offenders, that being China, Indonesia, India, Russia.”

And on immigration, Garcia said she’s open to reforming the nation’s laws, but her first priority is securing the border.

“And that’s also become a national security interest as well, given the rise in international terrorism, the potential of bioterror and pandemics that we’re seeing.”