SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

On Breitbart News Sunday, Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker said America must not bring in more Syrian refugees.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“I think we need to stop bringing in more refugees not because we haven’t been good-hearted,” Walker said on Sirius XM Patriot channel 125, noting that America has “stepped up” by permanently settling 70,000 refugees over the last year, including several thousand from Syria, and spending $4 billion to aid with the Syrian refugee crisis.

Walker told host and Breitbart News Executive Chairman Stephen K. Bannon that resettling more Syrian refugees who cannot even be properly vetted by intelligence agents is another example of the Obama administration “not addressing the problems” and merely “addressing the symptoms.”

Walker, who blasted Obama for drawing a line in the sand that he allowed Syria’s Bashar al-Assad to cross, said the the problems are “Assad and Syria” and “we need to take action on both.”

If he were president, Walker said he would empower and give cover to rebels in Syria to take on Assad and institute more no-fly zones. Regarding ISIS, Walker said he would push to lift political restrictions on the military personnel already there in Iraq so they can support the Kurds and the Sunni tribal allies to take out ISIS and “do so in a way that doesn’t allow them to creep back into Syria.”

On the domestic front, Walker said he would send a bill to Congress to repeal Obamacare on his first day in office and sign an order that would force Congress to live under the same rules as everyone else to “light a fire under their tales” to repeal Obamacare, which Walker said would also be good for the economy.

Walker said voters were promised that a GOP majority would vote to repeal Obamacare, and they are frustrated that there still has not been such a vote since Republicans got their majority in Congress.

He also spoke about reining in “out of control regulations,” an “all of the above energy policy,” making sure people have the education and the skills to succeed in the country, reforming labor laws so taxpayers and American workers are in charge instead of union bosses and a “legal immigration policy that gives priorities to American working families and their wages.”

When Bannon asked Walker if he would veto potential bills that would increase the number of H-1B visas, Walker just responded by saying he would focus on policies that would prioritize “American working families and wages.”

He said a focus on what “is the impact on American working families and wages” instead of just “what’s the benefit to American corporations” is something that has been missing in the debate on immigration, trade, and other issues.

The Wisconsin governor stressed that he is an outsider and an anti-Washington candidate, and he acknowledge that voters are drawn to frontrunners Donald Trump, Dr. Ben Carson, and Carly Fiorina–none of whom have held elected office–because they are so frustrated with the governing elite in Washington, especially the Republican establishment.

Citing his record of successful reforms in Wisconsin, Walker said that though people may not want to hire him to build condos in New York, be a neurosurgeon, or be the CEO of Hewlett-Packard, he will appeal to “people looking to hire someone who can take on Washington and win–and we’ve got the best record.”

“We need more than just a Republican in the White House,” Walker said. “We need a reformer who is committed to doing those things once they take office. We need someone who is actually going to get it done.”

Walker, who had once been at the top of state and national polls earlier in the year, barely registers in some national polls today–the most recent CNN/ORC poll found Walker with 0% support. But the Wisconsin governor mentioned that Time magazine once dubbed him “Dead Man Walker” when he had terrible poll numbers at the beginning of the recall election but “we came back with more votes in June of 2012 than in the original election.” Walker said that turnaround happened because “we stayed true to who we were” and the “conservative reforms worked.”

“And we can do it again,” he said, remaining hopeful that he will see a bounce in his poll numbers.