AP Photo Rep. Steve Cohen, a Tennessee Democrat, took to the House floor to pay homage to Minnie Minoso, the major leagues’ first black player from Latin America, who died Sunday.

As the Supreme Court mulled whether to yank Obamacare coverage from six million Americans Wednesday, a brief but poignant tale spun out nearby about a little boy with polio and his baseball hero.

Rep. Steve Cohen, a Tennessee Democrat who represents Memphis, took to the House floor to pay homage to Minnie Minoso, the major leagues’ first black player from Latin America, who died Sunday.

Minoso was an almost iconic figure in Chicago after starting his American career with the all-black New York Cubans, who played in Paterson, N.J. He was from Cuba and known as “the Cuban Comet.”

Minoso wound up playing parts of five decades and made seven All-Star teams. Nobody's quite sure of his age but he was probably in his 90s. But, for certain, he played an exhibition came in Memphis in 1955 while with the White Sox.

Cohen was a young Sox fan who was on crutches and recovering from polio. As he recalled Wednesday, he was wearing a Sox cap and t-shirt and getting autographs before the game when a white player came up and gave him a baseball.

He told his dad who was elsewhere in the stands. The dad told him to go back and thank the player. When he did, the Sox pitcher said to thank “that player over there,” pointing to Minoso, the lone black among the White Sox and St. Louis Cardinals.

“In segregated Memphis a black player didn’t feel comfortable” giving a ball to a white kid, Cohen recalled, and thus had asked his teammate to bring it to the boy on crutches.

“It taught me about the horrors of discrimination, prejudice and racism,” said Cohen.

Minoso became his friend and they’d visit when the team came to Memphis and Minoso had to stay at an all-black hotel.

Years later, after Cohen had moved to Los Angeles, Minoso saw Cohen’s dad at a Dodgers game and asked, “Doc, how’s the kid’s leg?”

Holding back a tear, the congressman, now 65, concluded, “I’ll miss Minnie Minoso. He’s a lesson why sports are more important than runs, hits and errors. Thank you, Minnie.”