The lobbyists asked for anonymity since criticizing Pfizer or the industry’s present position in Washington could get them fired.

The pharmaceutical industry was once the world’s most profitable, its companies topping lists of the world’s most admired corporations and Washington’s lists of its most influential. The industry has for years invested more in lobbying than any other.

But a series of criminal cases, multibillion-dollar fines and other scandals has diminished its reputation, and its prices — the last 10 cancer drugs approved before July 2015 have an average annual price of $190,217 — are again becoming a major political issue. Even with discounts and insurance coverage, a growing number of Americans find themselves choosing between their lives and lifetime savings.

“We’re on the wane. There’s just too much obvious greed,” said another veteran lobbyist for a major drug maker, citing Turing Pharmaceuticals’ overnight price increase on a 62-year-old drug to $750 a tablet from $13.50. “Everybody in the industry is talking about this.”

The White House has begun building a political case for reining in drug costs, and the administration recently agreed in the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade accord to intellectual property protections for advanced pharmaceuticals that was about half of what the industry demanded and United States law provides. Worse, a 2011 patent law has resulted in a wave of lawsuits funded by hedge funds against the industry’s most valuable property — drug patents.

In years past, according to interviews with longtime industry lobbyists, such problems could have been fixed by a vigorous lobbying push. No more.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The last time the industry’s prices and other practices raised significant concerns in Washington, drug makers decided that the solution was to increase the share of patients who had health insurance so that more people had help buying drugs. So in 2009, the industry rallied around President Obama’s push for the Affordable Care Act, striking an $80 billion deal with the administration that even led the industry to fund an advertising campaign supporting the law.

For decades, drug makers had overwhelmingly supported Republican lawmakers with campaign contributions. But the alliance with the Obama administration changed that, and Pfizer led the way. The company appointed Jeff Kindler, a lawyer and a longtime Democrat, as its chief executive in 2006, and Mr. Kindler became chairman of the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, the industry’s main lobbying arm, on the eve of the Affordable Care Act’s passage in Congress in 2010.

Mr. Kindler for the first time in memory not only directed a majority of the company’s political donations toward Democrats but also hired top Democrats to lead the company’s lobbying efforts. His most important hire was plucking Ms. Susman from beauty brand Estée Lauder Companies.

Together with her father, a lawyer and an investment banker, Ms. Susman had raised more than $1 million for Mr. Obama’s election in 2008 just as she was being hired by Pfizer. Her father was so good at bundling money for Democratic politicians that he was nicknamed “the Vacuum Cleaner” and “the Hoover.” Mr. Obama rewarded Mr. Susman by appointing him ambassador to Britain, among the most coveted assignments in diplomacy. He resigned in 2013.

When he became chief executive in 2010, Mr. Read asked Ms. Susman to improve the company’s image, and Ms. Susman commissioned a series of studies “to really research what it is the public holds and harbors against the industry so we can address it in a new and fresh way,” Ms. Susman said in 2011. She declined to be interviewed for this article.

“I’ve been here four years, and I definitely feel the tides shifting,” Ms. Susman said in the same 2011 interview. She said she found the public’s lack of excitement about the industry’s scientific advancements frustrating.

Pfizer’s greatest challenge in the past two decades has been its laboratories’ lack of productivity. To continue growing, the company has been forced into a series of mergers with other drug giants, including Warner-Lambert, Pharmacia, Wyeth and now Dublin-based Allergan.

In her emailed statement, Ms. Susman, who is a resident of New York City and has a weekend house in Sag Harbor, N.Y., said that improving the company’s research productivity was an important reason for the merger with Allergan, an argument the company has made after each of its major mergers.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The purpose of this combination of Pfizer and Allergan is to create a global R & D leader with an expanded ability to make investments in the U.S., find cures and treatments for conditions ranging from Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease to cancer and rare genetic disorders,” Ms. Susman wrote.

Those arguments are losing traction in Washington, where rising drug costs are an important reason for increasing premiums under the Affordable Care Act, veteran industry lobbyists said.

“Lawmakers are now telling us that they’re being pounded at home by voters who can’t afford our prices,” said one of the industry’s top lobbyists.

“These people are angry. And it’s not easy for people on the Hill to support us in that environment. And now with this Pfizer thing? I think we’re going to have to start getting used to losing.”