LITTLE ROCK — Three lawyers are competing to succeed Democratic Attorney General Dustin McDaniel, who is prohibited by term limits from seeking a third term.

Libertarian Aaron Cash, 27, of Springdale is a lawyer in private practice.

Republican Leslie Rutledge, 38, of Little Rock is a lawyer in private practice. She is a former clerk for the state Court of Appeals, deputy counsel to Gov. Mike Huckabee, Lonoke County deputy prosecutor, attorney for the state Department of Human Services’ Division of Children and Family Services, deputy counsel for Huckabee’s 2008 presidential campaign, deputy counsel for the National Congressional Campaign Committee and counsel for the National Republican Committee.

Democratic state Rep. Nate Steel, 33, of Nashville is a lawyer in private practice and has been a member of the state House since 2011. He formerly served as attorney for Howard County and as a Howard County deputy prosecutor. He is engaged to Lauren Slabaugh.

Candidates were asked three questions and allowed up to 150 words for each answer. Each responded via email.

1. What would your top goals be as attorney general?

Cash: Without a doubt, my No. 1 priority as attorney general will be supporting my staff by ensuring they have the resources needed to accomplish, not only their work for the people of Arkansas, but also their personal career goals. As to policy goals and initiatives, I think it’s incredibly important that we stop sending people to jail and prison for petty non-violent crimes, including marijuana use. It costs the state a fortune. We also need to send a message to prosecutors who over zealously police non-violent activities. For example, focusing on crimes such as loitering does little more than harass otherwise law-abiding citizens in the name of public safety and allows police to exact control and conduct searches. This practice is fundamentally against the principles of all Arkansans. Instead, our focus should be on investigating and prosecuting violent criminals to keep us safer.

Rutledge: My goal every day as Arkansas’ next chief legal officer will be to stand for Arkansans against those who would wish to do them harm. Whether it is a hardened criminal, a bad business, or an overreaching federal government, Arkansans need an attorney general with the right experience to protect and defend on day one — I will be that attorney general. While protecting Arkansans will be my primary goal, I will also work as attorney general to foster a more predictable, pro-market regulatory atmosphere in our state that encourages good business practices. By ensuring a predictable business environment, our economy and jobs will thrive. When my time as attorney general is done, I hope Arkansas is safer and more prosperous.

Steel: My first priority will be to address the parole crisis created by our prison overcrowding problem. I also would like to see the role of the cybercrimes division expanded to be able to investigate data security, identity theft, and other consumer issues. I hope to also be able to create a Veteran’s Advocacy Bureau to specifically serve those who have so bravely served our country.

2. What do you believe are the proper roles of the attorney general with respect to the state Legislature and the federal government?

Cash: The attorney general’s office should advise the legislature on the potential ramifications of proposed statutes, including: constitutionality, effects on the average Arkansan, effects on businesses, monetary costs to implement, possible interpretations by the courts, repeal or revision of unnecessary laws, and so forth. As to the federal government, the office should be focused on the local needs of Arkansans first. If, however, a specific issue arises involving overreaching by the federal government, and there are non-frivolous means to stop the overreach, the attorney general should zealously address the problem.

Rutledge: The role of the attorney general is to be the lawyer for the state of Arkansas and its people, upholding the rule of law in matters affecting the Arkansans and advising the Legislature, the executive offices and state agencies. I will work with the Legislature to find innovative solutions to problems facing our state and will help them craft clear, concise laws, but I will not try to stand in their place. I will work with law enforcement to protect children from online predators and human traffickers. I will defend laws passed by our Legislature, such as pro-life statutes, when challenged in court. It is not only the role but the statutory obligation of the Attorney General to push back against federal overreach to protect states’ rights. Whether it is Obamacare or the EPA, Arkansas needs an attorney general with the experience and willingness to stand against Barack Obama.

Steel: With respect to the state Legislature, the attorney general is both an advocate and an adviser. As is the case with any constitutional officer, the attorney general should advocate for legislative action based on what he or she believes the needs of the state are. I have proposed a detailed “legislative package” that will do just that. As the legislature’s attorney, the AG’s role is to advise his or her client on legal matters. I will take that role very seriously and will offer that advice objectively, without regard to personal or political beliefs. Generally, I prefer to leave federal politics to federal politicians. There are exceptions, however. For example, when arbitrary regulations affect Arkansas disproportionately, such as the recent EPA regulations on coal energy, it will be my role as the state’s attorney and advocate for consumers to stand up on their behalf and challenge the same.

3. What makes you the best candidate for the office?

Cash: I’m the best candidate for attorney general because I’m the only one in the middle trying to keep common sense in the game. I’m not using this race as a political launching-point; I’m not beholden to outside billionaire donors or a political party. I’m not worried that my support for common sense ideas will hurt my rank in a political party. I am not a politician. I’m just a normal guy who thinks we need to clean up a lot of the nonsensical issues in this state which make us laughable on the world stage and hurt the average Arkansan.

Rutledge: In one word: experience. All of the experience I have as a lawyer directly relates to and has prepared me to be attorney general on day one. After spending a lifetime helping conservative candidates and officeholders combined with my 13 years practicing law, I knew it was time to step up to defend our state and the people I love so much from those who seek to harm us. When Arkansas leaders, such as Gov. Mike Huckabee, Congressman John Paul Hammerschmidt, Chief Justice Betty Dickey and law enforcement leaders encouraged me to run and endorsed my candidacy without hesitation, I knew that I was the right candidate for attorney general. As attorney general, I will use my experience to protect Arkansans from those who seek to harm them so that our citizens will have safe communities in which to raise their families and grow their businesses.

Steel: Two things: Experience and Focus. I am the only candidate with real world experience trying felony cases. As a prosecutor, I handled everything from capital murder, rape and drug dealers, to traffic tickets. And as a state legislator, I have been recognized as Legislator of the Year by the Fraternal Order of Police and the Arkansas Association of Chiefs of Police, as well as “Advocate for Justice” by the Arkansas Association for Prosecuting Attorneys. Secondly, my focus is on Arkansas and not a national political agenda.