Until this summer, a mere 50 ultrarunners had tried the single-push traverse across all 14 of the Sawatch Range’s 14,000-foot peaks, a daunting route known as Nolan’s 14. The monumental feat of endurance — 100 miles up and down 90,000 vertical feet in a scant 60 hours — had only been completed by seven men since 1999, until this year.

In the past six weeks, at least 18 endurance athletes — including three women — attempted the largely trail-less trek across the top of the Sawatch Range, marking the most activity ever on the underground race route. Four of those runners topped all 14 of the range’s summits in less than 60 hours.

The list of contenders on this season’s Nolan’s 14 route — named after Colorado mountaineer Jim Nolan — is a who’s who of ultrarunning.

Peter Jones and Kendrick Callaway kicked off the Nolan’s 14 season last month.

Jones ran — with snowshoes in the winter — up the adjacent Grays and Torreys peaks once a week for a year, logging 728 miles and 275,600 feet of climbing over the year.

Callaway regularly sprints up dozens of fourteeners every summer. The pair made it to the top of their fifth peak, Missouri Mountain, in about 24 hours before realizing they had too little food to make the final self-supported push over nine more summits.

Sixty hours seemed possible during their training, when Jones and Callaway pieced together a few peaks at a time.

“But once you start lining it up together and putting together sections, you realize how big it is. It is just huge. So far, so long, so much vertical,” said Jones, who lives in Boulder. “You read the trip reports of people who have done it and the level of commitment is beyond what most people can understand. You have to keep going through everything. Rain, pain, sleep deprivation.”

A dozen more racers dropped from the audacious Nolan’s 14 mission in subsequent weeks. Colorado ultrarunning heavyweights Gavin McKenzie of Leadville and Brandon Stapanowich of Manitou Springs were the first to finish in less than 60 hours. They raced the route from north to south from Aug. 29-31, finishing in 56 hours, 21 minutes. The duo share the second fastest time behind the 52-hour, 42-minute record set by John Robinson in 2002.

Like most every Nolan’s 14 contender, McKenzie and Stapanowich are well versed at creating their own challenges, establishing first-ever benchmarks referred to as “fastest known times,” a sort of trophy-less crown noting rarified accomplishments beyond podiums.

Take Stapanowich, who in July ran up and down the Manitou Incline — an old railroad bed climbing more than 2,000 vertical feet in less than a mile — 22 times in 24 hours, setting what many assume is a world record for the most vertical gained in a single day: 44,000 feet. He dubbed his 24-hour effort the “UltraInclinathon.”

Stapanowich’s account of his descent of Mt. Princeton — the pair’s 11th peak after 48 hours of constant movement — sounded like a nadir for the veteran endurance racer.

“Loose talus fields made bipedal travel nearly impossible as we crab-walked from lichen rock to lichen rock … Even finding the trail offered small relief however as the journey began to seem never-ending,” he wrote in his online trip report. “I don’t think I’ve ever been more tired, as I was literally lifting my eyebrows to keep my eyes open.”

Stapanowich said waking up every morning in the shadow of mountains stirs athletes to ponder what many would consider impossible.

“In a way, the challenges we decide to pursue and ultimately who we are, are at least partially defined by our surroundings,” he said.

Brandon Worthington of Aurora raced north to south, finishing atop Mt. Shavano in 59 hours, 24 minutes, entering the hallowed Nolan’s 14 halls of under-60-hour runners. Worthington estimates he slept less than any other finisher this season, grabbing about 10 minutes of sleep around hour 42. He lost more than an hour finding the trail up Mt. Princeton after that catnap. He was too tired to worry.

“I didn’t have the energy to waste on thinking that the time I lost there cost me the 60 hours in the end,” said the 29-year-old who credits his finish to his support crew.

Nolan’s 14 is not a race. Few athletes run it at the same time, but the weather window between snowmelt and snowfall arrives in August and September, creating a sort of “Nolan’s season.” Most of the competitiveness is tracked online. Athletes’ GPS coordinates are followed via Facebook or forums such as 14ers.com. The course’s popularity mirrors the exploding participation in formal ultradistance trail races, such as Silverton’s famous Hardrock 100.

Most of the Nolan’s 14 athletes are veterans of the nation’s toughest 100-mile and multi-day ultramarathons. The route, which many consider more difficult than the Hardrock, is a testpiece for athletes well versed in the most grueling running races.

McKenzie said the popularity of the route increased last year when international endurance superstar Anton Krupicka attempted to run Nolan’s 14 in less than 30 hours, blowing up after five peaks.

And the creativity of Nolan’s is alluring, McKenzie said.

“It’s a given the summits you have to hit but everything in between is up to you. It’s open for interpretation,” he said. “You choose the route, not the race director.”

All but two of this season’s racers ran with a support crew that provided food, pacing and encouragement in the transitions between peaks.

Boulder endurance runner Britt Nic Dick bowed out after reaching seven peaks in a little more than 50 hours.

Fourteener legend Andrew Hamiltonbecame the first-ever self-supported finisher. The father of four added yet another chapter to his rich history on the state’s highest peaks, which includes a 1999 speed record, a 2003 “self powered” ascent record that saw him pedaling to each trailhead, and, most impressively, climbing all the state’s fourteeners with his son, who notched his first peak at age 4.

Earlier this month Hamilton traveled the Sawatch Range south to north in 57 hours, 18 minutes. Not only did he beat the 60-hour mark, but he ran without any support crew. His energy came from a powder he mixed with stream water. He never stopped to sleep. He followed routes established by previous racers.

Hamilton said he wasn’t expecting to even finish.

“I definitely do not have a superhuman ability to endure and suffer. What I do have is a long history of failure in endurance events,” he said. “In that long string of failures I have learned a lot about myself. I know that it is possible continue through what seems like unendurable pain, and I know that it is possible go without very much sleep, despite what may otherwise seem possible.”

When Hamilton reached the trailhead below Mt. Massive after 60 hours, 19 minutes of non-stop running, he thought he had missed his goal by mere minutes.

“He was kind of bummed because he made a wrong turn descending Massive and lost 30 minutes going down the wrong trail and missing the 60-hour cutoff,” said Matt Mahoney, the unofficial scorekeeper of all Nolan’s 14 attempts. “I told him it was the time to the last summit that counted and it is still a FKT (fastest known time) unsupported since he was the first to do it.”

In August last year, weather forced Telluride’s Ben Clark off the course after seven peaks. A month later he reached 10 summits — all of them buried in snow- before a snowstorm pushed him off the Sawatch Range. Earlier this month, flash flooding forced him off Mt. Yale, the 10th peak of his third north-to-south effort.

“Me and this line have been doing the dance,” said the single dad, who retired from Himalayan guiding to stay closer to home, but didn’t give up on mountaineering missions.

A filmmaker, Clark is c rafting a movie on Nolan’s 14. This weekend, Clark returns to the route for a fourth try, vying for a first-known unsupported north-to-south push across the Sawatch Range. And this time he’s aiming simply to finish. Joined by Josh Butson, the owner and lead guide of Telluride Alpinism, Clark wants to finish without any support crew. The pair will carry meager 30-pound packs, following their well-honed light-and-fast mountaineering ethic (you can follow them at share.delorme.com/BenjaminClark).

“It’s been about racing the clock in my first three attempts and now it’s about doing on my own terms,” Clark said. “Now, it’s about doing that north-to-south self-supported for the first time and turning it into something original and not force anything. Hopefully we can inspire more people to get out there and spend time in the mountains.”

Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374, jblevins@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jasonblevins

Racing to the summits

A look at the attempts to complete Nolan’s 14 in the past few weeks:

Aug. 7, 5 p.m.: Peter Jones, Kendrick Callaway start at Leadville Fish Hatchery and end five peaks later at Missouri Mountain around 8 p.m. Aug. 8.

Aug. 10, 6 a.m.: Brett and Missy Gosney and Jason Koop start at Leadville Fish Hatchery and end 12 peaks later at 12:30 p.m. Aug. 12.

Aug. 24, 6:30 a.m.: Britt Nic Dick starts unsupported and solo at Leadville Fish Hatchery and ends seven peaks later at Mt. Oxford at 11:41 a.m. Aug. 26.

Aug. 29, 5 a.m.: Jason Halladay starts at Leadville Fish Hatchery and ends nine summits later at 7:43 p.m. Aug. 30 on Mt. Yale due to illness.

Aug. 29, 5 a.m.: Julian Smith starts at Leadville Fish Hatchery and ends seven peaks later at 3:30 p.m. Aug. 30.

Aug. 29, 5 a.m.: Israel Archuleta starts at Leadville Fish Hatchery and ends seven peaks later at 7:04 p.m. Aug. 31.

Aug. 29, 5 a.m.: Will Carlton starts at Leadville Fish Hatchery and ends six peaks later 4:06 p.m. Aug. 30.

Aug. 29, 5 a.m.: Gavin McKenzie, Brandon Stapanowich start from Leadville Fish Hatchery and finish 14 peaks later atop Mt. Shavano at 12:18 p.m. Aug. 31. Total time was 56 hours, 21 minutes, second fastest ever.

Aug. 30, 4:30 a.m.: Ginny Laforme starts from Blank Cabin Trailhead heading north and ends nine summits later at 6:19 p.m. Sept. 1.

Aug. 30, 4 a.m.: David Ruttum, who was stormed off the route the previous weekend, starts at Blank Cabin Trailhead heading north and finishes 14 peaks later atop Mt. Massive at 4:37 p.m. Sept. 1. Total time was 60 hours, 37 minutes.

Aug. 30, 5:55 a.m.: Jason Antin and Brandon Worthington start at Leadville Fish Hatchery. Antin drops after four peaks with a knee injury. Worthington finishes 14 peaks later atop Mt. Shavano at 3:19 p.m. Sept. 1. Total time was 59 hours, 24 minutes.

Sept. 3, 7:04 a.m.: Ben Clark starts at Leadville Fish Hatchery and ends nine peaks later at 1:07 a.m. Sept. 5, just below the summit of Mt. Yale.

Sept. 12, 5:40 a.m.: Andrew Hamilton starts self-supported at Blank Cabin Trailhead heading north and finishes atop Mt. Massive at 2:58 p.m. Sept. 14 at 2:58 p.m. Total time was 57 hours, 18 minutes.

Source: Matt Mahoney, mattmahoney.net/nolans14