Story highlights Hillary Clinton has her work cut out for her

She must connect with ordinary voters

She has favors to repay to friends

Hillary Clinton is set to hobnob with world leaders and the biggest names in business, politics, academia and philanthropy -- not to mention celebrities -- at the Clinton Global Initiative in New York City, fresh off her re-entry into the political fray at the Iowa Steak Fry.

The two settings couldn't be more different: one a huge family reunion-style gathering in a field dotted with farm equipment, the other a star-studded roster of events in swanky midtown Manhattan hotel ballrooms where Leonardo DiCaprio, Jordan's King Abdullah II and Melinda Gates, among (many, many) other prominent people will make appearances. Clinton's challenge, if she runs for president a second time, will be showing she is just as comfortable with Iowa's steak fry crowd as with New York and Washington's elite.

As she spends this fall campaigning for vulnerable Democrats trying desperately to maintain control of the Senate, Clinton needs to show she understands the problems of everyday Americans, even though she rubs shoulders with world leaders and the uber rich.

She will flex political muscles that have atrophied since her 2008 presidential run and try to avoid making errors like those that punctuated her reintroduction to public life this summe: a book tour bookended by gaffes -- including her remark that she and her husband were "dead broke" -- and her phone call to President Obama in which she apologized for disparaging his foreign policy in an interview with The Atlantic.

Here's what Hillary Clinton needs to do this fall as she re-enters the campaign sphere:

19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush has said his decision to run for the Republican nomination will be based on two things: his family and whether he can lift America's spirit. His father and brother are former Presidents. Hide Caption 1 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker has created a political committee that will help him travel and raise money while he considers a 2016 bid. Additionally, billionaire businessman David Koch said in a private gathering in Manhattan this month that he wants Walker to be the next president, but he doesn't plan to back anyone in the primaries. Hide Caption 2 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal is establishing a committee to formally explore a White House bid. "If I run, my candidacy will be based on the idea that the American people are ready to try a dramatically different direction," he said in a news release provided to CNN on Monday, May 18 Hide Caption 3 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Sen. Bernie Sanders , an independent from Vermont who caucuses with Democrats, has said the United States needs a "political revolution" of working-class Americans looking to take back control of the government from billionaires. He first announced the run in an email to supporters early on the morning of Thursday, April 30. Hide Caption 4 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates On March 2, retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson announced the launch of an exploratory committee. The move will allow him to raise money that could eventually be transferred to an official presidential campaign and indicates he is on track with stated plans to formally announce a bid in May. Hide Caption 5 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates South Carolina Sen. Lindsey Graham has said he'll make a decision about a presidential run sometime soon. A potential bid could focus on Graham's foreign policy stance. Hide Caption 6 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Hillary Clinton launched her presidential bid Sunday, April 12, through a video message on social media. She continues to be considered the overwhelming front-runner among possible 2016 Democratic presidential candidates. Hide Caption 7 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Sen. Marco Rubio announced his bid for the 2016 presidency on Monday, April 13, a day after Hillary Clinton, with a rally in Florida. He's a Republican rising star from Florida who swept into office in 2010 on the back of tea party fervor. But his support of comprehensive immigration reform, which passed the Senate but has stalled in the House, has led some in his party to sour on his prospects. Hide Caption 8 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Lincoln Chafee, a Republican-turned-independent-turned-Democrat former governor and senator of Rhode Island, said he's running for president on Thursday, April 16, as a Democrat, but his spokeswoman said the campaign is still in the presidential exploratory committee stages. Hide Caption 9 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Jim Webb, the former Democratic senator from Virginia, is entertaining a 2016 presidential run. In January, he told NPR that his party has not focused on white, working-class voters in past elections. Hide Caption 10 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Vice President Joe Biden has twice before made unsuccessful bids for the Oval Office -- in 1988 and 2008. A former senator known for his foreign policy and national security expertise, Biden made the rounds on the morning shows recently and said he thinks he'd "make a good President." Hide Caption 11 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has started a series of town halls in New Hampshire to test the presidential waters, becoming more comfortable talking about national issues and staking out positions on hot topic debates. Hide Caption 12 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Rep. Paul Ryan, a former 2012 vice presidential candidate and fiscally conservative budget hawk, says he's keeping his "options open" for a possible presidential run but is not focused on it. Hide Caption 13 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Sen. Rand Paul officially announced his presidential bid on Tuesday, April 7, at a rally in Louisville, Kentucky. The tea party favorite probably will have to address previous controversies that include comments on civil rights, a plagiarism allegation and his assertion that the top NSA official lied to Congress about surveillance. Hide Caption 14 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Texas Sen. Ted Cruz announced his 2016 presidential bid on Monday, March 23, in a speech at Liberty University. The first-term Republican and tea party darling is considered a gifted orator and smart politician. He is best known in the Senate for his marathon filibuster over defunding Obamacare. Hide Caption 15 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Democrat Martin O'Malley, the former Maryland governor, released a "buzzy" political video in November 2013 in tandem with visits to New Hampshire. He also headlined a Democratic Party event in South Carolina, which holds the first Southern primary. Hide Caption 16 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Republican Rick Perry, the former Texas governor, announced in 2013 that he would not be seeking re-election, leading to speculation that he might mount a second White House bid. Hide Caption 17 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum, a social conservative, gave Mitt Romney his toughest challenge in the nomination fight last time out and has made trips recently to early voting states, including Iowa and South Carolina. Hide Caption 18 of 19 19 photos: Potential 2016 presidential candidates Political observers expect New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo to yield to Hillary Clinton's run in 2016, fearing there wouldn't be room in the race for two Democrats from the Empire State. Hide Caption 19 of 19

JUST WATCHED Hillary's madcap media mob Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Hillary's madcap media mob 02:11

JUST WATCHED Clinton acknowledges what we all knew Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Clinton acknowledges what we all knew 04:08

1) Connect with ordinary voters

Clinton's big book tour blunder was saying that she and her husband, former President Bill Clinton, were "dead broke" when they left the White House. The former secretary of state followed that assertion by saying that they are not "truly well off," despite having earned more than $100 million as a couple since 2000.

Democrats are practically pleading for Clinton to use her midterm campaign rally appearances -- which she has yet to announce -- to bring herself back down to earth.

"She is a Midwesterner really," said one Democratic strategist supportive of a Clinton run, who was granted anonymity to speak freely, "and she has been spending a lot of time in very rarefied air."

She tried to start reaching out at the Harkin Steak Fry by addressing voters' economic anxieties. "If you work hard and play by the rules, you deserve the possibility of a good life for you and your family," Clinton told the jeans and T-shirt crowd as they ate red meat with plastic forks.

Supporters of Clinton insist the notion that she is out of touch won't hold. But that won't stop her critics from trying to make it stick.

Clinton observers say they are concerned she will react to her unforced errors of the book tour by being too scripted, maintaining a controlled environment that ultimately stifles her authentic moments and makes her appear aloof.

"All good politicians in the Internet Age maintain a controlled environment. In Secretary Clinton's case, one of the reasons her off-script moments have so much power is because people have gotten so used to seeing her through that controlled prism," says Phil Singer, who served as a spokesman on Clinton's '08 campaign.

He cited her testimony before Congress on Benghazi -- when she countered Republican questions about what prompted the attack on the U.S. mission in Libya by exclaiming "What difference at this point does it make?" -- as an example of Clinton effectively standing her ground. And he said her improvised quips when a shoe was thrown at her during a speaking engagement in April highlighted her sense of humor and made her seem quick on her feet.

2) Rally the base, especially women

Hillary Clinton needs to tune up her appeal to key parts of the Democratic base: African-Americans, Latinos, younger voters and, in particular, women.

On Wednesday, the final day of CGI, Hillary Clinton and Melinda Gates will appear before a crowd of thousands to discuss progress around the world for girls' and women's equality, an issue Clinton first took to the international stage in 1995 at the United Nation's Women's Conference in Beijing.

Clinton has begun embracing her gender -- something she put on the back burner in 2008 -- as she specifically addresses women's economic concerns.

"We see it in the motherhood penalty, with many women forced to take a pay cut when they have children while men often get a pay bump," she said. "So let's be clear; these aren't just women's issues, they're family issues, they are American issues and they hold back our entire economy."

In Iowa, some of Clinton's most well-received comments were about equal pay and women's reproductive health.

Her base is eager for more.

"I think she's really qualified. Plus I'd kind of like to see a woman in the White House!" Linda Church of Ames, Iowa, told CNN, a constant refrain among women at the Harkin Steak Fry.

Clinton is expected to take that appeal on the campaign trail, where many of the candidates she may stump for are women -- Sen. Kay Hagan in North Carolina, Sen. Jeanne Shaheen in New Hampshire or perhaps Staci Appel, who is running for a seat in the House in Iowa and has a real shot at becoming the first woman Iowans elect to a federal office.

She could help Democrats in states where women's issues are playing big, like Colorado, where the hot-button issue of reproductive health has become a major campaign topic in the race between Democratic Sen. Mark Udall and his

Republican challenger, Rep. Cory Gardner. Or Clinton could campaign for men running against women, like Bruce Braley, who is facing off against Republican candidate Joni Ernst in Iowa's Senate race.

3) Kiss and make up with Iowa

JUST WATCHED DREAMers confront Hillary Clinton Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH DREAMers confront Hillary Clinton 01:13

50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, pictured here on Tuesday, March 3, has become one of the most powerful people in Washington. Here's a look at her life and career through the years. Hide Caption 1 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Before she married Bill Clinton, she was Hillary Rodham. Here, Rodham talks about student protests in 1969, which she supported in her commencement speech at Wellesley College in Wellesley, Massachusetts. Hide Caption 2 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Rodham, center, a lawyer for the Rodino Committee, and John Doar, left, chief counsel for the committee, bring impeachment charges against President Richard Nixon in the Judiciary Committee hearing room at the U.S. Capitol in 1974. Hide Caption 3 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton helps first lady Rosalynn Carter on a campaign swing through Arkansas in June 1979. Also seen in the photo is Hillary Clinton, center background. Hide Caption 4 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Bill Clinton embraces his wife shortly after a stage light fell near her on January 26, 1992. They talk to Don Hewitt, producer of the CBS show "60 Minutes." Hide Caption 5 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight With Hillary, Democratic presidential candidate Bill Clinton waves to the crowd at his victory party after winning the Illinois primary on March 17, 1992. Hide Caption 6 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Al Gore, Tipper Gore, Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton wave to supporters at the Chautauqua Institution in Chautauqua, New York, after they gave speeches on family values on August 23, 1992. Hide Caption 7 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton gestures at a campaign rally November 3, 1992, in Denver. After taking office, President Clinton chose his wife to head a special commission on health care reform, the most significant public policy initiative of his first year in office. Hide Caption 8 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Bill and Hillary Clinton have a laugh together on Capitol Hill in 1993. Hide Caption 9 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton pours herself a cup of tea in 1993 while testifying to the Senate Education and Labor Committee about health care reform. Hide Caption 10 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton speaks at George Washington University on September 10, 1993, in Washington during her husband's first term. Hide Caption 11 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton waves to the media on January 26, 1996, as she arrives at federal court in Washington for an appearance before a grand jury. The first lady was subpoenaed to testify as a witness in the investigation of the Whitewater land deal in Arkansas. Hide Caption 12 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Hillary Clinton looks on as President Clinton discusses the Monica Lewinsky scandal in the Roosevelt Room of the White House on January 26, 1998. Hide Caption 13 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Hillary and Bill Clinton arrive at Foundry United Methodist Church on August 16, 1998, in Washington. He became the first sitting president to testify before a grand jury when he testified via satellite about the Lewinsky matter. Hide Caption 14 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton shakes hands during a St. Patrick's Day parade in the Sunnyside neighborhood of Queens, New York, on March 5, 2000. Hide Caption 15 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton waves to the crowd as she arrives on the stage at the Democratic National Convention on August 14, 2000, in Los Angeles. Hide Caption 16 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton campaigns for a Senate seat October 25, 2000, at Grand Central Station in New York. Hide Caption 17 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Hillary Clinton is sworn in as a senator of New York in a re-enactment ceremony with, from left, President Clinton, nephew Tyler, daughter Chelsea, brother Hugh Rodham, mother Dorothy Rodham and Vice President Al Gore on January 3, 2001, in Washington. Hide Caption 18 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Andrew Cuomo, Eliot Spitzer and Clinton celebrate with a crowd of Democratic supporters after their wins in various races November 7, 2006, in New York. Hide Caption 19 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton speaks during a post-primary rally on January 8, 2007, at Southern New Hampshire University in Manchester, New Hampshire. Hide Caption 20 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight The Clintons pay a visit to the 92nd annual Hopkinton State Fair in Contoocook, New Hampshire, on September 2, 2007. Hide Caption 21 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton speaks at a campaign rally September 2, 2007, in Portsmouth, New Hampshire. She was running for the Democratic presidential nomination. Hide Caption 22 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton addresses a question during a debate with other Democratic presidential candidate at Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire, on September 26, 2007. Also pictured are U.S. Rep. Dennis Kucinich of Ohio, left, and former U.S. Sen. Mike Gravel of Alaska. Hide Caption 23 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Felipe Bravo, left, and Christian Caraballo are covered with Hillary Clinton stickers in downtown Manchester, New Hampshire, on January 8, 2008. Hide Caption 24 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton campaigns in Council Bluffs, Iowa, with her daughter, Chelsea, on January 1, 2008, two days ahead of the January 3 state caucus. Hide Caption 25 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton waves as she speaks to supporters at the National Building Museum on June 7, 2008, in Washington. After pulling out of the presidential race, Clinton thanked her supporters and urged them to back Barack Obama to be the next president of the United States. Hide Caption 26 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Obama and Clinton talk on the plane on their way to a Unity Rally in Unity, New Hampshire, on June 27, 2008. Hide Caption 27 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Obama watches Clinton address the Democratic National Convention on August 26, 2008. The two endured a long, heated contest for the 2008 nomination. Hide Caption 28 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Sen. Charles Schumer, left, looks toward Secretary of State designate Clinton as Senate Foreign Relations Committee chairman Sen. John Kerry, center, looks on during nomination hearings January 13, 2009, on Capitol Hill. Hide Caption 29 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton testifies during her confirmation hearing for secretary of state on January 13, 2009, in Washington. Hide Caption 30 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton, as secretary of state, dances with a local choir while visiting the Victoria Mxenge Housing Project in Philippi, a township on the outskirts of Cape Town, South Africa, on August 8, 2009. Hide Caption 31 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton looks through binoculars toward North Korea during a visit to an observation post July 21, 2010, at the demilitarized zone separating the two Koreas. Hide Caption 32 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton walks up the steps to her aircraft as she leaves a meeting of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations on July 23, 2010, in Hanoi, Vietnam. Hide Caption 33 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Hillary and Bill Clinton pose on the day of their daughter's wedding to Marc Mezvinsky on July 31, 2010, in Rhinebeck, New York. Hide Caption 34 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight U.S. President Barack Obama and Clinton observe a moment of silence before a NATO meeting November 19, 2010, in Lisbon, Portugal. Hide Caption 35 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton listens as Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu makes a brief statement November 29, 2010, before a bilateral meeting at the State Department in Washington. Hide Caption 36 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton shakes hands with a child during an unannounced walk through Tahrir Square in Cairo on March 16, 2011. Hide Caption 37 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Obama, Vice President Joe Biden, Clinton and members of Obama's national security team receive an update on the Osama bin Laden mission May 1, 2011, in the Situation Room of the White House. Hide Caption 38 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton checks her personal digital assistant prior to departing Malta on October 18, 2011. Hide Caption 39 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton dances while in Cartagena, Colombia, on April 15, 2012. Hide Caption 40 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton enjoys a beer at Cafe Havana in Cartagena, Colombia, on April 15, 2012. Hide Caption 41 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton appears with little makeup during an event in Dhaka, Bangladesh, on May 6, 2012. She tells CNN, "I feel so relieved to be at the stage I'm at in my life right now ... Because you know if I want to wear my glasses, I'm wearing my glasses. If I want to wear my hair back I'm pulling my hair back. You know at some point it's just not something that deserves a lot of time and attention."

Hide Caption 42 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton speaks as Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai listens during a news conference at the presidential palace in Kabul, Afghanistan, on July 7, 2012. Hide Caption 43 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton arrives at Ben Gurion International Airport in Israel on July 15, 2012. Hide Caption 44 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton looks on as Obama makes a statement in response to the attack at the U.S. Consulate in Libya on September 12, 2012. Hide Caption 45 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton applauds Myanmar opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi during a ceremony where Suu Kyi was presented with the Congressional Gold Medal on September 19, 2012. Hide Caption 46 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Bill Clinton kisses his wife after introducing her at the Clinton Global Initiative annual meeting on September 24, 2012, in New York City. Hide Caption 47 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton shakes hands with Catherine, the Duchess of Cambridge, while attending a reception with Prince William, second from right, in New York in December. Hide Caption 48 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Clinton speaks to reporters at U.N. headquarters on Tuesday, March 10, addressing her use of private email for official work as secretary of state. She said she used a private domain out of "convenience" but admitted in retrospect "it would have been better" to use multiple emails. Hide Caption 49 of 50 50 photos: Hillary Clinton's career in the spotlight Democratic presidential candidate, former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton gestures before speaking to supporters Saturday, June 13 on Roosevelt Island in New York, in a speech promoted as her formal presidential campaign debut. Hide Caption 50 of 50

When I asked Hillary Clinton in Iowa if she is going to return to the Hawkeye State to campaign for candidates, her answer didn't inspire confidence that she would.

"Well, we're gonna do what we can," she replied.

Clinton's visit to the Harkin Steak Fry, her first political event in almost six years, was a return to the scene of great disappointment, where in 2008 her campaign sorely underestimated the wave of new caucus-goers that then-Sen. Barack Obama would turn out in the first-in-the-nation contest, and she finished in third place, behind John Edwards as well.

"Iowa was tough. It was where the wheels came off the wagon. I don't think anybody has ever forgotten that," said one Clinton '08 alum, "but I do also think that those who want her to run again understand how important it is for her symbolically as well as politically to start off well there."

Her visit last week was a first step, but Iowans want more.

"I think she just needs to connect with everybody more than she did before, especially Iowans," said Joni Williams of West Des Moines, an '08 Obama supporter who is now backing a presumed Clinton run. "I don't think she really showed up as much as Barack did last time. He was here all the time."

And that enthusiasm that Obama inspired? It might be impossible to replicate.

"That'll never happen again. That was a one-time event with Barack Obama," said Jim Mikulanec of Indianola, Iowa. "I think we're going to have a great campaign with Hillary if she runs, but you can't put that back in the bottle. She'll have to reconfigure."

One Iowa politico, who was also granted anonymity to speak freely, said Clinton will find an enormous amount of support but noted there is still a significant minority of Democratic caucus-goers who are skeptical of her.

"They are not impressed with her since she left the State Department. Her (book tour) gaffes are reminiscent of how she approached the ('08) campaign. It doesn't mean they won't support her, but their enthusiasm depends on how she relates to Iowans. She needs to press the flesh to get over that, she needs to show she is listening to voters, sharing her views, not telling her views."

Another visit to Iowa before the midterms would go a long way.

4) Repay favors to friends

While Clinton's midterm campaign stops are still not public, those close to her say she will campaign where her popularity will best help candidates.

Her appearances will be limited: We may not see her on the stump until home stretch poll numbers in tight races determine where Clinton is most useful as a surrogate or until the beginning of early voting periods, which attract more Democratic than Republican voters.

This is also a time for Clinton to help those pals who have supported her over the years, and all the better if they happen to be in a state that's advantageous to her presidential aspirations.

Sen. Jeanne Shaheen seems like a natural recipient of a visit from Hillary Clinton. New Hampshire holds the first-in-the-nation primary election, and Clinton's '08 win there breathed new life into her candidacy after her Iowa loss.

The Clintons also owe the Shaheens a debt. Shaheen's husband, Bill, fell on his sword in 2007, resigning as co-chair of Clinton's New Hampshire operation after suggesting that Obama's disclosure of cocaine use in his younger years would hinder his candidacy. Former President Bill Clinton has already hosted a high-dollar fundraiser for the New Hampshire incumbent.

"The premise (would be) she is just there to help a longtime friend," one Democratic strategist said of the possible campaign appearance.

Friends or not, Hillary Clinton will be judged by whether the candidates she endorses win or lose.

That's why Bill Clinton will be doing much of the heavy lifting. He's expected to squeeze every minute out of the next couple months campaigning alongside Democrats. His wife, sources say, will choose more carefully, appearing with far fewer candidates.

"Remaining less political is in her interest," said Ron Brownstein, editorial director at Atlantic Media, pointing to recent poll numbers that show Clinton's approval rating dipping as she has re-entered public life. "But the people she owes favors to and she wants favors from are all going to expect her help."

5) Get to yes ... or get out of the way

Clinton ruled out a second presidential run as recently as late last year. How things have changed.

In July, after "Daily Show" host Jon Stewart asked her if she liked an office with or without corners, she joked, "You know, I think that the world is so complicated, the fewer corners that you can have, the better."

Now she says she will make her decision after the new year and teased the crowd in Iowa, saying, "It's true. I am thinking about it."

So what is she struggling with? It seems to be finding a way to articulate a case to voters about why they should put her back in the White House.

"We've reached a point in our life when we think you really shouldn't run for office if you don't have a clear idea of what you can do and a unique contribution you can make and you can outline that," Bill Clinton said this summer.

And then there's the question of what a Hillary Clinton team would look like. Her '08 campaign was notorious for infighting and strategic disputes. Many observers say she greatly needs to refresh her team with new talent, a difficult task for a woman who values loyalty, sometimes above skill, sources say.

"She's got a very small group that is advising her and they're clumsy," said one Democratic strategist who wants to see her widen her circle beyond the group of stalwarts who were with her at the State Department -- many of whom date back to her time in the White House as first lady.

"She has to sort through that universe and another universe of people who are qualified but haven't worked for her in the past and create a team ... that's cohesive and that's functional," said Jay Carney, the former Obama White House press secretary and now a CNN contributor. "It's not an easy task."

If Clinton waits too long to make up her mind, there's a serious risk to the party: Right now she is effectively blocking other Democrats from getting in the race, though Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley and Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, an Independent who votes with Democrats, have been making the requisite stops in key states.

"It sows a seed of discontent if she's holding out, and those (caucus-goers) skeptical of her might solidify for other candidates," said one Democratic operative in Iowa, who thinks they might seize the opportunity to get in the race if Clinton drags out her decision.

Clinton declared her candidacy in January 2007 for her first shot at the White House, but lamented how early she got in. This time, it's as if she's already running.

"If she's at 43% approval now in 2014, after just doing a quote-unquote book tour, then the public already sees her as a candidate," said Amy Walter of the Cook Political Report. "It's just about making it official."