CALABASAS, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Atlas Medical urges laboratories to escalate to a strategic level, even as healthcare pressures threaten labs. In a Company position paper released today, ATLAS says the “Golden Age of Diagnostics” is a time when labs need to respond to healthcare market forces instead of being swept aside by them.

The Company’s new white paper — “Thrive Amid Healthcare Pressures by Leveraging Laboratory Value — Embracing 8 Strategic Solutions Powered by the ATLAS Coordinated Diagnostics Platform™” — shares how labs become the epicenter and shake off perception of being a cost center. Lab and other diagnostic data (as well as information technology to track them) are vital to stakeholders that have financial incentives, propelled by the Affordable Care Act, to coordinate patient care and slow healthcare cost growth.

In the paper, ATLAS explains how healthcare pressures — mergers, hospital closures, reimbursement constrictions and others — threaten a lab’s operations and even the ability to stay in business. Strategic labs leverage diagnostic data to improve healthcare outcomes and reduce costs, according to ATLAS. “Strategic labs deliver knowledge and insight across individuals and populations, and now payers are in the mix. They manage the diagnostics process at a different level, because they are concerned with improving outcomes in healthcare and decreasing healthcare spending,” said Rob Atlas, founder of Atlas Medical.

Explored in the Company’s white paper are the eight Platform solutions including those focused on “clean” test orders and results reporting; faster and more advanced electronic medical record connectivity and multi-lab connectivity; and enhanced workflow at patient service centers. Newer ATLAS Platform solutions aid labs in embracing consumerism, achieving patient-centricity, optimizing test utilization and enabling actionable intelligence.

“The Platform is a strategic solution that connects outside the four walls of the healthcare organization to the care continuum,” said Rob Atlas. With powerful adjunct technology, the Platform seamlessly and elegantly melds with enterprise EHR, LIS and other third-party middleware and outreach solutions.

For more information on Coordinated Diagnostics, or to request a complimentary copy of the white paper “Thrive Amid Healthcare Pressures by Leveraging Laboratory Value — Embracing 8 Strategic Solutions Powered by the ATLAS Coordinated Diagnostics Platform™”, visit http://atlasmedical.com/coordinated-diagnostics/.

About Atlas Medical

Atlas Medical is a trusted provider of industry leading, configurable software that is changing how healthcare is coordinated across the care continuum. ATLAS solutions span the private and public health sectors, offering products and services that address diagnostic connectivity, clinical data interoperability and public health disease surveillance. With more than 25 years’ experience in pre- and post-analytic diagnostic testing workflow, we provide our customers with peace of mind — delivering expertise and creative solutions to help solve their interoperability and business problems, on time and within budget. Our cost-effective patient-centric outreach and clinical solutions include integrated CPOE for Laboratory, Radiology and other disciplines, a next-generation EMPI and patient-centric repository for the care continuum, along with integration to support EMRs/EHRs, ACOs and HIEs. Our solutions enable healthcare organizations to effectively manage their operations, reduce costs and provide quality patient care. Atlas Medical is a division of Atlas Development Corporation. For more information, please visit us at www.AtlasMedical.com and follow us on Twitter @AtlasCoordDx and with #coordinateddiagnostics and #ATLASListenLearnLead.