EASTON — There have been countless letters to the editor and many phone calls to the newsroom about his work, either supporting his opinions or calling for his head. His cartoons and columns have baffled, angered or made his audience chuckle at their pointed satire. But who is Rick Kollinger really, and what makes him tick?

In an email interview, the 25-year-veteran cartoonist and columnist for The Star Democrat discussed being placed on the cover of the 2014 edition of “Best Editorial Cartoons of the Year,” and revealed a little bit about himself and the madness behind his methods.

Though he has had cartoons in the prestigious collection for 20 years, Kollinger said, “It was a thrill to have one on the cover. It’s usually reserved for cartoonists from big city papers.”

He has one more cartoon in the collection, which features artwork on topics such as Obamacare, gay marriage, the government shutdown, Nelson Mandela and more.

He wasn’t aware he would be on the cover. “They called me several months ago and asked for the cartoon in color. I thought that I hadn’t sent them any, since they normally publish the book in November.”

Kollinger has his favorites among his fellow artists in the book. “Michael Ramirez is head and shoulders above everyone else, I like Mike Luckovich a lot, and Steve Kelley and Mike Peters are two of the funniest ones around,” he said, adding, “I like the old-school guys who draw well and don’t depend on a lot of computer-generated images.”

Some of the writers he uses as templates for his own pieces include Carl Hiaasen, Elmore Leonard, Dave Barry and Harry Crews.

The reason for those choices, he said, is “all these guys had Florida as a backdrop for humorous situations.”

He cites Mort Drucker from Mad Magazine as “the best caricaturist I’ve ever seen,” but said, “Each cartoonist has their own style, so that you should be able to tell a Luckovich cartoon without looking at the signature.”

In regards to his own sketches and how he draws inspiration to create them, Kollinger said, “Just about anything does it. A good cartoon should be a metaphor, so the inspiration can come from any daily job or situation that I see that I can compare to something in politics.”

”Fortunately, I have a short attention span. My favorite cartoon is usually the last one I did,” he said, answering a question that is posed to him all the time.

Noting that most of his readers’ favorites were not his own personal choices, he says, “It just shows that different people like different cartoons for different reasons.”

Another question Kollinger is asked frequently is why did he become a cartoonist and columnist. His answer: “A lack of ambition.”

Though born in Virginia, Kollinger has lived on the Eastern Shore all his life, saying he’s “old enough to be eligible to wear my pants up under my armpits and look under the steering wheel of my Buick.” Before coming to The Star Democrat, he worked in Ocean City, and before that, he was in the swimming pool business.

”Drawing cartoons is the only thing I’m even mildy competent in,” Kollinger said.

As some of his latest work has addressed, Kollinger recently was diagnosed with cancer.

“I have to condense it into those days or hours when I have energy. So many days I spend just so tired that it’s difficult to pick up a pen,” he said, mentioning how his condition has affected his work. “I have to be careful though, that on the days following chemotherapy, when I’m jacked up on steroids and can’t sleep that I don’t try to write a column.” He also said, “Many of my 3 a.m. cartoons I don’t understand the next day.”

In his line of work, Kollinger has made many friends and foes.

He calls his fans “brilliant, insightful individuals.”

Those who disagree with what he writes or draws and demand his immediate retirement?

“They’re wrong,” he said.

“Seriously, I enjoy the different viewpoint,” Kollinger added. “But it’s like people who root for the Yankees. You know there are a lot of them out there, you just can’t figure out why.”

Follow me on Twitter: @dorian_stardem.