No one can tell CNN what the news is.

That’s why the network will be taking a wait-and-see approach to covering the House select committee’s investigation of the Benghazi terror attack in 2012 and its aftermath, CNN President Jeff Zucker told the New York Times on Monday, according to numerous media reports.

That’s right. CNN — which became a national punchline for its non-stop non-coverage of non-developments in the case of a missing Malaysian airliner — hasn’t decided yet whether an attack that left four Americans dead and spurred accusations President Obama and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton deliberately misled the American public for political gain is worthy of its attention.

And Zucker doesn’t care what anyone else in the cable news business thinks about it.

“We’re not going to be shamed into it by others who have political beliefs that want to try to have temper tantrums to shame other news organizations into covering something,” Zucker told a reporter for the “newspaper of record.” “If it’s of real news value, we’ll cover it.”

By “others,” he’s talking about Fox News, of course, which has led coverage of the Benghazi attack and the machinations that led the White House to blame the attack on spontaneous demonstrations over an anti-Muslim video rather than the planned operation it’s now known to have been.

Ben Carson riles up Whoopi with welfare truth;

has conservatives cheering on ‘The View’

But his accusation that Fox coverage is determined by its political opposition to the Obama administration is risible, since it’s a projection of the way the mainstream media’s liberal politics have coddled the first black president since even before he was elected. And if President Obama has his way, that’s going to continue with non-coverage of the Benghazi investigation and more blind-eye reporting on the disaster that is Obamacare.

At a fundraiser Monday night, the president made the marching orders clear, according to a report in the Washington Examiner.

“[The] debate we’re having right now is about, what, Benghazi? Obamacare?” Obama said. “And it becomes this endless loop. It’s not serious. It’s not speaking to the real concerns that people have.”

He meant it’s not speaking to the real concerns Democrats have about losing control of the Senate for Obama’s last two years in office.

And that means it’s not likely to make it to the top of coverage for CNN, the New York Times and the rest of the mainstream media that’s been carrying Obama’s water since 2008.

And that’s really the shame of it.