In October 2011, an animal rescue group found the bag containing Saunders' dismembered body. It was behind a Bethany grocery store.

Carina Saunders' case is described as one of the most horrific murders investigators have ever seen.

Richards Saunders and Margie Queen sat down for an exclusive interview with News 9. They are worried their daughter's case has been forgotten.

Two years after a 19-year-old girl was brutally killed, dismembered and placed in duffle bags, her killers are still walking free.

Carina Saunders' case is described as one of the most horrific murders investigators have ever seen. Now, her parents are breaking more than a year of silence hoping to create a resurgence in the investigation.

Richards Saunders and Margie Queen sat down for an exclusive interview with News 9. They are worried their daughter's case has been forgotten.

"It's just gut wrenching and I have to just cry out to God because there is no one else that can satisfy that pain," Margie Queen said.

And Richard Saunders agreed it's been two years too long waiting for answers. Carina Saunders died on Oct. 10, 2011.

7/2/2013 Related Story: OSBI Completes Investigation Inside Bethany Police Department

"Carina's life is still an open book until we can put some closure on it and put it to an end," Richard Saunders said.

The parents waited patiently as Bethany Police chased down more than 1000 leads in their daughter's death. The case took several turns in the nine months between her body being found and the arrests of two accused killers.

"I have put myself in her place and imagined her last moment," Queen said.

2/6/2013 Related Story: OSBI Officially Opens Investigation Into Carina Saunders' Murder Case

Investigators claimed Jimmy Massey and Luis Ruiz tortured Carina and dumped her body in a field. Both were charged with her murder.

Before the parents could take any comfort in having suspects charged with her murder, they said they had to deal with an unexpected twist in the case.

"We felt good about the case and then when they handed it to the district attorney we felt really good about the case," Richard Saunders said. "Then, when everything stopped, it was like someone stabbed us in the heart again."

2/5/2013 Related Story: New Developments In Carina Saunders Murder Case

Saunders' mom, Margie Queen said it has made her sick, wondering if they let go of the murderers.

Then, 15 months after the murder, the investigation switched hands and the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation began sorting through the evidence.

"It's almost like we are back at square one again," Queen said.

The parents said they've heard of little progress made in the case since then.

8/15/2012 Related Story: Medical Examiner Releases Autopsy Report For Carina Saunders

"I would just go out there and play detective, but I don't know where to start," Saunders said.

Instead, the parents are calling on everyone to take interest in the case because there is still a threat of it happening again.

"They are still out there and who knows what they are capable of and they've already done the worst," Queen said.

The OSBI claims agents are still actively investigating Carina Saunders' murder. Investigators say it is not a cold case, but there are not a lot of new leads coming in to the agency.

If you have any information, call the OSBI tip line at 1 (800) 522-8017.

2/27/2012 Related Story: M.E. Officially Rules On Carina Saunders' Death