Trump Calls Russell Moore 'a Terrible Representative of Evangelicals'

Prominent Southern Baptist leader Russell Moore attacked Republican frontrunner Donald Trump over the weekend, and The Donald shot back on Twitter Monday morning. Moore called Trump's campaign "reality television moral sewage," and Trump called Moore "a nasty guy."

Russell Moore is the president of the Southern Baptist Convention's Ethics and Religious Liberty Commission, and he had been opposed to Trump's candidacy throughout the primary. Speaking on CBS News "Face the Nation," Moore declared that "character matters" is a key tenet of conservatism and that "virtue has an important role to play in our culture and our politics."

"What we have in the Donald Trump phenomenon as well as in the Hillary Clinton phenomenon is an embrace of the very kind of moral and cultural decadence that conservatives have been saying for a long time is the problem," Moore declared. He attacked "conservatives who were saying in the previous Clinton era that character matters, and rightly so, who now are not willing to say anything when we have this sort of reality television moral sewage coming through all over our culture."

Trump shot back on Monday morning, tweeting this:

.@drmoore Russell Moore is truly a terrible representative of Evangelicals and all of the good they stand for. A nasty guy with no heart! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 9, 2016

The Donald's decision to defend himself is not surprising -- after all, Moore did hit him pretty hard. The irony is that Trump, a man with a very checkered religious and moral past, is attacking Moore as a "terrible representative of Evangelicals and all the good they stand for." This attack is likely to lose Trump whatever currency he had among believing Christians familiar with Moore's work.

Moore spearheaded an early movement of believing Christians against the real estate tycoon -- his efforts are nothing new. His influence likely led the Christian Post to oppose The Donald on Super Tuesday. That outlet declared that "Trump does not represent the interests of evangelicals and would be a dangerous leader for our country."

The Christian Post further added that Trump is not a Christian. "There are certain non-negotiable actions need to become a Christian: One must repent of their sins and follow Christ as Lord and Savior. Trump doesn't talk this way, even when urged to." Indeed, beyond any offensive statements he has uttered, The Donald has bragged about cheating on his wives and sleeping with other men's wives. Given this history, his statement that he cannot remember asking God for forgiveness is rather telling.

Next Page: Trump is not a good standard bearer for Christians concerned with morality.