Thanksgiving marks the beginning of the 2015 holiday season. The question for today is how much are you planning to gobble-gobble? If you’re hungrier for a healthier, happier, less stressful and more meaningful celebration this Thanksgiving holiday, I have some ideas to share:

Sense your stressors. Listen to your body — especially your gut, the seat of great wisdom. If thinking about Turkey Day makes you feel tense and weary, your body is speaking the truth: Something is wrong. Sit calmly and meditate upon the source of your stress. Painful memories? (The bird that never thawed.) Future fears? (Your son comes dressed as a zombie.) Let it all go, including your perfectionist need to model Martha Stewart. Those handcrafted John Smith meets Pocahontas centerpieces are so yesterday.

Review your guest list. If you’re hosting, know you can suspend tradition and eliminate toxic people from your table. But if you’re stuck with guests whom are mean-spirited, self-centered or — my nemeses — gossip queens, see Thanksgiving as an opportunity to practice acceptance and compassion. Be thankful that you are evolved enough to handle their pathology. Or simply buy some pumpkin-scented place cards and seat them as far from you as possible.

Be a conscious cook. This year ban the Butterball and feature a free-range turkey raised on organic feed and Mozart sonatas. Thanksgiving is a symbolic meal, and your typical farm-factory turkey — loaded with chemicals, hormones and antibiotics — represents all that is wrong with America’s addiction to fake, tortured food. (None of this need be discussed at table.)

To express your own commitment to avoid processed foods, serve only real food: fresh veggies, wholesome grains and really good chocolate. But what about everyone’s favorite Pepperidge Farm dressing with pork sausage? Here’s what I know: If you cook with love and choose tasty, fresh ingredients, your family and friends will not be disappointed.

Have a plan. Calm your nerves by getting your Thanksgiving to-do list going now. One by one, day by day, check off what needs to be done. Organizing calms the cluttered mind. Resist martyrdom. If you need help — with the cooking, the serving or the cleanup — ask for it. Schedule yourself for at least one non-kitchen activity that makes you feel good — a run, a yoga class or a call to an old friend you keep meaning to talk to.

Create a ritual. To shift the mood in the room and bring on the attitude of gratitude, welcome your guests with a clink of the glass. Be bold! Ask them to turn off their cellphones. No peeking, no texting, no distractions. Dim the lights, light a candle and pass it around asking everyone to say who or what they’re grateful for. You may be surprised by how this simple ritual changes the energy and turns a bunch of soloists into a loving choir. Allow your guests to pass without speaking, but keep the candle moving, the spirit rising.

Do something charitable. Make a double-portion of your favorite holiday dish and take it to a homeless shelter, write a check to a favorite nonprofit or extend your hospitality to someone who has nowhere else to go. Generosity, just like maple-glazed Brussels sprouts, is a great thing to pass around.

—Marilynn Preston is a fitness expert, personal trainer and speaker on healthy lifestyle issues. She has a website, marilynnpreston.com, and welcomes reader questions, which can be sent to MyEnergyExpress@aol.com.