Buy Photo A line of fire trucks from the Okolona Fire Department is seen behind WHAS during the 61st annual Crusade for Children, which raised $5,637,680. June 8, 2014 (Photo: Aaron Borton/Special to The C-J)Buy Photo

Contributions to the 61st annual WHAS Crusade for Children totaled $5,637,680 when the tote board flashed its final figure at 7 p.m. Sunday.

Kentucky and Southern Indiana fire departments again raised the bulk of the donations, which, as expected, fell a bit short of the just over $6 million raised last year for the special 60th Crusade.

However, with a recovering economy, several recent days of good weather at the prime time for fundraising and the traditional community outpouring of support for the much-respected charity, Crusade officials expressed delight with the contributions.

RELATED: Crusade for Children donations roll in across city

RELATED: Crusade for Children adds QR codes for donations

RELATED: Crusade for Children's final push this weekend

The one-year record for collections was $6.3 million, raised in 2003 for the 50th campaign, and since 1954 the Crusade, which provides direct benefits to special-needs children in Kentucky and Southern Indiana, has raised about $160 million.

Crusade president and CEO Dawn Lee said this year's televised Crusade got off on the right foot Saturday night when, during the opening variety show at the Kentucky Center, it received checks for $150,000 from Kosair Charities and for $100,000 from auto dealer Sam Swope.

But it's not just the big bucks that count, she said. "Every dollar, dime or penny really makes a difference ... and 100 percent goes to the kids."

During the day Sunday, a steady string of fire departments, which traditionally raise nearly 60 percent of the Crusade contributions, and numerous other groups lined up at the WHAS-TV studio at Sixth and Chestnut streets to drop off money and to read long lists of individual donors. The last group to report was Fern Creek's fire department, which turned in $142,725.

Although the final total fell a bit short of last year, many of the groups reported donations that were higher than in 2013.

The Eastwood fire department, for instance, raised $27,038 — up from just under $24,000 a year ago. Giving to the Crusade has become a community tradition, said Megan Shirley, who has been raising money for the Crusade for 14 years. "People know what the cause is. They like to help the children."

The West Point department in Hardin County increased fundraising fivefold over 2013, turning in $26,050 Sunday.

Josh Roederer, a West Point city councilman and volunteer fundraiser, said the department made the Crusade effort a tribute to Ralph Wright, who was West Point fire chief for 27 years and died in late May. The campaign in Wright's memory "made us all work harder," Roederer said.

West Point's fundraising included a benefit auction, a fish fry, a golf cart poker run and roadblocks. "Everybody pitched in," Roederer said.

Jim Sitzler, chief of La Grange Fire & Rescue, said the department raised about $37,000 — up nearly 20 percent from a year ago. The department stuck primarily to roadblocks and door-to-door soliciting, he said. People support the Crusade, Sitzler said, because "just about everybody knows someone who has benefited from it."

Rabbi Gaylia Rooks of The Temple brought a small flock of fundraisers who had rounded up about $3,000, including pledges from Temple members. Rooks has served on the clergy advisory committee and interviews charities that apply for Crusade funding. The clergy members then recommend how the funds should be divvied up, and the Crusade board of directors, which has the final say on the allocations, has never veered from the recommendations, Lee said.

"In my opinion, there's nothing more important that we do as a community than taking care of our special-needs kids," Rooks said.

It takes scores of volunteers behind the scenes to make the Crusade a success. Many return year after year after year.

Laurie Pardieu, in her 16th Crusade, sat at a table just outside the television studio Sunday, directing traffic and helping to schedule the groups waiting to go on TV to report their earnings. And she was handing out plastic red Crusade fire helmets to kids and other passers-by.

Pardieu developed a soft spot for the Crusade when she was growing up in Bards­town. "It was a big deal for the community. It is heartwarming to see the kids that the Crusade helps grow up."

Martin Blakeley has worked in the Crusade money room for about 25 years. There he was again Sunday, separating the coins, dollar bills and checks.

"I've never had any direct benefit from the Crusade, but a lot of other people have," he said.

Crusade officials believe the annual campaign is no longer being affected by the 2009 scandal in which a fire chief and Crusade board executive, Paul Barth, was convicted of embezzling about $200,000 from the Crusade.

After that, some stricter procedures were adopted on handling and securing money. Firefighters, for instance, now deposit money in a local bank soon after it is collected.

Lee said that two people now always count the money, and bank representatives stay close at hand to secure cash as soon as it comes into the studio. On board the trucks, collected cash is sealed in tamper-proof bags. The money that TV viewers see being dumped from the boots into the bins is only token cash. "It is staged, part of the production," Crusade spokesman John Blim said.

This year, the Crusade has requests from more than 200 organizations seeking funding totaling about $11 million, Lee said. Crusade weekend is over, but people can donate to the charity year-round.

TOP CRUSADE FUNDRAISERS

Top Five Kentucky Fire Departments

Pleasure Ridge Park Fire District, $286,435

Fern Creek Fire Department, $142,725

McMahan Fire Protection District, $120,677

Highview Fire District, $107,329

Zoneton Fire Protection District, $78,917

Top Five Indiana Fire Departments

Lafayette Township Fire Department, $93,052

Charlestown Fire Department, $52,481

Clarksville Fire Department, $41,163

Jeffersonville Fire Department, $38,255

Sellersburg Fire Department, $35,000

Top Five Organizations

Archdiocese of Louisville, $297,000

Kosair Charities, $250,000

LG&E KU PPL Companies, $191,072

Louisville Triple Crown of Running, $142,639

Norton Healthcare, $138,722

Reporter Sheldon S. Shafer can be reached at (502) 582-7089. Follow him on Twitter at @sheldonshafer.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1pqYdjC