Although Patrick Roy’s attitude with his team behind closed doors and in semi-private situations is far more heated and critical, the Avalanche coach’s post-game comments for public consumption are surprisingly upbeat and perhaps numbingly familiar.

Perhaps it can come off as a bit like Bob Uecker’s character in “Major League” saying, “Just a bit outside” as Indians pitcher Ricky Vaughn’s first offering eludes a diving catcher and goes all the way to the backstop.

It’s not that the Avs have been that off target in the early stages of the season, but that after their 4-3 loss to San Jose at home Sunday they are 3-7-1 with several losses to bad teams.

“I get it,” Roy said. “We don’t have the result to support what we’re doing. And that’s all that’s missing right now. We played a great game for 57 minutes. We were very solid.”

The Sharks had lost five of their previous six games, and one of them was only 25 hours earlier at Dallas. But defenseman Brent Burns’ second goal of the game, at 18:21 of the third period, broke a 2-2 tie.

“They took advantage of a bad line change and bad positioning in our D-zone and they scored that winning goal,” Roy said. “Both teams played hard and both teams played well. It’s just a frustrating situation right now. We do a lot of good things out there. We just can’t get rewarded with it.”

Roy added, “It’s amazing how many pucks we’re missing in front of the net, bouncing. It just does not bounce in our favor right now, unfortunately for us. . . We deserved a lot better than we got.”

Roy lodged a coach’s challenge on Burns’ decisive goal, hoping that video review would reveal that the Sharks had interfered with Avalanche goalie Semyon Varlamov. The goal stood, though, and Roy lost his only timeout. “I thought they bumped into Varly a bit,” Roy said. “But I don’t know how much … At this time of the game, I had no choice, I had to make the call.”

Joe Pavelski’s empty-netter for the Sharks at 18:40 made it 4-2, and Colorado got back within one on Cody McLeod’s goal 15 seconds later. But with Varlamov still out, Colorado couldn’t get the tying goal in the final minute.

After going 0-for-14 on the power play on a three-game road trip, the Avalanche twice scored with the man advantage Sunday getting goals from Jarome Iginla and Francois Beauchemin. However, Beauchemin’s first goal of the season canceled out a short-handed Sharks’ goal from Burns only 21 seconds earlier on the same Colorado power play, and the veteran defenseman knocked in the rebound of Gabe Landeskog’s shot.

“We’re still not getting the job done, and at the end of the day, that’s what matters — whether you get the two points or not,” said Landeskog. ‘We didn’t tonight. If you look at the game, we played well and we gave a strong effort. We just kind of let them have the game there in the third. We have to be able to mature and take it into overtime and win in overtime or a shootout.”

If the Avs are so close, how do they get over the hump?

“I’m not going to start blaming anybody,” Roy said. “We all could do a little bit more. We’re all in it together…Right now, it’s just bad bounces and bad decisions at the wrong time.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei