Cedar Cove owner says contractor destroyed what was left

Keith Williams walks Wednesday on what is left of his land at Cedar Cove west of Loveland. His vacation home was destroyed by the September 2013 flood and he said a contractor removed several feet of dirt, making the land less usable, when emergency repairs on U.S. 34 were made. But he hopes the Colorado Department of Transportation will replace the soil and someday his grandchildren will be able to use the property. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The 2013 flood washed away Keith Williams' cabin in Cedar Cove, but he still hoped his family would visit the property he has cherished and cared for since the 1960s.

He envisioned grandchildren and great-grandchildren having picnics on a grassy lot that borders the Big Thompson River, maybe even staying overnight in a recreational vehicle.

But upon visiting the rocky ground, barren of greenery and grass, he's not sure that will ever happen.

Unless, he says, the Colorado Department of Transportation returns to him several feet of dirt he says its contractor scooped from his property without permission to make emergency repairs on U.S. 34.

"I'd like for them to replace the dirt," he says, so his daughter, grandchildren and great-grandchildren could plant grass and trees and build a beautiful river front property.

He knows his family could never rebuild the cabin that he constructed from scratch or create the same haven, but they could have a prime picnic spot to make new memories, said Williams, who lives in Fort Morgan.

Just after the flood, Williams visited the property and has pictures to show its elevation and the deposited dirt.

Then, after the repairs of U.S. 34 by Kiewit, a contractor for the Colorado Department of Transportation, he said his property was 4 to 8 feet lower, all rock and barren ground with no base for grass or greenery.

Advertisement

The contractor hired to make emergency repairs on the highway did clear out sediment that was deposited in the community to repair the roadway, and at the same time realigned the moved river channel closer to its pre-flood condition, according to information from Jared Fiel, spokesman for CDOT.

The transportation department is aware of Williams' complaints after he attached a note to his property taxes asking when the dirt would be returned. Larimer County officials forwarded that note to CDOT, and Scott Ellis, lead project engineer at the time, met with Williams.

The property owner said he felt like Ellis was listening to his concerns.

Tragically, however, Ellis died of a heart attack during a 100-mile bike ride in August at the age of 55.

Before his death, he had told Williams CDOT officials would meet with him and other property owners when they had a design and time schedule for permanent repairs on the highway, according Fiel.

The agency still plans that meeting.

"We do not have a great amount of design at this location yet," Fiel said in an email. "but we are planning to have a neighborhood meeting for this area soon as there are several other concerned citizens in the Cedar Cove area."

For Williams, he just wants a delivery of dirt so his family members can do something with the property they all loved.

"There's nothing beautiful about this," William said, frowning at the rocky ground that is difficult to walk across and not fit for recreation.

"It could be beautiful again."

Pamela Johnson: 970-669-5050, ext. 526, johnsonp@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/RHPamelaJ.