Sarah Palin is once again arguing the government will create "death panels" by paying doctors for offering end-of-life counseling.

In a lengthy Facebook post published late Thursday entitled "Death Panels Still Not Dead," Palin condemned the Obama administration's proposal this week to start paying Medicare doctors for talking to patients about their different care options as they near death.

"Certainly, all patients and families should be advised of options, but we engage in that today and we don't need government bribing any party to do so," the former Alaska governor and 2008 GOP vice presidential candidate wrote.

"Government needs to stay the hell out of our 'end-of-life' discussions," she added.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

While Obama and some lawmakers had talked back in 2009 about including end-of-life counseling in the Affordable Care Act, Palin helped kill the idea by coining "death panels," a term she used to argue that such counseling would result in the government rationing healthcare.

But Medicare is proposing to pay doctors for counseling patients without requiring them to prod patients one way over another. Many health advocates believe end-of-life counseling to be an effective way of helping terminally ill patients think through whether they'd like to receive medical interventions that could be ineffective or worsen their quality of life.

Palin is bringing back her death panels claim, however, writing that the "ultimate fix" for Obamacare is rationed care.

"Rationed care decided upon by a panel of faceless bureaucrats who, rational people like me will argue, will measure a person's worth using disagreeable criteria as they justify doling out limited government-controlled care," she wrote. "That, my friend, is a death panel."

Betsy McCaughey, another political pundit who vocally opposed Medicare paying for end-of-life counseling, also said this week that she's deeply skeptical of the administration's latest announcement, although she distances herself from the term "death panels."