TAHLEQUAH, Oklahoma—Employee volunteers from Cherokee Nation Businesses and Cherokee Nation Entertainment are continuing an annual tradition of supporting local students by donating and delivering supplies to classrooms in need.

CNB leads the company-wide initiative to support community schools. Employee volunteers donate to the supply drive throughout the month of August.

“Our employees at CNB are an integral part of the communities they live and work in. They know firsthand just how invaluable this kind of assistance and volunteerism can be to a young student in the local school system,” said Cherokee Nation Principal Chief Bill John Baker. “That’s why it is so important to be involved in this way. Every additional opportunity we can offer a child means they have a better shot at academic success today and lifelong success for years to come.”

This year, employee volunteers donated more than 3,500 items, including basic learning tools, backpacks and classroom necessities, to schools located throughout the tribe’s 14-county jurisdiction.

“We would like to thank CNB for donating school supplies to our students,” said Carolyn Robbins, principal at Peggs School. “Our students will put the supplies to use by making wonderful art displays, maps for geography, essays for English class and many other educational projects.”

Fifteen Cherokee Nation properties designated a receiving school and participated in this year’s school supply drive. Participating properties included CNB locations in Catoosa, Tulsa, Jay, Tahlequah, Pryor, Stilwell and Woodmark. Participating CNE properties included Hard Rock Hotel & Casino Tulsa, Cherokee Casino Ramona, Cherokee Casino Fort Gibson, Cherokee Casino Roland, Cherokee Casino Sallisaw, Cherokee Casino Tahlequah and Cherokee Casino & Hotel West Siloam Springs.

The annual school supply drives are coordinated through the tribe’s Community Impact Team, a group of tribal employees dedicated to volunteering, engaging and supporting local communities.

“We volunteer and donate as much as possible to our local community throughout the year,” said Becky Welch, accounting associate and employee volunteer at Cherokee Nation Businesses. “The school supply drives are especially rewarding because of the joy they bring the students and staff at schools that might not otherwise have all the supplies they need.”