More links to stories by our APR newsroom interns are at the bottom--Pat D

Internships at Alabama Public Radio…”Where YOU make the news!”

The international award-winning Alabama Public Radio news department is always accepting applications for internships. After some training, news director Pat Duggins assigns each intern his or her own story every day. These students research their story, track down interview subjects, do the interviews and cut the tape, and write copy to be edited under supervision of APR’s professional staff. These stories air statewide on APR newscasts, and interns even get to do spots for air. All from this work is done in our new Digital Media Center inside Bryant-Denny Stadium.

Last year, APR interns put in 750 hours of works that led to 142 minutes of Alabama focused news—all done by students. Interns who stick with APR for follow-up semesters have the opportunity to produce long-form public radio features. Previous student stories have included the fiftieth anniversary of “bloody Sunday in Selma, the arrival of the SEC Network at ESPN, getting students involved in Presidential politics, and signing young people up for coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

It all begins by contacting APR assistant news director Stan Ingold at singold@apr.org. Here's what some of our former interns have to say about their experience here...

"I thoroughly enjoyed breaking into the news industry through Alabama Public Radio. Working there gave me a chance to see the industry as run by true professionals. My time helped me gain a sense of storytelling, on-air presence, and deadlines. It was a pleasure and a huge professional boost."--- David Kumbroch--Web reporter/producer, WHNT-TV Huntsville

"My experience with interning at APR was very beneficial. I learned a lot of fundamental information that helped further my career path in news broadcast. While working in the newsroom I had the opportunity to answer the phone and take messages. I also had the opportunity to interview people and write my own voicer or cut and copy which also aired on the radio. I enjoyed interning at APR very much the news staff and everyone in the office was friendly and made me feel welcomed!"--- Kristen Fisher, News Producer--WAKA-TV Montgomery

"The time I spent at APR was immense in helping me become a better writer. Out of all the places at UA you can intern at, APR is the best place to hone your writing skills. I developed audio editing skills and received great vocal training. You also get a better grasp of state politics, which helped me get a leg up on the others in my class on Alabama politics. I recommend any aspiring broadcast journalist to get their start off in public radio."---Travis Leder, WAAY-TV reporter, Huntsville.