House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis. (Photo: USA TODAY)

WASHINGTON — The House will vote next Tuesday on overriding President Obama's veto of legislation that would repeal key portions of Obamacare and defund Planned Parenthood, House Speaker Paul Ryan announced.

Ryan, R-Wis., does not have the votes needed to override Obama's veto of the bill, which was passed by the House on Jan. 6 by a vote of 240-181 and vetoed two days later. The Senate passed the bill in December using a budget procedure that prevented Democrats from blocking the vote.

It takes two-thirds of the House and Senate to override a veto, and Republican leaders do not have enough support in either chamber to thwart the White House.

But Ryan sees the symbolic Jan. 26 vote as an important message for Republicans to deliver in an election year as the GOP fights to win the White House. Ryan has unveiled an agenda for 2016 that is aimed largely at giving the Republican presidential candidate a platform on which to run.

"It's (the override vote) taking it all the way through the end of the constitutional process and declaring our position versus his (Obama's)," Ryan said.

Repeal of the 2010 Affordable Care Act — better known as Obamacare — has been a major goal of congressional Republicans. GOP lawmakers say the law has raised health care costs, limited patients' ability to choose their doctors, and damaged the economy.

Democrats say it has helped nearly 18 million Americans gain medical coverage, allowed young people to stay on their parents' insurance plans until age 26, and stopped insurance companies from refusing to cover patients with pre-existing conditions.

The bill also would strip Planned Parenthood of federal funding for the 2016 fiscal year. The override vote will come just days after a big "March for Life" organized by opponents of abortion rights. The march will take place here this Friday.

Planned Parenthood has been under attack by conservatives since anti-abortion activists released undercover videos last year allegedly showing group officials talking about selling tissue from aborted fetuses. Planned Parenthood has denied making any profit from the sale of fetal tissue. The group announced in October that it would immediately stop taking reimbursement for supplying the tissue for medical research.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1V6gSjk