Wyo. only state with increase in uninsured citizens

In the United States, the implementation of the Affordable Care Act – love it or hate it – has lowered the uninsured rate in every single state except one: Wyoming.

In the Cowboy State, the rate of uninsured citizens has gone up, from 16.6 percent in 2013 to 18.2 percent in 2015, according to the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index. Wyoming also had the second-highest percentage of uninsured, after Texas which at least dropped their rate to 20.8 percent uninsured, down from their 2013 high of 27 percent.

Across the country, the uninsured rate in states that have chosen to expand Medicare and set up their own state exchanges or partnerships in the health insurance marketplace has declined significantly more since 2013 than the rate in states (like Wyoming) that did not take these steps.

The ten states with the largest reductions in percentage of uninsured citizens included Arkansas (which saw the largest decrease from 22.5 percent to 9.1 percent); Kentucky, Oregon, Rhode Island, Washington, California, West Virginia, Alaska, Mississippi and North Dakota.

The 10 states with the fastest declines in their uninsured rates all expanded Medicaid. The fastest drop happened in Rhode Island, where uninsured rates fell 79.9 percent between 2013 and 2015.

At the other end of the spectrum, nine of the 10 states that had the smallest decline in their uninsured rate (or, in Wyoming’s case, the rate increase) did not expand Medicaid.

Wyoming’s poor showing could also have something to do with the high cost of healthcare within the state, as Wyoming has some of the highest health insurance premiums in the country. Most states’ average monthly premiums are around $225. In Wyoming the average is $426. However, Wyoming is not the hardest hit. Alaska’s average premium is $719, given that state’s even greater remoteness. And Alaska has managed to drop its uninsured rate from 18.9 percent in 2013 to 10.3 percent in 2015.

According to the index, Americans’ attitudes about the law known as “Obamacare” have become more positive in recent months, and now as many Americans approve of the law as disapprove, a shift from the last several years in which disapproval had consistently outweighed approval.