Lisa Eads had confronted a motorist who drove wrong way through alley

PEORIA — A code enforcement officer in a marked city vehicle was attacked Tuesday in the West Bluff after confronting a motorist who drove the wrong way through an alley.

That motorist — allegedly a 21-year-old Peoria man with a minimal criminal record — has been taken into custody pending formal charges by the Peoria County State’s Attorney’s Office.

The code enforcement officer, Lisa Eads, 49, parked about 1 p.m. in the stretch of Russell Street between North Underhill Street and North Bourland Avenue. A red Jeep approached heading the wrong way down a one-way portion of the alley.

The city vehicle blocked the Jeep’s path, according to a police report on the incident. Eads told the driver through her open window: “You’re going the wrong way on a one way.”

The driver responded by stopping his vehicle and calmly walking toward Eads’ open window, a full cup of a beverage in his hand. He asked what Eads said, cursed at her and threw the soda in her face, the empty cup landing inside the vehicle.

The suspect then reached through the window and punched her.

As the man walked away, Eads rolled up her window and locked her doors. He briefly returned to the code enforcement vehicle and tried to pull open the door, then fled.

Eads wrote down the license plate of the vehicle and later identified the suspect in a photo line-up, according to a police report.

Officers apprehended Ervin C. Allen, 21, of 3207 W. Willow Knolls Drive, Apt 63, on Wednesday morning. He was booked into the Peoria County Jail on a charge of aggravated battery but had not yet been formally charged by later in the afternoon. He could make an initial appearance before a judge to have his bond determined Thursday.

Allen has one previous arrest in Peoria County for a charge of possessing 30 to 500 grams of marijuana in December 2012 and a related delivery charge. The case remains open pending completion of 24 months of probation as part of a first-time offender plea deal that could keep a felony drug conviction from appearing on his record.

Matt Buedel can be reached at 686-3154 or mbuedel@pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @JournoBuedel.