Business Briefs: Sutter Care at Home Acquires Alliance Home Health

Sutter Care at Home Acquires Alliance Home Health

Sutter Care at Home, a leading not-for-profit home care organization in Northern California, has acquired Salinas, California-based Alliance Home Health, effective Dec. 7. The acquisition is expected to expand Sutter Care at Home’s home health services and programs in Monterey County, California.

Alliance Home Health provides a full array of homecare services, including occupational therapy, skilled nursing, speech therapy, physical therapy, home health aide services and medical social services. With the addition of Monterey County, Sutter Care at Home provides home health services in 24 Northern California counties.

As a for-profit organization, Alliance Home Health is set to become a part of the not-for-profit Sutter Health system.

Well Care Home Health Inc. Buys Davie County, North Carolina’s Home Health Agency for $1.8 Million

Davie County, North Carolina, commissioners have approved the sale of the home health care agency operated by the county to a private company for $1.8 million.

The buyer was Wilmington, North Carolina-based Well Care Home Health Inc., which officially took over the county’s home health agency on Dec. 14.

All 17 employees of Davie’s home health care agency will be offered jobs with Well Care, with no cut in pay, County Manager Mike Ruffin told commissioners.

Ruffin announced last year that the county was trying to get out of the home health care business, citing its increasing unprofitability.

In a statement, Ruffin said changes in home health services reimbursements have affected the department’s revenues. He added that the Affordable Care Act has also resulted in a decrease in payment rates, making profitability almost impossible.

“The financial loss the department is experiencing makes the timing of the sale critical,” Ruffin said in the statement. “We are in a position where selling the department now allows us to sell the agency for a respectable profit as it is attractive to private companies who are looking to expand their footprint into the Davie County area.”

Beebe Healthcare Home Care Services Introduces Expanded Leadership Team

Millsboro, Delaware-based Beebe Healthcare Home Care Services, a not-for-profit community health care system, announced its new leadership team.

“With the growth in the aging population in southern Delaware, and the corresponding growth of our team members and services, we saw the need to expand our leadership team,” said Dana Warrington, director of Beebe Home Care Services.

Warrington was promoted to director in May after working for Beebe Home Care Services for 17 years as a staff nurse, case manager, clinical team lead and nurse manager.

Michele Dennis, who has over five years of experience in critical and long-term care, was promoted to Clinical Team Lead in October. She has been a nurse with Beebe Home Care Services for over a year.

Maureen Adair, who has worked as a nurse at Beebe Home Care Services for seven years, was promoted to the role of nurse manager in October.

Audrey Moore, who has worked as a nurse with Beebe Home Care Services for two years, has been promoted to Team Lead Quality Assurance. Moore has over seven years of experience in home care nursing.

Additional leadership team members are Janet Davis, manager of coding, and a clinical documentation specialist; and Maggie Kniele, Manager of Rehabilitation Services.

Beebe Home Care Services offers in-home nursing services, as well as occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech therapy and consultation with social workers. It also offers an individualized remote monitoring program for patients with chronic illnesses such as heart failure, diabetes and COPD, and specialized wound care services.

FirstLight HomeCare of Glen Rock Celebrates Re-Opening in New Location

FirstLight HomeCare of Glen Rock in Glen Rock, New Jersey, celebrated its new location with a ribbon cutting and grand re-opening reception on Dec. 3.

“While we have served Bergen County since 2013, we wanted to celebrate our expansion and new location, and say thanks to all who have made it happen,” said owner Boyd Lowry.

FirstLight HomeCare services residents throughout Bergen County, New Jersey.

Concord VNA Names Beth Slepian as New CEO

The CEO of Concord Regional VNA, Mary DeVeau, has stepped down after 18 years.

Beth Slepian, a physical therapist who serves as vice president of Education and Clinical Compliance at Concord Regional VNA, is expected to take over as CEO on Dec. 20.

Concord Regional VNA is the largest visiting nurse association in New Hampshire, covering 40 communities with an annual budget of more than $31 million.

DeVeau, who previously worked as a nurse in the intensive care unit, is stepping down and will “take some time to determine what her options are,” according to Andy Morse, director of communications at the association.

Concord VNA primarily provides services to seniors, often in their homes. It has 400 employees who serve approximately 5,000 patients in their homes or living facilities, in addition to around 800 hospice patients, including those in its 10-bed hospice, and about 260 “private duty” clients who receive services not covered by Medicare.

Concord VNA has expanded greatly over the last 20 years to meet the region’s needs, with its budget increasing approximately tenfold in 18 years, Slepian said.

“We are pretty passionate about helping people aging in place,” she said. “We want to deliver high quality of care in the home.”

Slepian joined Concord VNA 2.5 years ago. She was picked unanimously by the association’s board of trustees after a six-month, country-wide search.

Written by Mary Kate Nelson