CU great, now 70, made history 25 years ago

Hale Irwin kisses the U.S. Open trophy after winning the championship for the third time in 1990 at Medinah Country Club in Medinah, Ill. ( Al Behrman / AP )

Hale Irwin Age: 70 (June 3, 1945) Education: Boulder High School, University of Colorado CU football highlights: Two-time first-team All-Big Eight at cornerback in 1965 and 1966. ... Compiled nine interceptions. ... CU's All-Century Football team for first 100 years (1989). CU golf highlights: 1967 NCAA national champion. ... Two-time Big Eight conference champion (1966, 1967). Professional golf highlights: PGA Tour — Three-time U.S. Open champion (1974, 1979, 1990). ... 20 career PGA Tour wins. Champions Tour — Seven major championships, including the Senior PGA (1996, 1997, 1998, 2004), U.S. Senior Open (1998, 2000) and Ford Senior Players Championship (1999). ... 46 total Champions Tour wins. ... Champions Tour player of the year in 1997, 1998 and 2002. Other — In addition to the PGA and Champions tours, he has 14 other wins, including the World Match Play Championship in 1974 and 1975. ... Five Ryder Cup appearances (1975, 1977, 1979, 1981, 1991), which were all wins for the United States.

Earlier this month, Hale Irwin celebrated his 70th birthday.

Advertisement

Age has delivered a few more aches and pains and higher scores on the golf course.

"The old nagging things that you wake up with and years ago they'd nag for a while and go away," he said. "They continue nagging now. My talents aren't what they once were. My body is just not what it once was."

Before age started taking a toll on Irwin's body, he was one of the true gems in sports.

An all-Big Eight cornerback as a member of the Colorado football team, Irwin is the only Buffalo to win a national championship in golf, having won the NCAA title in 1967. He's enshrined in the World Golf Hall of Fame, the CU Athletics Hall of Fame, Colorado Sports Hall of Fame and the Missouri Sports Hall of Fame (he grew up in Joplin, Mo.).

"All in all, I'd have to say I can't complain, because I've just gotten to experience so much and meet so many good people and have had such a good run, that it would be ludicrous to complain and say I haven't enjoyed it," he said.

Irwin's career included three U.S. Open championships, and seven major titles on the Senior Tour.

This week marks the 25th anniversary of perhaps his most remarkable victory. On June 18, 1990, Irwin completed an improbable comeback to defeat Mike Donald in a sudden-death playoff and win the U.S. Open title at Medinah Country Club, just outside of Chicago.

At 45, Irwin became the oldest winner of the U.S. Open, a title he still holds. Amazing, considering he almost didn't get a chance to compete that year.

At that time, Irwin hadn't won a PGA Tour event in five years and had lost his automatic eligibility. He was given an exemption just to get in to the tournament.

"My goal was not to make this is a poor selection for the USGA," he said.

With ease, he achieved that goal, and more.

Keeping it simple

Irwin was three shots off the lead after the first round and four shots back after the second round. After a third-round 74, he was still just four shots back, but was tied for 20th.

As he hit the back nine during the final round, Irwin was six shots behind Donald and had the goal of finishing in the top 15, which would get him into the next year's Open.

"I was not thinking of winning," he said. "The old saying, 'Keep it simple stupid,' that's what I was trying to do."

By keeping it simple and focusing only on the next shot, Irwin posted four consecutive birdies, on holes 11, 12, 13 and 14.

On 18, Irwin hit his approach onto the green, but about 45 feet from the cup.

"He'll take a two-putt from where he's at," the commentator on ABC-TV said.

Irwin then lined up his putt, struck the ball and rolled it across the green. As it inched closer to the cup, the roar of the gallery grew louder. The ball dropped into the cup and Irwin took off running, high-fiving fans standing near the 18th green.

"That's the fastest he's moved since he played football at Colorado," ABC's color analyst said.

Clubhouse leader

That putt put made Irwin the clubhouse leader, at minus-8. He spent the next two hours watching his competition. Nick Faldo barely missed a birdie putt on 18, costing him a chance at a playoff. Donald remained at 9-under until a bogey on No. 16 that dropped him into a tie with Irwin. Donald then two-putted for par on 18, setting up a playoff with Irwin.

The next day, a bogey by Irwin on No. 12 gave Donald a two-shot lead heading into the final six holes. It was still a two-shot Donald lead with three to play. Then, Irwin birdied 16, and Donald bogeyed 18. They were tied again.

On the first hole of a sudden-death playoff, Irwin drained a birdie putt that gave him the championship.

"I was nervous the whole time," Irwin said. "There's a lot of players who take nervousness and turn that into an asset. Jack Nicklaus was the best at it; Tiger Woods. All the great players have taken that tension and become very focused and turned it into an asset for them and make it a plus. That's hopefully what I was doing.

"The blood was flowing. I was alive. There was work to do."

Irwin's work that week provided one of the most thrilling finishes in U.S. Open history.

Giving back

Irwin kept the momentum going by winning the next week. Then, during the next couple of decades, he established himself as one of the greatest players in Senior Tour history.

"Hale picks courses apart," Hall of Famer Ben Crenshaw once told Sports Illustrated. "His course-management skills are so sharp he has a tremendous advantage over most players."

Another competitor, Paul Azinger, told SI, "Hale is without a doubt one of the most competitive individuals I've ever known."

No wonder it bothers Irwin that, at 70, he's no longer putting up the scores he did in his 40s and 50s.

As the years go by, however, Irwin becomes less concerned with his achievements and his own scores. He's still involved in golf course design (mostly remodels, he said) and actively works with junior golfers. Those are his passions today.

"Every day, I am so appreciative of what I was afforded, what God gave me to do and what I was capable of doing," he said. "I've tried to be grounded and very real about what I am in the annals of golf history.

"But, the most important thing to me is not my golf history; it's what I have been able to do to kind of give back to the game that's made so much for me. The older I get, the more important that becomes."

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.