Nearby residents worry about density, school crowding, impact on open space

Council meeting The revised plan for the Anthem Filing 20 is slated to be discussed at City Council's meeting at 6 p.m. Tuesday in Council Chambers at the George Di Ciero City and County Building.

A plan for 389 new homes in the Anthem Highlands area in north Broomfield is drawing criticism from residents who are fearful it will change the area's character, negatively impact open space and stress already overcrowded schools.

Residents are concerned new construction will destroy a portion of a walking trail, encroach on open space that is home to a pond and wildlife, and "squeeze" homes into an area that will not match the neighborhood design to the north.

The plan for Anthem Filing 20, which is east of Lowell Boulevard and north of Preble Creek Parkway, was criticized by at least a dozen residents at a Nov. 24 City Council meeting. Emails to council from an additional 16 residents expressed similar viewpoints.

Change in owners, changing plans

"As founding homeowners in the Anthem Highlands neighborhood, we have enjoyed the beautiful mountain views and natural wildlife for over nine years from our backyard," Lou and Rhonda Conte wrote in an email to council. "While we have always known that Anthem Filing 20 would occur, we have heard three or four different scenarios of how that part of the neighborhood would be developed — each rendition becoming further and further from the original Pulte concept of having estate-sized, semi-custom homes capitalizing on the gorgeous Front Range views."

Advertisement

PulteGroup Inc., formerly Pulte Homes, was the original developer of Anthem Highlands and Anthem Ranch, a community for ages 55 and older. After building more than 1,300 homes, Pulte in 2012 it sold its remaining interest in the development to private real estate firm Wheelock Street Capital LLC.

Wheelock earlier this year sold to North America Sekisui House, or NASH, according to an April 1 story by John McManus posted by Builder Magazine.

'Complicated situation'

Anthem Filing 20 is a single-family neighborhood that would build 389 homes on a 128.843 acre property.

The existing plan for Anthem Highlands allows for 1,800 dwellings. As of last week 1,071 were approved, which means if Filing 20 is approved as proposed, the total would grow to 1,460.

NASH Anthem LLC held six public meetings to get feedback from residents about issues ranging from open space and wildlife to building a new school and density.

"It's a complicated situation," Councilwoman Elizabeth Law-Evans said at the beginning of council discussion at the meeting last month. "Ideally I'd like to see a resolution where everyone goes home happy tonight. I don't know if that's going to happen."

Anthem residents at that meeting proposed their own plan, which calls for 10 fewer lots. They decried destroying a portion of a walking trail, a change developers said was always part of the plan, since the existing trail is on private property.

Ultimately council decided to allow developers to revise the proposal, so the trail can remain intact. If revisions are made, the public can comment on those changes during the meeting Tuesday, which is when council is slated to vote on the proposal.

Bonnie Niziolek, of Norris Design, who presented NASH Anthem's plan to council last month, said the plans are in step with density requirements for a mixed-residential area, which are two to 13 houses per acre. The proposed plan allows for four houses per acre.

Some at last month's meeting, such as Alan Bradley, said they felt they were promised a master planned community with open space trails and wildlife access that grew "further and further" away from the original concept with each rendition.

"We'd like things to stay the same as what we were sold," he said.

Councilman Greg Stokes said when council first approved Anthem, it wanted a mix of houses, and forcing a developer to create bigger houses cuts into affordability. And he said it is disingenuous to say the proposed homes at Anthem 20 will bring down the value of existing homes.

Councilwoman Law-Evans said it is important to remember the developer owns the property and said she couldn't fault developers for trying to make money, since "that's their job."

But she said she understands residents' frustration and agrees the "pond is beautiful and the trail is lovely."

School crowding a growing concern

Residents and council members last month also talked about schools and how classrooms at Meridian and Coyote Ridge elementaries, which serve the Anthem area, have overflowed to modular buildings, how programs have been cut and how Meridian at the start of the school year wasn't accepting new students.

Adams 12 school district did soften that stance a bit, and was allowing a select few new students in by grade. Earlier this year there was limited space in Meridian's extended-day kindergarten program and first-, second- and third-grade classes. But Rob Webber, chief operating officer for Adams 12, said Meridian and Coyote Ridge are at capacity.

Stephanie James said she saw how growth impacted her son while he attended full-day kindergarten at Coyote Ridge. Her son was in a classroom with 26 other children and was regressing academically, she said. And while she loved the teacher and the school, James said she wasn't sure she was getting the best education possible for her son or for the $300 a month she paid for the full-day program.

James said she transferred her son to a school in Boulder, where he has 16 classmates, and his work improved.

"Increases in class size correlate with student success," she said.

Webber said Adams 12 started planning as early as 2000 to build schools in the Anthem area, but had to change direction after voters twice rejected bond measures — one in 2008 and 2014.

The district has started a community group to get an idea of what the community wants as it works on a five-year plan for capital needs. Webber said the district hopes that work is finished in the spring, with a possible bond recommendation going to the superintendent in time for the 2016 election.

The district hopes to open a pre-K-8 school with a 900-student capacity in Anthem.

If a bond doesn't go through, alternatives could be similar to those the district has made elsewhere where growth has outpaced capacity — boundary changes, transportation of students or year-round school to address overcrowding, Webber said.

A bond for a new school is a tough sell, however, without the residents who would use it, said Councilwoman Martha Derda.

"Anthem needs to build those houses or they're never going to get those votes for it," Derda said.

Jennifer Rios: 303-473-1361, riosj@broomfieldenterprise.com or Twitter.com/Jennifer_Rios