Mission City Community Network, a non-profit, Federally Qualified Health Care (FQHC) organization announced today that Dr. Neil Chatterjee, M.D., has been recruited to the company as Chief Medical Information Officer/Assistant Chief Medical Officer. Effective immediately Chatterjee is responsible for oversight and management of all clinical functions and promoting the integration of clinical programs and specialty services offered as well as quality Improvement (QI) for the care to the indigent patients we serve.

"We are very happy that Dr. Chatterjee has joined MCCN," says Nik Gupta, President/Chief Operating Officer. "We are living through very exciting times; with the onset of the Affordable Care Act we are committed to continue providing quality health care. With Dr. Chatterjee’s heading MCCN’S clinical programs we will be able to meet the needs of our growing medi-cal patients. We value Dr. Chatterjee’s over fourteen years of medical experience in Family Medicine.”

As Assistant Chief Medical Officer with MCCN, Dr. Chatterjee assists the CMO in all capacities, particularly by serving as Quality Improvement (QI) Coordinator. He is responsible for the collection of data related to clinical performance measures, service utilization, patient satisfaction, and other QI issues, and making reports to the CMO on all QI issues.

While beginning his career in family medicine with Bienvenidos Family Clinic and Plaza Community Clinic in East Los Angeles, Dr. Chatterjee also founded and served as Chief Medical Officer for Medicuro, Inc. A consulting firm that provided web-based electronic medical records, real-time coordination of care, and implementation of paperless arrangements for medical clinics and practices.

Dr. Chatterjee speaks Spanish and Bengali in addition to English. In 2003 he received certification in Clinical Ayurvedic Medicine, with a focus on application of Ayurvedic principles in modern clinical practice, from Government Ayurvedic Medical College in Puri, Orissa, India. During 2004 he served as a visiting medical officer with Government Health Centers in West Bengal. In 2005 he was a tsunami relief physician in Tamil Nadu and a humanitarian physician/general surgeon at Sri Sathya Sai General Hospital in Andhra Pradesh, India.

Most recently, Dr. Chatterjee was employed as a general practitioner with Sacred Heart Family Clinic in Paramount, CA, and as a family physician with Asian Pacific Health Care Venture, a Federally Qualified Health Center in Los Angeles.

"I am delighted to be part of MCCN’s model to provide quality health care to the uninsured and underserved population," says Dr. Chatterjee. "I am looking forward to addressing the needs of our patients."

Dr. Neil Chatterjee received his Medical Degree from University of Southern California (USC), Keck School of Medicine in 1997 and completed his surgical internship and residency at LA County/USC Medical Center in Los Angeles, California, during which time he was named Intern of the Year by USC Medical Center.

About Mission City Community Network

Mission City Community Network (MCCN) was founded in 1989 as a private, non-profit organization. Our mission is “To provide, advocate and model quality health care and social services for the uninsured and low-income families in the communities of Southern California.” Beginning with a single site in the San Fernando Valley that provided 3,190 patient visits in our first year, we have grown to the current total of 11 fixed sites and two mobile clinic vans, including Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) and FQHC Look-Alikes, which provided about 110,000 visits in 2013. MCCN has a respected history of providing culturally competent and age-appropriate medical, dental, and behavioral health services to low-income and medically underserved residents of uninsured, low-income communities. Since establishing our first clinic in North Hills in Los Angeles County in 1989, we have expanded to operating a total of 13 clinic sites that serve low-income populations in Los Angeles County’s San Fernando Valley, San Gabriel Valley, and community of Inglewood, as well as a clinic in San Bernardino County in the community of Victorville. Among our patients, 84% report incomes below the Federal Poverty Level (FPL), and 97% have incomes below 200% of the FPL.