Bryan Bulaga had surgery to repair torn cartilage in his knee and will be out longer than expected. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

Green Bay — Green Bay Packers right tackle Bryan Bulaga will not return to the lineup as soon as the team hoped after it was discovered he had suffered torn cartilage in his left knee.

NFL Network reported Saturday that Bulaga had surgery to repair a meniscus tear and the prognosis for recovery is four to six weeks.

However, a source familiar with Bulaga's situation said the hope is that it will be three-week injury and he would be able to return before the bye week, perhaps for the San Diego game Oct. 18. Much of that will depend on how quickly the knee responds to rehab.

The Packers could wait until after that game so he would have the bye to recover. The bye week follows the Chargers game, and waiting would give him six weeks of recovery. But after the surgery took place, a three-week time frame had not been ruled out.

Cartilage injuries are more serious than medial collateral ligament tears, which is what Bulaga was thought to have suffered and may have still suffered.

An MCL tear does not require surgery and can be reinforced with a brace. In the case of the cartilage tear, Bulaga either had a piece of it removed or had it repaired. Either way, the fact it required surgery makes the recovery time longer.

This is the fourth time Bulaga has injured his left knee and the second time it has required surgery.

Bulaga suffered an MCL tear to the same knee in Week 1 last year and missed just one game. The previous year, he suffered a torn anterior cruciate ligament in the knee and was lost for the season. That was the first time Bulaga had the knee surgically repaired as a Packer.

Bulaga also missed four games with an MCL sprain in his left knee in 2011, his second year in the league.

In addition to three knee injuries, he suffered a hip injury in 2013 that ended his season prematurely.

The Packers already had declared Bulaga out for Sunday night's game against the Seattle Seahawks. Veteran Don Barclay, who missed the entire 2014 season with a torn ACL, is expected to start for Bulaga. The Packers also have Josh Walker as an option at right tackle.

The loss of Bulaga hurts not only because he was playing very well, but he also was insurance in case something happened to left tackle David Bakhtiari. Bulaga played left tackle in college at Iowa and would be able to switch sides without too much adjustment.

The Packers will have to hope nothing happens to Bakhtiari because Barclay struggled to play left tackle in the exhibition season and Walker is in only his second year playing tackle.

The Packers finished their week of practice Saturday and were impressed enough by safety Morgan Burnett's participation that they upgraded him to probable.

Burnett, who missed the season opener against Chicago with a calf injury, is expected to return to the starting lineup Sunday night .

The Packers listed Burnett as questionable Friday despite not practicing.

Receiver Randall Cobb (shoulder) and outside linebacker Jayrone Elliott (thigh) are both probable.