SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

HOUSTON, Texas–Catholic Charities in Texas is helping fulfill the needs of the thousands of illegal immigrants that continue to flood the U.S.-Mexico border. Breitbart Texas has learned that Catholic Charities’ St. Jerome’s Home for Children, located in Fort Bend County, is providing many benefits including financial support, English classes, legal assistance, and release services to youths in the U.S. illegally. The charity is looking to hire several staff members to help accommodate the influx of migrants.

St. Jerome’s webpage reads, “While the youth are living in this home, evaluations are provided to assess all their needs (medical, psychiatric/therapeutic, educational, vocational, social, familial, legal) with the development of an initial service plan.”

“After these assessments are completed, a decision about a long-term placement is made in the best interest of the youth,” it continues. “If appropriate, the youth moves to live with an individual foster family. Otherwise, the youth remains in the agency foster home. If a youth is not able to maintain the foster family placement, he or she returns to the agency home to live until discharge.”

The programs administers “financial assistance” for the foreigner’s housing, food, clothing, and other necessities. It additionally provides case management by social workers, vocational training, English lessons, and legal assistance.

It appears that the program’s ultimate goal is to place unaccompanied minors in U.S. foster homes.

In order to accommodate the migrants staying at St. Jerome’s, Catholic Charities is currently seeking new paid staff members. Job listings for a lifeguard, bilingual recreation specialist, transition to adulthood case manager, and several youth care workers all appear online.

“Our competitive benefits package includes health, dental, vision, long-term disability, life insurance, FLEX plan, 401(k), and an Employee Assistance Program (EAP). Catholic Charities is an equal opportunity employer,” Catholic Charities claims on its employment webpage.

The organization is known for receiving a bulk of its funding from the U.S. government. In 2010 alone, it received $2.9 billion from the federal government, about 62 percent of its annual revenue.

The organization could soon receive significant funds from the federal government; the Department of Health and Human Services recently announced a “funding opportunity” of $350 million for “residential care providers” for minors in the U.S. illegally. Receiving organizations must provide the minors with daily outdoor activities, case management services, daily education, legal help, family planning services, medical care, and family unification and release services.

Follow Kristin Tate on Twitter @KristinBTate.