Best 'SNL' cameos of the season: 6 bit parts that blew us away

share tweet pin email

"Saturday Night Live" has had no shortage of talented A-listers hosting the sketch comedy show. But sometimes — as in this season — it's the unexpected cameos that end up taking center stage.

Here are a few of our favorite surprise appearances from the 2013-2014 season:

Spidey tongue

"Amazing Spider-Man 2" star Emma Stone popped up during co-star/boyfriend Andrew Garfield's first hosting gig on May 3 during his monologue and left viewers giggling. It wasn't enough that she gave Garfield sound advice in the opening moments, she came back to share some seriously awkward tongue action with him in a Spidey sketch. Fortunately, Coldplay frontman Chris Martin was able to show her how to properly give a swoon-worthy kiss.

It's Jesse, *@$&%!

"SNL" alum Tina Fey may have been the host of the season premiere, but all the attention was on "Breaking Bad" star Aaron Paul. The actor, dressed as Jesse Pinkman, took part in the president's press conference about the Affordable Care Act to share the heartbreaking tale of his ailing friend and mentor, Walter White, who got "sick, like, cancer sick" and "did what any of us would've done — he started cooking meth."

Can't top the real thing

The Christmas episode offered a holiday haul of celebrity cameos, including Madonna, Barry Gibb and Chris Rock. But the best of the bunch was Paul McCartney, who helped Fallon kick off the show with a sweet Christmas tune during the monologue.

'I'm flying!'

After talking himself up to be quite the acting big shot during his monologue, host Jonah Hill was brought back to earth by "Wolf of Wall Street" co-star Leonardo DiCaprio, who had come to support his pal before the former started talking smack. But in the end, all was good as the Titanic star hilariously re-enacted his famous bow scene with Hill as lady love Rose.

So long, farewell

"SNL" couldn't let longtime Weekend Update anchor Seth Meyers sign off without a proper farewell on Feb. 1. After Meyers — who has moved on to host "Late Night" on NBC — delivered his final joke, former cast members Amy Poehler and Bill Hader (as the catty and sassy Stefon, of course!) rolled in to tell him about life after "SNL." And to wrap it all up, "Brooklyn Nine-Nine" star Andy Samberg serenaded the now late-night host with Boyz II Men's "It's So Hard To Say Goodbye to Yesterday."

Mad about Hamm

"So, Jon Hamm, what are you even doing here?!" That's what we'd like to know! The dashing "Mad Men" star looked just as confused to find himself a guest on a talk show run by two boy-crazy girls (played by host Lena Dunham and repertory player Nasim Pedrad). Turns out yes, his publicist had instructed him to show up, but he also wanted the free pizza that was promised.

The season finale of "Saturday Night Live" airs Saturday at 11:30 p.m. on NBC.

Follow Anna Chan on Google+ and Twitter.