Frank Bruni on why the tangerine man won't be playing more songs for you.

On Thursday, when John Boehner grew weepy in the presence of the pope, I assumed that we were seeing the tears of a proud Catholic. On Friday, when he announced that he’d be resigning as the speaker of the House of Representatives and leaving Congress at the end of next month, I revised that view. I think he was crying, at least in part, for the ill fortunes and uncertain future of his pathologically self-destructive party. It’s something that should have all of us sobbing. ... I’m not saying that the Republican Party alone has wing nuts, disrupters, brats. Too often that’s the impression left by journalists ruing the G.O.P.’s unruly ways. But Democrats over recent years haven’t been bedeviled by internal dissent and rendered dysfunctional to the extent that Republicans have. They’ve kept something of a lid on things and maintained a semblance of order.

It's more than just "Democrats don't allow their crazies to disrupt the process." It really is "Democrats just aren't that crazy." Sure, sure, the media demands a king-size helping of both-sides-do-it every time they're forced nose to gaping maw of insanity with just how bad the GOP has become. Only finding some obscure comment on a web site or from a junior city councilmen in West Podunk is not the same as putting the nuts in charge of the government. The GOP is crazy. And it's dysfunctional. Both. Find me any Democratic official, even in East Podunk, who can match the lead-weight idiocy of Louie Gohmert. Hell, find me a Democrat as crazy as Ted still-a-serious-contender-for-the-GOP-nomination Cruz.

Ruth Marcus also has a tear theory.

Who could not be struck, listening to Francis’s stirring description of the role of the lawmaker, by the stark gulf between the papal ideal and the ugly, partisan reality of the chamber over which Boehner presides? “Your own responsibility as members of Congress is to enable this country, by your legislative activity, to grow as a nation,” Francis said, as the speaker’s eyes welled and he wiped away tears. “You are the face of its people, their representatives. You are called to defend and preserve the dignity of your fellow citizens in the tireless and demanding pursuit of the common good, for this is the chief aim of all politics.” ... House Republicans once had to wait 40 years in the desert of the minority before entering the promised land. Unlike the ancient Israelites, whose time in the wilderness imbued them with the necessary maturity and faith, House Republicans took power and continued to behave like petulant children, especially after retaking the majority in 2010 and installing Boehner as speaker.

I don't disagree about the childishness of the House GOP, but I'm concerned about the rush to canonize Boehner. Yes, the House Republicans were insane, but Boehner was also a bad Speaker. Both things can be true.

Dana Milbank gets the final word on His Orangeness.

That the Catholic speaker made his announcement just after his audience with the pope is no accident. Though Boehner said Francis didn’t lead him to his decision (he had planned to leave at year-end anyway, he said), the speaker made the association himself in a news conference Friday afternoon. ... The connection of the two events is fitting on another level. Francis’s speech to Congress, though touching on climate change, immigration, poverty and war, was really about the obligation of leaders to work together for the common good and to resist polarization. “A good political leader is one who, with the interests of all in mind, seizes the moment in a spirit of openness and pragmatism,” the pontiff said. This is the kind of leader Boehner, who I’ve followed since I first covered Congress 20 years ago, aspired to be. This is the kind of leader Boehner was on a good day. But for most of his speakership, he could not be that leader, because his caucus constantly tugged him toward extremism and implacability. He kept his title, but he lost any ability to lead. Finally, he had enough.

Again, just because the Republican caucus was actively awful, doesn't make Boehner good. How many votes did Boehner schedule on repealing Obamacare? How many did he schedule on Climate Change, Immigration, or anything else that matters? Sure, you can argue that those things wouldn't have passed, but neither did the 50+ Obamacare attacks. If you're going to have pointless votes, why not at least make them on the side of history?

Ross Douthat goes all musical theater by naming his piece "Springtime for Liberal Christianity."

[Pope Francis] is certainly not a Marxist, and he’s not a “liberal” as American politics understands the terms. But he has been a gift to liberals who are also Christians, to religious believers whose politics lean left. It’s a gift the religious left sorely needed, because the last few decades have made a marriage of Christian faith and liberal politics seem doomed to eventual divorce. Since the 1970s, the mainline Protestant denominations associated with progressive politics have experienced a steep decline in membership and influence, while American liberalism has become more secular and anti-clerical, culminating in the Obama White House’s battles with Francis’ own church.

Douthat: In the intellectual arena, religiously-inclined liberals have pined for a Reinhold Niebuhr without producing one, and the conservative fear that liberal theology inevitably empties religion of real power has found all-too-frequent vindication.

Chorus: Germany was having trouble, What a sad, sad story, Needed a new leader to restore, Its former glory

See how subtle Rossy is this week? He's definitely looking for a pat on the head for his tricksy Broadway symbolism. Play along with Douthat, and you can compare the lyrics of thetune with his text.And now, let's go over to Broadway...Godwin? What? Why, don't be silly. It's not like Douthat drew any parallels between the Pope and Hitler. None at all.

Colbert King on Christians In Action (CIA).

For the past several days, the best and the worst of CIA have been on display — most noble and inspiring, some inescapably cringe-worthy. Chief among the moments of inspiration was the arrival on U.S. soil of Francis, the 78-year-old Catholic who is the church’s 266th pope. ... Pope Francis’s call for respecting each other as well as the natural world is also being praised. Heeded? That’s something different. Still, this pope speaks with a moral authority lacking in so many others on today’s world stage. His brand of Christianity is inclusive, tolerant and gentle. It encourages believers to be a little less afraid of God, in whose hands are all Christians, in all nations.

In a small pocket of war-torn Syria, a group of Christians who know the Islamic State is closing in on them send out messages that, even as they await extinction, their food kitchens are feeding people of every faith.

I'm stretching the King quote so I can get in one more instance of Christianity as I understand the term.There. That's the stuff. The stuff down the page where Ted Cruz doesn't want to let Muslims into the country? Get thee behind me, Ted. (And yes, Mr. Douthat, that was a literary allusion.)

Molly Worthen on the rise of the... what was that again?

Donald Trump's high poll numbers among evangelicals have preoccupied the media for months. But the most interesting thing about his Christian fans is not their willingness to overlook the sins of a casino playboy. Evangelicals happily voted for a divorced man of uncertain faith once before: Ronald Reagan. What is most striking is that Mr. Trump’s campaign has exposed a rift within evangelicalism — a split between those calling for culture war as usual and those who say Christians must adjust to life as a minority in American Babylon. Some evangelical leaders are content to follow old models. They promise, as Jerry Falwell and his colleagues in the Moral Majority once did, that Christians are destined to lead the nation in “a moral and conservative revolution.”

Arguing about how evangelicals are willing to overlook Trump's faults with some idea that he's following conservative Christian principals overlooks the truth on all levels. What evangelicals like about Trump is that he is, to paraphrase Dick Nixon, a man who really knows how to hate. That's what he has in common with the evangelicals who follow him. They don't like Trump in spite of his being an asshole. It's his assholery they like.

Bono and Mark Zuckerberg speak out in support of new UN goals.

... world leaders put forth a new set of global goals in New York last week. If we want to build a world where not just some but all get to live in security and prosperity, there’s a lot still to do, as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development signed off on by United Nations member states shows. It lists 17 goals and 169 targets, and one of these, 9(c), is a target that we believe is crucial to accelerate realization of all the others

: a commitment to provide Internet connectivity for all by 2020.

Living wages? Vaccines for kids?Ah. Okay. That would also be good. However, noting that Zuckerberg alone is worth nigh on 36 billion, he could invest $10 for every person on the planet currently lacking Internet and likely solve the issue himself. I'm not saying that global Internet access isn't important, or that it doesn't represent an improvement of opportunity for many. Heck, I still have to connect with dial up (hello, everyone who ever wondered why I was so slow to get these things done), and I'm just thirty miles outside a major American city. Lord knows, we could do better. I'm just a wee bit confused about whether someone who makes a fortune off the 'net pressing to expand the 'net constitutes philanthropy or a business investment.

Leonard Pitts looks as some not very ancient history.

.. a young white woman named Norma Lee Padgett concocted a tale of gang rape by four black men. A doctor’s exam turned up no evidence of sexual assault. Neighbors who saw Padgett right after the alleged attack said she was neither disheveled nor panicked. They scoffed at the idea she was raped, but refused to testify for the defense. “Wouldn’t do to be called nigger lover,” one said. In Klan-infested postwar Florida, Padgett’s flimsy claim was enough for police to essentially start rounding up black men en masse: Walter Irwin, Samuel Shepherd, Ernest Thomas and Charles Greenlee. The men didn’t all know each other. No forensic evidence tied them to the “crime.” But again, this was Florida in 1949. Before it was over, a white mob would rampage through an African-American community, one man would be killed trying to escape, three would be beaten and tortured, the sheriff would summarily execute one man, and the remaining two would be convicted.

A petition is headed to Rick Scott asking that the men who were charged with crimes in 1949 be exonerated, and that the true nature of events be recognized. You'd think it would be a case of simple justice, long delayed. But then... this is going to Rick Scott, so unless that petition includes a tax cut for the wealthy or more pointless drug testing for the poor, it may not get noticed.

Science Daily looks into whether early humans were capable of telling Liszt from $#!^.

Research into human fossils dating back to approximately two million years ago reveals that the hearing pattern resembles chimpanzees, but with some slight differences in the direction of humans. ... Humans are distinct from most other primates, including chimpanzees, in having better hearing across a wider range of frequencies, generally between 1.0-6.0 kHz. Within this same frequency range, which encompasses many of the sounds emitted during spoken language, chimpanzees and most other primates lose sensitivity compared to humans.

Interesting tidbit in the article says that human hearing may have shifted to higher frequency sounds as people moved out on the savanna where deep rain forest calls didn't carry as well. Without hominds spending time in the grasslands, you'd never be able to hear Frankie Valli's falsetto. It's up to you whether or not that's a good thing.