The number of Americans insured through Obamacare tops 20 million

Photo: Ryan Evon, Associated Press Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Sen. Ted Cruz has compared his fellow Republicans fight against Obamacare to then British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain's strategy of appeasement with Hitler. "Look, we saw in Britain, Neville Chamberlain, who told the British people, 'Accept the Nazis. Yes, they'll dominate the continent of Europe, but that's not our problem. Let's appease them. Why? Because it can't be done. We can't possibly stand against them.' And in America there were voices that listened to that. I expect those same pundits who say it can't be done, had it been in the 1940s, we would have listened to them." (AP Photo/Odessa American, Ryan Evon) less Sen. Ted Cruz has compared his fellow Republicans fight against Obamacare to then British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain's strategy of appeasement with Hitler. "Look, we saw in Britain, Neville Chamberlain, ... more Photo: Ryan Evon, Associated Press The number of Americans insured through Obamacare tops 20 million 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

During Thursday night's raucous Republican presidential debate, ultraconservtive Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, claimed that the Affordable Care Act (aka Obamacare) is "the biggest job killer in America."

The noisy debate drowned out news that contradicts Cruz's assertion, as well as Donald Trump's claim that the ACA has imposed an "incredible economic burden."

A new report, released by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, that 20 million -- 20 million!!! -- Americans have gained health insurance between passage of the law in 2010 and early 2016.

The HHS report included 17.7 million Americans who gained coverage through insurance exchanges or Medicaid -- Washington has sharply increased its Medicaid coverage -- while 2.3 million young adults aged 19 to 25 have remained on their parents' health care plans.

Is it a job killer? The Bureau of Labor Statistics reported Friday that the economy added 242,000 last month, with the unemployment rate staying at 4.9 percent. The 200,000-plus figure has been achieved frequently in recent months.

The truth is, as HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell put it: "We have seen progress in the last six years that the country has sought for generations."

(Burwell used to serve as Global Development Program director, and later chief operating officer at the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.)

The brawling Republican candidates, and fratricide in the party, proved a distraction from other good news:

--The uninsured rate among (non-Hispanic) African Americans has fallen by more than 50 percent, from 22.4 percent to 10 percent, in human terms meaning that 3 million adults have secured coverage;

--The uninsured rate among Hispanics plummeted by more than 25 percent from 41.8 percent to 30.5 percent, meaning about 4 million Latino adults have secured coverage.

--The uninsured rate for (non-Hispanic) Whites in America dropped by more than 50 percent, from 14.3 percent to 7.0 percent, translating to 8.9 million adults securing health care coverage.

The overall percentage of uninsured Americans has been halved from 20.3 percent in 2012 to 11.5 percent at present.

The U.S. House of Representatives has, since Republicans took control in 2011, cast more than 60 votes to repeal the Affordable Care Act or to gut it.

Cruz has tried to shut down the government over Obamacare, complaining that fellow Republicans haven't resisted enough. He even once likened GOP colleagues to British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain in not standing up to Hitler.

On the campaign trail, we hear Trump promising to "replace Obamacare with something so much better" -- details not apparent in the plan he released Thursday, Marco Rubio declaring "Repeal Obamacare!" and Cruz pledging to "repeal every word."

What would that mean for 20 million Americans, so many of them young or black or brown, who have secured health insurance for the first time in their lives?

It's a question to consider when the shouting stops . . . if it will ever stop.