By Jason Hart | Watchdog.org

Labor unions used the Supreme Court’s King vs. Burwell ruling as a chance to accuse Obamacare critics of putting lives in jeopardy.

Before the decision, Service Employees International Union warned “~10,000 people a year could die prematurely” if the Supreme Court overturned an Internal Revenue Service rule propping up HealthCare.gov in 34 states.

If plaintiffs win in #KingvBurwell, ~10,000 people a year could die prematurely bc of losing their coverage. pic.twitter.com/YRtHKha9EJ — SEIU (@SEIU) June 17, 2015

The King plaintiffs’ argument was that Obamacare only allowed health insurance subsidies, mandates and penalties in states with state-run Obamacare exchanges, in text ignored by President Obama’s IRS.

According to a court brief filed by the American Public Health Association and a group of college faculty, cutting off the subsidies in states using HealthCare.gov could “translate into over 9,800 additional deaths annually.”

Unsubsidized health insurance is unaffordable for many Americans largely because of government mandates, but SEIU dismisses proposed alternatives as attempts at “taking health care away.”

If SCOTUS rules against #Obamacare in #KingvBurwell case, ~10,000 ppl could die a year who otherwise would've lived. pic.twitter.com/CvKlCjTEns — SEIU (@SEIU) May 28, 2015

SEIU frequently accuses anyone who doesn’t support Obamacare — technically called the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, abbreviated as ACA — of trying to take health care away from the poor.

The King plaintiffs actually sought to have Obamacare enforced as written, which may have prompted Congress to change a law costing millions of Americans their health insurance plans and imposing fines and mandates on millions more.

Celebrating the Obama administration’s Thursday victory in King vs. Burwell, SEIU bashed Obamacare critics as “extremists” and “haters,” insisting “it’s time to move on.”

Extremists cheered SCOTUS on to take away hc from millions. Tell your GOP Senator #ACAHereToStay → 855-728-5215 pic.twitter.com/zF5ZBeKtR8 — SEIU (@SEIU) June 25, 2015

If opposition to Obamacare makes one an extremist, a slim majority of Americans are extremists based on the latest RealClearPolitics polling average.

Why is SEIU concerned about protecting Obamacare subsidies but indifferent to the fines, mandates, higher premiums and plan cancellations resulting from the law?

SEIU is heavily invested in Obamacare — and not just in a metaphorical sense. From 2010 to 2013, SEIU poured $1.6 million into Health Care for America Now, an activist group promoting increased federal control of health care.

During President Obama’s first year in office, HCAN orchestrated rallies across the country to help ram Obamacare through Congress.

A founding leader of HCAN, SEIU is not the group’s only union backer. American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, American Federation of Teachers and National Education Association are also HCAN founders.

RELATED: Taxpayer money fuels big labor’s political machine

AFSCME, the nation’s fourth-largest union, gave HCAN $2.9 million from 2009 to 2013. Like SEIU, AFSCME slammed “extremist” Obamacare critics in a statement applauding the King vs. Burwell ruling.

The ruling, AFSCME president Lee Saunders said, “preserved the health and peace of mind of the more than 8 million Americans” who receive Obamacare subsidies through HealthCare.gov.

NEA, the largest labor union in America, gave HCAN $1.8 million from 2008 to 2013. AFT, the nation’s third-largest union, gave HCAN $325,000.

On Thursday, NEA president Lily Eskelsen Garcia praised the Supreme Court for keeping health insurance “secure” and “affordable” through Obamacare. AFT president Randi Weingarten cheered the Court for preventing “a major step backward.”

Even in the specific professions the unions claim to speak for, workers’ support for Obamacare is mixed.

“As a teacher, I’ve already felt the implications of Obamacare in a negative way,” Rhonda Lochiatto, who teaches at a Florida charter school, told Watchdog.org. “My costs have gone up.”

“That doesn’t help me at all,” she added, “So why would the unions fight for that when it’s actually hurting their members instead of helping?”

Lochiatto was a public school teacher for 15 years, and saw firsthand how NEA and AFT affiliates push members to support policies like Obamacare.

“The union jumps on board with all these issues that have nothing to do with education,” she said. Lochiatto is currently a member of Association of American Educators, a non-union professional organization.

Florida is a right-to-work state, but individuals in states without right-to-work laws can be forced to pay union fees — and indirectly support union activism — as a condition of employment.

In 2014, SEIU took forced “fair share” fees from 176,969 nonmembers. AFSME took mandatory fees from 125,255 nonmembers, and NEA took mandatory fees from 90,255 nonmembers.

SEIU, AFSCME, AFT and NEA all failed to respond to questions from Watchdog.org about how they gauge support for Obamacare among the workers who pay their bills.