WASHINGTON — The $20 million mark in television advertising is about to be surpassed in Arkansas’ hotly contested U.S. Senate race.

U.S. Sen. Mark Pryor, D-Ark., and U.S. Rep. Tom Cotton, R-Dardanelle, and a slew of outside interest groups have so far aired more than 47,500 spots on Arkansas’s broadcast stations at an estimated cost of $19.5 million. They spent $2.4 million in the last week alone to run nearly 4,100 ads, or roughly one every two-and-a-half minutes, according to the nonpartisan Center for Public Integrity.

The pace of advertising is not expected to slow down as Pryor and challenger Cotton compete for every vote ahead of Election Day on Tuesday, Nov. 4.

“You can compare it to a nuclear arms race,” says Jay Barth, a professor of politics at Hendrix College. “If one side backed down, they might well lose in a race which has been so close for so long. So, you are not going to see anyone back down.”

The Arkansas Senate race ranks 7th nationally in ad spending — North Carolina tops the list at $39.8 million spent.

Overall, Senate candidates and their supporters have spent $282 million so far this election cycle to air some 681,800 ads. More than 200 million, however, was spent in just eight races. Candidates account for about half the spending. The rest is paid for by independent groups, reports the Center for Public Integrity. The watchdog group is tracking ads through data provided by Kantar Media/CMAG.

Republicans need to pick up six seats this mid-term to gain the majority in the U.S. Senate, and Arkansas is among the GOP’s strongest targets. Pryor is the lone Democrat in the Arkansas delegation to Congress — a sharp turnaround from six years ago when no Republican challenged Pryor and the state’s delegation included five Democrats and a single Republican.

“Advertising generally isn’t going to cause huge swings in a race, but when you’ve got a race as close as that in Arkansas, you don’t need a big swing to flip the race to one part or the other,” says Travis N. Ridout, an associate professor of political science at Washington State University.

In Arkansas, Republicans are outspending Democrats by about $600,000. Democrats, however, have run about 800 more spots — as outside groups pay a higher ad rate than candidates. Cotton and his supporters are catching up. In the last week, they spent an estimated $1.37 million on 2,342 spots while Pryor and his supporters spent about $900,000 on 1,793 ads.

Arkansas was one of only two Senate races where Republicans outspent Democrats in the last week. The other was Kentucky, according to the Center.

The sheer volume of advertising has diminished the impact that any individual spot is making on voters in Arkansas, Barth says. Those that do tend to be ads where the candidate speaks directly to the camera — as Pryor did in an ad where he described his battle with cancer or as Cotton did when he enlisted his mother to demonstrate his support for seniors.

Barth says most of the ads have been “negative” in tone, particularly among outside groups, where the crux of the message is aimed at the voting record of their opponent.

“The pure attack ads kind of run together,” Barth says.

The Wesleyan Media Project found that 55 percent of Senate ads run during a two week period in September were “negative” ads while just 27.5 percent were positive ads focused solely on a favored candidate. Ridout, who is co-director of the Project, said negative ads are popular because they sometimes work.

“People pay more attention to negative ads, and they are generally more memorable. They often attract media attention, and they give voters a reason to vote for one candidate over another,” he says.

Janine Parry, a professor of politics at the University of Arkansas, says most of the so-called “negative” ads actually provide a clear contrast for voters on important policy differences between the candidates. That has been particularly true in Arkansas where “negative” ads have largely focused on the voting records and public statements of the candidates.

“They are really ‘contrast’ ads,” she said.

Parry points to an ad that the Pryor campaign ran linking Cotton’s vote against basic research to the Ebola outbreak.

“Obviously, it was over the top. But, the ad actually is very much in keeping with Pryor’s message that Tom Cotton believes in a smaller government to the point where it potentially is dangerous to you,” she said . “The contrast between the candidates on the scope and scale of government is legitimate.”

Similarly, Parry says that an anti-Pryor “Spelling Bee” ad run by American Crossroads pulled no punches as it repeats the Cotton campaign message that a vote for Pryor is a vote for President Barack Obama and his agenda.

“Saddling any Democratic candidate in this climate with the Obama albatross is a surrogate for the argument that Obama and the Democrats believe in a scope of government that is big and could possibly grow bigger,” she said.

Taken as a whole, Barth says that the campaign ads boil down to simple themes.

Cotton and his supporters want to tie Pryor to an unpopular president, and in particular his support for the Affordable Care Act. Meanwhile, Pryor and his supporters are focused on Cotton’s voting record as being “too extreme” for middle-of-the-road Arkansas.