MUSKEGON, MI - Good, bad or in between, Mercy Health in Muskegon wants to know more about patient wellness and the community's healthcare experiences.

The nonprofit, Catholic hospital system, which has four main campuses across the Muskegon Lakeshore region, is asking residents in Muskegon, Newaygo and Oceana counties to complete a survey for its routine Community Health Needs Assessment.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which passed in 2010, requires nonprofit hospitals nationwide to conduct the assessment every three years to maintain their 501(c)(3) status and to form a strategy to help remedy local findings.

The hospital's storefront community benefit, the Muskegon Community Health Project, is spearheading the effort and is also performing the assessment on behalf of the United Way of the Lakeshore, District Health Department #10, and other health providers in the region.

The organization has set up an online questionnaire at SurveyMonkey.com that takes about 10 minutes to complete.

Health Project Community Benefit Program Coordinator Kristina Baas said the agency began surveying residents in February and is aiming to get at least 3,000 residents to participate.

They will continue to solicit online survey respondents until March 31.

In April, the Health Project will then coordinate five public forums using the "community conversation" format in all three counties. Newaygo will host one conversation, while Oceana and Muskegon County will each host two, Baas said.

"Those are like town hall meetings," she said. "Residents can come and talk to people and share their stories."

In addition to the public meetings, the Health Project will form topical focus groups for certain disease and health conditions based on the survey results in May.

The last assessment, completed in 2012, identified obesity, depression, diabetes, high blood pressure and STDs and teen pregnancy as the top-ranked issues in Muskegon County. Second-ranked issues included smoking, dental care access, the need for health insurance and preventative care, nutrition education and access to healthy foods.

Oceana and Newaygo counties reported similar issues but also listed other matters as concerns, including lack of prenatal care, language barriers, senior isolation and home care and Native American resource awareness.

Baas said the results will help local healthcare administrators allocate their resources to improve services.

Mercy Health is also welcoming residents to volunteer to help conduct surveys. Baas said many patients in the community have limited or no computer and healthcare literacy and need help responding to questions. Other residents need assistance because they are vision disabled, she said.

"We want to make sure everyone's voice is being heard and not just those with high literacy levels," Baas said. "It really is about the voice of the community."

The survey queries community members about an array of personal details, including their gender, annual household income, immunization and family medical history, if money has affected their ability to access mental health services and if they have ever experienced healthcare-related challenges and because of their race or ethnic background.

The results from the community assessment are expected by September 2015.

Take the survey below at: https://www.surveymk.com/s/CHNA_English.

Baas said survey respondents should be at least 18 years old and should not complete the questionnaire more than once.