The city's largest employees union and Chicago aldermen today unveiled a plan they said would expand services at the city's remaining mental health clinics without costing city taxpayers money—potentially steering some troubled youth to treatment rather than street confrontations with police.

But the city says it won't work and, in fact, would be "counterproductive," according to Dr. Julie Morita, the city health commissioner.

Under the plan submitted by Ald. Jason Ervin and 20 colleagues, and backed by the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, treatment options would be expanded in needy, often crime-plagued neighborhoods by expanding community outreach and hiring more staff at the city's six mental health clinics.

"The six mental health clinics have the capacity to serve many more clients," sponsors said in a written summary.

The plan would be funded by requiring the city's Department of Public Health to join three managed-care networks that reimburse mental health care, using the Medicaid program.

But according to Morita, the plan wouldn't pay its own costs, much less get the city new money.

Each psychiatric visit to a city clinic costs about $450, but Medicaid reimburses only $75, she said. And the federal system comes with so much red tape that the city's ability to get a better price from vendors would be harmed, leaving the city worse off than it is now.

AFSCME spokesman Anders Lindall termed that response "a red herring," since many of the medical personnel who would be used already are on the city payroll. But the group's own statement said the intent is to "treat more people."

Emanuel set off huge protests earlier in his tenure when he closed six other mental health clinics in a cost-cutting move. That storm never has quieted, and in fact has picked up recently with suggestions that some of those involved in police shootings were unable to get needed mental health treatment.

Lindall denied that AFSCME's intent in today's move is to reopen the clinics.

Ervin Mh Ordinance