Buy Photo Second Baptist Church in New Albany, In, is rumored to have once been a pitstop and gateway to freedom for slaves on, " The Underground Railroad". August 18, 2014. (Photo: Matt Herp, Special to the C-J)Buy Photo

As far east as Louisville's old Haymarket, slaves yearning for freedom could see the 150-foot-tall steeple of New Albany's Town Clock Church.

For those daring to make the attempt, the steeple served as a guide to one of the first stops on the Underground Railroad, where members of the church and the local free African American community helped them on their way north.

On Sunday, historian and author Pam Peters discussed the Underground Railroad and its connection to the church building during a presentation there by the Louisville Historical League.

Peters is a Floyd County historian and author of the 2001 book "The Underground Railroad in Floyd County, Indiana.

"From Appalachia to the Mississippi River, New Albany was unique," she said. "It was the only one to offer safe havens across from a large metropolitan area in a slave state. It is, to me, the center of anti-slavery sentiment. You don't hear about it as much in Jeffersonville and Clarksville."

Since the Underground Railroad was a highly secretive and loosely organized structure, documentation is sometimes hard to find, but Peters found extensive written and oral histories for her book.

"There is, of course, oral tradition," Peters said. But there are also records from the national Presbyterian church related to this church, and newspaper criticism at the time from the New Albany Daily Ledger."

Although called the Town Clock Church by many, the Second Presbyterian Church started construction on the building at 300 E. Main Street in 1849 after it broke away from the First Presbyterian Church just a block away. Both churches were anti-slavery, but Second Presbyterian took an active stance on abolishing slavery.

"These were a group of white evangelical people who befriended African Americans," Peters said. "They were baptizing them, marrying them, and burying them."

In 1889 a black Baptist congregation purchased the building, transforming it into the Second Baptist Church.

The church's iconic steeple was destroyed by lightning around 1914. The Friends of the Town Clock Church works to raise money to restore the church, and ultimately, the steeple.

Today, a short tower crowns the church, containing the original clock and the five-foot-diameter bell "which rang in joy at the end of the Civil War and in mourning at Lincoln's death," said Peters.

Once restored, the steeple will rise from the top of the clock tower as it did when it beckoned fugitive slaves away from Louisville so long ago.

The church will follow up Peters' presentation with a musical evening dedicated to the hidden messages in spiritual songs sung by slaves, on Feb. 23 titled "Follow the North Star, The Underground Railroad: Finding hidden meaning in the music".

For more information on the church's history or the friends group visit TownClockChurch.org.

If You Go:

Follow the North Star

The Underground Railroad: Finding hidden meaning in the music

Second Baptist Church

300 E. Main Street, New Albany

Monday, Feb. 23, 7 p.m.

No admission fee

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1DvOgsY