EDMONTON, ALBERTA — The Avalanche completed a road swing through western Canada with a 3-2 victory over the Edmonton Oilers on Sunday night.

Gabe Landeskog was excellent in his return to the lineup, scoring the game’s first goal and also contributing an assist.

Landeskog showed the same willingness to play the body he had before serving his NHL suspension, jarring the puck loose on a bruising hit on Oilers defenseman Griffin Reinhart. Before the zone could be cleared, Carl Soderberg found the Avalanche captain alone in front of Laurent Brossoit and he swiftly tucked the puck around the rookie goaltender.

“I think it started on a lost draw,” Landeskog said. “We were good on the forecheck and both Matthias and Carl made two nice plays that lead to me getting basically a break away from the corner.”

“It felt good, no doubt.”

Although the Oilers had difficulty dialing in their aim, when they did, Calvin Pickard was more than up for the task. The Colorado goaltender stopped 26 of the 28 shots he faced.

Avs Mailbag: Pose a question for Mike Chambers

Pickard picked up where he left off in his last game against the Oilers. The 23-year-old stopped 27-of-29 shots in a 3-2 win at Edmonton on Feb. 20.

His most sensational save Sunday came with nine minutes left in the first period. Oilers rookie Connor McDavid found a trailing Darnell Nurse, who outwaited everything but Pickard’s stick — which swiped the puck away from the open net.

“We’re trusting Pick, he’s been playing really well for us,” coach Patrick Roy said. “He’s competing out there and he deserves a lot of credit.”

There’s something about the Oilers that brings out the best in Tyson Barrie.

The defenseman extended Colorado’s lead 11:31 into the second period, just as an Oilers penalty expired. Barrie ripped a slap shot that ricocheted off Mark Fayne and past a screened Brossoit for the 2-0 advantage.

The goal was Barrie’s 13th of the season — and team-leading sixth point against the Oilers.

Edmonton ruined Pickard’s bid for a shutout in the third period. Oilers winger Matt Hendricks reduced the Avalanche’s lead 2:53 into the frame, receiving a pass from a sprawling Mark Letestu that he slid past Pickard for the gritty winger’s fifth goal of the season.

The game was put out of reach midway through the final period. On a McDavid high-sticking penalty, Shawn Matthias tipped an Erik Johnson point shot past Brossoit for his fourth goal as a member of the Avalanche.

Ryan Nugent-Hopkins tallied with 7.6 seconds left in the game to match the score from the teams’ Feb. 20 meeting.

Despite winning, the Avs were unable to extend their lead over the Minnesota Wild in the race for the final wild-card playoff berth in the Western Conference. Minnesota defeated the Chicago Blackhawks 3-2 in a shootout Sunday.

Colorado remains one point ahead of the Wild, with both teams having only nine games remaining.

“Our focus was on making sure we got the two points tonight,” Landeskog said. “We knew that (Minnesota’s game) was tied going into the third, so it will be tight down the stretch.”

The Avalanche returns home after picking up six out of a possible eight points on the road swing. They are back in action Thursday, hosting the Philadelphia Flyers at the Pepsi Center.