Freedom Partners may have canceled October advertising time that had been reserved for attacks on Sen. Jeff Merkley, but for now the group is continuing to flood the airwaves with TV commercials blasting the Oregon Democrat.

The group, which is affiliated with the Koch brothers network, on Thursday unveiled a new ad attacking Merkley, who is portrayed as a cardboard cutout and derided as "just another paper-thin politician."

Freedom Partners, which has run ads in the state through two subsidiaries, had initially reserved a reported $3.6 million in advertising in Oregon through the November election. Earlier this month, the group canceled its October time but said it would continue with $1.6 million in spending through this month.

The group could again reserve time in October if its polling shows signs that Republican challenger Monica Wehby is moving within striking distance of Merkley.

Billionaire industrialists Charles and David Koch have built a network of large donors who help fund a variety of independent expenditure campaigns, in many cases without having to publicly disclose their contributions. This year the network has been focused on ending Democratic control of the Senate and is reportedly seeking to spend about $300 million nationally.

The ad repeats some previous criticisms of Merkley for voting to raise the debt limit and oppose a balanced budget amendment. The ad also claims he voted for "higher health care costs" because he supported the Affordable Care Act, often known as Obamacare. That issue has been debated, with proponents arguing that it has helped moderate increases in health care costs while others saying it's put the country on a trajectory toward big boosts in spending.

UPDATE: Merkley campaign spokesman Jamal Raad ridiculed the Freedom Partners ad, saying that the Wehby campaign's removal of copied issues material from its web page shows that "the only thing that's paper thin is the rationale for Wehby's candidacy."

Raad also said:

Hours after Wehby was caught brazenly plagiarizing her economic and health care policy plans from Karl Rove and national Republicans, the oil billionaire Koch brothers are calling Jeff a prop. That's absolutely hilarious.



-- Jeff Mapes