Tristan Remillard, 9, and Zane Sundermann, 8, visit with Santa Claus on the back of a festively-decorated fire truck at the Penrose Volunteer Fire Department on Saturday. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Penrose — Santa Claus stopped in at the Penrose Volunteer Fire Department on Saturday to gather wish lists from local girls and boys, as well as toys for students at Penrose Elementary School.

The department invited the community to drop by the station, visit with Santa and bring a donation of a toy or cash to help local families in need of a little something extra to go under their Christmas trees.

Children visited with Santa on the back of a festively-decorated fire truck, a place he genuinely is familiar with. Santa — also known as Hank Hankins the other 364 days of the year — was a firefighter for 27 years in Colorado Springs. He has a soft spot for firefighters and for children.

"I'm here because little folks are my favorite people," he said.

Fire Chief Calvin Sundermann said the department typically gives money or does something special for the school during the Christmas season, but this year, he decided to do something a little bit different by hosting the event.

"I think in every community there are kiddos that are in need that we don't realize," said Jodi Remillard, event co-organizer and parent of three Penrose Elementary School students.

Sundermann said everything collected will be given to the staff at Penrose Elementary School to be distributed to families.

"I think we'd be surprised at the number of kids there are (in need)," he said.

Advertisement

While waiting for their turn to see Santa on Saturday, children were entertained by River Valley Bounce Houses, and then while sitting on Santa's lap, Remillard, operator of Bits of Heaven Photography, took professional photos. Sundermann said the department likely will host the event again next year.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com or twitter.com/cariecanterbury