Voters unhappy with the current field of presidential candidates now have a local option. Paradise High School and Chico State University graduate Carol Torkko filed her bid to run for the highest office on July 10.

Torkko, who graduated cum laude with a Bachelor’s degree in math, is running as a Republican with a focus on the country’s money problems rather than social issues.

“What I’m heading toward is seriously balancing the budget and insuring the longevity of our Social Security trust fund,” she said. “Those are the two major items that you don’t hear any of the candidates focusing on very much in their campaigns.”

She considers herself a moderate Republican and acknowledges that a tax increase will be necessary to get the country back on its feet.

She also knows the Affordable Care Act has problems and is looking to fix it.

“I’m not going to throw out the health plan,” she said. “I think it’s wrong to give something to the American people and then take it away. But a number of people complain that they’re required to have health insurance when they don’t want it. I know we can fix that.”

She also wants to better manage illegal immigration, though she’s not looking to build a wall or deport anyone unless they break the law.

She is looking to upgrade the education system and take better care of veterans, as well. She’ll admit that she doesn’t have any foreign policy experience, but notes that President Obama and many other U.S. presidents didn’t either. Still, she will surround herself with expert advisers to help guide her through those tough situations.

She will say that she prefers diplomacy over military action, though she is not afraid to use military action if necessary.

She has a short, 100-page book titled “Together We Will Save Our U.S. of A” for sale on Amazon that has further information on her plan including charts and official federal government statistics, she said.

The book can be downloaded for .99 cents, though Amazon Prime members can get it for free.

“I made it as inexpensive as I could,” she said. It is more important to spread the word, she said.

Torkko, who now lives in Redmond, Wash., knows she probably won’t win the seat, but hopes her message resonates with Ridge residents and spreads to the rest of the country.

“If nothing more, if I don’t make it to office, I hope I wake up the American people on what they really need to go after,” she said.

Those who want to support her campaign can donate to: Carol Torkko for U.S. President, 15600 NE 8th Street, Suite B1-449, Bellevue, Wash. 98008. This is a Post Office box number that was created through the Federal Elections Commission and she is not allowed to use one penny of donated money for herself. The funds are only for her campaign, though she is allowed to donate any remainder to charity and has chosen two veterans organizations to support.

Advertisement

More on Torkko can be found on her website, www.torkkoforuspresident.com, on Facebook at torkkoforuspresident, and on YouTube by searching “Torkko.”