Tax decisions may pinch Medicaid funding Fed rulings could force state to dip into general fund

Michigan could lose two tax sources this year that contribute up to $700 million in state general fund revenue used to help support the state's fast-growing $13.6 billion Medicaid program.

Over the past 20 years, Michigan has increasingly relied on a hybrid mix of taxes on mostly health care companies to help fund Medicaid, which now covers about 2.3 million people, or about 20 percent of the state's population.

But this gravy-train arrangement — providing taxes of up to 5.5 percent of premiums or medical claims that the federal government has allowed states to charge health care companies, self-insured employers and individuals to boost Medicaid budgets — may be coming to an end.

There are two primary reasons for this. First, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 6th Circuit in Cincinnati this summer could reverse a 2014 lower court ruling that upheld the state's 0.75 percent Health Insurance Claims Assessment tax on medical claims.

This HICA tax, if upheld, would raise $300 million next year, which translates through 2-1 federal matching formula into $900 million in state Medicaid funding.

The second reason is that the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services has told Michigan it will not be able to use funds generated by a 6 percent tax on HMO premiums for federal matching funds after Dec. 31.

This HMO use tax raises $600 million annually, which provides $400 million for Medicaid and $200 million for school funding. With federal matching, the $400 million earmarked for Medicaid magically multiplies into $1.2 billion in total state Medicaid funding.

The third tax Michigan imposes on health care companies is on hospitals, nursing homes and ambulance companies. The so-called Quality Assurance Assessment Program, or QAAP tax, which is not in jeopardy, generates an additional $1.1 billion. Matching funds raises this amount to $3.3 billion.

In all, Michigan total taxes on health care organizations and medical claims amount to $1.8 billion. When federally matched, this totals $5.4 billion, or 40 percent of the Medicaid program's $13.6 billion budget.

"There is a perfect storm brewing about how you finance Medicaid. We have relied on provider and use taxes" for the past several years, said Rick Murdock, executive director with the Michigan Association of Health Plans. "The use tax is a huge part of financing, but it will no longer be available as a matchable expense" after Dec. 31.

As a solution, several key state legislators in the House and Senate are working on a plan that ultimately may require Michigan to come up with additional general funds to continue serving about 2.3 million Medicaid beneficiaries at the same benefit level.

Sen. Ken Horn, R-Saginaw, has been appointed by Majority Leader Arlan Meekhof to lead a subcommittee to develop a solution to the Medicaid financing problem.

While Horn declined to comment, sources told Crain's that one working plan calls for the HMO use tax to continue but not be used directly for Medicaid. Instead, the HMO tax could be repurposed and used as general fund revenue, which could then free up other general funds to be used for federal Medicaid matching dollars.

"Horn is looking at a solution for both doomsday scenarios," said Murdock, referring to the possibility that the state could lose both the HICA and the HMO use tax. "We need a financing option for Medicaid."

California recently faced a similar situation and came up with an interesting solution that taxes health plans, but gives the insurers tax credits to hold them harmless for the $1 billion in taxes.

It is waiting to hear from the federal government whether it will be allowed to use the alternative health plan tax plan to fund its $85 billion Medicaid program that covers 13.5 million people, or more than one-third of the state's population.

Laura Appel, vice president of federal policy and advocacy with the Michigan Health and Hospital Association, said the Medicaid funding problem in Michigan is very serious.

"We have actively been a part of the case since the beginning," she said. "We rely heavily on the taxes to fund the Medicaid program."

But Appel said "there is a strong feeling we are living on borrowed time. If we were to lose millions of dollars in tax revenue to fund Medicaid, it is not real tricky what will happen next."

Appel said the state would be faced with either covering fewer people, offering fewer benefits or paying providers less.

"The state will probably have to take a tough look at all three of those things," she said, noting that paying providers less will make worse the shortage of doctors and dentists."

But not all are bemoaning the potential end of the HICA tax.

Bret Jackson, executive director of the Economic Alliance for Michigan, said the alliance has fought against the HICA tax since it began in 2011 because it increases employers' health care costs.

"Employers have paid $1 billion since Michigan began the tax," said Jackson, noting it increases costs for businesses, including fully insured companies and small groups.

He said the companies accrue no benefits by paying the tax. The largest payer, he said, is the UAW Retiree Medical Benefits Trust, which provides care for 288,000 retired autoworkers in Michigan. The trust pays $6.8 million annually to support the HICA tax.

Jackson said he is working with state officials and others to come up with a solution to replace the HICA and HMO use tax, but he cannot not divulge any options at this time. "The HICA tax needs to go away, and we want to make sure Medicaid is fully funded," he said.

But if the 6th Circuit Court overturns Michigan's HICA tax, which some say is possible yet unlikely, the state Legislature will have to come up with $300 million in replacement general funds to garner the federal matching dollars — on top of the $600 million for the HMO tax, Murdock said.

"We have to find a solution. There is a ticking time bomb, and we need a long-term solution to Medicaid," Jackson said.

Because of a U.S. Supreme Court ruling in March — Vermont's Alfred Gobeille v. Liberty Mutual Insurance Co. — Michigan's HICA case, Self-Insurance Institute of America v. Rick Snyder, was sent back to the 6th Circuit Court for reconsideration.

Mike Ferguson, president of the Self-Insurance Institute of America, which filed the lawsuit in 2012 against Michigan, said the institute is concerned that other states could follow Michigan's lead in assessing taxes on self-insured companies.

The Illinois Legislature is considering a bill similar to Michigan's to institute a 1 percent HICA-type tax on medical claims of self-funded employers. "We are fighting to beat that back," he said.

Ferguson said the institute argued in the Michigan HICA case that a provision in the federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act disallows the tax because it places undue administrative burdens on self-insured plans.

"We lost at trial court, lost the appellate level and filed an appeal with the U.S. Supreme Court," Ferguson said. "At the same time, the Vermont-Liberty Mutual case was going through the 2nd Circuit. The Supreme Court took the Liberty Mutual case and put our case aside."

What happened next was the Supreme Court ruled in favor of Liberty Mutual and ordered the 6th Circuit to reconsider the Michigan HICA case.

Does Ferguson have a suggestion on how Michigan can replace the HICA tax if overturned?

"That is up for them to figure out," he said. "If the state believes there is a positive effect to the revenue stream, they can pass a broad-based tax across the population."

Related Links