Budget Day is here

With help from Erin Mershon

BUDGET DAY COMETH — The budget officially drops at 11:00 a.m. in D.C. this morning, and HHS Secretary Sylvia Matthews Burwell holds her press briefing at 1:30 p.m. Expect a science-heavy request from the White House this year, given its ongoing cancer "moon shot" program, its emerging efforts to address the opioid crisis, and its new focus on the Zika virus.

Story Continued Below

WELCOME TO TUESDAY — AND THE FIRST PRIMARY OF 2016 — What you need to know about New Hampshire: Bernie Sanders has a 13-point average lead on Hillary Clinton, while Donald Trump has a commanding 16-point average lead over his Republican challengers. Meanwhile, Marco Rubio, John Kasich, Ted Cruz, and Jeb Bush are all polling between 10 percent and 15 percent — and they're all jockeying to be seen as viable alternatives to Trump.

Trump spent the final day making crass last-minute attacks on Cruz — and mounting populist attacks on big pharma and other industries. "Those drug companies are going to hate me so much," he said, promising to let Medicare start bidding for drugs. But as usual, no details on how.

From this morning's budget to this evening's election, it's shaping up to be a long day for PULSE. Email ddiamond@politico.com or find me on Twitter at @ddiamond to send tips — or condolences.

Midnight voting results straight from New Hampshire's Dixville Notch, Harts Location, and Millsfield:

— Cruz, Kasich, Trump tied with 9 votes apiece.

— Sanders tops Clinton with 18 votes; she has 8.

STATES TARGET PRESCRIPTION PAD IN OPIOID FIGHT — New Hampshire's put a spotlight on the rise in painkiller overdoses, which have become a major issue on the 2016 campaign trail, at the White House, and in Congress. But much of the work to stem the tide of abuse is unfolding in statehouses in places like New Hampshire, Pro's Brett Norman reports — and they're looking to continue the fight even as the nation's political attention moves past that state's primary.

FIRST IN PULSE: HOW WHITE HOUSE, WALGREENS PLAN TO TACKLE OPIOID CRISIS — The White House and Walgreens will unveil a plan this morning to set up safe medication disposal kiosks in more than 500 pharmacies across the country to address the drug diversion problem. They'll also explain plans to distribute Naloxone, a lifesaving antidote to opioid overdose, without a prescription in the Walgreens located in the 35 states and Washington, D.C., where it's legal to do so.

Scheduled to attend: White House drug czar Michael Botticelli, Walgreens executive Richard Ashworth, Senator Mark Kirk, and Rep. Robert Dold. DEA chief Chuck Rosenberg is expected to appear, too.

McDONOUGH SICK OF OPIOID ADS AT THE SUPER BOWL — Sunday's pharma commercials didn't play well with some health experts, and add one more critic to the list: White House Chief of Staff Denis McDonough."Next year, how about fewer ads that fuel opioid addiction and more on access to treatment," McDonough tweeted on Monday.

ICYMI: WHITE HOUSE WANTS $1.8 BILLION FOR ZIKA FIGHT — The White House on Monday detailed its ask for emergency funding on Zika at home and in Latin America — and the NIH's Anthony Fauci said a vaccine could be available in late 2017, faster than some had imagined. The story for.

More on the Zika fight:

— CDC has moved to Level 1 activation for Zika, its highest level for response. CDC scientists are conducting surveillance and preparing diagnostic tests; they're also investigating Zika's possible link with microcephaly and Guillain Barré syndrome (a rare neurological disorder where the body's immune system attacks the nervous system).

— Doctors are worried about Zika, according to a new poll conducted by SERMO, an online social network for physicians. About 49 percent of 2,315 surveyed doctors think that a Zika outbreak in the United States is "inevitable," regardless of measures undertaken by the government.

MEET THE WHITE HOUSE FREQUENT FLIERS — InsideGov recently broke down the most visitors to the White House since Barack Obama became president and — no surprise, given the fight to pass, implement, and defend the ACA — many health care officials are on the list. According to the Blaze, the top 25 visitors across the past seven years include …

25. Chiquita Brooks-LaSure, former deputy director at CCIIO

20. Aryana Khalid, former Chief of Staff to CMS administrator

17. Richard Kronick, head of AHRQ

16. William Schultz, general counsel for HHS

13. Kenneth Choe, former deputy general counsel for office of health reform, HHS

11. John O'Brien, director of health care and insurance at OPM

10. Caya Lewis, former counselor to the secretary for science and public health, HHS

5. Cynthia Mann, former CMS deputy administrator

4. Michael Hash, director of the office of health reform at HHS

2. Marilyn Tavenner, former CMS administrator

Where are they now?

— AHIP: Tavenner and Khalid.

— Manatt: Mann and Brooks-LaSure.

— State Department: Lewis

— Hogan Lovells: Choe.

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): More transparency is needed into generic drug pricing and reimbursement rates set by drug plan middlemen. Bipartisan legislation (H.R. 244) would enhance oversight of federal health programs and help ensure pharmacy reimbursement for generic drugs reflects market fluctuations. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **

CMS PLANS TO TEST NEW WAYS TO PAY FOR MEDICARE B DRUGS — CMS is looking to test new payment methods for Medicare Part B drugs starting in this summer, a notice to contractors obtained by POLITICO says. The agency plans to experiment with different versions of how it pays physicians and hospital outpatient departments. CMS didn't comment on the notice, which was released and then quickly withdrawn. Sarah Karlin has the story for Pros.

— Why providers might not like this move. The current ASP plus 6 percent payment methodology give providers incentives to use higher-priced drugs — and turn a higher profit.

OUT TODAY: NEW ESTIMATES ON UNINSURED — Just 9.1 percent of Americans were uninsured in the first nine months of 2015, according to estimates from the National Health Interview Survey. That's a historic low and represents a 2.4 percentage-point decrease from 2014.

— One key difference: Poverty status. The estimates pointed to a problem that's bedeviled advocates of coverage expansion. Roughly one-quarter of people surveyed who were poor or near-poor still lacked health insurance, versus just 7.7 percent of people who were not-poor.

The uninsured rate for adults aged 18-64 in …

— Medicaid expansion states: 10.0 percent

— Nonexpansion states: 17.3 percent

ALSO OUT TODAY: CEO OF ZENEFITS — Parker Conrad, the founder of the fast-growing health benefits broker, has stepped down over compliance issues. Zenefits has been valued at $4.5 billion and is one of Silicon Valley's most-buzzed-about companies.

— Why it matters: Zenefits is just the latest health care "unicorn" (so named because it's been valued at over $1 billion) to find that attempting to disrupt health care may be, well, disruptive. ZocDoc fired its CEO; Castlight Health is trading at a fraction of its IPO price. And let's not get started on Theranos …

HEALTH AFFAIRS: VACCINE SHORTAGE MAY BE DRIVEN BY LOW PRICES — The government may want to consider paying more for some vaccines, particularly older products, to help reduce shortages, a new Health Affairs study concludes. Sarah Karlin has the story for Pros.

HOW SHOULD MEDICARE HANDLE CHRONIC ILLNESS? — That's what the Senate Finance Committee wanted to know in December, after it issued a policy options paper on ways for Medicare to improve its process. On Monday, the committee released the 327 comments it received in response.

AHA TO CMS: THOSE SITE-NEUTRAL CHANGES SHOULDN'T COUNT FOR MOST OF US — The American Hospital Association is asking CMS to be pretty lenient regarding the provisions of last year's budget deal that cut Medicare payments to hospital outpatient departments, Pro's Erin Mershon reports. They want to make sure that any facility that got grandfathered in gets to keep its higher payments — even if it relocates, rebuilds, starts offering new services, or if another health system buys it. Pros can read their full letter to CMS here: http://politico.pro/1QRm35L

GOP TO OIG: PLEASE CHECK ON MEDICAID'S DEAD MONEY — House E&C Chair Fred Upton, E&C Health Subcommittee Chair Joseph Pitts, and Senate Finance Committee Chair Orrin Hatch on Monday sent a letter to the HHS Inspector General, asking whether Medicaid's still having problems verifying whether beneficiaries and providers are alive or dead. About nine months ago, a GAO report found that Medicaid was likely paying out tens of millions of dollars per year for deceased beneficiaries, doctors, and suppliers.

CHCF: HOW COVERED CALIFORNIA COULD GET BETTER — A new California HealthCare Foundation report reviews the experience of enrolling online with the state's exchange and concluded that Covered California's customer experience should be improved. One interesting finding: That the "window shopping" part of the website — touted as a way to help expedite the experience — may have confused some customers; many participants didn't realize they were only window shopping and couldn't purchase a plan.

HOW FITBIT HELPED A COUPLE REALIZE … WE'RE HAVING A BABY — Here's a fun BuzzFeed story about how a FitBit device (and some folks on the Internet) sleuthed out that a woman was a pregnant.

WHAT WE'RE READING by Jennifer Haberkorn

Eight states saw a significant drop in the number of uninsured residents according to a new CDC report out today. The national uninsured rate fell from 14.4 percent in 2013 to 9.1 percent during the first nine months of 2015, according to the AP story. http://wapo.st/1T9Q2cn

The Zika virus is quickly spreading into Colombia and Venezuela, the Wall Street Journal reports. http://on.wsj.com/1T2aElM

Emily Whelan Parento, the former executive director of the Kentucky Office of Health Policy, is calling on Kentuckians to voice their support for the ACA. http://bit.ly/1KC8IyS

Rep. Kristi Noem says that the Indian Health Service in South Dakota has "deep-rooted problems" that have been going on for decades, in the Argus Leader. http://argusne.ws/1PicfBs

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **