Republicans Take the Senate – Debates Continue on Health Care and Immigration Reform

Michael F. Schwarze, Staff Writer

The 2014 midterm Congressional elections yielded a divided government with the Republicans taking control of the Senate and increasing their seat count in the House of Representatives. Prior to the elections, the Democrats had fifty-three seats to the Republicans’ forty-five seats with two independents, who caucus with the Democrats, rounding out the Senate. But as of November 7, the Republicans have fifty-two seats to the Democrats’ forty-six seats.

Two races have yet to conclude. The votes in the Alaska Senate race are still being tallied, but Republican challenger Dan Sullivan appears to have clinched the Senate seat. Democrat incumbent Mark Begich refuses to concede, stating that they are awaiting the results of uncounted votes. The Begich campaign is hopeful that the uncounted votes, especially from rural areas, will push him over the top. The other remaining seat belongs to the state of Louisiana, where a runoff will be held on December 6.

Due to Louisiana’s open primary system, a candidate must receive over fifty percent of the total votes in the general election to avoid a runoff between the top two vote-getters. Incumbent (and Democrat) Mary Landrieu led with 42.08% of the votes followed by Republican Bill Cassidy with 40.96% of the votes. Republican Rob Maness received 13.76% of the votes, forcing a runoff between Senator Landrieu and Mr. Cassidy. With Maness now out of the race, his constituency will likely vote for Cassidy.

In the House, the Republicans currently have 243 seats compared to the Democrats’ 181 seats, with the results from eleven races still inconclusive. However, with the current numbers, the Republicans have picked up 12 seats from their rival party. Notable incumbent losers include Republican (and former House Majority Leader) Eric Cantor, who lost months earlier in the primaries against Dave Brat, an economics professor at Randolph-Macon College whose primary campaign was managed by Haverford alumnus Zachary Werrell ‘13.

Following the gubernatorial elections, the Republicans will now hold governorships in thirty-one states contrasting with the Democrats’ seventeen states. Final results from Alaska and Vermont are still being waited on, but Independent Bill Walker and Democrat Peter Shumlin are likely to win in those states, respectively.

Despite the divided government, as the Presidency still remains in Democratic hands, both sides made it clear that they are willing to work together. Soon-to-be former Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid tweeted, “I congratulate Sen. McConnell, who will become Majority Leader. Voters made clear they want us to work together. I stand ready to do that.” Speaker of the House and Republican John Boehner stated, “The American people made it clear on Election Day: They want to get things done, and they don’t want the president acting on a unilateral basis.” Senate Majority Leader-Elect Mitch McConnell has also emphasized the need for bipartisanship in Washington.

With two years before the 2016 Presidential election, the actions in Washington in the interim will play a large role in influencing voters. Two major issues that will arise over these next two years are immigration reform and the ongoing health care debate. The Obama Administration has hinted at the usage of unilateral actions to expedite the process. Republicans have responded with hostility to these suggestions with Speaker Boehner stating, “I’ve made clear to the president that if he acts unilaterally … he will poison the well and there will be no chance for immigration reform moving in this Congress. It’s as simple as that” (Associated Press). Despite President Obama’s adamant stance on the Affordable Care Act, Republicans have continued to express their desire to repeal it.