Insurers play to win, but the patients lose Those with cancer oftenare denied coverage forimportant clinical trials

George was 18 when he was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia, a blood cancer that is fatal but curable with effective therapy. He was treated and went into remission. This was 24 years ago, in 1991. Afterward, George got a job, married, and now has two lovely children, ages 8 and 10. Unfortunately, in May 2015, at age 42, his leukemia came back. He and his wife were devastated, and his children probably did not realize that the course of their lives had suddenly changed.

This type of leukemia is much harder to treat the second time around. But George is a fighter, full of hope, and he decided to receive chemotherapy, at doses more intense than what he endured 24 years ago. Sadly, the chemotherapy had no effect on the leukemia this time. Several additional regimens were tried, to no avail. Despite the bad news, George maintained a positive outlook, and wanted to beat the disease at any cost. He wanted to be there for his kids as they grow up. He didn't want to die.

When George had exhausted all standard treatment options, we recommended a clinical trial in our department at MD Anderson in the hope of controlling his leukemia. Success also would allow George to undergo a potentially curative stem cell transplant from his brother. Our expert opinion was that the clinical trial was his best option. It is approved by the Food and Drug Administration and MD Anderson's own Institutional Review Board; it involves the use of an investigational drug that is provided free of charge.

All ancillary testing (bloodwork, doctor visits, etc.) is considered "standard of care" (required for optimal care regardless of participation in the clinical trial). In a nutshell, this was a "no-brainer" and a win-win situation for everyone: The patient would benefit directly from the best treatment, and the insurance company would not have to pay for the drug. Also, the Affordable Care Act requires that insurance companies cover clinical trials.

However, George's insurance company denied coverage for the clinical trial. Unfortunately, this is a common scenario. We routinely encounter situations where insurance companies deny clinical trial coverage for patients with cancer using a variety of excuses. The only motive is to save money.

Besides flat-out denial, multiple strategies are employed to stall, frustrate and delay insurance approval of clinical trials, including inserting intermediaries between physicians and insurance companies' medical decision-makers, delays in responding to calls and requiring up to 72 hours to respond to any request (patients with leukemia may die if therapy is delayed for one to two days). Lengthy approval processes and delay tactics save insurance companies millions of dollars "lost" on patient care. These strategies are detailed in an excellent book, "Deadly Spin: An Insurance Company Insider Speaks Out on How Corporate PR Is Killing Health Care and Deceiving Americans," written by Wendell Potter, a former senior VP of an insurance company who, morally burdened by the denials that harmed patients, resigned from his job and wrote this book to expose these tactics and financial motives.

In George's case, the insurance company also cautioned that if we did enroll him, he would be liable for every cost incurred, including standard-of-care treatment. Health care is very expensive: Hospitalization, blood tests and doctor visits can easily and quickly add up to tens of thousands of dollars. Paying out-of-pocket for cancer treatment is impossible for most Americans, as was the case with George.

In addition to the ACA mandate, we strongly believe that clinical trial participation for cancer treatment should be covered by all insurance plans for the following reasons:

Most cancers are incurable with currently available treatments; therefore, participation in clinical trials is of utmost importance for the benefit of the patient, and for society at large.

The National Comprehensive Cancer Network, which represents 26 major cancer centers, advocates ".... that the best management of any cancer patient is in a clinical trial" and that "without clinical trials, cancer care can't improve." The NCCN guidelines are used by some, but should in fact routinely be used by all, insurance companies as a benchmark for what is considered standard of care.

All clinical trials undergo a rigorous review process at the institutional level and by the FDA to make sure that it is justified and in the best interest of the patients.

George is currently receiving another cycle of chemotherapy; he is hoping for a miracle. He knows that his chance of a positive response is close to nil, but the alternative is to quit treatment altogether and die. He does not want to give up. He wants to live. He hopes the insurance company will hear his plea, but he knows that time is running out. Insurance companies should chart a clear dual mission of making decent profits but also emphasizing their corporate social responsibility and moral obligation to help patients gain access to optimal care. Clinical trials are "essential medicine" for patients with cancer. Depriving them of this is a grave injustice.

Jain and Kantarjian are faculty members in the Department of Leukemia at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. Kantarjian is also a Baker Institute Scholar in Health Policy at Rice University.