Lynchburg, VA - Linda Cochendarfer has been seeing Dr. Thomas Eppes for 40 years, but in her last several appointments, she's noticed an unwelcome visitor in the room.

She's not talking about the ABC 13 camera. She's talking about her doctor's laptop.

In doctors' offices across the country, laptops like these have been popping up more and more... all because of the Affordable Care Act.

"Doctor Eppes is very personable and takes a real interest in his patients, but just the amount of detailed work now he has to do, something's got to give, " Cochendarfer said.

The federal government is now encouraging doctors to record electronic files full of data on each of their patients. Doctors get bonuses for doing this now, but Eppes says, it will be required in the future.

That means a lot more typing - and sometimes less personal attention.

In Eppes' office, data entry is a team effort.

"The more they do on the screen before I get in the room, the more time I can spend on the patient, and not have this number as I focus on the chart, " Eppes said.

Nurses like Kathy Jones say there are lists of questions she now must ask.

"You have to address each individual problem, then you have your template that you have to follow and ask the questions that follow each individual problem, " Jones said.

Those questions correspond to codes used for billing purposes - codes that can be very complicated depending on the illness.

Dr. Eppes uses diabetes as an example.

"I would've coded this Diabetes Type 2 Control in the past. Now, what you have popping up is diabetes with all these secondary complications that get increasingly specific of each little thing that you have - whether it affects your eyes, your kidneys, or your nerves, " Eppes said.

But that's not all: say you're injured while riding a horse and buggy...there's a code for that. Parachuting is in there too. Even space travel!

"Occupant of a spacecraft, occupant of a military aircraft, crew of a commercial aircraft....you could code into absurdity, " Eppes said.

In all, the number of codes has grown from 10,000 to 60,000 thanks to the ACA.

"In order to keep up with the demands of the Affordable Care Act, it takes two of us to work with each individual doctor, and still there are days where you feel like you are going to pull your hair out, " Jones said.

According to a 2012 Medscape survey, 40 percent of doctors nationwide are experiencing symptoms of burnout - mental and physical exhaustion.