The U.S. Supreme Court's ruling in Michigan v. Environmental Protection Agency may not have the wide-ranging effect of its same-sex marriage decision. It will not elicit the firestorm of commentary that followed the Court's decision to uphold the Affordable Care Act.

However, in ruling that the federal regulatory agency must consider costs when drafting its rules, the Court struck a blow on behalf of common sense.

It is true that everyone benefits from clean air and water, and environmental regulations help to protect those resources for future generations. But everything has a cost, and just as government's expense is borne by the taxpayer, those of business are ultimately passed along to the consumer.

To simply ignore that fact is an impertinent approach to public policy, and we are pleased to see the Court take the EPA to task for it.

Some of the most uncompromising environmentalists would have us value protecting the air, water and land over all else. It's an impractical approach that plays on the false premise of business and industry being determined to systematically destroy our climate if given the opportunity.

Thankfully such thinking does not triumph in government. Those in office reflect public opinion in recognizing the importance in striking a fair balance between the use of natural resources and their preservation, management and protection.

Of course, we need environmental regulation, but overly harsh or unnecessary rules can damage our economy, shutter businesses and put people out of work. A similar effect occurs when the rules aimed at protecting natural resources come at a cost far exceeding the benefit.

That's what we have with the 2012 EPA attempt to limit mercury emissions and other hazardous air pollution from coal- and oil-fired power plants.

The agency's own analysis said the intrusive new rules would cost power producers $9.6 billion annually, but only reduce pollutants that would generate health benefits of $4 million to $6 million annually. The estimation went on to claim tens of billions in accumulated health benefits, but there is no way to independently verify those projections.

In drafting those regulations, and then arguing in their defense before the Supreme Court, the EPA essentially contended that it should not have to consider costs when choosing whether to make rules under the Clean Air Act. It conceded that costs were subsequently weighed later in the process.

However, the Court concluded otherwise. With his typical aplomb, Justice Antonin Scalia, writing for the majority, argued, "It is not rational, never mind 'appropriate,' to impose billions of dollars in economic costs in return for a few dollars in health or environmental benefits."

We couldn't agree more. Costs to businesses are passed on to consumers, and everyone — from suburban homeowners to large industrial employers — would end up paying the nearly $10 billion for compliance in their monthly bills. To not consider that effect is woefully shortsighted.

The Court's ruling will not have an immediate effect on the rule itself. For instance, Dominion Virginia Power intends to press forward with its plan to close the Yorktown coal-fired power plant on an unchanged schedule.

And the Court left the EPA to decide how to conduct its evaluation of costs, which may prove to be a loophole in the ruling. When considering figures this large, it would be ideal to have independent analysis on which to rely.

But we do hope this decision will affect rule-making in the future and shape Washington's insistence on imposing burdensome regulations on American businesses.

It irresponsible to ask an industry to readily accept a crushing financial burden without ample evidence it will have a comparable benefit. Yet that is all too common in the halls of our federal government.

We hope this ruling is one step toward putting a stop to it.