WASHINGTON (CBSDC/AP) — President Barack Obama jokes that he has been unfairly targeted over the jeans he has worn.

Speaking to On Air with Ryan Seacrest Friday to talk about the Affordable Care Act, Obama poked fun over the criticism he’s received over the jeans he’s worn.

“I’ve been unfairly maligned about my jeans,” Obama said. “The truth is, generally I look very sharp in jeans. There was one episode like four years ago in which I was wearing some loose jeans mainly because I was out on the pitcher’s mound and I didn’t want to feel confined while I was pitching and I think I’ve paid my penance for that. I got whacked pretty good. Since that time, my jeans fit very well.”

Obama also discussed his Gap shopping trip in New York City this past week.

“They thought for a dad, I displayed reasonably good taste,” Obama said about the sweaters he bought for his daughters. “The bar is fairly low. But I didn’t get too adventurous. It was your basic sweaters and solid colors, didn’t get too wild.”

The president did show his serious side to Seacrest, describing to listeners why they should enroll in Obamacare before the March 31 deadline.

“If you get into an accident, or heaven forbid, have an illness or someone in your family does and you do not have health insurance, it can bankrupt you or you may not get the treatment you need,” Obama adds. “And for a relatively modest cost there are millions of people who have already signed up and have been able to get health insurance – we have 4.2 million who have signed up as of the beginning of the month and that means there are a whole lot of people out there who could still use it.”

Obama was in New York on Tuesday to raise money for the Democratic National Committee at a high-dollar fundraiser at the home of Alan Patricof, the founder of a New York venture capital fund. Patricof is a longtime Clinton friend and fundraiser for her Senate and presidential campaigns, and the event aligns the Obama and Hillary Clinton orbits as the former first lady considers a White House bid in 2016.

(TM and © Copyright 2014 CBS Radio Inc. and its relevant subsidiaries. CBS RADIO and EYE Logo TM and Copyright 2014 CBS Broadcasting Inc. Used under license. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. The Associated Press contributed to this report.)