Buy Photo Sydney Rogers (Photo: Tennessean/Sam Simpkins)Buy Photo

Sydney Rogers, the head of a Nashville education nonprofit group, is mounting a campaign to run as a Democrat to challenge Republican Tennessee House Speaker Beth Harwell for her Nashville seat.

Rogers, outgoing executive director of Alignment Nashville and longtime administrator at Nashville State Community College, told The Tennessean she will seek the Democratic nomination for House District 56, the Green Hills-area seat that Harwell has held for years.

Rogers said her career experiences “fill the bill” for what she said is much-needed new leadership at the state legislature.

“For the last years, there’s been a lot frustration with our legislature, and what’s happening in the leadership and the representation of the people who live in the district,” Rogers said. “And it seems like nothing is happening — nothing that we need substantial to happen to move the state forward.

“Representative Harwell is in a position to make a difference and she has become the protector of the status quo.”

The qualifying deadline to run for state legislative seats in August primaries is April 7. If she wins the Democratic nomination, Rogers would face Harwell in November.

The 65-year-old Rogers, who spent 30 years in different roles at Nashville State Community College, in January announced plans to retire from the nonprofit Alignment Nashville at the end of June. The mission of the group, where Rogers was founding executive director, is to connect businesses and other community groups with public schools.

In recent weeks, Harwell has become the focus of a statewide billboard campaign funded by Martha Ingram and other health care activists to urge Harwell to bring Insure Tennessee to a floor vote.

Harwell has countered by arguing she can’t unilaterally force a vote on Insure Tennessee, the health care program backed by Gov. Bill Haslam to extend health care coverage to low-income Tennesseans through federal funds made available by the Affordable Care Act.

Expect Rogers — who lives just three blocks from Harwell — to bring up the issue of Insure Tennessee frequently in her uphill election against Harwell.

“It’s incomprehensible to me how we cannot even have this discussion on the House floor,” Rogers said. “That is an issue that I will absolutely address. My two big issues are Insure Tennessee and public education.”

District 56, which includes Forest Hills, Oak Hill, Belle Meade and Green Hills, features some of Davidson County’s wealthiest and most conservative neighborhoods.

Harwell, first elected in 1988 and on the short-list of potential 2018 Republican Tennessee gubernatorial candidates, has faced Democrat opponents twice in recent years and won both races easily.

In 2014, Harwell defeated Democrat Chris Moth in the House District 56 race by a margin of 63 percent to 37 percent. In 2010, Harwell beat Democrat Matt Kenigson by an even larger margin of 67 percent to 32 percent.

Rogers responded to those results by saying “times are changing and people are increasingly frustrated — even and especially in this district.”

Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236 and on Twitter @joeygarrison.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RTbCPY