John Boehner has a numbers problem. And while it's not a big enough one for him to face losing the speaker's gavel, he's completely beholden to the two minority groups that occupy either end of the political spectrum in the House.

The lower chamber is no longer operating on a two-party system, with the speaker and his allies controlling the majority. Instead, conservatives in the House are essentially behaving like a separate party altogether, one that is unwilling to compromise and is happy to embarrass party leadership.

On any given issue so far this term, Boehner has found himself abandoned by anywhere from a few dozen Republicans to the 167 of his 247-member caucus who refused to support a clean funding bill for the Department of Homeland Security on Tuesday.

Democrats, with 188 members, are inclined to sit back and watch the Ohio Republican flounder, unless he hands them something they want in return.

And flounder he has, with both minority parties emboldened by the new Republican majority in the Senate. They now behave as if they have nothing left to lose, sitting on their hands and waiting for Boehner to come begging for their help and their votes.

That's left Boehner forced to seek support from one group or the other as he looks to build a coalition with moderate Republicans. With increasing frequency, he has chosen to side with the moderates and rely on Democrats to get legislation passed.

“Every major controversial bill that gets passed has to to pass with that coalition intact,” says Tripp Baird, a conservative strategist and former director of government affairs at Heritage Action for America. He spent several years as an aide to former Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss.

[READ: House Agrees to Fully Fund DHS]

“Harry Reid, Nancy Pelosi and the White House will get everything they want” on all the big fights going forward, Baird says, since Boehner and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., have dropped any pretense of taking a conservative stand. “You can look down the road on all these fights coming up, and you don’t see any leverage that a Republican-slash-conservative coalition can get now.”

While the DHS fight over the past several weeks has been the most public indication that Boehner has lost control of his caucus, the signs have been there from the very beginning of the session, when 25 Republicans voted against him for speaker, the most opposition a sitting speaker has faced in decades.

Following the contentious vote, Boehner issued stern warnings to defiant members, kicking lawmakers off the House Rules Committee and threatening to remove others from committee positions if they continued to cause him headaches.

Illustration by Ethan Rosenberg for USN&WR/Photo by Mark Wilson for Getty Images

Several weeks into the session, however, the leadership was forced to cancel a vote on a border security bill, knowing immigration hard-liners opposed it. And last month, that same group of conservatives delivered a surprise defeat to the majority vote-whipping team, when 52 Republicans voted to sink a three-week stopgap measure to keep the lights on at DHS.

The GOP leadership has so far been largely reluctant to violate the so-called Hastert Rule, which demands any measure have the backing of a majority of majority-party members to pass. But with House conservatives and Senate Democrats staking out uncompromising opposite positions, it’s an option Boehner will likely have to turn to more and more.

Boehner has seemingly been at the mercy of conservatives since the 2010 tea party wave ushered in a Republican majority and handed him the speakership, most notably when he oversaw a shutdown of the federal government in October 2013 – a closure largely sparked by tea party hero Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, who has interfered in so many of the House’s internal battles that some began referring to him as “Speaker Ted Cruz.”

Boehner eventually allowed the House to vote to raise the debt ceiling, once the Senate refused to pass a version of the bill that would defund the Affordable Care Act, with just 87 Republicans joining all Democrats.

Part of Boehner’s problem is that he gave up the ability to use earmarks to convince reluctant lawmakers to hew to the party line when he became speaker in 2011. In doing so, he ceded a critical means of leverage, though it was a choice a former aide says the speaker has never regretted – even when it leads to “occasional indignities” and taking heat for choosing the least-bad item “from a menu of lousy options.”

“The House has the power of the purse, but that power is only in effect when the majority can operate in a unified fashion,” says David Schnittger, who left his role as Boehner’s deputy chief of staff in January.

“The House went on record with its position, as it should do – that’s it’s institutional prerogative,” he says. But it is now “coming to terms with the limitations [of] being in the majority in the Senate.”

[ALSO: Tea Party Won't Oust Boehner Over DHS Funding]

“Those limitations played themselves out vividly over the past few weeks,” he says.

Boehner has laughed off suggestions that he could lose his leadership spot, but rumblings from members of the newly formed Freedom Caucus have kept speculation alive that a revolt is brewing after what they see as a series of Boehner betrayals.

“I’m still optimistic that leadership can herd the cats,” said Rep. Andy Harris, R-Md., according to The Washington Times. “But if they can’t, then I think there will be consideration about whether a new leadership team needs to be put in place.”

In practice, overthrowing a sitting speaker would involve a resolution passed by the entire House – not just Republicans. Not only have Democrats said they would prefer to stick to the devil they know and back Boehner, but even those conservatives musing publicly about unseating the leadership admit privately they don’t have a replacement with enough support in the caucus to win.

And Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, chairman of the Freedom Caucus, outright dismissed talk of an overthrow on CNN’s “State of the Union” on Sunday.

“No, of course not. That’s not the point,” Jordan said. “The point is to do what we told the voters we were going to do, and to do it in a way that's consistent with the United States Constitution.”

But a series of upcoming deadlines, raising the specter of yet another fiscal cliff this fall, will provide a uniquely difficult challenge for beleaguered party leaders. Between now and then, the Highway Trust Fund, the Export-Import Bank, aspects of the Patriot Act, funding for the Federal Aviation Association, and a key provision that will slash Medicare payments to physicians will all need to be renewed or fixed. And Congress again will be faced with the challenge of passing a new appropriations bill for the entire federal government.

McConnell, who made a show of voting four separate times on a House version of the DHS funding bill he knew would not pass, has otherwise demonstrated little patience for the kind of brinkmanship that has become the norm on the other side of the Capitol.