Ricki Lindsay

Correspondent

On the front line of dispensing medical advice and information, physicians face the challenge of practicing what they “preach” to their patients about staying healthy.

While their approaches vary, all agree that regular physical exercise is absolutely essential to good physical and mental health. For some, it is a way to stay connected to nature; for others it is almost spiritual. Competition drives some, while others find simple joy in doing something fun.

Health+Fitness interviewed several local doctors in various specialties to learn how they stay strong and healthy despite 12-hour days — and, in many cases, active family lives.

Adam Bright, outdoorsman

An orthopedic surgeon with a subspecialty in hip and knee replacements, Adam Bright is a devotee of outdoor exercise.

“I think that exercising outdoors is better for your health, in that you are out in the fresh air and natural light and can interact with neighbors and other folks. If you coordinate with friends to meet up and exercise, that’s even better,” he says. “I tell my patients that exercise is more important than any two risk factors when it comes to how long you are going to live. Fit and fat is better than being sedentary. A sedentary lifestyle is a huge risk factor for health.”

The surgeon notes that not all exercise is the same.

“Weight-bearing, upright exercise that works the large muscles of the legs is the most important — especially for women, who are at higher risk of osteoporosis,” he explains. “Walking on a treadmill is better than a stationary bicycle. That said, though, if for some reason you can’t walk any distance, a bicycle is better than nothing.”

Bright exercises six to seven days a week, mostly running in the very early morning. Time with family is very important to the surgeon, father of four kids. Vacations are active endeavors, always structured around activities, from mountain biking in the Grand Tetons and Yellowstone national parks to ice climbing this summer in Iceland.

Passionate about combining exercise with nature, the 50-year-old participates in serious competitions around the country. He has completed three 100-mile runs, including the grueling Leadville Trail Race, at altitudes up to 12,970 feet. He has also competed in several Ironman competitions. This May, he plans to run the Grand Canyon, a 50-mile event where runners traverse the vertical canyon from the south to the north rims, twice.

Bright put his undergraduate degree in engineering to good use, building a 23-foot climbing wall on the side of his home. He often invites friends to participate in his running and wall climbing activities.

“It’s good for you to do things with your friends. A little peer pressure helps,” he adds. “We are really blessed here in Sarasota to have so many ways to combine exercise with nature. You haven’t lived until you have run through the tall grass of the Celery Fields and heard the lions from the Big Cat Habitat roaring in the distance, or heard the coyotes howling on the Myakka Prairie, or run the beach during a full moon. If you are at home in bed or on the sofa watching TV, you miss all of that.”

Chippy Nalluri, meditator

For cardiologist Chippy Nalluri, the route to physical fitness is an inside-out path; one that starts and ends with meditation and spiritual reflection.

A single mother of two with a small frame, Dr. Nalluri was diagnosed with osteoporosis in her early 40s after multiple broken bones, a herniated disk in her back and other injuries. A week at an Ayurveda Center over a Christmas holiday convinced her that her mental and spiritual well-being were inexorably connected to her physical health, and had to take precedence.

“I realized that I needed to go beyond exercise and diet. The life lesson was that I needed to be absolutely and completely whole as a person to be emotionally and physically healthy and available to my patients and my children,” she recalls of her “inward journey” week.

Now she meditates twice a day and incorporates yoga and strength training into her physical fitness regimen along with a vegetarian diet.

“There is substantial and credible scientific data about the power of meditation,” she notes. “Physically, I now have so much more energy and joy. The meditation has been transformative and along with yoga, it has helped put me back together physically, mentally and spiritually.”

For cardiovascular protection and fitness, Dr. Nalluri takes a moderate approach for herself and her patients. She advocates 30 minutes a day, five days a week of moderately intense exercise combined with two days a week of strength training.

“Heart disease is silent and progressive,” she explains. “Two thirds of women who die from sudden cardiac death had no idea they had cardiac issues. This fact underscores the need for prevention. We need to be protective of our hearts, rather than reactive, and that often calls for a lifestyle change. This has to be a paradigm shift in health care overall.”

Mauricio Concha, pleasure seeker

As a child and young man, neurologist Mauricio Concha was always active, swimming and participating in the national pastime of mountain biking in his home country, Colombia. Later, he became a competitive water skier, performing with ski shows throughout Colombia.

Though no longer a competition skier, Concha just doesn’t feel like himself if he isn’t active. Today, however, his motivation is for the pure joy that he gets from a physical undertaking. Recently turning 50 gives him an additional incentive. Now, he bikes “at a good athletic” level for fitness as well as enjoyment. Recently, he completed a 200-mile cross-Florida bicycle race with two neurology colleagues.

“I am attached to sports that bring me pleasure,” he says. “I find gyms boring and I would rather be outside. The connection to nature is very important to me, too. What motivates me is the joy of recreation, not competition. I enjoy and accomplish what I can.”

The father of three also has made a point of mixing his workouts with his children’s activities, such as horseback riding with his daughter, Valentina. Sparring with his wife, Lilliana, a Taekwondo instructor, also keeps him on his toes.

“In Colombia, I grew up with a very balanced diet and everything in moderation. That’s very much a part of our culture,” he adds. “It’s not longevity for the sake of longevity, but for quality of aging. That is my motivation for staying fit.”

As director of the stroke program at Sarasota Memorial Hospital, Concha is adamant about prescribing aerobic exercise and increasingly, strength training, which he declares is not just for the young. Pilates and yoga to build core body strength and balance are also important.

“Exercise is the best investment you can make in your health for the next 20 to 30 years,” he said. “It’s far cheaper than the cost of a stroke or congestive heart failure.”

Karen Hamad, Treadclimber

Life can’t get much busier for internist and pediatrician Karen Hamad, the mother of two teenagers, wife of local gynecologist Jon Yenari and chief of staff at Sarasota Memorial Hospital. But the 46-year-old says she has learned that she just feels better when she has done something physical. She literally burned out her first Treadclimber, a crossover elliptical treadmill machine, and is now on her second.

She religiously schedules an hour a day on the machine six days a week, and works in several lunchtime strength and balance sessions with a personal trainer.

“Knowing I have this exercise as part of my life helps me maintain my sanity and health,” she said. “For fun, I get on my bicycle and bike Siesta key or play tennis with my husband.”

Hamad is a big proponent of the Weight Watchers program, feeling it teaches people how to eat for life and energy, not just weight loss.

“I have a sweet tooth,” she admits. “But it’s all about choices. I exercise so that I can have cookies and ice cream on occasion.”

The physician’s prescription for health and happiness is simple, she says: “Find some kind of activity that is exercise-based that you enjoy doing and make it a part of your daily routine — or for at least three days a week. Be a role model for your kids, because these habits are best instilled and started when they are young. Pay attention to what you eat, because it matters. Follow a Mediterranean-based diet with limited sugars and simple carbs. And, finally, make sure to do something nice for yourself.”

Jonathan Hoffberger, calorie counter

Cardiothoracic surgeon Johnathan Hoffberger, who routinely fixes the results of poor lifestyle choices, knows that a healthy diet and regular exercise are the key to a good life. While he makes a point of hitting the gym two to five days a week, often with his wife, his mantra is one of “diet, diet and diet.”

“It’s simple math,” he says. “It is intake versus output. You can walk a mile and burn 100 calories and undo that by adding 300 calories of the wrong salad dressing. Diet is 90 percent of the equation. Everyone wants the magic bullet for good health, but it takes work and discipline,” he stressed.

The father of four said his family is moving to a more vegetable-based diet.

“That is where the data is showing the most benefit to cardiovascular health,” he noted. “Load up on the vegetables, not the carbs or the sugars, and make sure any meats are lean and dairy is low-fat.”

Dr. Hoffberger’s rules for optimal health includes doing something enjoyable to relieve daily stress. For him, that can be time spent playing his guitar or out on his boat with his family.

“Being on the boat, either water skiing or fishing or just enjoying the bay, is like ‘medication’ for me,” he says. “It’s so beautiful and a great stress reliever.”