LITTLE ROCK — Arkansas is at a “watershed moment,” Gov. Asa Hutchinson told a joint session of the state House and Senate on Wednesday, the opening day of a special legislative session on the future of the state’s Medicaid expansion program.

“This is one of those moments in history where your decision will impact our communities, our economy, our balanced budget, our health-care system and most importantly, the lives of thousands of real people that reside in each of your districts,” Hutchinson said in a speech in the House Chamber.

The governor called the session to ask lawmakers to consider his proposal to replace the program known as the private option with a similar program called Arkansas Works.

Under the governor’s plan, the state would continue to accept federal Medicaid money to pay for private health insurance for low-income Arkansans but would add features, including referral to voluntary work training for unemployed recipients, premiums of up to 2 percent of their income for recipients earning over 100 percent of the federal poverty level, and a requirement that recipients obtain employer-sponsored insurance if a cost-effective, small-group plan is available.

“Some say these reforms go too far, and some say I did not push hard enough for more reform. With the criticism from both sides, it’s some indication that we might have it about right,” Hutchinson said.

Hutchinson also read an excerpt from a letter he received from U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell that he said is an indication the federal government will look favorably on requests for waivers to allow the changes proposed under Arkansas Works.

Later Wednesday, the House and Senate committees on insurance and commerce endorsed, in voice votes, matching House and Senate bills containing the governor’s proposal. The bills go to the House and Senate floors Thursday.

Sen. Jim Hendren, R-Gravette, the sponsor of Senate Bill 1, told the Senate committee that ending Medicaid expansion would create a $101 million hole in the state budget for the coming fiscal year and would have a negative impact on the state budget of $757 million over the next five years.

Dr. Dan Rahn, chancellor of the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, told the committee that ending Medicaid expansion would force UAMS to cut services and would jeopardize 19 Arkansas hospitals that are “on the endangered list.”

David Ray, Arkansas director of Americans for Prosperity, urged the panel to reject the bill, saying the federal Affordable Care Act is driving up the national debt.

Sen. Terry Rice, R-Waldron, cast the only audible vote against the bill. He also expressed concern about the national debt.

“We are enslaving future generations of our children and grandchildren to debt and we are irresponsibly putting it on their credit card,” Rice said.

Rep. Charlie Collins, R-Fayetteville, the sponsor of House Bill 1, told the House committee that Arkansas would be saying no to $5 billion in federal funds over the next five years if it were to end Medicaid expansion.

“I’m all for killing Arkansas Works and putting that $5 billion into a bucket behind the White House on one condition: that we don’t only hurt our people,” he said. “California and New York aren’t going to do it. Arkansas is only 1 percent of the population, and we aren’t the rich 1 percent. I’m not going to do it while the fat cats in California and New York are laughing at us and spending money like drunken sailors.”

Rep. Robin Lundstrum, R-Springdale, cast one of at least two votes heard against the House bill.

She said later that Medicaid expansion is unsustainable and claimed that eventually more than a third of the state’s population will be on Medicaid.

“How are we going to pay for that?” she said.

The private option, Arkansas’ alternative to the expansion of Medicaid rolls envisioned in the Affordable Care Act, has divided Republican legislators since it launched in 2013. Arkansas Works is expected to obtain the simple-majority vote in each chamber needed for approval, but in the fiscal session that begins April 13, it will need a harder-to-achieve three-fourths vote in each chamber to be funded.

Hutchinson had planned to asked lawmakers to consider two proposals during the special session, but he dropped the second proposal — to reduce costs by allowing private companies to manage parts of the traditional Medicaid program for high-cost populations — from the session’s agenda after legislative leaders said Monday there was no consensus on the issue.

Some legislators who oppose managed care have floated a competing proposal under which the state would contract with administrative services organizations to cut costs but would continue to reimburse health-care providers directly. Legislative leaders said there would not be enough time in the special session to give the issue a full debate.

House Speaker Jeremy Gillam, R-Judsonia, said Wednesday it would be more appropriate to debate managed care and alternatives “after the fiscal session, in another special session.”

“Everybody is on board with looking for the savings, but we’re going to allow them the time to comprehend, and to get comfortable with, the two concepts that have been put forth so far on reaching those savings,” he said.

The special session is expected to conclude Friday. The governor has said he will call another special session shortly after the fiscal session adjourns, primarily to consider a plan to boost highway funding.

Dale Ellis contributed to this report.