Kristine Crane (Photo: Special to the News Journal)

It was often said during World War II that whoever flew the highest was going to win the war. Flying high had obvious advantages, allowing for evasion of enemies as well as quicker travel time through thin air at high altitudes.

But it also posed serious risks — perhaps not as much to the planes as to the people inside them.

Dr. Jay Dean, a physiology professor at the University of South Florida and the director of its Hyperbaric Biomedical Research Laboratory, said there were two enemies during the war: the enemy with gunfire, and the environment.

“Winning the air war was dependent on getting enough oxygen and not freezing,” Dean said. “You don’t see this in the movies. Hollywood doesn’t always work this in.”

“Flying back then was a rough deal,” Dean added. Most planes were not pressurized, so as they climbed the skies, the oxygen level dropped, and with oxygen masks only in their infancy, airmen (and women) were at risk of passing out and even death. Decompression sickness, similar to divers’ bends, was also common.

Unpressurized planes also meant flying unprotected through subzero temperatures (as low as minus 60 degrees Fahrenheit) for several hours at a time. “Physiologists helped them at least survive and tolerate the conditions better,” Dean said.

Dean will speak about the evolution of aviation medicine during WWII at a lecture Thursday titled “Your Body in Flight During World War II: How American Physiologists Learned to Protect the Health of Airmen in the World’s First High Altitude, High Speed Air War,” at the Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition Evening Lecture Series in Pensacola.

At the start of the war, U.S. aviation medicine was behind Germany’s, but by the end of the war, researchers had contributed to the development of game-changing technologies like the oxygen mask and the G-suit, a puffy pantsuit that inflates with air to prevent blood pooling that occurs when planes accelerate and gravitational pull increases.

“As (the plane) is pulling a sharp turn, your heart has a hard time pumping blood to your head and eyes, so you could lose vision and consciousness in a matter of seconds,” Dean said. G-suits prevented blood pooling, keeping airmen clear-headed enough to wage war.

“When we started using G-suits, we doubled our kill numbers,” Dean said. “We could outperform our enemy in a dog fight and turn sharper than they could.”

Crane is IHMC communications manager.

Want to go?

What: IHMC’s Evening Lecture Series.

When: 6 p.m. Thursday (reception at 5:30).

Where: IHMC, 40 S. Alcaniz St., downtown Pensacola

Note: Seating is limited; to reserve, call 202-4462, or RSVP to http://ihmc-20151203.eventbrite.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1HvsHOu