Advocates push for direct primary care model as solution to rising health care costs

Family physician John Blanchard, M.D., has been pushing the direct primary care service concept of concierge medicine for more than 14 years through his Premier Private Physicians PLC office in Troy.



As a private physician who doesn't bill health insurers for services, Blanchard sells subscriptions for primary care services to patients, mostly executives, at about $200 per month. The subscriptions cover a catalog of primary care services, limited diagnostic tests and extended time with a medical doctor.



His patients usually carry health insurance, so if a referral to a specialist or diagnostic test is required, Blanchard helps his patient find the right provider.



But Blanchard said if health insurers offer high-deductible health insurance plans that cover the concierge services or if a self-insured employer offered the service in its health benefits plan, he and other physicians could lower their monthly fees to about $100.



Some practices — estimated at up to 75 in Michigan — already offer lower monthly fees, including Jeff Huotari, M.D., at BlueSky Health in Howell. Huotari charges $30 a month for comprehensive primary care services and some procedures.

Last year, state Sen. Patrick Colbeck, R-Canton Township, heard about Blanchard and Huotari and the concept of direct primary care, and lightblubs went on for the former health care IT executive who said he ran for office in 2010 because of his opposition to the Affordable Care Act.



"This is the free-market solution and the replacement for Obamacare," said Colbeck, who also voted against Healthy Michigan Medicaid, which narrowly was approved in 2013 and covers more than 550,000 mostly formerly uninsured Michiganders.



Late last fall, Colbeck won passage of Senate Bill 1033 — and in January, Gov. Rick Snyder signed it — that gives the green light for doctors to offer direct primary care without fear of state insurance department regulation. Some states have accused doctors who sell monthly primary care plans as selling insurance without a license.



"Passing the bill was the first step," he said. "I want patients, doctors and insurance companies to know about (direct primary care) and get on board."



Blanchard, who also views direct primary care as an alternative to Obamacare and traditional health insurance, said direct primary care has the promise to lower health care costs.



For example, a recent study by Seattle-based Qliance Medical Management LLC found a 20 percent reduction in health care costs by employer-sponsored health plans that also adopted direct physician care.



Hundreds of physicians who practice direct primary care are in some 24 states, according to the American Academy of Private Physicians.



But for Colbeck and Blanchard's dream of direct primary care to become mainstream in Michigan — and meet the insurance mandate in the Affordable Care Act — at least one of two things are needed.



One, either a health insurance company needs to offer a high-deductible, wraparound policy with a direct primary care provision. Or two, self-insured employers in Michigan offer direct primary care in their health benefits package and also offer the insurance coverage.



Under Section 1301 of Obamacare, direct primary care is allowed to compete on health insurance exchanges when combined with a qualified high-deductible plan and a "qualified direct primary care medical home plan."





Jack Billi, M.D., chair of quality, efficiency and economics with the Michigan State Medical Society, said the medical society doesn't have a position on direct primary care other than it has determined it is not insurance.



"We have discussed it. I am personally skeptical," said Billi, who also is associate vice president for medical affairs at the University of Michigan Health System in Ann Arbor.



"If many of our primary care physicians switch to concierge medicine or direct primary care, this will cause a huge worsening of the shortfall of primary care physicians that currently exist," Billi said.



For example, Billi said, the average internist treats up to 3,000 patients a year. But concierge doctors advertise themselves as treating 300 to 500 per year, he said.



"Who is going to care for the other 90 percent of patients?" said Billi, noting he knows of physicians in Florida who have switched to concierge medicine and have notified dozens of their patients they must pay the extra fee or find a new primary care doctor.



"While this solves a lot of problems for the individual doctor (low reimbursement for valuable face-to-face extended contact and care coordination) it is not a scalable model for the nation given the current shortage of primary care."



Tom Valenti, founding partner of Detroit-based Forthright Health Management LLC, a consulting firm that advocates for direct primary care, said telehealth services and other practice efficiencies could increase the number of patients handled by direct primary care practitioners.



Over time, Valenti said, the number of physicians choosing primary care could increase because they might like the direct primary care practice style.



"As new technology comes on board, (direct primary care) physicians could take care of 5,000 patients each and manage a team of dietitians, nutritionists" and advanced practice nurses, Valenti said.



But Billi said improving electronic health records, office efficiencies and reimbursement can alleviate more problems for primary care physicians.



"I am not opposed to trying things, studying them and modifying them," he said. "The best strategy going forward is population health and the efforts we are making to coordinate care."



Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325, jgreene@crain.com. Twitter: @jaybgreene

Related Links