After almost 30 years, the IRS is finally getting around to changing some of its procedures for cases appealed to the US Tax Court.

In Notice 2015-72, which was issued by the IRS on Oct. 15, the nation’s tax-collection agency has proposed revisions that would affect the administrative process for cases docketed in the Tax Court. The proposed guidance would update IRS practices established under Revenue Procedure 87-24, issued way back in 1987.

It’s a different world for the IRS now than it was in the late 1980s. Despite being hamstrung by budget cuts, the agency faces additional responsibilities, such as imposing penalties under the Affordable Care Act, as well as other administrative matters. IRS Commissioner John Koskinen is officially on record saying the IRS is charged with “doing more with less.” The proposed changes are designed to help lighten the workload.

The IRS acknowledges that the modifications in Notice 2015-72, which are often technical in nature, are hardly earth-shattering. The IRS’s main goal is to use these updated procedures to improve the flow of docketed cases between its Office of Appeals and its Office of Chief Counsel. In addition, the proposed guidance updates procedures pertaining to tax-exempt organizations.

The proposals won’t materially affect the current practice of referring docketed cases to Appeals for settlement – the preferred approach in the vast majority of cases. This is expected to continue on a nationwide basis. However, the IRS realizes that more time may be needed in certain cases before they are referred to settlement and spells out some of those instances.

The proposals also encourage better coordination between the Chief Counsel’s office and the Appeals office. For example, Appeals may exclude the Chief Counsel’s office from settlement conferences with the taxpayer in docketed cases if it determines this will slow down the process. Furthermore, the IRS addresses situations where a taxpayer raises a new issue in a case docketed in Appeals.

Trending {{item['sft-title']}}

Finally, Notice 2015-72 describes procedures for requesting assistance from the Chief Counsel while the docketed case is in Appeals, as well as implementing custody transfers of administrative files for docketed cases referred to Appeals.

Of course, the appeals process is ongoing, and a number of cases that may be affected are already docketed in the Tax Court. Thus, the IRS is seeking a prompt resolution of the proposed procedures. It is giving the public until Nov. 16 to respond with comments.