Lisa Dubay, Matthew Buettgens, and Genevieve Kenney

March 17, 2015

Over the last three decades, the US has taken important steps to reduce financial barriers to health insurance coverage for low and moderate-income children. These steps began with the Medicaid expansions for children in the 1980s and early 1990s, which were followed by the creation of the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) in 1997. Most recently, Congress reauthorized CHIP in 2009 and enacted the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in 2010.

This commitment to children has resulted in substantial increases in coverage. The uninsured rate among children decreased from 15.0 percent in 1989 to 6.6 percent in 2012 (Exhibit 1).

A New Uncertainty

Not since CHIP reauthorization was being debated in 2007 has there been such uncertainty around children’s coverage and risk of coverage losses. The fate of the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) and children’s eligibility for Medicaid and CHIP coverage rests with Congress. The availability of tax credits for marketplace coverage under the Affordable Care Act in the 34 states with federally facilitated marketplaces is in the hands of the Supreme Court in King v. Burwell. In two new reports, we estimate how decisions on these issues would affect children’s coverage in 2016. The first report focuses on the future of CHIP, while the second report also estimates the impact of King v. Burwell and the maintenance of Medicaid eligibility for children.

Separate CHIP Programs

In the absence of new federal funds 3.7 million children would lose coverage in separate CHIP programs in 2016. About half of these children could obtain marketplace tax-credits. The other half have what are considered “affordable” offers of employer-sponsored coverage under the current interpretation of the firewall that determines access to tax credits — i.e., the cost of employee-only coverage is less than 9.5 percent of family income. However, many of these families face costs far above 9.5 percent of family income to cover their children, a problem sometimes called the “family affordability glitch.”

In fact, on average, families with children currently enrolled in separate CHIP programs in this circumstance would face $3,751 in additional costs to cover their children in employer-sponsored coverage, which would constitute approximately 9.1 percent of their income. If we also consider the premiums these families were already paying to cover parents, they would need to pay 12.2 percent of their income on average to obtain employer-sponsored health insurance coverage for their family. Particularly hard hit would be the families in this circumstance in the upper quartile of the distribution, who would face $8,814 in additional costs just to cover their children in employer-sponsored coverage. The CHIP program currently protects these families from facing these costs.

If funding for CHIP is not extended and coverage for separate CHIP programs is eliminated, we estimate that 1.1 million of the 3.7 million children with separate CHIP coverage would become uninsured. About 1.2 million would obtain coverage in the marketplace, although families would face face higher out-of-pocket costs and less comprehensive benefits when they use services in marketplace plans than they would under CHIP. The remaining 1.3 million children would obtain employer-sponsored coverage, at an average cost of 6.7 percent of family income, for a total of 11.4 percent of income to cover the family.

Medicaid Expansion Programs

Under current law, children enrolled in Medicaid expansion CHIP programs are protected from losing their coverage by the maintenance of eligibility (MOE) requirements of the ACA. Even if no additional federal funds are allocated to CHIP, states are required to maintain coverage for these children and to cover a higher share of the costs. However, a recent legislative proposal to extend funding for CHIP would relieve states of the responsibility to maintain Medicaid and CHIP eligibility above 138 percent of the federal poverty level (and potentially for children ages 6 to 18 with incomes between 100 and 138 percent FPL — the so-called stair step children). If all states were to limit Medicaid and CHIP eligibility for children to 138 percent of the FPL, we estimate that an additional 2.0 million children would become uninsured.

King v. Burwell

The coverage circumstances would be even more dire for children if the Supreme Court were to rule for the plaintiff in King v. Burwell. If marketplace tax credits were only available in states with state-based marketplaces, an additional 700,000 children would become uninsured. The combination of this change and an elimination of separate CHIP coverage would result in 1.9 million more children being uninsured, a 65 percent increase.

Finally, if marketplace tax credits were only available in state-based marketplaces and states reduced Medicaid and CHIP eligibility for children to 138 of FPL, 3.3 million additional children would be uninsured. This would lead to a reversal of decades of progress in increasing coverage among children.

Mapping The Consequences For Children

The impacts of these policies would not be felt evenly across states or income groups. The accompanying interactive tool allows users to see how the outcome in King v. Burwell and changes in CHIP and Medicaid eligibility for children would affect the number of uninsured children at different incomes and in different types of states, relative to the situations if 1) the ACA were not implemented and 2) the ACA were implemented fully.

Prior research findings indicate that Medicaid and CHIP provide important short-run benefits to children and their families by reducing unmet health needs and financial burdens and increasing receipt of preventive care. A growing body of research exploring longer-term consequences of expansions of Medicaid and CHIP coverage in childhood suggests that enrollment in these programs may be associated with improvements in adult health, higher tax revenues, and higher educational attainment. As CHIP and Medicaid eligibility is debated at the federal level, it will be important to keep these short- and long-term benefits in mind in addition to considering the cost implications of alternative proposals.