Conservative groups are targeting moderate Republicans in the upcoming primary by tying them on campaign signs to President Obama. This anti-Bob Robson sign is in Tempe on the corner of Warner and Rural roads, on Thursday, Aug. 7, 2014. (Photo: Charlie Leight/The Republic) Story Highlights State Rep. Bob Robson, R-Chandler is cited with two misdemeanor charges for tampering with political signs.

Robson denies the charges and his attorney countercharges opponents with the same tampering allegations.

The skirmish is a sign of the anger that remains from the Legislature's 2013 vote to expand Medicaid.

State Rep. Bob Robson, R-Chandler, has been cited with two misdemeanor charges of tampering with political signs.

Through his attorney, Robson rejects the allegations and accuses the man behind the complaint of tampering with signs and, possibly, with illegally coordinating campaign activities.

The sign scrum is yet another indication of the high tensions swirling around the Legislature's vote in 2013 to expand the state's Medicaid program to cover 300,000 low-income Arizonans. Robson, along with 13 other Republicans, joined Democrats to approve the expansion proposed by Gov. Jan Brewer. Opponents vowed to seek retribution at the polls, working to defeat what they called "legis-traitors."

As part of that opposition, the Arizona Taxpayer Action Committee installed signs stating "voted for Obamacare" with an arrow pointing at the campaign sign of certain Republicans. These signs, which the committee calls the "arrow of truth," were reportedly removed by Robson Monday as Maricopa County Sheriff's Office deputies witnessed the act.

Allhands: The dumb game of campaign-sign stealing

However, the citation notes the sign tampering occurred on Robson's own property, and state law exempts property owners from the tampering charges if they alter signs put on their own property without the owner's permission.

Robson's attorney, Tom Ryan, said his client is not guilty.

"He has not touched a sign," Ryan said of the veteran lawmaker. "He has not tampered with a sign."

The citation is for tampering with a candidate's sign, but Ryan said the "arrow" signs Robson is alleged to have removed do not meet the state law's requirement of being a candidate sign. There is no candidate named "arrow," he argued.

Ryan said Michael Richardson, a Republican political activist in Robson's legislative district, was captured on surveillance cameras tampering with signs that were supportive of Robson and his running mate, Jeff Dial.

Ryan said he intends to file a complaint with Chandler police, as well as the Arizona Secretary of State's Office, charging Richardson with sign tampering.

"I've got physical evidence of it," he said. "I'm talking video and stills."

Ryan also suspects Richardson has been illegally coordinating campaign activity with Tom Morrissey, who is running against Dial for the GOP nomination for the Senate seat in Legislative District 18.

The tampering allegation is reminiscent of a 2001 incident in which then-state Sen. Harry Mitchell was charged with stealing a rival's signs. Mitchell successfully argued the signs were not campaign signs and therefore were not subject to the state penalties.

Reach the reporter at maryjo.pitzl@arizonarepublic.com or at 602-444-8963.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1oR2aAA