This week on The Broke and the Beautiful, two former Phillies traded barbs, a Super Bowl ticket seller didn’t have a super week, and the company that distributed “Ace Ventura” is on its way out of bankruptcy.

Lenny Dykstra in action during a spring training game in 1998 against the Cincinnati Reds at the Ed Smith Stadium in Sarasota, Fla. Rick Stewart/Getty Images

Two former Philadelphia Phillies recently expressed some bitter pheelings toward each other. According to the New York Daily News, Mitch Williams and Bankruptcy Beat legend Lenny “Nails” Dykstra traded barbs during the Philly Sports Roast, an event that helps raise money for charity. The Daily News noted that the bad blood between the two started when Mr. Williams gave up a walk-off home run during a 1993 World Series game (skip to 2:47:55) against the Toronto Blue Jays, causing the Phillies to lose and to give the Blue Jays the championship.

“Prison was like a f—— fantasy camp” compared to playing with Mr. Williams, said Mr. Dykstra, who went away for bankruptcy fraud. He continued with some scathing words about Mr. Williams’s former gig as an analyst for the MLB Network, noting, “He found a way to f— that up just like he found a way to f— up the World Series. What haven’t you f—– up?”

Mr. Williams’s reply? “I have five kids that I have never stolen a dollar from,” a comment that Mr. Dykstra seemed to take offense to, retorting, “This is about baseball, not personal.”

Super Bowl ticket seller SBTickets.com didn’t have a super week. Amid battles with customers whose tickets to the Big Game fell through, the New York ticket short seller filed for chapter 11 protection, Bankruptcy Beat reported. People from as far away as Papua New Guinea and Australia are looking to recoup money for travel and lodging after their tickets to the game failed to materialize just hours before kickoff. Mark Jay Heller, a lawyer for the company, said SBTickets hadn’t realized there would be a shortage of tickets and that “regrettably, at the final hour, the tickets were not made available.” The company said this was the first time it didn’t have enough tickets.

The company that distributed movies such as “Ace Ventura” and “Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves” is getting ready to leave bankruptcy. According to Reuters, Inverness Distribution Ltd. got the OK to emerge from bankruptcy despite protests from the U.S. trustee in the case. Judge Shelley Chapman of the Manhattan bankruptcy court said the U.S. trustee—an arm of the Department of Justice—had a “very, very disturbing” dependence on doctrine. Inverness, which also distributed “Major League” and “True Romance,” filed for bankruptcy in 2011.

Write to Melanie Cohen at melanie.cohen@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @MelanieLisa