Napa-based OLE Health has expanded its services to Solano County, partnering with Aldea Children and Family Services, also of Napa, to provide much-needed care for patients in the areas of adult health, pediatrics, dental care and behavioral health.

The newly constructed health center is located at 470 Chadbourne Rd., Ste. A, in Fairfield. It provides more than 5,000 square feet of space for staff and patients. High-technology upgrades are said to be coming soon, such as self-check-in appointment kiosks and electronic pharmaceutical dispensaries.

“The onset of the Affordable Care Act has created an access issue for many newly insured Solano County residents who have been unable to find a health provider for themselves and their families, OLE Health has been a trusted provider for the entire Napa Valley for over 43-years and we are excited to continue our work to help meet this need,” said Tanir Ami, CEO of OLE Health, formerly Clinic Ole.

The partnership between OLE Health (707-254-1770, olehealth.org) and Aldea Children and Family Services (707-224-8266, aldeainc.org) is designed to provide Solano County residents with access to the comprehensive services by utilizing OLE Health’s integrated model of care and innovative programs that places patients at the center of their own team of medical professionals.

“As one of the few providers in this region continually accepting Medi-Cal and Denti-Cal patients, we’re able to offer quality services and programs to anyone who walks through our doors, including adult health, pediatrics, dental care and even helping patients enroll in health insurance,” said Colleen Townsend, M.D., OLE Health chief medical officer. “The focus for OLE Health is on prevention so that we help patients get well — and stay well.”

Coordinated care between providers increases the likelihood of better health outcomes for patients, according to the health care providers. With the partnership expanding from Napa Valley into Solano County, both organizations said they hope to build better health for residents who often travel between both areas.

“Our collaborative model of fully integrated health care is not ‘business as usual,’” said Mark Bontrager, executive director of Aldea Children and Family Services, which also has been serving Solano families previously. “Patients will have a dedicated treatment team providing them medical, dental and mental health care in a single location. This project reaches far beyond the traditional co-location or referral methods. We’re truly partnering with our patients to support them in all areas of their health.”

Kaiser Permanente and Partnership Healthplan of California supported the expansion, OLE Health and Aldea officials said. It’s a service area that has a long-standing issue of overutilization of emergency rooms, and the clinic bridges the gap in health care for the newly-insured and uninsured, they said.