<p>FILE PHOTO</p>

By Tom Kisken of the Ventura County Star

Once mired in a $6 million hole that threatened to jeopardize its future, the Gold Coast Health Plan now has so much money its leaders need to find ways to spend it.

The primary reason is the Affordable Care Act.

Gold Coast is the publicly funded plan that provides Medi-Cal insurance to low-income Ventura County residents. The federal reform plan known as Obamacare expanded Medi-Cal and similar insurance systems across the nation in an effort to provide coverage to the uninsured.

That expansion brought 59,000 new members into Gold Coast, far beyond expectations and increasing total membership to 178,000.

The state-calculated reimbursement for care of the new members means the health plan took in $30 million more than its costs over the first five months of the fiscal year. That’s about $22 million more than budget projections.

“Compared to where we’ve been, we’re in an unusual circumstance,” said Ruth Watson, interim CEO for the plan, emphasizing that reimbursement reductions and possible increased care costs could push the bottom line down.

The plan’s net equity — revenue in excess of costs — is estimated at about $70 million over more than three years of existence.

After its first year of operation, the equity was a negative $6 million. The deficit prompted officials from the California Department of Health Care Services to mandate changes, threatening to pull the plug on Gold Coast if edicts weren’t followed.

The state’s corrective action plan remains, although monitoring has lessened as the plan’s position has improved. Watson said the turnaround comes from planning and hard work but is also driven by the increase in members.

“It’s phenomenal for any plan,” she said of the 59,000-member tidal wave.

The new revenue prompted plan leaders to give many primary-care doctors, specialists and pediatricians who contract with Gold Coast a 20 percent raise as of next month. Watson said the raise is the first since the plan’s 2011 launch.

Doctors say the raise is appreciated but also noted that Medi-Cal has long reimbursed at rates that don’t cover costs and rank among the worst in the nation. Doctors currently are paid at a capitated rate, meaning they receive $8.38 a month for each adult Medi-Cal patient under their care, whether the person needs to see them or not.

“It’s under-reimbursed care and it still will be,” said Dr. Josephine Soliz, an Oxnard family doctor. “But it will be less under-reimbursed.”

Gold Coast leaders have other plans, too. They want to pay off $7.2 million borrowed from the county, build financial reserves and launch projects designed to improve care for new members.

The quality-care initiative is tied in part to the state’s requirement regarding funding of care for the 59,000 people who joined Medi-Cal because of the program’s expansion. All but 15 percent of the new revenue must be spent directly on health care or it could be lost.

“If you spend less than 85 percent of your total reimbursement on health care, you would have to return the difference,” said Bob Freeman, CEO of a similar Medi-Cal plan that covers Santa Barbara and San Luis Obispo counties.

Freeman’s CenCal Health organization has seen its revenue grow from a surge of new members eligible because of the Affordable Care Act.

New members in many regions have been slow initially to use their new insurance, meaning plans are being paid more money from the government than they need in order to cover the expense of care.

That could change at any moment, Freeman said, noting that it is too early to assess finances.

“We’re not counting the money as ours,” he said. “We’re kind of holding it.”

Gold Coast leaders said they’re currently spending about 40 to 50 percent of their new Medi-Cal expansion revenue on health care, far below the 85 percent benchmark. The exact makeup of any new programs that funnel more money to care is unknown. But they could include measures aimed at reducing emergency room visits or helping people navigate a complicated health care system.

There are reasons for caution. Watson said state leaders already are planning a rate change that, if approved by the federal government, could mean 20 percent less in reimbursement.

Watson said the plan is being conservative. Even the raise for doctors will be reviewed in six months.

“We’re in a temporary situation and we know it,” she said.