William Carpenter III (Photo: Submitted)

Legislative rhetoric in a state that is nearly in a health crisis is too focused on politics and not policy or on reducing chronic disease, hospital executives say.

Leaders of greater Nashville's health care industry, which contributes $30 billion annually to the local economy, have backed Insure Tennessee and described it as an opportunity for the state to ensure access to health insurance for hundreds of thousands who are not covered.

"It's not about policy. This is about politics," said William F. Carpenter III, chairman and CEO of LifePoint Hospitals. "It is concerning to me that politics has so negatively impacted and will so negatively impact people who reside in rural communities in the state of Tennessee."

Franklin along with neighboring Brentwood are home to several hospital operators that own facilities across the country. The health care industry is the No. 1 employer in Williamson County. The county's four legislative representatives opposed Gov. Bill Haslam's Insure Tennessee proposal.

"We always have to be concerned about people who have jobs with companies in our district, but at the same time you don't want to listen to special interests so much that you're not taking into account the very obvious concerns that taxpayers might have," said Rep. Jeremy Durham, R-Franklin. "It is something we have to consider, but right now I haven't seen a sound proposal that I could support."

Tennessee hospitals provided $2 billion in charity care in 2013 — a number that could be on this rise if Maury Regional Health Care System is an indication. The hospital system spent $14.5 million on charity care in fiscal 2014 and is on track to have that number top $15 million for the fiscal year that ends in June, CEO Alan Watson said.

Williamson Medical Center, the only acute care hospital in the county, provided $6.1 million in charity care in 2013. Durham estimates that more than 90 percent of the county's residents have insurance.

Insure Tennessee debate

The debate around Insure Tennessee has not distracted hospital executives from thinking about how best to care for patients.

"This is the nuts and bolts of what we do, and I spend a lot of time thinking about how we can improve patient safety and quality, but I am spending a lot of time these days thinking about Insure Tennessee and concern about the opportunity lost," Carpenter said.

More than 400,000 Tennesseans are uninsured and an additional 180,000 rely on federal tax credits to pay monthly premiums for health insurance on the federally run exchange. Those tax credits are in jeopardy because of a Supreme Court case in which the plaintiffs say that tax credits are available only on state-run exchanges.

Without tax credits, those people, depending on whether there are alternative measures, could be uninsured.

Rep. Jack Johnson, R-Franklin, cited uncertainty surrounding the court case as one of the reasons he voted against Insure Tennessee.

Lawmakers are watching the court case. Nearly 20 joined an amicus brief in support of the plaintiff arguing that tax credits for health insurance are valid only on state-run exchanges. Sen. Brian Kelsey, R-Germantown, proposed a bill to pre-emptively ban a state-run exchange. The proposal didn't make it out of committee.

Health care achievements

There have been a handful of bright spots for health care executives in this year's legislative session. Lawmakers approved a bill supporting telehealth, which the Tennessee Hospital Association commends because it "will enable health care providers to offer telemedicine services with greater ease."

The legislature is on track to reapprove a hospital assessment, which helps fund TennCare. Hospitals also agreed to a higher assessment to fund the state's portion of Insure Tennessee. The assessment, a voluntary tax that must be approved each year, raised concern for Johnson.

"That money doesn't magically appear; it gets passed down to insurance companies and people who are paying hospital bills," Johnson said. "That tax is a voluntary assessment, but it's still a tax and it's inequitably applied. … If that assessment were to be challenged, and I'm not a lawyer, but I think it's fair to say that assessment is constitutionally suspect."

Hospital executives are concerned about other measures that could come from the legislature. Three senators will take up a review of the certificate-of-need program this summer to prepare for possible reforms — which are opposed by health care leaders — in the next legislative session. Health care providers apply with the Tennessee Health Services and Development Agency for a certificate of need to build facilities or expand into new services.

"Frankly, for (Insure Tennessee) never to get to the floor is totally illogical. It was an illogical outcome to what, we thought, was a logical policy," Mark Medley, executive vice president for hospital operations at Capella Healthcare in Franklin, said after the special session. "We are on edge."

Rep. Charles Sargent (Photo: Handout)

Lawmakers on why they oppose Insure Tennessee

So that Tennessee residents can engage in the debate over Insure Tennessee, here is contact information for the four lawmakers from Williamson County, who explain their problems with Insure Tennessee:

• Rep. Charles Sargent, R-Franklin

615-741-6808; rep.charles.sargent@capitol.tn.gov

"I think we have to figure out something, but just to say we're going to expand Obamacare — no. I think that's a bad word when we're looking at it. I understand the plight of people. The population I represent has a very low population of uninsured, and I think we have to look at the hospital situation and what we're going to do with the hospitals. The way it was at the present time, I would have voted against the proposal."

Rep. Jeremy Durham (Photo: Submitted)

• Rep. Jeremy Durham, R-Franklin

615-741-1864; rep.jeremy.durham@capitol.tn.gov

"Williamson County as a whole is over 90 percent insured so just taking that into consideration we had to make sure that since there was probably a fewer percentage of people that benefit from it, we just needed to know that we would not put ourselves back into the same situation we had back in the (Gov. Phil) Bredesen era when we had to cut all those people from the (TennCare) rolls. We want to make sure we can pay for it. We definitely want to have people obtain health insurance — it's really just a matter of making sure the funding mechanism is sound."

• Sen. Jack Johnson, R-Franklin

615-741-2495; sen.jack.johnson@capitol.tn.gov

"Well, a number of (issues concern me about Insure Tennessee). The uncertainty of the King vs. Burwell decision, which will come in June, and I understand that's with the exchange, not necessarily the expanded Medicaid population. … I think it jeopardizes the entire infrastructure of the Affordable Care Act. I know it wasn't the Obama administration's intention to even have this doughnut hole because the Medicaid expansion was mandatory in the first version of the bill, but that's a big concern to me."

Sen. Jack Johnson (Photo: State of Tennessee)

• Rep. Glen Casada, R-Franklin

615-741-4389; rep.glen.casada@capitol.tn.gov

"It increases the dependency upon government. This is real topical. We are growing government, we are increasing federal debt. The money either comes to Tennessee or it stays in Washington. It's dangerous. More people, Tennesseans, are now looking to government for insurance and that's not good. ... Two hundred eighty thousand won't cost the state anything, but if it's like other states where it's nearly doubled, then it will cost us a lot."615-741-4389; rep.glen.casada@capitol.tn.gov

Rep. Glen Casada (Photo: State of Tennessee)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1ywR4Xq