U.S. Sen. Richard Shelby said Monday that he supports fundamental reform of the nation's tax code.

“We all benefit from some provisions in the tax code, all of us, but we do not benefit from all of them. I think if we had fundamental tax reform it would be good for this country," the Tuscaloosa Republican said during a breakfast meeting organized by the Chamber of Commerce of West Alabama at the Embassy Suites hotel in downtown Tuscaloosa. "We would become a nation of savings and it might help us fund our government.”

Shelby said he supports a flat tax, which is generally defined as a single rate that spans all income brackets of taxpayers instead of the current system, which taxes higher-income people at increased rates and includes many deductions and exemptions.

He said he believes the American people want to change the tax code and would support reforms at the Internal Revenue Service.

During questioning from the audience, Shelby spoke about the importance of lowering the national debt, criticized the Affordable Care Act and discussed the need for a stronger foreign policy.

Shelby said these issues will be important in the upcoming session of Congress and he noted that this is a presidential election year.

“This year is pivotal. I would like (Republicans) to stay in control of the U.S. Senate. I am running, and I run on my record of service to the people of Alabama and to the nation,” Shelby said.

Four Republicans are seeking to remove Shelby from the seat he has held since 1987: Marcus Bowman, John Martin, Jonathan McConnell and Shadrack McGill. On the Democratic side, Ron Crumpton and Charles Nana are running for Shelby's Senate seat.

The primary will be March 1. The winners in the Republican and Democratic primaries will face each other in the Nov. 8 general election.

Tuscaloosa Mayor Walt Maddox attended the chamber meeting, and he praised Shelby's efforts to help Tuscaloosa.

“He is certainly not a senator that goes to a castle and disappears. He is always in contact with me personally. His staff does a phenomenal job of working with our team,” Maddox said.

Shelby also spoke Saturday during a meeting of the Young Republicans Federation of Alabama at the Hotel Capstone in Tuscaloosa.