While the inauguration of the five new 2014 Blackfeet Tribal Business Council members came off with the expected installment of the new Councilmen and the election of the Tribal Executive Council, the process reflected the disunity experienced by the Blackfeet Tribe over the past two years.

Oddities revealed themselves from the beginning when some sitting members of the BTBC objected to Earl Old Person’s joining the procession into the dance arbor. Although Old Person was allowed to participate through the actions of some of the incoming Councilmen, there was no chair for him at the table. Incoming Councilman Joe McKay brought him a chair from the audience, but Old Person was not allowed to vote on the Executive Council members.

Instead, George Calftail, who was appointed to Old Person’s seat the day before inauguration by the Willie Sharp faction, voted in his place and spoke as a sitting Councilman.

Prayers were heard in abundance, with Titus Upham and singers providing music for people entering the Arbor, then Father Ed Kohler and elder Al Potts offering prayers of their own.

The ceremony began with departing Councilmen speaking, mostly talking about how they’d tried to accomplish things for the Tribe. Then it was the sitting Councilpersons’ turn. Bill Old Chief spoke about the difficulty he’d had in getting things done and focused on opportunities available to the Blackfeet Tribe. While he strongly believes in what he is doing, Old Chief said he would “humble” himself and work with the newly elected members.

Old Chief was followed by Cheryl Little Dog, who departed from the theme of unity expressed by nearly everyone else. She complained about the Indian Health Service, the Affordable Care Act and the actions of some Councilpersons over the past several months. While Little Dog had some vocal support from the audience, that changed when she began attacking Earl Old Person. Saying, “He’s not my chief” and blaming him for paychecks not being issued on time during Christmas and Easter, Little Dog’s supporters grew less and less vocal while others began shouting for her to be shut off. Police filed into the Arbor, but Little Dog walked back her remarks somewhat, saying, “Everyone has their opinion” and “I’m praying for you all.”

Forrestina Calf Boss Ribs was next and said she wishes for people to put their discord behind them so the Blackfeet can be a great nation again, and George Calftail spoke, beginning with the comment, “Praise the Lord and pass the ammunition.”

Earl Old Person then spoke in a calm voice, questioning the vitriol he’d encountered over the past several months and wondering aloud how many times he’s been suspended from the BTBC in the last six weeks. His remarks and statements calmed the crowd and paved the way for the rest of the inauguration.

The five new members were sworn in, but before voting on the new Executive Council was held, Tyson Running Wolf took part in a pipe ceremony. Following the ceremony, voting was held for Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary. Harry Barnes won the Chairmanship on a 5-4 vote, beating out Bill Old Chief. Iliff “Scott” Kipp was named Vice Chairman, winning over Calf Boss Ribs, and Running Wolf assumed the Secretary position, beating Little Dog.

In his opening remarks, Barnes announced the Tribal Council would meet at 1:30 p.m. the same day. At that meeting, the BTBC voted to remove Calftail and to reinstate Old Person, all on 5-4 votes.