Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Boulder's Frasier Meadows nears completion after $11M in flood damage All 410 senior residents unscathed during 2013 disaster, which CEO says is 'beyond comprehension'

One Year Stronger: 2013 flood anniversary September marks one year since the historic 2013 flood ravaged homes, displaced thousands of residents and killed 10 people across the state, including four from Boulder County and two from Larimer County. This special section is a collaboration of the Daily Camera, Longmont Times-Call and Loveland Reporter-Herald. Flood anniversary: Full coverage Faces of the flood: Boulder area Faces of the flood: Longmont area Faces of the flood: Loveland area In memory: Stories of the victims Interactive map: Untold stories submitted by readers Interactive timeline: Colorado flood and recovery milestones Photo gallery: The year of recovery As evening approached Sept. 12, 2013, Keith Kohnen, 87, sat looking out his bedroom window at Boulder's Frasier Meadows retirement community. It had been pouring rain for days, and his wife had suggested he move their car up to the street level. He never did. "I remember looking at the stairwell down to the garage, and there was 2 feet of water in it," Kohnen said this week, nearly a year after the historic 2013 flood. "I looked again two minutes later, and it was almost up to the top. I ran up and down the hallway banging on doors and yelling, 'Let's get out of here!'" Over that Thursday evening and long into the night, similar scenes would play out across the 20-acre, 410-resident Frasier Meadows campus. Whitewater was rushing inside the buildings. Residents — at an average age of 87 — were being wheeled to safety and evacuated to higher spots by administrators, maintenance workers, nurses and any others available, through rainwater and mud that would reach about 3 feet tall. Cars were floating underground. Kohnen's vehicle, along with about 80 others, was totaled. Flooded streets meant the fire department was unable to access Frasier Meadows. "We were on our own," CEO Tim Johnson said. Soon, employees from all corners of the complex were pressed into duties they never imagined they'd perform. Johnson remembers wheeling one woman across the courtyard, which was under water. Advertisement "I was moving her with my body and cradling her with my arms to keep her up," he said. "She was in a wheelchair, and I was just telling her she'd be OK." The problem was no one knew yet how they'd reach the point of "OK." At the climax of chaos, the campus had 90-year-olds scaling stairwells with their walkers, a lobby filled with people in gurneys, dozens of residents with dementia being carried out of the complex's memory care unit, and every available employee — from the maintenance crew to the administration — pitching in. Frank Gomez, of Pinkard Construction, works to repair holes in the floor of the Frasier Meadows senior complex as reconstruction from last September's flooding continued last week. (Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera) "We found ourselves experiencing something that no book could teach us," Johnson said. "You don't have time to look at the emergency manual. You don't have time to decide who does what. You had to react; you had to remember and you had to move forward." Single costliest rebuild When all is said and done — which, save for a few loose ends on the construction front, is mostly the case already — flood recovery at Frasier Meadows will cost a whopping $16 million, just under a third of which will go toward future flood mitigation. The total damage was $11 million. The Federal Emergency Management Agency has reimbursed $275,000 of that total, but Frasier Meadows officials are optimistic much more will roll in soon. According to FEMA officials, it's the single costliest rebuild they're aware of, among the thousands of Colorado individuals and organizations needing assistance after the flood. "It's not an honor I like having," Johnson said. "But," he added, "I would say that I saw this as a disaster from the first few days and began to realize that we could turn disaster into the biggest opportunity Frasier ever had." And so they have. The garages and busted walls are redone. Nearly all 35 assisted-living residents displaced during the flood are comfortably back on the campus. In the next few months, the assisted living unit will reopen, at long last, with 38 remodeled units. Bill and Louise Bradley were evacuated from Frasier Meadows during the 2013 flood. They were displaced for a little over two months but have moved back to the senior complex. (Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera) "Frasier was magnificent in the way they handled this," said Bill Bradley, 89. "The optimism from Tim and the staff, it really does affect us." 'Beyond comprehension' no one was hurt Ask around, and most residents and staff members will tell you that memories of the flood no longer loom over Frasier Meadows. And that's largely a credit to the focus of the employees, some of whom stuck around the campus for 10 consecutive days and nights during and after the flood, securing the property and ensuring everyone's safety. "We had so many hands here, so many bodies here that normally wouldn't be here," Johnson said. "We had spouses and children here to help. And it's beyond comprehension that, with the speed things were going, something worse didn't happen." The extra effort paid off. During the flood itself, every resident survived, and no one was injured beyond a bruise or two. Most everyone present for the September disaster said that's nothing short of miraculous. "The water's bursting, and it's coming up from the floor and shooting up the wall. I thought, 'Holy crap, people are going to die,'" CFO Pat McAteer said. "But you knew what you had to do — get them out of bed, up a staircase and across a corridor. Just move them. And do it as fast as we could." Even with the power knocked out, elevators dead, sirens wailing throughout the complex and water halfway up people's wheelchairs, the Frasier Meadows healthcare team continued administering care. "I think it's made me a better nurse, to go through something like that," said Gigi Gibson-King. "The thing that stuck with me was the number of people we had to help at once. It changed the entire dynamic, with people losing their homes, out of their rooms." Gibson-King said at one point during the flood, she wheeled a woman from the healthcare space to the kitchen, where Frasier Meadows keeps an emergency generator that nurses used to plug in the woman's nebulizer, helping her breathe. "They made all the right decisions to save all those lives," said assisted-living resident Will Bernthal, 94. "They followed the flood information coming in, and in the emergency they really rose to the occasion and made us comfortable as best they could." 'The unknown' Bernthal and his wife, Lorna, were displaced longer than any other Frasier Meadows residents after the flood. For more than seven months, they lived in Boulder's Golden West retirement community, with which Frasier Meadows has a reciprocal aid agreement. Despite such an inconvenience, particularly considering his age, Bernthal said he's forever grateful to the staff. When the new assisted-living wing is complete at Frasier Meadows, he and Lorna will move back in. "We're not suffering," he said. "My opinion is, 'We'll move back in when everything is ready.'" Bill Bradley and his wife, Louise, 81, still visit Golden West once a month to have dinner with the friends they made there while displaced for a little over two months. Each month, the dozen or so participants in what has become known as the "refugees dinner" discuss a different topic at Golden West. When they meet on Sept. 12, they'll talk about what sticks out most about the flood, one year later. "My most vivid memory," Bill Bradley said, "was not understanding what was happening. It was dark, with the damn siren going on and on and on. I was waiting by the stairwell, not knowing how far I would get up. It was just the unknown." Kohnen will be at the next refugees dinner, but he hasn't yet decided what he'll share with the group. "My memory is that it was all far more than we expected," he said. "But I know that it brought us together. We really went through it all, at once." Contact Camera Staff Writer Alex Burness at burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness.