Helbling Benefits Consulting adds Sears, Simon

Helbling Benefits Consulting announced the addition of two new employees: Josh Sears and Brandon Simon.

• Josh Sears has joined the firm as general counsel and benefits consultant. Sears has practiced law in Idaho mostly in the areas of ERISA, employee benefits, COBRA, HIPAA and the Affordable Care Act. He previously worked in-house for a third party health insurance payor and ran his own law firm specializing in employee benefits and general corporate matters. Sears will provide in-house counsel for the firm and consult with clients in the areas of compliance, ERISA, employment law and much more. He will also provide benefits consulting and brokering for large employer-sponsored group health plans in Idaho.

• Brandon Simon has joined the firm as a benefits consultant. Prior to joining HBC, Simon worked as the district sales manager for Blue Cross of Idaho. Simon has 17 years of experience in the health care industry and will provide benefits consulting and brokering for large employer-sponsored group health plans in Idaho.

Weymouth elected to T-O Engineers Board of Directors

Ben Weymouth, professional engineer, has been elected secretary of the T-O Engineers Board of Directors. Weymouth is T-O Engineers’ Coeur d’Alene office manager and a seasoned project manager with more than 18 years of experience and a wide range of expertise. He works closely with his clients to guide them through complex agency requirements, and often applies his past agency experience to untangle complex entitlement and permitting issues. He works on land developments, sewer and water projects, roadway improvements, airport landside development and maintenance, and utility company system improvements and expansions. His clients include public agencies, private and public utility companies, Native American tribes and developers.

For more information about T-O Engineers, visit www.to-engineers.com.

If you have a new, relocated or expanded business, or announcement of events, promotions or awards, The Press wants to let our readers know. The service is free and items run Tuesday through Saturday. To get the word on the street about your movers and shakers, email City Editor Maureen Dolan at mdolan@cdapress.com.