HARRISBURG — Joe Sestak commanded an aircraft carrier battle group in the Navy, and has walked across the state as part of his six-year campaign to try to win a U.S. Senate seat despite the funding and political objections of his own party.

So what's 30 inches of snow?

Democrat Sestak spoke before the Pennsylvania Press Club in Harrisburg on Monday afternoon, when all of state government was shuttered and the city's mayor asked residents and business owners for patience while crews cleared streets. The event drew 41 people — including a tracker for incumbent U.S. Sen. Pat Toomey, a Republican from the Lehigh Valley.

"When I spoke last time, the place was jammed," Sestak said before jokingly comparing himself to a stand-in actor who cannot draw a crowd on Broadway.

Then, speaking more seriously with a smile that never left his face, Sestak said he is running to ensure the Senate has an experienced voice for military intervention.

Leading the aircraft carrier group after 9/11, Sestak said he knew the Afghan War was just. As a naval officer, Sestak said, he followed orders — even ones he did not agree were wise, such as when Toomey sided with GOP President George W. Bush to open a second battlefront in Iraq. Sestak said doing so split allied forces, and led to a war that did not make America safer.

"Militaries can stop a problem," Sestak said, "they just can't fix a problem. Look at Iraq."

Sestak also criticized Toomey for voting against various budget bills involving the Department of Veterans Affairs.

Sestak is mischaracterizing Toomey's record on veterans to distract from his own liberal agenda, Toomey spokesman Steve Kelly responded later. Toomey has supported budget bills that funded the VA several times, Kelly said, and has supported 16 other bills to help veterans.

In an answer to a question, Sestak defended his use of his military title and pictures of his uniform in his campaign literature, even though the Pentagon's code of ethics frowns upon mixing military rank with politics. Sestak said he disagreed with the rules, saying his 31-year career in the Navy earned him the right to use his title.

Sestak said he also was running to make the nation's health care system better for civilians. After watching his daughter fight cancer, he said he knows Congress can do more to improve health care even though the Affordable Care Act, which he supported as a congressman, is working.

"We give health care in the military, not because it's political, but because it's practical," he said.

Sestak said he's also running as a candidate who cannot be pressured by the political establishment, as evidenced by Democrats recruiting another candidate, Katie McGinty, Gov. Tom Wolf's former chief of staff.

McGinty has experience in the public and private sectors to create good-paying jobs that will help middle-class families, pre-schoolers and women, her campaign spokeswoman, Sabrina Singh, said later.

John Fetterman, mayor of the small Pittsburgh-area borough of Braddock, also is a Democratic candidate for Senate. His campaign did not return an email for comment.

Campaigning Sestak said he has heard people's anger at politics and politicians. It is the same anger, he said, Donald Trump has tapped into in his quest to win the Republican primary for president. But Sestak said he has no interest in using what he described as Trump's politics of hate and fear to win votes.

Fetterman will speak at next month's Press Club luncheon. The primary election is April 26.

steve.esack@mcall.com

Twitter @sesack

717-783-7305