Politico slugged its breaking news alert: “House Democrats on Tuesday re-elected Rep. Nancy Pelosi to serve as minority leader for another two years.”

It wasn’t exactly a surprise. Like the sun coming up, it would only really be news if it didn’t happen – this, despite Pelosi having presided over losses which saw her party reduced to the lowest number of House seats since the Truman administration.

That fact that her colleagues did not hold her responsible and did not insist on a change in leadership means the Democrats are in for a rough few years. There’s no need to read the tea leaves when all you have to do is read the election returns. Under Pelosi, in this election, Democrats got thumped in almost every district that was not in some way a progressive stronghold.

[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Democratic Party]

It’s clear that for those in the party holding office, as opposed to those who cast votes at election time, common sense has given way to ideological blindness. Pelosi and her colleagues have, time and again, fallen on their swords for President Barack Obama, and it has cost them dearly.

In Progressiveland, however, that analysis has been stood on its head. One of progressivism’s leading figures, television and radio host Thom Hartmann, explained to me the other day that the fault lay in the party’s not being progressive enough, that it was so-called “corporatist Democrats” offering a GOP-light agenda that were the big losers while the progressives did just fine.

It’s an assessment based on a perception of the nation’s political leanings that puts Massachusetts' Democratic Sen. Elizabeth Warren square in America’s ideological center. To her right are corporatist Democrats in the Bill and Hillary Clinton mold and, to their far right, the Republican Party of incoming Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, House Speaker John Boehner and Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus.

[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Republican Party]

If this is true, then the GOP is doomed no matter what they do. Progressives have long denied that America remains a center-right country. In the days since the election they have pointed to the successful passage of state and local initiatives against fracking and in support of increases in the minimum wage, mandatory paid sick leave and marijuana legalization as evidence they are right; unfortunately, none of those issues cuts as clearly across the electoral canvas as they would like to think.

Plenty of Republicans support lesser penalties or outright decriminalization of marijuana possession and personal use. The success of fracking bans can easily be ascribed to sophisticated scare tactics that ignore sound science to provoke an emotional response. Adding costs and regulations to the workplace through the exercise of the universal franchise will almost always succeed if voters can be made to believe, contrary to reality, that nameless “others” will bear the economic costs of their largess and push towards “fairness.” On the big issues however – issues like the size of government, the total tax burden, spending, Obamacare, national defense and immigration – the polls and the behavior of the voters still hew in a rightward direction.

Pelosi’s re-election to her leadership post suggests House Democrats are digging in their heels with the intention of becoming more insular. The caucus is small but – and for that very reason – much more in line with the thinking of their leader, a woman who perfectly resembles and represents the urban, pro-union, high spending, expensive social services, radical environmentalist, anti-reform, group identity politics of the modern Democratic Party.

[GALLERY: Editorial Cartoons on the 2014 Congressional Elections]

People forget how hard it was for Bill Clinton to win the 1992 Democratic presidential nomination for reasons not having to do with Gennifer Flowers. Clinton had to seize the reins of power within the party from the folks who took over after 1968, the radicals who had nominated George McGovern, Walter Mondale and Michael Dukakis for president and also re-nominated Jimmy Carter in 1980 (who, by that time, had been outed as a liberal rather than a Southern centrist), before he could beat a path to the White House door.

By failing to accurately assess the reasons for their loss in 2014, Pelosi and company have thrown in with the very people and coalition the Clintons tried so hard to push to the back benches. The “community organizer” wing of the party is in charge once again, which augurs ill for Democratic presidential prospects, not just for Hillary Clinton but for any Democrat who wants to follow Obama in the Oval Office.