Hospitals in Colorado and 25 states that opted to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act treated fewer charity cases and other uninsured patients in the first quarter of 2014, according to a study released this week.

Researchers concluded that the previously uninsured represented the lion’s share of new Medicaid enrollees.

The Colorado Hospital Association study, released Monday, gathered data from 465 hospitals in 30 states. It showed more people are finding coverage who didn’t have it before, rather than people with private insurance switching to public insurance under Medicaid’s eased eligibility requirements.

The average increase in Medicaid volume, 29 percent, in hospitals in expansion states, the study said, is demonstrably due to the Affordable Care Act. Among other requirements, the act expands Medicaid eligibility to include those adult Americans making up to 133 percent of the poverty level who aren’t eligible for Medicare.

Among Colorado hospitals, the trend is even more pronounced than it is nationally. The increase in Medicaid volume in the first quarter of 2014 was 30.5 percent.

Medicaid, which paid 15.4 percent of all Colorado hospital charges in the first quarter of 2013, paid 20.1 percent in 2014.

The net result of Medicaid expansion is a reduction in uncompensated care, which could help reduce health care costs, according to the association’s Center for Health Information and Data Analytics.

Uncompensated care is the cost of hospital care for which providers receive no payment from either the patient or insurer. In Colorado, it totaled about $500 million in 2012, according the association.

Those losses are absorbed by the hospitals, which decrease services or access to services, or shifted to private insurers. Health policy analysts say this “cost shifting” is one of the driving forces behind rising health care costs.

The CHA study found a 25 percent decrease in self-paying patients, which often results in bad debts. And it found a 30 percent drop in charity care for the uninsured.

In Colorado, hospitals experienced a 30.3 percent decrease in those patients paying out of pocket, and a 36.2 percent drop in average charity-care costs.

“These findings not only affirm that more people are finding health care coverage who didn’t have it before, but also that it is having a positive impact by reducing the levels of uncompensated care at hospitals, which could further efforts to reduce health care costs,” said CHA chief executive Steven Summer.

Beginning this year, Medicaid coverage for the newly eligible adults is fully funded by the federal government through 2016.

The Congressional Budget Office estimates the federal government will cover nearly 93 percent of the costs of the Medicaid expansion through 2022.

Critics of Medicaid expansion, such as conservative think tank Heritage Foundation, say the already overburdened program could draw some younger, presumably healthier people who otherwise would have to buy private insurance.

To read the full Colorado Hospital Association report, “Impact of Medicaid Expansion on Hospital Volumes,” see www.cha.com/Documents/Press-Releases/CHA-Medicaid-Expansion-Study-June-2014.

Electa Draper: 303-954-1276, edraper@denverpost.com or twitter.com/electadraper