Many taxpayers are giving money to professional tax preparation services when they could be using that money on food or other essentials and getting their taxes done free of charge.

It's part of an Internal Revenue Service program called VITA- Volunteer Income Tax Assistance.



If you're a working student, a retiree, anyone who made less than $60,000 last year , hundreds of certified volunteers are waiting to help you with your taxes.

There are VITA locations across the state. The 25 locations in King County are run by United Way.



"What you need to make sure you bring is a photo ID and Social Security card for you and everyone on the return, so if you have kids that you're claiming, you want to make sure that you have it for them," said Yuri Kim, United Way of King County's VITA coordinator.



You also need to bring all tax-related documents and receipts. But in most cases you don't need an appointment. And don't be surprised if the IRS certified volunteer helping you works at Microsoft. Every year, Jill McGovern recruits her co-workers to join other volunteers who help with the VITA program. McGovern says this year there are 70 Microsoft volunteers which is double the number who assisted with tax returns last year.



"You get a chance to use professional skills, to help someone who doesn't have tax expertise," said McGovern. " And we're saving them money in the tax preparation fees."



Regardless of where the volunteers come from, their work is double-checked by a site manager before the client's taxes are electronically filed and the client leaves the location. The free help can save as much as $100 or more in tax preparation fees, and make sure you get all the tax credits, deductions and exemptions you have coming.



One big change this year is the requirement to report your health insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act. There's a lot of confusion, not only among taxpayers but among the staff at many professional tax preparation services.



The confusion is especially problematic for people who have what's known as an I-10 exemption. So no matter where you get your tax work filed, it's important to take all tax-related health care information with you, and discuss health care in detail with the person who's authorized to help you file.