Brookings, SD

Longtime assistant Eric Eidsness has been promoted to associate head coach, South Dakota State University head football coach John Stiegelmeier has announced.

“I am excited that Coach Eidsness will be taking on an expanded role within our coaching staff,” Stiegelmeier said. “Coach Eidsness has been with the Jackrabbits for a total of 13 years and not only knows Jackrabbit football, but he also knows South Dakota State Unviersity. With the addition to his title comes administrative duties that help our program move in the correct direction.

Eidsness, who will continue to serve as offensive coordinator and quarterbacks coach, has been an assistant under Stiegelmeier on three different occasions. His first stint was as a graduate assistant during the 1996 and 1997 seasons, coaching the team’s receivers. After a season at Ferris State (Mich.), he returned to SDSU as offensive coordinator in 1999 and directed the team’s offense to an average of 27.6 points per game over five seasons.

A Sioux Falls native, Eidsness left SDSU after the 2003 season to become head coach at Southwest Minnesota State University, where he compiled a 26-40 overall record. His 2008 squad posted a 6-5 record for only the eighth winning season in program history.

Eidsness rejoined the Jackrabbit coaching staff in 2010 as quarterbacks coach and was elevated to offensive coordinator following the 2011 season. The Jackrabbits have posted prolific numbers in both the running and passing games en route to three consecutive playoff berths (2012-14), including tallying school-record totals of 3,612 passing yards and 6,092 yards of total offense over a 14-game schedule last season.

The Jackrabbits open the 2015 season next Saturday (Sept. 5) at Kansas. Kickoff is set for 11 a.m. at Memorial Stadium in Lawrence, Kansas.

Courtesy: SDSU

College {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

DISCLAIMER: The views of the author are not necessarily those of this station, its owners, officers, agents or employees.