Seven-year-old Katelyn Pauling of Montevideo was on hand as Sen. Scott Dibble, DFL- Minneapolis, and Rep. Carly Melin, DFL- Hibbing, announced a bipartisan compromise bill legalizing certain forms of medical marijuana during a press conference at the Capitol in St. Paul on Thursday, May 15, 2014. Katelyn suffers from Batten Disease, a form of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL) that effects children and can cause seizures. Katelyn's parents Jeremy and Kristy Pauling were also there. (Pioneer Press: Ben Garvin)

Minnesota Gov. Mark Dayton delivers his State of the State address before a joint session of the Legislature Wednesday, April, 30, 2014 in St. Paul, Minn. (AP Photo/Tom Olmscheid)

Sometimes, the best lobbyists in the world are mom and dad.

Minnesota lawmakers passed many bills over the past three months, from more than $1 billion for public works projects and $550 million in tax cuts to legislation on bullying and boosting the minimum wage.

But the emotional core of the 2014 session came from a small but determined group of parents who relentlessly pushed for — and ultimately won — access to medical marijuana for their children.

The kids suffer from rare and debilitating seizure disorders that don’t respond to conventional treatments but might be helped by marijuana in a liquid form.

When legislation stalled in mid-March, the families marched on the Governor’s Residence and persuaded Gov. Mark Dayton to reopen the issue.

The families were front-and-center once again, repeatedly testifying at Capitol hearings and telling stories that legislators couldn’t ignore.

The lobbying worked. In some cases, the stories prompted lawmakers to listen to their own parents.

“There was a message — ‘I would like to talk to you about medical marijuana’ — and it was from my mother,” said Sen. Charles Wiger, DFL-Maplewood, during a Senate floor debate in early May. “Mom said: ‘Uncle Bill is dying. … He’s in the most courageous battle of his life now with cancer and endures a great deal of pain.’

“… At the beginning of session, I wasn’t quite sure how I would vote on this. I had concerns registered by law enforcement, treatment professionals,” Wiger said. But he concluded: “For God’s sake, if people are suffering and we have the ability to provide a way to alleviate that pain, let’s hear their concern, let’s hear their prayer.”

The end result is a bill that Dayton pledged to sign granting access to marijuana for terminally ill patients and those with any of eight serious medical conditions. The state Health Department would select and regulate two manufacturers that could sell marijuana in the form of liquids and pills, but not the plant itself. Patients would not be allowed to smoke marijuana or vaporize plant materials.

While the medical marijuana issue pulled at lawmakers’ heartstrings, they also took care of a long list of meat-and-potatoes issues. With rarely seen bipartisan teamwork, they passed a massive public works bonding bill and used part of a budget surplus to cut taxes.

Leaders of the Democratic-Farmer-Labor majorities said they were able to check off almost everything on their to-do list.

“History might look at it as the most productive legislative biennium in a generation,” said Senate Majority Leader Tom Bakk, DFL-Cook.

But Republicans argued DFLers went on an out-of-control tax and spending spree over the past 1 1/2 years.

“They passed one of the largest tax increases in history (and) the largest spending increase in history,” said House Minority Leader Kurt Daudt, R-Crown. “We can’t sustain that.”

While lawmakers accomplished a lot, here are some things they didn’t do:

— Although Minnesota is falling behind on maintaining its roads, bridges and a growing demand for mass transit, Dayton and DFL legislators put off possible transportation tax increases until next year.

— Earlier this year, a federal judge made it clear he wanted lawmakers to fix the state’s sex-offender program, which essentially confines ex-cons for life after they complete their prison sentences. Instead, state policymakers again ducked the issue, opening the door for court intervention.

— Legislators kept their “get-out-of-jail-free” cards for drunken driving during legislative sessions. Concordia University students launched a campaign to clarify that lawmakers can’t avoid arrest for DWI or other crimes during sessions under a constitutional “legislative immunity” provision intended to protect them from being prevented from voting. But the drive stalled as lawmakers argued their ID cards don’t actually prevent arrests.

Here’s a look at some of the key things lawmakers did do:

MINIMUM WAGE

Minnesota goes from being one of the nation’s lowest minimum-wage states to one of the highest.

Increases start in August. By 2016, large employers will be paying $9.50 per hour, with an annual inflation adjustment capped at 2.5 percent to start in 2018. The Department of Labor and Industry could suspend the inflation increase in bad economic times.

The state’s current minimum wage for large employers is $6.15, though in practice, most minimum-wage jobs in Minnesota pay the federal rate of $7.25. The wage hike passed with no Republican votes in either body.

BUILDING PROJECTS

Minnesota will launch the state’s most ambitious effort to finance affordable housing, spark a construction spree on college campuses across the state and finish renovating the aging state Capitol under a $1 billion-plus public works funding package.

Legislators also invested in upgrading state prisons and hospitals, parks and zoos, a massive water project for parched southwestern Minnesota and dozens of civic centers, theaters, museums and similar projects across the state.

Separately, DFL lawmakers approved a new $90 million office building for senators — $77 million of it covered by taxpayers — which Republicans fiercely criticized as lavish. A groundbreaking is scheduled for July if it clears a long-shot lawsuit.

TAX CUTS

Lawmakers tapped a $1.2 billion budget surplus in this election year to send $550 million back to taxpayers.

They cut income taxes by matching some, but not all, state tax credits with the federal tax code, repealed three sales taxes on businesses that they passed last year and voted last week to send property tax refunds to more than a million homeowners, renters and farmers. Refund checks are typically mailed in October.

EDUCATION

An overhaul to Minnesota’s 37-word bullying-prevention law requires schools to develop bullying-prevention policies, to quickly address instances of bullying and to work with students who are bullied or bully others.

Lawmakers focused $54 million of the supplemental budget bill on new education spending, putting $25 per pupil on the general education formula. The budget bill also provided new money for preschool scholarships and funds to guarantee hot lunches for every student who wants one.

Lawmakers also budgeted $10 million to help implement the new teacher-evaluation system that is set to begin statewide in the fall.

An education policy omnibus bill includes broad changes to how students learning English are taught, new ways adults can earn credit toward high school diplomas and alternative methods candidates for teaching licenses can use to demonstrate math and English proficiency.

SPENDING

Legislators used $283 million of the surplus to provide 5 percent rate increases for home and community-based health caregivers for the elderly and disabled, increase K-12 school aid and early-childhood scholarships and expand broadband Internet access across rural Minnesota.

LOTTERY

The House and Senate approved a bill to squash the state lottery’s step into online sales of scratch-off tickets. Lottery sales at gas pumps and ATMs would be gone, as well. Online sales of lotto-type games such as Powerball still would be allowed.

Dayton has not said whether he’ll sign the bill.

A state fiscal analysis estimated ending online lottery sales would cost the state about $3 million in fiscal year 2014-15 and $12 million in fiscal year 2016-17.

WOMEN’S ECONOMIC SECURITY ACT

Signed into law on Mother’s Day, this bill provides more workplace protection and equal pay for women.

It increases unpaid pregnancy and parenting leave from six to 12 weeks, grants sick leave to care for sick grandchildren and requires more private space to nurse other than bathrooms. Among other provisions, it requires businesses with large state contracts to certify they pay men and women equal salaries for similar jobs, and it bars employers from discriminating against pregnant women and parents with young children at home.

LIQUOR

Minnesota liquor stores will continue to be closed on Sundays, but taprooms can be open.

Advocates say they were on track to win permission for small breweries to sell growlers — containers that can be filled with beer, sealed and carried away by the customer — on Sundays, but that provision was killed after intervention by the Teamsters union.

Other provisions: Hennepin County authorities can OK a 4 a.m. closing time for bars and restaurants on the Monday and Tuesday nights of the 2014 baseball All-Star Game events at Target Field. And the University of Minnesota still will be able to sell beer at TCF Bank Stadium.

GUNS

Domestic abusers subject to a restraining order have to give up firearms, and weapons restrictions tighten for those convicted of domestic assault or stalking.

The measure passed even though gun-restriction measures have faced an uphill battle in recent years at the Capitol.

Advocates pitched the measure as offering protection to victims and police officers without infringing on the rights of law-abiding gun owners. It aligns state statute with federal law.

TECHNOLOGY

Minnesota becomes the first state to enact a “kill switch” law requiring smartphones and tablets sold in the state to have a remote shut-off feature to deter theft. It takes effect in July 2015.

Law enforcement authorities need a tracking warrant to get electronic device location information. The warrant can be issued only if authorities show there is probable cause to believe the person possessing the device is committing, has committed or is about to commit a crime.

ENVIRONMENT/ENERGY

Retail sale of consumer cleaning products containing triclosan is banned, which state officials say appears to be the first ban of its kind in the nation. Individual products already approved by the FDA for consumer use would be exempted. The provisions go into effect Jan. 1, 2017.

Triclosan, an antibacterial chemical found in liquid hand soaps, toothpaste and other products, is an endocrine-disrupting compound thought to contribute to antibiotic resistance, according to the state Pollution Control Agency.

Responding to a severe propane shortage last winter and related price spike, lawmakers approved $20 million in aid to assist propane users and pledged to address some of the systemic issues contributing to the crisis.

The larger fixes didn’t happen, but consumers get provisions on transparency, equity and nondiscrimination on pricing, budget payment plans and purchase contracts. A study is requested to investigate converting propane gas users to natural gas or other alternative-energy sources.

CRIMINALS

Those exonerated of crimes would qualify for reimbursement for costs associated with their sentence plus $50,000 to $100,000 for each year in prison and $25,000 to $50,000 for each year served on supervised release or as a registered offender.

Among factors to be considered in calculating monetary damages are lost wages as well as health, educational, housing and transportation expenses. Twenty-nine states currently have such compensation statutes.

Modifications made to an expungement mechanism allow judges to seal the criminal records of reformed offenders to make it easier for them to find jobs and housing. Businesses screening services are required to delete expunged records.

UNSESSION

Dayton launched a drive to get rid of outdated and duplicative laws and regulations and make state government work faster, cheaper and simpler.

As of Friday, 925 of his 1,007 proposals have become law.

Christopher Magan contributed to this report.