Alternative school program encounters some success as well as some challenges

Ten weeks into the school year, the Tuscaloosa County School System's new G.R.A.D. Academy program has met with success, as well as some difficulties.

Principals Neil Guy and Mark Franks, who run the $250,000-a-year alternative school program out of Holt and Tuscaloosa County high schools, said they've each had a student already graduate from the program. But Guy said he's also had a student who had to be dismissed from the program and recommended for expulsion.

In the 2011-12 school year, the county system had 42 expulsions and 178 dropouts, and students were suspended for a total of 5,688 days. The purpose of G.R.A.D. Academy, which stands for Growth, Recovery, Achievement and Dedication, is to cut down student expulsions.

Franks said the academy is the last resort for students with a considerable track record of behavior and academic problems.

Greg Hurst, coordinator of student services, said if students don't make it through the academy, it's highly likely that they will be recommended for expulsion.

“If that happens, they pushed it just about as far as it can go,” Franks said, referring to student behavior.

Hurst said he's never met a parent who didn't want his or her child to succeed in school. But even with parental support and extra support coming from a school, some students continue to make bad choices.

“The student has to want it,” Hurst said.

Before students are recommended for expulsion, Hurst said he makes sure that everything the school system can do for the student has been done.

Prior to sending students to G.R.A.D. Academy, he said at-risk students are assigned a problem-solving team composed of counselors, students, parents and administrators. Their job is to come up with academic and behavioral achievement plans for each at-risk student.

“That's had a huge impact,” Hurst said.

If a student's behavior and academics don't improve, despite the help of the problem-solving team, the academy becomes the only option.

The G.R.A.D. Academy is a holistic program in which students receive individualized instruction and behavior plans. The academy has small classroom sizes, low student-to-teacher ratios, parental involvement and home visits from the system's social workers and behavior specialists.

Guy said the academy's social worker has been instrumental in keeping the program's students on track.

“The social worker works with the students' families and makes multiple home visits to provide additional support to the parents that we just can't provide,” Guy said. “If there's issues at home, the social worker can offer community resources outside of what our school system can offer.”

There are currently seven students in the academy. Each G.R.A.D. Academy class can take up to 15 students for a total of 30.

Franks, Guy and Hurst said they hope to be able to increase that number soon by moving the academy into its own building.

“Our vision is to move into a stand-alone facility with other programs,” Franks said.

Hurst said that with board permission, they'd like to move into the vacant Lloyd Wood Middle School building alongside the Sprayberry Center, which is also looking to relocate to Lloyd Wood.

The move would mirror a similar one made in the Tuscaloosa City School System at the beginning of the school year when Oak Hill School, a school for alternative education and special-needs students, relocated to the vacant Stillman Heights Elementary School building.

To be recommended for enrollment into the academy, a student must meet at least one of the following criteria:

Be referred to the program by a hearing officer.

Have failed two or more classes.

Had 10 or more absences.

Had three or more office referrals.

Individual schools can choose other factors that would qualify students for the program.

Students are enrolled in the academy full time for at least 30 days. They can't leave the academy until they have at least a 70 average in all academic classes, a 75 overall average, 20 successful days of attendance, two or fewer tardies, two or fewer excused absences, a weekly behavior average of at least 80 and two or fewer disciplinary issues at the academy.

Reach Jamon Smith at jamon.smith@tuscaloosanews.com or 205-722-0204.