Bloomberg calls into question the future of General Electric Co.’s lighting business, which is based in East Cleveland.



“After agreeing to jettison its century-old home-appliances division this month” to China’s Qingdao Haier Co. for $5.4 billion, the news service says, GE “may now shed its legacy business that sells lighting to retail customers. While GE continues to make bulbs for consumers, it’s concentrating on technologically advanced industrial and commercial lighting products — like a streetlamp that calls authorities when a gun is fired.” (The story does not identify any potential buyers by name.)



Bloomberg notes that GE’s retreat from consumer-focused businesses “has been rapid,” as it has divested units that made microwaves, refrigerators and TVs, and that offered credit cards or savings accounts. “Lighting is the only division not already divested or in the process of being sold as part of GE’s dramatic restructuring to focus on heavy-duty industrial equipment,” Bloomberg says.



Beth Comstock, vice chair and head of the business innovations unit that includes lighting, tells Bloomberg, “The lighting industry has become somewhat commoditized. We like where we are, but the focus on our future really is on the smart, connected, commercial space for lighting.”



GE Lighting, formed in 1879, has changed with the times as the “push for more energy-efficient bulbs has led to the phase-out of incandescent technology in recent years,” the story notes.



Even so, “The legacy lighting business — we continue to evaluate our options,” Jeff Bornstein, GE’s chief financial officer, tells Bloomberg. “It’s a business that shrinks every day, every quarter as the world continues to transition away from old technology to new technology.”



The company’s focus is on a new business called Current, which, as Bloomberg puts it, “blends portions of the commercial lighting business with GE’s growing energy-focused operations, and smart LED bulbs for the home.”



“There’s a lot of things we’re learning about what you can do with a light source,” said Maryrose Sylvester, Current’s CEO and formerly head of GE Lighting. “There is a technology shift going on in the lighting industry that is probably more dramatic than anyone expected.”



Crain’s last year produced a special section that looked at the history and future of GE Lighting and Nela Park. You can find those stories here.





The heart of it all

The action in the banking industry these days “is on Main Street, not Wall Street,” Forbes says, and Northeast Ohio has emerged as a particular force.



“The falling share prices and declining CEO pay across Wall Street may not abate in 2016 as the industry adapts to post-crisis regulations, which significantly penalize being too-big-to-fail,” Forbes says.



By contrast, “there is an unheralded crop of regional banks that are growing their earnings by increasing their lending and expanding their footprints,” according to the story. “Many of these Main Street banks are growing organically, taking regional market share from the JPMorgan’s and Citigroup’s of the world.”





This and that

A prime example is the $3.4 billion takeover of Akron-based FirstMerit Corp. by Columbus-based Huntington Bancshares , which Forbes says “exemplifies this undercurrent of change across the United States.” Huntington’s acquisition will also expand its footprint outside of Ohio and into Chicago and Wisconsin.Similarly, Forbes notes, Cleveland-based KeyCorp is pursuing a merger with First Niagara , which would expand Key’s presence in western New York, Pennsylvania, Connecticut and Massachusetts.“In each of these cases, consolidation should drive firms well in excess of $100 billion in assets, a tenth of the size of trillion dollar too-big-to-fail firms, but enough to have the scale to offer the mobile banking services customers expect while being able to also manage regulatory burdens,” Forbes says. “And this trend may be in the early stages.”On Main Street, Forbes concludes, “banks recovered far more slowly from the crisis, hampered in part by the implicit guarantees lavished on their too-big-to-fail counterparts, in addition to weaker-than-expected economic growth. But it seems they are now hitting their stride just as Wall Street firms stumble, burdened by regulation and concerns over the global economy.”

That's the spirit!: The Ohio Department of Commerce’s Division of Liquor Control reports that sales of spirituous liquor in the state reached a record $1.018 billion last year, an increase of 7.34%, exceeding last year’s total by about $70 million.



Retail sales in 2015 were $731 million, an increase of about 8%. Wholesale transactions — liquor purchased by retail permit holders such as restaurants, bars and clubs — were $287.1 million, an increase of 5.5%.



Here are the 10 best-selling brands of spirituous liquor by gallons sold in Ohio for 2015:



• Jack Daniels Tennessee Whiskey – 379,492 gallons



• Fireball Cinnamon Whiskey – 298,406 gallons



• Crown Royal Canadian Whiskey – 291,609 gallons



• Captain Morgan Spiced Rum – 288,676 gallons



• Bacardi Superior Light Rum – 287,901 gallons





• Smirnoff Vodka – 283,801 gallons• Absolut Vodka – 272,521 gallons• Black Velvet Canadian Whiskey – 266,670 gallons• Tito’s Handmade Vodka – 259,328 gallons• Kamchatka Vodka – 250,578 gallonsIn a Republican primary, there’s not a greater insult than this The New York Times says a national conservative group, the American Future Fund , plans to spend $1 million on ads in New Hampshire that brand Ohio Gov. John Kasich an “Obama Republican,” according to the group’s chief strategist.The group “will run a commercial that goes after Mr. Kasich for supporting Common Core educational standards and expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act,” according to the story. It shows an image of Kasich smiling, face to face with Barack Obama, and calls him “one of the few Republican governors to cheerlead Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion.”The ad closes: “John Kasich — Not a conservative. Not even a moderate. An Obama Republican.” New Day for America , a super PAC supporting Kasich, plans to file a complaint with the New Hampshire station WMUR and the Federal Election Commission about the ads. “The first-in-the-nation primary will be decided by New Hampshire voters, not faceless out-of-state millionaires,” Connie Wehrkamp, a spokeswoman for the group, said in a statement.





You also can follow me on Twitter for more news about business and Northeast Ohio.