In the age of “Trump-mania” and “Bernie-mania,” the often ignored and highly underrated Pennsylvania Democratic primary for U.S. Senate seems a bit player.

Yet, this Senate race might matter more in the end than much of the hoopla, hijinks, angst and antics associated with the 2016 presidential race.

That’s because it is almost impossible for national Democrats to regain control of the U.S. Senate without winning Pennsylvania. And it is impossible for state Democrats to win Pennsylvania unless they nominate someone who can beat incumbent Republican Sen. Pat Toomey.

Democrats need only to pick up five seats to control the next Senate. Of the 34 Senate seats elective this year, 24 will be defended by Republicans, including critical seats in Illinois, Wisconsin, New Hampshire, Ohio and Florida.

So Democrats are optimistic about regaining the Senate — and only a little less optimistic about defeating Pat Toomey this fall. Toomey’s strong conservative voting record doesn’t look like a good fit for this year’s electorate and he only won his seat in 2010 by a scant 2 percentage points.

To defeat Toomey, state Democrats fielded four candidates in Tuesday’s primary election: John Fetterman, Katie McGinty, Joe Sestak and Joe Vodvarka. The latter recently was restored to the ballot by the state Supreme Court.

The three major candidates, Fetterman, Sestak and McGinty, differ little on key issues. Each supports campaign finance reform, the Affordable Care Act, gay and abortion rights, gun control, President Barack Obama’s Clean Power Plan and his policies regarding the Middle East and the Islamic State terror group.

Fetterman, the mayor of Braddock, a small former steel town in Allegheny County, talks much about reigniting the working class and the revival of small towns like Braddock.

Sestak, a retired admiral and national security expert, finds his comfort zone discussing national security, defense and foreign policy issues. This is Sestak’s second run for the Senate.

McGinty, a former state official and environmental adviser to Bill Clinton, stresses issues that resonate with women, especially the pay gap and social issues. McGinty is supported by many of the state’s most important labor unions. Consequently, she has emphasized job security, health care and wages.

These candidates have very different personalities and campaign styles. There are real differences among the three.

Fetterman styles himself as the candidate of working men and women. With few airs and even less campaign cash, his most identifiable characteristic comprises his unique persona, complete with a 6-foot-8-inch frame, embroidered with tattoos. A strong supporter of Bernie Sanders, his emphasis on the working class and populist issues makes him the most left-leaning of the three.

Sestak is the quintessential maverick. He defied the Democratic establishment by running in the 2010 primary against the endorsed Sen. Arlen Specter, who earlier had switched parties from Republican to Democrat. Sestak is not well-liked by party leaders. His aloofness, estrangement and sometimes abrasiveness toward many party leaders has hurt him. He has not received any major endorsements from either the national or state Democratic parties. Nor has he endorsed a presidential candidate.

Sestak’s a tenacious campaigner, has spent the last five years campaigning aggressively across the state, often meeting with small groups of Democrats and local leaders. Consequently, many rank-and-file Democrats support him.

McGinty frequently mentions her humble beginnings, as one of nine siblings, the daughter of a Philadelphia police officer, tying these beginnings to policies that protect the safety network. She goes out of her way to deny it, but she is clearly the candidate of the party establishment, having received the endorsements of Mr. Obama, Vice President Joe Biden, Sen. Bob Casey and Gov. Tom Wolf.

Former Gov. Ed Rendell is her campaign manager and she has endorsed the presidential candidacy of Hillary Clinton. In addition, she has received a huge chunk of the state’s major union endorsements.

So what’s likely to happen?

Sestak, winner of the 2010 primary, has steadily led McGinty in polls. But more than 30 percent of voters remain undecided, leaving the race very volatile.

This might be a race where the hoary old maxim of “follow the money” proves prescient.

Campaign spending by the top three Democrats ranks among the top five nationally for the most spending among the 34 Senate seats up for election. Spending in Pennsylvania now exceeds $10 million.

McGinty has picked up almost $3 million in contributions from groups outside of the state, including $1.5 million from the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee and $750,000 from Emily’s List.

Sestak, however, has been no fundraising slouch, raising slightly more than $4 million so far, while Fetterman trails badly, only raising about $330,000.

The race started as a titanic struggle between Sestak and McGinty for the nomination and the heart and soul of the Democratic Party. It’s ending with the outcome still very much in doubt.

Sestak has money and message, and he’s an experienced campaigner. McGinty has momentum, money and the support of virtually the entire state and national political establishment.

Don’t bite your nails off early this week. You may need them on election night.