BROADVIEW HTS. — Surrounded by hulking CAT heavy equipment, Gov. John Kasich told a standing-room only crowd on Tuesday that he was starting to gain traction in his presidential bid.

“We did not rise in the polls based on somebody else’s terms,” Kasich said. “Our campaign is rising in the polls based on a vision and a positive message.”

Kasich, who is battling three other rivals for the Republican presidential nomination, held his rally at the Caterpillar factory in Broadview Heights after returning from Michigan, where he had hoped to win his first primary. He is also hoping to win Ohio’s primary next week as he and other Republicans try to halt current front-runner Donald Trump’s momentum.

At one point, Kasich argued that he is best positioned among his Republican brethren to face Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton, who held her own Cleveland campaign event Tuesday. He said he was beating Clinton by 11 points in some polls.

Wearing a homemade Kasich shirt, Sarah Rish, 32, of Westlake, also mentioned Kasich’s possible crossover appeal after the candidate left the stage.

“I think he’s got the most experience,” Rish said. “I like his positive message. I think he can appeal to a wide variety of voters, including Democrats.”

“How are you going to trump Trump?” one man called out as Kasich began a question-and-answer session.

Kasich said he thought it was fair to compare records, but he didn’t like the attacks that have dominated the Republican campaign.

“Personal attacks, I think, are just not acceptable and getting into a personal attack game, especially with (Trump) in particular, I don’t believe works,” Kasich said, but he also added that many of Trump’s supporters have legitimate concerns.

“This anxiety is real,” Kasich had said earlier in the event.

Later a woman called out that the other three Republican candidates “all need their mouth washed out with soap,” drawing laughs from Kasich and the crowd.

“You’ve got to look for lots of opportunities to make sure everybody in America feels as though they have a chance, because if they don’t, we’re a divided country,” Kasich responded when dealing with a question about empowering minorities.

Kasich touted his record as governor, pointing out that since he defeated Democratic Gov. Ted Strickland in 2010 there have been 420,000 new jobs created in the state. He also said the state has balanced its budget and now has a $2 billion surplus.

Many in local government have been critical of the Kasich administration for slashing state funding to cities, villages and counties as he balanced the budget.

Kasich didn’t shy away from controversies that have hit Cleveland and the nation. He praised protesters for remaining peaceful despite their concerns about police. It was a reference to the decision not to charge two Cleveland police officers in the fatal 2014 shooting of 12-year-old Tamir Rice.

He said people in the city and state came together to deal with those concerns.

“(That) allowed us to go through some very difficult times without violence in the great city of Cleveland because people were united here, and what they said is, we’re not going backwards, we’re going forward,” Kasich said to applause from the crowd.

Kasich also tackled a question from Jenna Bing of Willoughby Hills, who said that pre-existing conditions had prevented her from getting health insurance until Obamacare. Although she said she wasn’t fond of the controversial program, Bing appreciated being able to get covered.

Kasich said he wouldn’t allow people to lose health care coverage because of pre-existing conditions, but also criticized Obamacare for having too many regulations. He said he would take federal resources and combine it with Medicaid and create an exchange that allowed people to purchase health insurance at reasonable rates.

He also said steps need to be taken to control the costs of health care, something he argued Obamacare failed to address. Kasich warned that if something isn’t done to rein in those rising costs, medical care would end up being “rationed.”

After Kasich wrapped up his roughly 40-minute appearance, Bing said she had been impressed with Kasich, who took her question seriously and wasn’t looking for the next person to call on.

“He kept eye contact and spoke to me,” Bing said.

Health care wasn’t the only issue where Kasich said he’d like to give more power to the states on issues ranging from welfare to education.

Kasich also talked compromise when asked about reforming Social Security, saying that some problems won’t be able to be solved without working with at least some Democrats. He said he would start working on Social Security reform.

Not everyone who showed up at the event was a Kasich supporter.

Tommy Menyes, 21, said he’s an independent voter still making up his mind about whom to support next week, but left the event with a positive impression of the governor.

“I liked what Kasich had to say, but I’m not 100 percent sure I’m going to vote for him,” said Menyes, of Medina.