Photo

In this over-polled, over-long, over-crowded Republican presidential contest, the spin of the day is that Ben Carson, the former neurosurgeon who touts his scientific background but rejects science on little things like evolution and global warming, is challenging Donald Trump for the supposed lead in the alleged campaign.

The reason for this, we are supposed to believe, is that he is somehow the anti-Trump: quieter, more thoughtful, more intellectual.

No less a disinterested party than his campaign manager, Barry Bennett, declared to The Washington Post’s Chris Cillizza, that “DBC” (that’s Dr. Ben Carson) “is the smartest man I have ever met.”

Well, that wraps that up. (Although it may have been a low bar for Mr. Bennett, considering that previous clients who paid him to praise them included Rick Perry, Liz Cheney and Rob Portman. Not exactly a Mensa gathering.)

But what is the evidence that he’s the anti-Trump? Well, according to Mr. Bennett and the news articles today about the Carson surge, we start with his long career as a neurosurgeon. Hard to argue with that.

According to Mr. Bennett, Mr. Carson has 67 doctorates! Now that’s impressive. That would be more than one a year, if he started the day he was born. Dr. Carson’s Wikipedia entry, which reads like he wrote it, says he has 38 honorary degrees. So he earned 29 more on his own. That’s got to be close to one a year after he finished medical school and his surgical residency. Wherever did he find the time to separate those conjoined twins that he talks about all the time?

That was an indisputable medical achievement, but is about as irrelevant to being president of the United States as Mr. Trump’s deep experience running casinos into the ground. And if Mr. Carson actually wins the nomination, just remember that the Republicans who will be singing his praises are the same ones who said in 2008 that Barack Obama could not be president because he only was elected to the Senate once.

So how is Mr. Carson different from Mr. Trump? You could be forgiven for assuming that he’s less of a bigot than Mr. Trump since the good (former) doctor is African American. But you would be wrong.

The rioting in Baltimore recently was not a racial matter, Mr. Carson declared at the time. And just like every run-of-the-mill white right-wing political hack, Mr. Carson makes the argument that politicians who talk about the lingering racism in this country, like President Obama, are just fomenting discontent and division.

When Mr. Obama attempted to talk honestly and rationally about racism in America after the South Carolina church murders, Mr. Carson said: “I think I would use the bully pulpit to help people realize what we have in common rather than what separates us. What it’s been used for the last several years is to create wars: a war on women, race wars, any kind of anything involving people of two different races, income wars, always class warfare, religious wars now, age wars.”

He also called the Affordable Care Act “the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery.” (When he was called on that ridiculous comment, Mr. Carson bleated that the political correctness “police” were after him — just like Donald Trump.)

Mr. Carson is different than Mr. Trump, according to Mr. Bennett and other supporters, because he is a scientist, which means he bases his beliefs on data and facts. Well, again, no.

Mr. Carson, in 2004, said he does not believe in evolution and that believing in evolution rejects “morality and the basis of ethical behavior.”

Mr. Carson recently said he does not believe there is any value in using human fetal tissue for medical purposes. Of course now he is running for office. Before that, he conducted research with tissue from fetuses aborted in the ninth and 17th weeks.

Mr. Carson has said that being gay is “absolutely” a choice – one that people often make in prison. He later conceded that he did not actually know how “every individual came to their sexual orientation.”

It is true that Mr. Carson has been quieter, literally, than Mr. Trump. But that may because he didn’t get the microphone much at the first Republican “debate.” Stay tuned.