CLEVELAND - Health fairs aren't anything new, but unlike those of the past, Saturday, Mayor Frank G. Jackson hosted a heath event aimed at helping people answer their many questions when it comes to the Affordable Care Act.

"It's: How do we blend the Healthcare Act with our Healthy Cleveland Initiative?" said Mayor Jackson adding, "If we're trying to set policies around a healthier Cleveland and there is a need to have people go into an infrastructure that will get them to access the healthcare. Then it's up to us to kind-of bring these things together."

"I think there's been a lot of negativity surrounding the topic of enrolling for healthcare but I think this event is really spectacular because it gives people an opportunity to get their questions answered from some trusted resources, from names that they know and they know that the information they're getting is accurate," said Stephanie Hicks with CHAP, the Cuyahoga Health Access Partnership.

That was true for Nedra Moore who admitted she was concerned about the Affordable Care Act. Moore explained, she is in Vocational Christian Service and doesn't earn enough for health insurance.

"I've been praying for like two or three years. I'm like, ‘God, you know I cannot afford any healthcare and so I certainly can't afford to pay any fines,' and I wasn't sure if I would be an exemption or something like that, so I was nervous," said Moore.

After consulting with certain professionals, Moore told NewsChannel5, "I got information which corrected the wrong assumptions that I had about what was happening and actually found a program that would meet my needs so it looks like I'll leave here covered by insurance. It's been a game changer, a life changer for me."

The Affordable Care for a Healthy Cleveland event took place at the Cleveland Public Auditorium at 500 Lakeside E in Cleveland. It began at 10 a.m. and lasted until 4 p.m. More than 30 organizations and health groups were represented at the event, which included everything from free flu shots for kids and adults, to computers allowing you to register for insurance.

The health event was a one-day event. If you missed out but are looking for help in getting your healthcare questions answered, below is a list of the vendors and organizations involved Saturday:

Asian Services in Action – www.asianinc-ohio.org

Benjamin Rose Institute – www.benrose.org

Buckeye Community Health Plan – www.bchpohio.com

Carmella Rose Health Foundation – www.carmellarose.org

City of Cleveland:

Department of Public Health

Department of Aging

Department of Public Works, Div. of Recreation – www.city.cleveland.oh.us

CareSource – www.caresource.com

Case Western Reserve University – www.case.edu

Cleveland Foodbank – www.clevelandfoodbank.org

Cleveland Public Library – www.cpl.org

Cleveland Young Professional Senate – www.clevelandyps.org

Cuyahoga Health Access Partnership – CHAP – cuyahogahealthaccess.org

Cuyahoga County Job and Family Services – cjfs.cuyahogacounty.us

Cuyahoga Metropolitan Housing Authority – cmha.net

Employment Connection – www.employmentconnection.us

Enroll America – www.getcoveredamerica.org

Fairhill Partners – www.fairhillpartners.org

LEAP – Linking Employment, Abilities and Potential – www.leapinfo.org

MedWorks – www.medworksusa.org

MetroHealth System – www.metrohealth.org

Molina Healthcare – www.molinahealthcare.com

Mt. Sinai Health Care Foundation – www.mtsinaifoundation.org

Northeast Ohio Neighborhood Health (NEON) – www.neonhealth.org

Northern Ohio Recovery Association – www.norainc.org

NAHU & CBIZ – www.ohioahu.org

Neighborhood Family Practice – www.nfpmedcenter.org

Paramount Advantage – www.paramounthealthcare.com

RTA – www.riderta.com

Recovery Resources – www.recres.org

Sickle Cell Anemia Association – www.ascaa.org

The Free Medical Clinic of Greater Cleveland – www.thefreeclinic.org

The Word Church – www.wordcity.org

UHCANOhio – uhcanoiho.org

United Way 211 – www.211cleveland.org

Western Reserve Area Agency on Aging – www.psa10a.org