By ,

It takes a deft hand to blend music of three centuries into one seamless musical performance.

Pianist Cory Smythe provided two such hands on Saturday evening's Present Music concert at the Broadway Theatre Center. He blended the music of 19th-century composer Robert Schumann and 20th-century composer Salvatore Sciarrino with improvisations of his own to create a thoughtful, artfully augmented performance of Schumann's "Carnaval."

Performing without interruptions between movements or composers, Smythe linked Schuman's fanciful vignettes, inspired by the annual Venetian Carnival, with Sciarrino's "Perduto un citta d'acque" ("Lost in a city of water"), also inspired by Venice. He used pitches common to Schumann's enigmatic "Sphinxes" movement and the opening of "Perduto" as the initial connecting thread.

Folding Sciarrino's "Due Notturni" I and II into the mix, along with his own improvisations and electronic enhancements, Smythe created a brilliantly conceived, beautifully wrought tapestry of styles, sounds, colors, moods, and characters.

Hearing it was a bit like listening to a familiar piece of music and letting one's mind wander now and then. The familiar rhythms and tonalities of the Schumann blurred seamlessly and dreamily into the Sciarrino pieces and Smythe's improvisations, returning smoothly to the Schumann and then away again.

This was not just a piano recital; it was a Present Music event, built around Smythe's performance and dubbed "Carnival." The event combined music with stock characters of the Commedia dell'Arte, thanks to the Quasimondo Milwaukee Physical Theatre troupe.

The Quasimondo actors interacted with the audience in the house before the concert. They appeared onstage several times during the concert, reacting to the music and each other in what appeared to be largely improvised vignettes and, in the last moments of the piece, interacting with Smythe as well.

Quasimondo's performance was both fascinating and entertaining. The idea of the theatrical vignettes was well suited to the musical vignettes that make up the Schumann. Still, the visual activity drew one's attention from the music, dimming some of the intensity of Smythe's performance.

Violinist Ilana Setapen opened the concert with a performance of Paganini's 24th Caprice for solo violin, dressed as the legendary violinist.

Many in the audience accepted Present Music's invitation to dress for the event, donning masks, headdresses or full costumes and making people watching part of the evening's fun.