This slideshow requires JavaScript.

By Zack Orsborn

Daily Journal

TUPELO – Miriam Goodman found out her son, Jackson, had autism at the age of 3 after being misdiagnosed by three different medical experts.

At the 2016 Autism Awareness Race Saturday hosted by the Autism Center, Miriam wore a green T-shirt that read “Running for Jackson” above a jigsaw puzzle piece, the symbol for autism awareness.

“It’s awesome to see this many people come out for autism awareness,” she said. “The more people that know about autism, the better because it does affect so many people.”

To kick off Autism Awareness Month, the Tupelo Autism Center hosted the 5k run to raise awareness and help fund therapy scholarships for families affected by autism.

At the time Miriam found about Jackson’s diagnosis, she didn’t know much about the condition even though she was a nurse.

“You have to be your child’s advocate,” she said. “It’s very hard to hear something is wrong with your child, and it’s easy to keep your head in the sand, but I knew that something wasn’t right.”

Miriam took Jackson, now age 6, to the Autism Center where he received speech therapy and occupational therapy. Miriam uses the Autism Center as a resource center to ask questions about Jackson’s symptoms and behavior.

Since then, Jackson adjusted to being mainstreamed into public school.

“Jackson is doing wonderful,” she said. “That has been the best thing for him, to be in a classroom with typical peers. He has a wonderful teacher and a full-time aide.”

All blue

Emilee Kennedy, fundraising coordinator with the Autism Center, helped organize the event, which included a burger meal hosted by Parks and Recreation, face painting and a bracelet shop hosted by Public Works.

“We’ve had well over 200 people here,” she said. “It cost $20 to pre-register and $30 to register today. Most of our funds go straight to the grants and scholarships we do for the therapy for the kids.”

To continue autism awareness in April, local restaurants and the city have planned events to raise funds.

“They have the buildings lit up in blue for the month of April at City Hall,” Kennedy said. “We have several restaurants that are going to do a Spirit Night where they donate a portion of their proceeds to the Autism Center.”

She said the run lets people become more aware about autism.

“We would love to get to a place where people know exactly what autism is and how to respond to it and how to help out,” Kennedy said. “We want to continue providing resources for families that have children with autism.”

More sensory-friendly

When Susan Hill, director of Bridge the Gap and volunteer at the Autism Center, found out her three children all had autism, she had to scour the Internet for information.

Locally, not much awareness for autism was being done.

“You didn’t hear much about it. You could see some help in public schools, but my son was diagnosed before school age,” Hill said. “It was difficult. Seeing this growing in awareness, it’s awesome.”

Hill appreciates that April is Autism Awareness Month, but for those families that “deal with it,” she wants to see a culture of acceptance.

It’s OK to be aware, she said, but people need to learn what autism is about.

“I know that April is just a month, but for people that don’t deal with it, it kind of steps them into it in a general way,” Hill said. “Then, down the road, if the come across someone with autism, they are like, ‘I know what this is,’ and they don’t feel clueless or uninformed.

As the director of Bridge the Gap, Hill promotes autism through a parent-led team of professions, both in education and experience, that seek to educate, equip and empower the community to become sensory-friendly, which means creating a calmer environment for children with autism.

Currently, Hill attends school for social work to help the community raise awareness.

“I’m a mom with three kids with autism, so I have some experience with it, and I need a little education to back it up,” she said. “With our support group, we try do sensory-friendly movies, and we create community events that sort of fills the gap that the Autism Center doesn’t do.”

Hill’s main goal is to help other parents receive the services they need and show what the Autism Center can do.

“We hope businesses can get on board and kind of learn how to adjust their businesses to create a supportive atmosphere,” she said. “We’d love to see this community become sensory-friendly.”

zack.orsborn@journalinc.com

Twitter: @thedaily_zack