Don’t be fooled by the fact the race for Congress in California’s 25th District is between two Republicans. The district, which runs from the north San Fernando Valley up to Lancaster and Palmdale, is notably bipartisan and diverse.

More power to the candidate who displays the better grasp of what the district is all about.

That appears to be former state legislator Tony Strickland, who receives the Los Angeles News Group editorial board’s endorsement for the November election.

This marks a change. Before the June primary, the editorial board endorsed Steve Knight — in a close call over two other solid candidates — believing the conservative state senator understood his constituents would expect a spirit of compromise from its next representative. But as sometimes happens, events in the campaign have brought that key assumption into question.

We are troubled by Knight’s on-and-off alliance with Tim Donnelly, the assemblyman from Hesperia who ran for governor in the primary and saw his extreme stands on the issues sharply rejected by voters.

In September, Donnelly announced plans to walk precincts in Santa Clarita to campaign for Knight, with whom he made common cause on the conservative side of issues involving guns and abortion and a weird dust-up about the sale of Confederate memorabilia in state facilities. Only after Democrats and independents in the district expressed alarm did Knight order Donnelly out of the congressional campaign. This was too late to keep Lee Rogers, the top Democrat in the 25th District primary, from withdrawing his valuable endorsement of Knight.

Not unfairly, Strickland says the episode calls Knight’s judgment into question. Knight should have headed off any connection with Donnelly before it became an issue.

The 25th District, whose registered voters are 37.5 percent Democrats and 37 percent Republicans, is choosing a successor to retiring Rep. Howard “Buck” McKeon, a lion of military policy. The district needs a representative with the credibility to work with both parties and all groups. Knight’s credibility is damaged.

That’s too bad. Knight impressed us before the primary with his rejection of the all-or-nothing attitude of many Congress members. He opposes Obamacare, for instance, but said he’d rather work to improve it than prolong efforts to repeal it.

Strickland should take a similar approach. Indeed, as the general-election campaign has dented Knight’s compromiser cred, it seems to have made Strickland more thoughtful. The one-time anti-Obamacare hardliner now says, “If there’s a fix to it, I’ll be part of that solution”; though he’s a Second Amendment hawk, he said he favors the new California law allowing relatives to ask judges to take firearms away from people they believe are a threat.

That Strickland emerges as a more suitable face for the 25th District is ironic. Having originally planned to challenge Rep. Julia Brownley in the 26th District, he is derided by some as a carpetbagger. But the way the campaign in the 25th has played out, Strickland does seem like a better fit than Knight.

Advertisement

Vote Strickland for Congress on Nov. 4.