Good morning.

We're prisoners of B.S. polling The electorate can no longer avoid The Question: Where the hell is the Fox Business Network on your satellite or cable channel guide? Yes, yes, Dr. Carson, I know, I know, it sounds like another "gotcha" question from the media. Regardless, before or after you do locate it, read Harvard's Jill Lepore about political polling in the new issue of The New Yorker. She offers a comprehensive and deflating overview, examining their increasingly dubious essence in a world of decreasing response rates. Lepore is also a New Yorker staff writer who calls the media penchant for and reliance on polls "frantic, volatile, shortsighted, sales-driven, and anti-democratic" in a piece titled, "Politics and the New Machine." And guess who, pretty obviously, has been this season's most vivid beneficiary of dubious polls? Yes, Donald Trump. "To reach the Land of Caucuses and Primaries, the Candidate must first cross the Sea of Polls. Trump is a creature of that sea," she writes. (Poynter) Well, enjoy the debate. And here's a Fox "channel finder" to save you from dialing 911 or the seemingly disappeared Maria Bartiromo, the former CNBC star now apparently at Fox Business Network, to ask where's the debate. (Fox Business)

A student photographer in Missouri shows us how to do it James Fallows of The Atlantic was rightly taken by the composure under duress displayed by Tim Tai as he sought to get photos of the student protesters at the University of Missouri, who weren't especially inclined to cooperate during their 10 minutes of rebellious renown. Looking at video of Tai, Fallows discerned how "In real time, under mounting pressure, he shows intellectual and emotional composure anyone in our business would admire. The way the students (and some professors) are dealing with him is the way I've seen officials in China deal with reporters, which is not a comparison that reflects well on them. Sincere congratulations to someone who this morning had no idea he would be in the national eye." (The Atlantic)

The reviews of Trump on SNL It seems fitting, does it not, that the ratings were very big, the reviews very bad? It's kind of a metaphor, no? "The Guardian billed the episode 'nothing short of torture,' Entertainment Weekly complained about the 'clear lack of energy or thought,' while, most damning of all, The Hollywood Reporter argued that 'even with expectations lowered to bargain-basement level, this week’s show was a dumpster fire.'" (Frontiers Media) There we go, thanks Hollywood Reporter, highly-rated "dumpster fire." Absolutely Norman Mailer-esque.

Rolling Stone's botched rape story (cont.) Another lawsuit was filed, this from the Phil Kappa Psi frat chapter at the University of Virginia. It seeks $25 million in damages, including "injury to its reputation." (Poynter) How many kegs of beer would that bring? Current workload for the magazine's attorneys: "Three individual fraternity members, who are now graduates, are suing for at least $225,000 each, and a university associate dean who claimed she was portrayed as the 'chief villain' is suing the magazine for more than $7.5 million." (The New York Times)

Totally legal corporate theft Journal Media Group, whose primary asset is the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, bought 13 Scripps Howard papers last year when it was called Journal Communications and has itself now been bought by Gannett. This means that Tim Stautberg, CEO of Journal Media Group, will be paid $4.56 million for less than one year of work. His very golden parachute will include $3.05 million in cash, $1.13 million in equity, $334,274 in pension and $44,503 in other perks, according to a proxy statement reported by the Milwaukee Business Journal. (Poynter) Imagine how many decent reporters Gannett could hire to actually cover Milwaukee with that amount of dough. They might even expand the business section to cover sweetheart compensation packages. Oh, I forgot: knock on wood the guy need not expend valuable time perusing the Obamacare website since his monthly health care premiums are taken care of for two-and-a-half years unless he gets hired by somebody else with group benefits.

Sign of the times As if readers notice anymore, a bank cut a deal with The Boston Globe to publish sponsored content and a popular column, "Talking Points," in the business section. "The written sponsored content will be authored by Boston Globe Media's new content services business unit, not its business news desk staff." (Talking Biz News) Hey, maybe the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Boston will now do penance and take out strip ads next to coverage of "Spotlight," the flick about the paper's nervy coverage of the child sex abuse within the church.

Obama's new Facebook page isn't so new So the White House announced a spanking new Facebook page for the president in an obvious attempt to deflect attention from the visit of Benjamin Netanyahu (right?). But this new "official" page is, ah, pretty much like one that had previously been launched. "It's really hard to tell what this new page accomplishes that the other does not. The same exact post is also on the official Barack Obama Facebook page as a re-post" from the other. (TechCrunch)

A cautionary note about campus 'political correctness' stories Writing in The Washington Post, Tufts University's Dan Drezner brings some needed context to media hyping the notion that free speech is under assault on campuses. Using a flap over race at Yale University as his hitching post, he notes, "One of the purposes of college is to articulate stupid arguments in stupid ways and then learn, through interactions with fellow students and professors, exactly how stupid they are. Anyone who thinks that the current generation of college students is uniquely stupid is either an amnesiac or willfully ignorant. As a professor with 20 years of experience, I can assure you that college students have been saying stupid things since the invention of college students." This piece should be clipped by anybody dispatched to a college campus on the next free speech dispute. (The Washington Post) If there's anything really different today, it's just that the stupid can go viral.

Publishers, beware A newsletter for publishers discusses distributed content, notably the many deals folks are cutting with Facebook. Says Andreas Pfeiffer, a sharp European tech and media consultant: "By adopting the new format, publishers might actually be depriving themselves of a major source of traffic. Since readers do not have to go to a publisher's website to read an article, they may have absolutely no idea who provides the information they are ingesting. Even worse, Facebook could skew their algorithms to favour Instant Articles over outgoing links, or favour a certain kind of story over another, considered more appropriate for the Facebook audience. Will it happen? It's too early to tell. Can you trust Facebook? I don't think so. It's certainly something to reckon with." This is a long, data-filled opus worthy of a look. (World Association of Newspapers and News Publishers)

Making money by NOT pandering to millennials Michael Wolff of USA TODAY is taken with Oldie, "a small phenomenon of British publishing, a growing and profitable magazine that celebrates a certain sort of crankiness and deftly turns its back on any interest in the young, or even in being young." It's the handiwork of a 75-year-old, Alexander Chancellor, doesn't appear to care about digital and targets "what must surely be a growing world of people weary of disruption, skeptical of innovation, disheartened by millennials and depressed by BuzzFeed." (USA TODAY)

As for tonight's GOP debate Says Fox Business Network co-moderator Neil Cavuto about the strategy for him, Bartiromo and The Wall Street Journal's Editor Gerard Baker (nice that Baker took the gig for himself): "Don’t trivialize this, don't 'gotcha' this, don't make this into something it's not. It's a debate on economic issues, it’s not 'Access Hollywood.'" We shall see.