Saturday Los Antojitos served their last meal until they reopen next year.

"I don't know what I'm gonna do for a year," said customer, Cindy Mckean.

Locals like Cindy Mckean have been coming to Los Antojitos for 25 years, but because of the upcoming DOT flyover project the restaurant served it's last meal on Saturday.

"Well it's sad, but I think it's a good opportunity with the traffic the way it is I sit in it everyday trying to get across the bridge," said Mckean.

Mynta Harbison and her husband have owned the restaurant for the past 14 years.

"We have mixed emotions, bittersweet. We have made some amazing memories here," said co-owner of Los Antojitos, Mynta Harbison. "We have met lots of great customers, we've had great fabulous employees, but we're definitely looking forward to chapter two."

Harbison says she wasn't happy about the deal at first, but now she's looking towards the future.

She said, "The law was not really on our side as far as benefits being paid to us, as far as business damages go, but at the same time we're just trying to say the glass is half full and we're gonna take this opportunity to build new."

In about a year's time this empty lot will be the new home of Los Antojitos and customers tell me they're already counting down the days until they reopen.

"I've got my very last bite that's gonna last me until 2016," said customer, Tammy Carpenter.

Carmen Chinchilla has been working as a waitress at Los Antojitos for the past 19 years. It was her first job after moving to the U.S. From Costa Rica. When she started she didn't speak a word of English.

"They're like family to me, they have been with me in the worst moments of my life and the good ones," said Los Antojitos waitress, Carmen Chinchilla.

Working as a waitress allowed Chinchilla to pay her way through college. She's now a surgical tech, but she still works as a waitress part time. To her it's much more than a restaurant, Los Antijitos is a home.

"We always sit around and drink and eat with the customers we share the meals you don't do that in other places," said Chinchilla.

Los Antojitos will relocate to Beck Avenue in St. Andrews. Harbison says they plan on breaking ground this April.