Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

We’re down to two.

And, boy, they both look impressive.

Top-ranked Clemson and No. 2 Alabama will face off in the desert for the national championship after dominating wins in the College Football Playoff semifinals Thursday. The Tigers romped in the second half for a 37-17 win over No. 4 Oklahoma in the Orange Bowl, followed by an even more dominating performance in which the Crimson Tide thumped Michigan State 38-0 in the Cotton Bowl.

The Jan. 11 title game in Glendale, Arizona, matches a high-scoring Clemson offense led by quarterback Deshaun Watson against Nick Saban’s latest dominating defense at Alabama, which limited the Spartans to 239 yards.

There’s another story line to the title game. Clemson coach Dabo Swinney is an Alabama alumnus who played on the Tide’s 1992 national championship team.

Now, he’s going against the greatest coach of this generation. Saban has won three national titles in the last six years at Alabama, to go along with a BCS title at LSU.

Clemson and Alabama will be playing for the first time since 2008, when Alabama won 34-10 in a game that signaled the Tide’s return to national prominence under Saban.

That was also a pivotal year for the Tigers. Embattled coach Tommy Bowden resigned after six games, and Swinney — who was in charge of receivers — took over as head coach. Serving at first on an interim basis, he got the job permanently after leading Clemson to bowl eligibility.

Now, he’s got the Tigers within one win of their first national title since 1981.

“I knew that we would be here,” Swinney said. “It was just a matter of when.”

Alabama is playing for another title after being upset by Ohio State in the semifinals of the inaugural College Football Playoff.

Saban said his team came into this playoff with a different attitude.

“Last year we sort of just participated in the game,” he said. “This year, we really wanted to make a statement and do something special.”

These teams have been on a collision course since Clemson and Alabama were ranked 1-2 in the second College Football Playoff rankings. They’ve held the top two spots since, leaving no doubt they’re the best teams in the country.

With Alabama favored by 7 points, Clemson is the underdog for a second straight game. Oklahoma was favored in the Orange Bowl by 4 points.

A look at the semifinals and what to expect heading to the title game:

NO MORE CLEMSONING

A team once known for such inexplicable stumbles that a derisive term was coined for it — Clemsoning — blew out the No. 4 Sooners over the final two quarters after trailing 17-16 at halftime.

Quarterback Deshaun Watson turned in another stellar all-around performance, beating Oklahoma with his arm and his legs. The defense did the rest, shutting down Baker Mayfield and a Sooners offense that was averaging 52 points over its previous seven games.