Republican candidate for governor Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott says he would still refuse federal health care money if elected. (Published Monday, Oct. 13, 2014)

NBC 5 is partnering with The Dallas Morning News, KERA and Telemundo 39 to produce in-depth reports about the race for Texas governor. We asked our viewers, readers and listeners to vote on the topics most important to them. For five days, we will report in-depth on each of those topics: education, immigration, health care, economy and infrastructure.

The third report is on health care. Click here to see our report on Texas Sen. Wendy Davis.

In a one-on-one interview, Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott explained his health care plan, saying it will provide more access to more people

"My plan increases funding for women's health care. It increases funding for veterans, disabled, and mental health needs," said Abbott.

"How do you not raise taxes and pay for all that?" asked NBC 5 reporter Julie Fine.

"My health Texans plan costs about $400 million. That can all be assumed by the current growth that we have in our state budget, so we pay for it out of general revenue without having to raise a single penny in taxes," said Abbott.

But this allotment not include money from Washington, D.C.

And Texas has the highest number of uninsured people in the nation.

Governor Perry did not take the federal money offered as part of the Affordable Care Act.

5 Days in October: Greg Abbott on Immigration

That would mean lower premiums for many.

In a debate, Abbott was asked whether he would try to work a deal with Washington.

Abbott instead said the best strategy for Texas is to try and get a block grant, which provides flexibility in spending.

"These bureaucrats in Washington, D.C., they don't know how to address our health care problem here," said Abbott.

Abbott, Davis Spar in Final Gubernatorial Debate

Health care is a big issue in this race, as is abortion rights.

"I am pro life. I am Catholic, and I believe like most Texans do that all life is sacred. But here in Texas we also understand that we live in a state that is governed by the rule of law," he said. "In what the state of Texas has passed in HB 2 does more than even before to protect innocent life, but also the health and safety of mothers, while at the very same time ensuring all women have at least five months to make the decision about whether or not they are going to have an abortion, regardless of how that child was conceived."

Abbott Responds to Davis' Abortion Revelation

We asked Abbott, who is an anti-abortion advocate, his position when a woman is raped or a victim of incest.

"Women who are victims of rape and incest have five months to decide whether or not they are going to have an abortion, but it is also essential to point out when it comes to rape and incest our first reaction must be one of compassion and support for the victims of that crime," said Abbott.

CLICK HERE for a special 5 Days in October section from The Dallas Morning News.