BOULDER — Colorado coach Tad Boyle has been trying to convince his players they are talented enough to win without two of their top scoring threats.

Perhaps the team finally believed it Saturday night.

Leading comfortably for most of the game, Colorado (10-9, 3-4 Pac-12) got 21 points from Askia Booker and snapped a four-game losing streak with an easy 90-58 conference victory over Washington State at the Coors Events Center. It was CU’s largest margin of victory this season.

“I told the guys to play with a free mind, an uncluttered mind,” Boyle said. “You can’t play this game worried about making mistakes. I want our guys to understand they are good.”

In its first season under veteran coach Ernie Kent, Washington State (9-10, 3-4) entered the game as one of the league’s biggest surprises. But the Cougars couldn’t keep up with Colorado’s small lineup that was without injured frontcourt stalwarts Josh Scott (back spasms) and Xavier Johnson (ankle) for the fourth consecutive game.

“That’s as well as I’ve seen Colorado play in a while,” said Kent, a former Oregon coach and a basketball analyst for the Pac-12 Network the past few years. “They played a wonderful game.”

Colorado shot 54.8 percent, and six Buffs players scored in double figures, a first since a win over Jackson State early in the 2013-14 season. Sophomore forward Wesley Gordon recorded a double-double with 10 points and 14 rebounds.

In addition to playing freely, Boyle told his team before the game it was OK for them to be ticked off about the four-game losing streak.

“We definitely played with more of an edge tonight,” CU junior guard Xavier Talton said.

Josh Hawkinson and DaVonte Lacy each scored 12 points for Washington State, which was limited to 38.7 percent shooting.

At the start, Colorado also was without the other member of its “big three.” Booker, a senior guard, was kept out of the starting lineup by Boyle as a penalty for being late to the afternoon shootaround.

“I thought Askia responded well,” Boyle said. “It’s not a big issue. But this team has standards.”

Connecting on seven of their first eight shots, the Buffs raced to a 19-5 lead — most of it produced without Booker. He entered the game at the 16:06 mark, with the Buffs up 13-5.

Colorado recorded 25 assists, the most in five seasons under Boyle. The Buffs worked the ball all over the court. Posting career bests in assists were Talton (six) and Gordon (five), the sophomore forward.

The Buffs were able to penetrate Washington State’s zone defense with slashing drives. Also, Colorado got a spark from an unlikely source. Freshman forward Tory Miller, a season-long reserve, contributed 10 points and seven rebounds, his best game as a Buff.

“I think you saw what this team is capable of,” Boyle told reporters. “You could just feel it turning. Maybe the light switch turned on.”