When Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto first visited the White House as president-elect in November 2012, he was determined to reframe the U.S.-Mexico relationship. Security had dominated the bilateral agenda since 2001, and the new administration sought to give economic ties the leading role.

Now beginning his third year in office, Peña Nieto will be back in Washington tomorrow for his second White House meeting amid renewed security concerns. While his bold structural reform program has impressed foreign investors and the international media, public anger over the September disappearance of 43 students in Guerrero state, compounded by a series of corruption allegations, threatens the administration’s economic message. Peña Nieto’s meeting with President Barack Obama could not come at a more critical time.

The Obama administration should seize this opportunity to review security cooperation and refocus on important joint efforts to strengthen the rule of law and confront drug-related violence. It would be a mistake, however, to allow the pendulum of the bilateral relationship to swing completely in this direction. Both dimensions — economics and security — require attention at the highest levels of government.



[SEE: 2014: The Year in Cartoons]

At a minimum, rebalancing in favor of economic opportunities has succeeded in positively changing the tone of the bilateral relationship in ways that tough security and migration challenges could not. As Obama acknowledged during a press conference prior to visiting Mexico in May 2013, “We’ve spent so much time on security issues between the United States and Mexico that sometimes I think we forget this is a massive trading partner responsible for huge amounts of commerce and huge numbers of jobs on both sides of the border.”

Both the U.S. and Mexican private sectors know the value of this relationship — not only trading products, but also designing and producing them together. More than $1 billion dollars’ worth of goods crosses the border every single day. The United States sells more to Mexico than it does to Brazil, Russia, India, and China combined. Moreover, it is estimated that 40 percent of the value of final goods imported from Mexico consists of U.S. content, a much higher proportion than any other trading partner.

Over the last two years, a veritable conveyor belt of cabinet secretaries between the two capitals has demonstrated the degree of interest in the trade and investment agenda. As the Peña Nieto administration pushed through landmark domestic reforms, from energy to telecommunications, the two governments established or reinforced existing bilateral mechanisms to provide strategic direction to joint economic-competitiveness initiatives.

U.S. Vice President Biden launched the U.S.-Mexico High Level Economic Dialogue in September 2013 and will host the second iteration of the annual meeting tomorrow. Attended by several cabinet secretaries from both countries, the dialogue created a space for an ongoing conversation around three pillars: promoting competitiveness, boosting economic growth and innovation, and fostering cooperation at the regional and global levels. Other new bilateral dialogues focus on educational exchange and entrepreneurship promotion.



[GALLERY: Barack Obama Cartoons]

Mexico has also elevated economics on the trilateral agenda with Canada. At the most recent North American Leaders Summit hosted by Mexico one year ago and at subsequent ministerial gatherings, the three governments have made substantial progress in areas such as commerce and energy. Most importantly, Mexico and Canada have been party to the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations since 2012, following intense lobbying by the pro-trade Mexican government. Once concluded, the Trans-Pacific Partnership will offer the best vehicle to upgrade the North American Free Trade Agreement, now more than 20 years old.

Such summits, meetings and negotiations amount to more than an overdose of acronyms. They are tackling nitty-gritty obstacles to the cross-border business that undergirds North American prosperity.

It is this economic reality that lends importance to Peña Nieto’s trip to Washington, the first foreign visit to the White House in the new year. As Mexico works to implement its reforms in 2015, the United States has a strategic opportunity to capitalize on the two countries’ increasingly unified and competitive economic space. Fortunately, the bilateral mechanisms created over the last two years have laid the foundation for continued cooperation on the massive trade and investment agenda, though progress will require sustained senior-level attention and close engagement with the private sector and civil society.