Police release CCTV of tattoo artist’s assassination CCTV footage recorded inside a tattoo parlour shows 40-year-old Daniel Vella coming face-to-face with the man who fatally shot him

BEFORE he even had the chance to realise what was happening, tattoo artist Daniel Vella was dead, the victim of a callous hitman who didn't care who he shot - or even if they lived or died.

Captured on security cameras, the moments before the murder show a gunman with no regard for who he is shooting or who is watching as he pumps one bullet into Mr Vella and another four into the air. Police have released the footage of two men ­responsible for the shooting of Mr Vella, who they believe was in the wrong place at the wrong time.

The 40-year-old tattooist had a minor criminal record from years ago and according to police there was no motive for anyone to want him dead.

"Mr Vella was just working in the wrong place," Detective Inspector Angelo Memmolo said. "It is obvious from the video they meant to shoot someone - anyone - and didn't care who it was."

On a Saturday night in March two years ago, Mr ­Vella and another tattoo artist were working on two clients inside the Pretty In Ink tattoo parlour on Victoria Rd, West Ryde. Two other staff and another customer were in the front reception area.

At 9.45pm, two men wearing hoodies and bandannas walked into the main studio via a rear entrance to the property. Without hesitation one of the men walked up to Mr Vella and shot him in the left shoulder while he was tattooing another male.

The shooting took place so quickly that no one else in the shop had time to react.

Mr Vella staggered out of the shop on to Victoria Rd, before collapsing on to the footpath, where paramedics frantically attempted to ­revive him. He was pronounced dead on arrival at Royal North Shore Hospital.

Police believe Mr Vella was not the intended target, but merely the target of an ­attempt at intimidation.

"These two are callous grubs who didn't care at all about who they were shooting," said Det Insp Memmolo.

"From our investigations Mr Vella was an employee of the parlour and had no links himself to bikie gangs.

"His family, particularly his mother, want to know who did this and why, and we want the public to help us."

After shooting Mr Vella, the assailant fired the weapon four more times before he and his accomplice fled through the rear door on to Gaza Rd. Beside the bullet that hit Mr Vella, none of the other four shots killed or ­injured anyone else.

The two other parlour ­employees working that night, and the three clients, all ran from the studio on to Victoria Rd and immediately called emergency services.

The CCTV camera was inside the parlour at West Ryde.

"We obviously want to talk to anyone who may know these two people, or have ­information about them," Det Insp Memmolo said. Other leads were also being followed.

Detectives from the State Crime Command's homicide squad formed Strike Force Wootten to investigate the shooting and hope the release of the footage will prompt someone to come forward.

CRIMESTOPPERS 1800 333 000