U.S. infrastructure will suffer some “very bad incidents” before officials double down on cybersecurity, a leading information security expert predicted.



Eugene Kaspersky, the founder and CEO of research and software firm Kaspersky Lab, said institutions that run power grids, chemical plants and other pieces of critical infrastructure are typically even slower to adopt good online security than corporations.





ADVERTISEMENT

The comments are the latest in a series of warnings to the infrastructure world to beef up cyber defenses before hackers or terrorists can use vulnerabilities to their advantage.“I don’t predict any scenario that is greater than cyber terrorism,” Kaspersky said at a lunch with reporters, according to Network World.“I’m afraid some very bad incidents will occur” before officials seek improvements, he said. “The good news: Not a lot of attacks like this are happening.”The Moscow-based Kaspersky Lab is considered one of the world’s preeminent authorities on the world of hacking and data breaches. The group regularly discovers new hacking operations and cyber thefts, including a global online bank heist worth as much as $1 billion.Kaspersky said Tuesday that the firm is focusing energy on the Internet of Things, a term that refers to the wide variety of everyday items that are connected to the Internet and thus vulnerable to hacking."We have to look at possible criminal scenarios of that device. Are the criminals interested in this particular device? And every time we do that for any device on the market,” Kaspersky said, according to the Boston Business Journal.“So we decided not to develop any kind of security for iPods. There was only one proof of concept written to infect the iPod, like 10 years ago and that's it. Apple Watches, we don't know. Google Glass? We checked and we said yes. Smart TV? We had a look at it and we have prototype. We don't release to the market because the threats don't exist at the moment, but we are waiting. We are 100 percent sure it will happen. When? We don't know. Smart cars? In future years. And maybe smart coffee machines, et cetera, et cetera."