Hospitals fear FCC’s spectrum auction

FCC SPECTRUM AUCTION: GOOD OR BAD FOR HEALTH CARE?: Hospitals are worried sick about the FCC’s plan to sell broadcast airwaves in the March 29 spectrum auction. The FCC’s handling of spectrum use around the auction will put wireless hospital devices — fetal-heart monitors, trackers on Alzheimer’s patients and the like — at risk for interference from others placed very near it, the American Hospital Association says. Hospitals already have a dedicated channel to use for such devices, Channel 37, but the FCC is endangering that by crowding the space with new wireless broadcasting, the AHA says. They continue to plead with the commission and Congress for help.

— But wireless companies say the upcoming spectrum auction — expected to generate billions in revenue — will greatly benefit the growing world of health gadgets and remote health monitoring devices. The broadcast airwaves up for sale are the beachfront property of spectrum – finite, highly desirable ways to wirelessly deliver data that can penetrate walls and travel great distances. Companies like Verizon and other tech companies say the additional spectrum could free up uses for round-the-clock monitoring of blood-sugar readings, heart rates and other health data. They’re pushing to keep the March 29 auction on track.

Story Continued Below

— The FCC — and Capitol Hill staffers paying close attention to the auction – don’t have the knowledge of health care and hospital engineering to fully grasp the fallout of commission’s policies, the Hospital Association says. The health staffers in Congress aren’t the ones working on FCC policies and vice versa. If something goes wrong and new broadcasters interfere with hospital wireless devices, they say, it will put patient lives at risk. Pros get the full story here: http://politico.pro/1SM7PWP

FIRST IN MORNING EHEALTH: Which is better? A community-wide health information exchange used by any and all willing participants or one developed by a health system for its affiliated hospitals and doctors? The question is explored in the March issue of The Milbank Quarterly. Both types have challenges, but so-called enterprise HIEs may be better, says the paper. And it’s all about the money. “Health policymakers might try to encourage the exchange of public information, but the business case for enterprise HIEs clearly is stronger,” the research concludes. “The sustainability of a community HIE, potentially a public good, may necessitate ongoing public funding and supportive regulation.” The paper: http://bit.ly/1XqaHaV

eHealth tweet of the day: @bobkocher: Retweeted OMBPress: Some of the biggest accomplishments of Obama is 18F, USDS, and Health Datapalozza = The Todd Park effect!

@OMBPress: ICYMI .@potus travels to SXSW to make his pitch to America's best & brightest: Help make government work http://wapo.st/1WewH8h

Welcome to Monday morning eHealth where the dorky side of us is celebrating Pi Day, 3.1416. Don’t forget to pass along your news at dpittman@politico.com and connect with us on Twitter @David_Pittman, @arthurallen202, @DariusTahir @ POLITICOPro, @Morning_eHealth.

MORE ICD-10 CODES TO LEARN: CMS and the CDC will add roughly 1,900 diagnosis codes and 3,651 hospital inpatient procedure codes to the ICD-10 coding system in fiscal 2017. The large number of new codes is due to the fact that updates weren’t allowed prior to last year’s implementation. That and the multiple delays in ICD-10 left a long list of new codes waiting to be added, according to the American Hospital Association.

UPDATE ON REMOVING SOCIALS FROM MEDICARE: Per last year’s Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act, CMS will start issuing new Medicare cards in April 2018 with a new Medicare billing identifier, HIMSS is telling its members. MACRA requires CMS to remove Social Security number-based IDs from cards, to cut down on identify theft. “All systems and business processes will need to be able to accept and process transactions using the new MBI by April 2018,” HIMSS says. Over 60 million Medicare cards with the new identifier will be distributed to beneficiaries between April 2018 and April 2019, says HIMSS. More info: http://bit.ly/22eefQY

GOVERNMENTS NAMED TOP INNOVATORS: Reuters is out with its list of top 25 government innovators across the globe. HHS came in at number 4 thanks to the work of the FDA, NIH and CDC. The full list: http://reut.rs/1RAh5bo

COMING THIS WEEK: FIRST HEALTH CYBER TASK FORCE MEETING: The Obama administration has been soliciting applications for its Health Care Industry Cybersecurity Task Force, mandated by the Cybersecurity Act of 2015 to draft a report on improving cybersecurity. The first teleconference for the task force is set for Thursday, per HHS’s Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response. We’ll keep you up to date on the panel’s membership and meetings.

HELP MENTAL HEALTH MARKUP: No word yet on whether or not a pilot that would add certain behavioral health providers to meaningful use under a five-year pilot will make it into a manager’s amendment, but the HELP Committee will mark up the bill Wednesday. Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse is pushing for the meaningful use pilot. “As he’s seen in Rhode Island and elsewhere, leaving behavioral health providers out of our IT infrastructure makes the challenging task of coordinating care for patients with mental health conditions even more difficult,” his spokesperson tell us.

MACRA OVERSIGHT: The House Energy and Commerce Committee on Thursday will hold a hearing on MACRA implementation. Questions may arise about how meaningful use will be folded up into the MIPS program. http://1.usa.gov/1RTwE0q

WHAT WE’RE CLICKING:

CDC head explains his agencies work on wearables: http://bit.ly/1Ulic3C

Colorado HIE wants to add behavioral health to its fold: http://bit.ly/1TTar6E

An example of how APIs are changing health care: http://bit.ly/1SLoERI

Maine newspaper supports tele-abortion provider in the state: http://bit.ly/1Rdqn2P

Tips, comments, suggestions? Send them along via email to our team: Arthur Allen (aallen@politico.com, @ArthurAllen202), David Pittman (dpittman@politico.com, @David_Pittman) and Darius Tahir (dtahir@politico.com, (@DariusTahir).