Walsh’s legislation is more blatant than most in duplication. | M.Scott Mahaskey/POLITICO Borrowed time: Tale of a Walsh bill

A college thesis isn’t the only source that Montana Sen. John Walsh has borrowed from.

The New York Times broadsided on Wednesday the appointed senator, who faces a difficult election campaign to begin with, by detailing a plagiarism case regarding his 2007 college thesis. But the Democratic senator got some good news the same day: His legislation to eliminate tax provisions exploited by outsourcing companies surprisingly advanced past a Republican filibuster, 93-7.

Story Continued Below

But it turns out that wasn’t really his legislation. Walsh’s “Brings Jobs Home Act” is identical to legislation written by Sen. Debbie Stabenow (D-Mich.) that failed in 2012, when Stabenow was running for reelection.

( Also on POLITICO: 10 high profile plagiarism cases)

Members of the same party frequently borrow from each others’ legislation — and Stabenow is a co-sponsor of Walsh’s 2014 retread of the “Bring Jobs Home Act.” Just two weeks ago the Senate voted on North Carolina Democrat Kay Hagan’s Bipartisan Sportsmen’s Act, which had a very similar thrust to Montana Democrat Jon Tester’s 2012 hunting and fishing bill, though it contained some changes. Tester was up for reelection in 2012, Hagan is up in 2014 — both respective bills failed.

And the practice isn’t limited to Democrats. In 2012 House Republicans laregly swiped a bill from Rep. Jim Himes (D-Conn.) and bestowed it on former Rep. Ben Quayle (R-Ariz.), who was locked in a tight primary. And swiping someone’s ideas for a bill isn’t considered to be on the same level as stealing from others’ research for a personal college thesis.

( Also on POLITICO: Report: Walsh plagiarized college thesis)

But Walsh’s legislation is more blatant than most: According to an analysis of the two bills run through a text comparison website, the biggest change to the bill in the intervening two years is the capitalization of the letter T. The only other changes that the program picked up were several additional spaces that have been inserted in the bill.

And in light of the plagiarism report in the Times, the timing could not be more inopportune.

A Walsh spokeswoman said Stabenow “asked Sen. Walsh to introduce the bill. It is not uncommon for Senators to work together and for bills to be reintroduced from Congress to Congress by different members.”

The legislative success of the Walsh-sponsored bill is likely to be short-lived. Republicans took to the floor to pan the bill for losing $214 million in revenue over 10 years, according to the Joint Committee on Taxation. They are also demanding votes on amendments — including Louisiana GOP Sen. David Vitter’s bill to gut health-care contributions to Capitol Hill aides and lawmakers.

It’s not the first case of bad timing to strike Walsh’s legislation. In May he introduced legislation called the “Do Your Job Act” that would prohibit Congress from recessing if it did not produce a long-term balanced budget. After introducing the bill, Walsh promptly flew back to Montana on recess, an incongruence not lost on GOP sources tracking Walsh.

But at least it was significantly different from Iowa GOP Rep. Tom Latham’s “Do Your Job Act” of 2012, which would keep lawmakers from getting paid if they don’t pass a yearly budget.