Mayim Bialik is no stranger to controversy. The Big Bang Theory actress, whom Refinery 29 reminds us has a Ph.D. in neuroscience, is open about her strong views on social topics — some of which cause backlash. Her most recent blog on Kveller, a parenting site, singles out Ariana Grande for one reason: her image.

Spotting a billboard with Grande’s new album cover, Bialik had an emotional reaction, particularly as a parent. She admits she does not know who Ariana Grande is, but makes some assumptions based on the photo.

“I will go ahead and admit I have no idea who she is or what she does. Based on the billboard, she sells lingerie. Or stiletto heels. Or plastic surgery because every woman over 22 wishes she has that body, I’m sure. Why is she in her underwear on this billboard though? And if she has a talent (is she a singer?), then why does she have to sell herself in lingerie? I mean, I know that society is patriarchal and women are expected to be sexy and sexually available no matter what we do in society, but I guess now I need to explain that to my sons?”

Bialik has two sons, Miles and Frederick, both under the age of 10.

Bialik’s blog post doesn’t stop with Grande, however. She also objects to the overt sexualization evident in many forms of advertising, singling out the promos for the series Masters of Sex and spots for Levi’s jeans. The Levi’s ads, as she describes them, are simply foreplay in an attempt to sell jeans.

“I saw this ad when I went to see the latest ‘Planet of the Apes’ movie a month or so ago and I thought to myself, ‘I don’t want my kids seeing this ad if they come to the movies.’ I just don’t want them to see this ad.”

Responding to anticipated pushback that she’s a “crotchety old lady,” Bialik says she may indeed be, but does not know why she has to be okay with women in lingerie on billboards. The real “Victoria’s Secret,” she says in half-jest, is that women really want to be in a robe with a cup of tea.

Refinery 29 responded to Bialik’s post by saying the answer to her questions are simply that “sex sells,” and some commentators repeatedly question its use. As the blog points out, it’s a very old debate.

In advance of The Big Bang Theory’s season premiere on September 22, Bialik has been exploring other projects, such as the reboot of the classic family show Candid Camera.

[Ariana Grande / Mayim Bialik Images: Google]