While New Hampshire’s Second Congressional District went for Obama twice, State Rep. Marilinda Garcia is up 4 points–41/37 (with leaners)–in a new Granite State poll from the University of New Hampshire. Still, 19 percent are undecided so there’s room for both sides to maneuver and grow as the election heads into the final stretch.

Needless to say, the Kuster camp fired off this fundraising email upon hearing the news:

Last night we got the results of the latest poll in our race. It shows that our opponent’s puppet masters’ - the Koch brothers - attack ads are working. Their relentless attacks on TV have erased our lead and made our race a pure toss up and a statistical dead heat. These next 27 days will determine what will happen on Election Day - the only day that matters – if we're up or we're down.

Meanwhile, former Rep. Charlie Bass has endorsed Garcia.

“New Hampshire’s 2nd Congressional District deserves an independent Representative who upholds our Granite State traditions of meeting with citizens and being accessible to the public. Marilinda Garcia will be that Representative, and I am proud to endorse her campaign for Congress,” said Bass. “Marilinda is an honest, responsible, and principled leader, and her commitment to common sense fiscal discipline would best serve the people of New Hampshire.”

“As an esteemed legislator who served the 2nd district admirably for nearly two decades, former Congressman Bass understands what is needed to deal with the important issues facing our district,” said Garcia in a statement. “I am honored that he has placed his faith in my candidacy and has endorsed my campaign for Congress.”

At the same time, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee has hit Garcia on education with an ad staring a “New Hampshire Teacher” detailing the evil Tea Party plans she has in store for the state’s residents.

While Garcia says that Obamacare is burdening families and new solutions to fix health care are needed.

Nevertheless, while this is only one poll showing Garcia in the lead, it's a sign that maybe Kuster should have emerged from the bunker more visibly than one month before Election Day.