by John Gibson

Follow on Twitter, Facebook and listen free/live on the foxnewsradio app

President Obama is celebrating the fifth anniversary of Obamacare today.

More than half of the country is trying to forget it: disapproval is running ten points ahead of approval among the public living under the law.

The Supreme Court of the United States could knock out the subsidies provided to millions of people in the King v. Burwell case now pending. That ruling comes in June.

But for now, it’s candles-on-the-cake time.

The President’s bragging points are that pre-existing conditions are covered, people previously uninsured are able to get insurance, and premium rates can’t be jacked up because the insured person is a woman. He hit those points this morning while taking his fifth year victory lap.

He is telling Obamacare opponents to “embrace reality.”

He is occasionally bending to requests from his allies to put off politically harmful aspects of the law.

What the President likes to ignore about his health care law is that people who were perfectly satisfied with their previous health care coverage are worse off. They pay higher premiums, they have fewer choices of insurance carriers, they are much more limited in choice of doctors and hospitals than they expected.

The President is also hiding a secret like a rabbit in his hat: in 2018 when he has left office the most pernicious aspect of Obamacare kicks in. That is the so called Cadillac Tax, which is designed to force employers to cut back on employer provided insurance. The purpose is to convert the cash value of employer insurance into employee pay. The government will then benefit by being able to tax a worker’s increased pay, in contrast to the employer provided health care benefit, which was exempt from taxation.

Get it? It’s a tax grab.

It’s sneaky. And it will give the government a $250 billion increase in tax revenues. And in the process little by little employer provided health insurance will fade away.

We have talked about these downsides to Obamacare for a long time. All these unpleasant aspects are true, but the cheerleaders for Obamacare pooh-pooh them, and say “look at this shiny object over here–no pre-existing conditions, your kid can stay on your policy until age 26, etc, etc, etc….”

The result is that Americans are doing what they always do when the government interferes with their lives: they complain, they mutter, they grumble, but they adjust and move on.

Which is what Obama has always counted on. A few people benefit big and their praise and hosannahs will be loud. Many people will be burdened with extra costs, longer drives, fewer choices but they will soldier on as they always do.

They may occasionally get sick, as happens. But everyday they will grow ever more sick of complaining.

It’s already happening.

That’s how Obama wins. Sooner or later most people will become accustomed to conditions they despise.

Slow boiling the frog works exactly the same way.