Avalanche coach Patrick Roy said he will take 28 of his remaining 40 players to Quebec for the consecutive-night preseason games against the Canadiens in Montreal and Quebec City on Thursday and Friday.

The Avs reduced their roster by reassigning 15 players and making one cut before practice Tuesday, following a split-squad, two-city doubleheader against the Anaheim Ducks on Monday night. Twelve players were assigned to Lake Erie of the American Hockey League and 2014 first-round draft pick Conner Bleackley was among three to be sent back to juniors.

Roy said he was disappointed in Bleackley and the Avs’ top pick in 2013, Chris Bigras, who also was sent back to his junior team. The coach said Bleackley, a forward, did not come into his first NHL training camp in adequate shape, and defenseman Bigras did not play as well as last year.

The Avs also sent defenseman Mason Geertsen back to juniors.

Those sent to Lake Erie were: goalies Francois Tremblay and Sami Aittokallio; defensemen Karl Stollery and Cody Corbett; and forwards Troy Bourke, Trevor Cheek, Nate Condon, Mitchell Heard, Garrett Meurs, Michael Sgarbossa and Colin Smith. Forward Kenny Ryan was released.

The Avs had 35 players participating in practice Tuesday. Captain and left wing Gabe Landeskog, who did not play in either game Monday, was held out because of a minor back injury, Roy said, and forward Daniel Briere was excused to travel to Philadelphia and attend to his son who was injured playing hockey.

Center John Mitchell (migraines) skated on his own but winger Jamie McGinn (back) has yet to skate in camp and could be weeks away from playing, Roy said. Winger Patrick Bordeleau (back) is out indefinitely.

Meanwhile, this week’s trip is special for the Quebec-born Roy, who won two his four Stanley Cups with the Canadiens, and fellow first-ballot Hockey Hall of Famer Joe Sakic, the Avs’ executive vice president/general manager who played the first seven years of his playing career with the Quebec Nordiques.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers