Ballot access deadlines and other logistical hurdles won't take precedence over family considerations as Joe Biden ponders a run for the White House, the vice president said in a new interview released Monday.

“For us, it's a family decision, and I just have to be comfortable that this is, that this'll be good for the family,” Biden told America magazine in an interview conducted last Thursday about Pope Francis' upcoming U.S. visit. “It's not quite there yet. And it may not get there in time to make it feasible to be able to run and succeed, because there are certain windows that will close.”

“But if that's it, that's it. But it's not like I can rush it,” Biden continued. “It either happens or it doesn't happen. I know that's not satisfying to anybody. But people who've been there, I know they understand.”

Biden's eldest son, Beau, died May 30 after a battle with brain cancer, upending the timetable for the vice president to make a decision about what would be his third bid for the presidency. As an independent “Draft Biden” political movement has worked to build support and the vice president's closest advisors have sought to keep all options available to him when he is ready to decide, polls have continued to indicate interest in his candidacy.

But even as he's engaged in public events that offer a glimpse of what his campaign could look like, Biden has consistently maintained that he would not run unless he could give it the full commitment it requires.

Interviews like this one, and another conducted recently with late-night TV host Stephen Colbert, suggest Biden may be far from making a decision.

But there were also some clues that could indicate the opposite.

Biden noted that the past campaigns he's run “have actually strengthened the family,” and that politics has become something of a “family business.”

He also revealed a message he received from the widow of Edward M. Kennedy, discussing how the late senator's family would deal with similar grief -- by dedicating themselves to the causes of those who'd passed on.

“That's the decision we've all made, that regardless of what I do in public or private life, we are not going to walk away from the things that made Beau's life in his mind, beyond his family, worthwhile,” Biden said.

The vice president will have a prominent role this week as Pope Francis visits the United States for the first time since becoming the leader of the Roman Catholic Church. Biden will join President Obama on Tuesday in welcoming Francis to the Washington area and will participate in meetings at the White House on Wednesday morning and attend mass in the afternoon.

Thursday, the vice president will attend the pope's address to a joint session of Congress. On Sunday, Biden will travel to Philadelphia for a departure ceremony as Francis ends his trip and returns to Rome.