A Coventry Health Care spokesman says the insurance company is taking a “measured, multi-year approach” to its participation in the health care exchanges that will open up nationally on Oct. 1.

The company informed the Louisiana Department of Insurance a few days ago that it will not participate in the state’s online health care marketplace as it originally planned.

“This decision was not made lightly,” said Walt Cherniak, spokesman for Aetna, which recently acquired Coventry.

Coventry’s decision appears to leave many Louisiana consumers with two companies — Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana and the Louisiana Health Cooperative — to choose from when they start shopping for the health care plans offered in accordance with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

Humana told the state Department of Insurance that it will offer its plans only to those in Jefferson Parish, though Humana would not confirm that to NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune Thursday. Vantage, which has been focused on northeast Louisiana in the past, plans to market its products to all but 10 parishes.

Here is the full statement Cherniak sent Friday (Sept. 20) in regard to Coventry’s decision:

“Coventry has decided to withdraw its Individual plan filings for the Louisiana exchange in 2014. This decision was not made lightly.

"We came to this decision as part of our ongoing review of Aetna’s overall company strategy, including the impact of the Coventry acquisition which closed in May, after the original exchange filings were submitted for both companies.

"We are taking a measured, multi-year approach to exchanges. In 2014 we are focusing on the markets where we can be most competitive and deliver the greatest value to our customers.

"It is important to note that this decision does not impact our existing business in the state. We are committed to the Louisiana market and will continue to serve individual consumers in the off-exchange market, as well as small and large employers.

"We will continue to assess our ability to participate on Louisiana’s exchange in 2015 and beyond."

Correction: An earlier version of this story incorrectly described the area Vantage Health Care plans to serve. This post has been updated to reflect the company's plan to market its products to residents in all but 10 Louisiana parishes.