AS the Abbott government begins to take on union power and corruption, a timely new book reveals the union movement's role in one of the most shameful periods of Australian history.

What the wharfies did to Australian troops - and their nation's war effort - between 1939 and 1945 is nothing short of an abomination.

Perth lawyer Hal Colebatch has done the nation a service with his groundbreaking book, Australia's Secret War, telling the untold story of union bastardry during World War 2.

Using diary entries, letters and interviews with key witnesses, he has pieced together with forensic precision the tale of how Australia's unions sabotaged the war effort, how wharfies vandalised, harassed, and robbed Australian troop ships, and probably cost lives.

One of the most obscene acts occurred in October, 1945, at the end of the war, after Australian soldiers were released from Japanese prison camps. They were half dead, starving and desperate for home. But when the British aircraft-carrier HMS Speaker brought them into Sydney Harbour, the wharfies went on strike. For 36 hours, the soldiers were forced to remain on-board, tantalisingly close to home. This final act of cruelty from their countrymen was their thanks for all the sacrifice.

Colebatch coolly recounts outrage after outrage.

There were the radio valves pilfered by waterside workers in Townsville which prevented a new radar station at Green Island from operating.

So when American dive bombers returning from a raid on a Japanese base were caught in an electrical storm and lost their bearings, there was no radio station to guide them to safety. Lost, they ran out of fuel and crashed, killing all 32 airmen.

Colebatch quotes RAAF serviceman James Ahearn, who served at Green Island, where the Australians had to listen impotently to the doomed Americans' radio calls:

"The grief was compounded by the fact that had it not been for the greed and corruption on the Australian waterfront such lives would not have been needlessly lost."

Almost every major Australian warship was targeted throughout the war, with little intervention from an enfeebled Prime Minister Curtin. There was the deliberate destruction by wharfies of vehicles and equipment, theft of food being loaded for soldiers, snap strikes, go-slows, demands for "danger money" for loading biscuits.

Then there were the coal strikes which pushed down coal production between 1942 and 1945 despite the war emergency.

There were a few honourable attempts to resist union leaders, such as the women working in a small arms factory in Orange, NSW, who refused to strike and "pelted union leaders with tomatoes and eggs".

This is a tale of the worst of Australia amid the best, the valour and courage of our soldiers in New Guinea providing our last line of defence against Japanese, only to be forced onto starvation rations and to "go easy on the ammo" because strikes by the wharfies back home prevented supplies from reaching them.

A planned rescue of Australian PoWs in Borneo late in the war apparently had to be abandoned, writes Colebatch, because a wharf strike in Brisbane meant the ships had no heavy weapons.

There was no act too low for the unionists. For instance, in 1941, hundreds of soldiers on board a ship docked in Freemantle entrusted personal letters to wharfies who offered to post them in return for beer money. The letters never arrived.

At one point in 1942 a US Army colonel became so frustrated at the refusal of Townsville wharfies to load munitions unless paid quadruple time, he ordered his men to throw the unionists into the water and load the guns themselves.

In Adelaide, American soldiers fired sub-machine guns at wharfies deliberately destroying their aircraft engines by dropping them from great heights. Australian soldiers had to draw bayonets to stop the same Adelaide wharfies from stealing food meant for troops overseas.

You will read this book with mounting fury.

Coelbatch offers various explanations for the treasonous behaviour of the unions. Many of the leaders were Communists obsessed with class warfare. Fervent "identity politics" led them to believe they were victims and servicemen and women were "puppets of capitalism whose lives were of no consequence". Contrary to popular belief, strikes and sabotage continued, even after the Soviet Union became an ally, writes Colebatch, who contends that the Australian Left may have wanted to undermine the military in preparation for revolution after the war.

Whatever the reasons for the defective morality of those unionists who sabotaged our war effort, the traitors have never been brought to account. This story has been largely suppressed for 70 years because Labor and the Left have successfully controlled the narrative of history.

No more, thanks to Colebatch.

ARCHITECT REFUSES TO BE DRAWN

ARCHITECT Peter Tonkin, who designed the Australian War Memorial's Tomb of the Unknown Australian Soldier, has spoken out about the foiled plan to replace the iconic inscription "Known Unto God" with a Paul Keating quote.

He backs memorial director Brendan Nelson's claim that Charles Bean, the WWI correspondent who first conceived of the memorial, had stipulated it not be "not sectarian in any sense at all.

"He wrote that very clearly in his purpose statement."

The Surry Hills architect described his design as "full of non-sectarian symbolism".

But he would not be drawn on the controversy over the God reference.

"My feelings on the matter are entirely private. I do think it's a great shame there's such a controversy about it all."

Nelson consulted Tonkin over his remodelling plans to incorporate Keating's 1993 speech.

"Known Unto God", a staple of Unknown Soldier monuments around the world, was not included in the original 1993 design, but was added six years later on the suggestion of historian Geoffrey Blainey, then a member of the memorial's council.

HONOUR TO MEET MAN OF VALEUR

I HAD the privilege of meeting Australian war hero Mark Donaldson last week. The SAS Trooper was the first Victoria Cross recipient in 40 years, recognised for courage under fire in 2008 during a Taliban ambush.

He told me he used to listen to Metallica in preparation for battle.

The extraordinary feats of the SAS in Afghanistan have barely been acknowledged, because of the need for secrecy, except in rare accounts of battles, such as Sandra Lee's 18 Hours. Donaldson, like many SAS warriors, is wiry and slight, his physical capabilities tightly under wraps, his demeanour guarded.

But now he has opened up in his book, The Crossroads, about his journey from rebellious teenager with a green Mohawk in Dorrigo, through the family tragedies which propelled him into the Army. It is an inspirational tale, and one we must honour. As our presence in Afghanistan ends, we are in eternal debt to a magnificent new generation of fighting men and women, whose sacrifices and valour will be revealed in time.

* Hear more of Donaldson's life and musical inspiration on my radio show today on 2GB 873, 4pm-6pm

JANICE REID - SYDNEY'S UNSUNG HIGH ACHIEVER

ONE of the most influential, yet unsung high achievers in Sydney is Janice Reid.

The vice-chancellor of the University of Western Sydney retires next month after 16 years in which she has built up Sydney's black sheep institution into a thriving success and the lifeblood of Sydney's vibrant west.

More than half its students are the first in their family to go to uni and she still gets a kick out of graduation.

Well done to a great Sydneysider.