Obamacare changed Palmer Township resident Debra Oren's life.

But she never imagined a thank-you note to the president would put her in the national spotlight.

Oren, 60, wrote to President Obama in February to thank him for the Affordable Care Act. She had lived for five years with osteoarthritis that was so painful she needed to use a wheelchair.

After enrolling in a federally-sponsored health plan in 2014, she received surgery on both knees that enabled her to walk again.

Then on Monday, she got a call from the White House that the president wanted to mention her letter in a speech Tuesday to the Catholic Health Association.

"I was so glad that he decided to use my story," said the graduate of North Hunterdon Regional High School. "He worked hard to get this passed and they're still shooting at it. I just wanted to let him know that there are people out here behind him 100 percent."

During a speech televised live on CNN on Tuesday, the president cited Oren's recovery as proof that Obamacare makes a difference in people's lives.

"She's back on her feet," Obama said. "She walks her dog, shops at the grocery story, gets to her doctors' appointments. She's cooking, exercising, regaining her health."

Oren declined an invitation to come to the speech in person.

"I had to make sure my grandson got out to school," she said. "That was a little more important."

Most people wouldn't have turned down a presidential visit, but Oren said it was her responsibility to make sure the eighth-grader got off to take his final exams.

That behavior is consistent with a woman who describes herself as stubborn. Even in her wheelchair, she tried to handle most of the housework.

"I would grumble at the vacuum," she said. "It would get tangled up in my wheels, but I managed to get it done."

She worked as a certified nurses' aid at Gracedale, the Northampton County nursing facility, until it was too painful for her to stay on her feet all day. She took a job running the salad bar at the Giant supermarket before she landed in her wheelchair. Her husband was a master mechanic at Integrated Packaging Corp. in New Brunswick, New Jersey, until the company went under.

The couple has three adult children, all men.

She encouraged the president to emulate her stubbornness.

"I'm a strong Irish woman," she wrote in her letter. "You just keep pushing. Let them know you won't take any guff. You will always be in my prayers, you and your family."

She was grateful for the call from the president, but perhaps more grateful for his work.

"It's wonderful to be able to go into the grocery store holding my husband's hand instead of him having to push a wheelchair."

Rudy Miller may be reached at rmiller@lehighvalleylive.com. Follow him on Twitter @RudyMillerLV. Find Easton area news on Facebook.

See Debra's letter below: