Split earbuds are developed to fit snugly in your ears without being connected to a cable.

Split earbuds are developed to fit snugly in your ears without being connected to a cable. …stephanie…, Creative Commons

A new listening device developed by a tech company will allow a person to listen to music simply by clicking their teeth to change tracks.

The earphones, known as “Split,” are individual buds and are not connected by any cable and wire, but are synchronized to play in unison through high precision crystal clocks. They’re hands free and consist of two 1-inch long ear buds that aren’t connected by a cable or wire, and are easy to pop into your ears.

Split was developed by a company named Greenwing Audio, founded by a physicist, a biologist, and a mechanical engineer who hope to “enlighten the portable audio market with safer and better performing wireless products,” according to their website.

On its Kickstarter page, which hopes to gather $435,000 by Oct. 31, the company describes how the device works: when music plays, the earphones act like two individual players that are synched. Short radio signals keep the earphones synchronized when the track or volume is changed.

While one bite skips tracks, two bites adjusts the volume. In order to avoid accidentally changing the track or volume when chewing or eating, users can “lock” the earphones by tapping them with your finger.

The company claims that the amount of radiation exposed to your head will be 1,000 times lower when using Split as compared to a Bluetooth streaming headset.

“We designed Split with one goal: To make it a non invasive presence in your life, so that you can carry music with you as you would carry two coins in your pocket,” the company explains.

The storage space on Split would be quite small — it would only able to hold about 24 songs at once, with a 4 hour battery life — but the device could be ideal for workouts or bike rides, when shuffling through your iPod while exercising could break your focus.

“Our goal is to completely reinvent the design and usability of the portable music player,” the company writes on its website.