Hobby Lobby To Open Santa Clarita Store In Valencia In 2015

Hobby Lobby, an Oklahoma-based craft store chain involved in a controversial Supreme Court decision, recently signed a lease on a Santa Clarita Valley property, according to a real estate site.

Don’t miss a thing. Get breaking Santa Clarita news alerts delivered right to your inbox.

“Hobby Lobby has signed a lease for the former 52,000 square foot Orchard Supply Hardware space at the Bouquet Canyon Shopping Center,” according to a news release from Cypress Retail Group, which posted the information on its site.

The location is slated for the Saugus shopping center at Bouquet Canyon Road and Newhall Ranch Road, according to the Cypress site.

The hobby and craft store will neighbor OfficeMax and a vacant storefront available next to a Best Buy.

The Hobby Lobby location is part of a 200,000 square foot shopping center that includes Best Buy, Trader Joe’s, Petco, Office Max and Sola Salon as tenants.

Hobby Lobby is scheduled to open their doors in early 2015. The lease was announced in July.

Related: Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc.

In the decision in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby, the Supreme Court ruled June 30 that federal law gives for-profit businesses owned by a small group a right to refuse, for religious reasons, to provide birth control methods and services for their employees, according to a SCOTUSblog post by Lyle Denniston.

The 5-4 vote gained national attention for the craft store’s policies, which ran counter to “Obamacare” regulations as part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

The court found: “As applied to closely held corporations, the regulations promulgated by the Department of Health and Human Services requiring employers to provide their female employees with no-cost access to contraception violate the Religious Freedom Restoration Act,” according to the blog post.

Do you have a news tip? Call us at (661) 298-1220, or drop us a line at community@hometownstation.com.



Source: Santa Clarita News