Already having battled one of their busiest seasons yet, Los Angeles County lifeguards are getting ready for busy beaches this weekend with a heat wave hitting Southern California. Hetty Chang reports for NBC4 News at 5 p.m. from Hermosa Beach Friday, Sept. 12, 2014. (Published Friday, Sept. 12, 2014)

A heat alert has been declared for parts of Southern California as possible record temperatures hit in the coming days.

The scorching heat wave, fueled by Santa Ana-wind conditions were increasing the fire danger in the parched region.

Video Firefighters Attack Brush Fire Above San Dimas

The alert, warning residents to stay indoors and hydrated, was expected to remain in effect Friday to Monday for the San Gabriel, San Fernando and Santa Clarita valleys and the Los Angeles Basin.

Valley Residents Seeking Relief From Heat

It's going to be hot this weekend with triple-digit heat hitting some valley areas in Southern California and officials are warning people to stay hydrated and keep an extra close watch on the elderly. Gordon Tokumatsu reports for NBC4 News at 6 p.m. from Woodland Hills Friday, Sept. 12, 2014. (Published Friday, Sept. 12, 2014)

"When temperatures are high, even a few hours of exertion may cause severe dehydration, heat cramps, heat exhaustion, and heat stroke," said Jeffery Gunzenhauser, the interim health officer for LA County. "Others who are frail or have chronic health conditions may develop serious health problems leading to death if they are exposed to high temperatures over several days."

Between Friday and Monday, temperatures are expected to reach above 100 in some areas of Southern California, according to the National Weather Service.

"High pressure building into California, so we’re going to see some intense heat the next few days," said NBC4 meteorologist Crystal Egger. "That dome of hot air means it could get dangerously hot."

Weather officials expect the peak of the heat wave to be Saturday, when temperatures could surpass 105 degrees in the valleys, lower mountains and the Antelope Valley. Inland areas such as downtown LA could see temperatures "well into the 90s," according to a statement from the NWS.

Triple Digit Temps Hit SoCal

An early fall heat wave is reviving some Southern Californians love for water sports while others are trying to shield themselves of the sun while staying hydrated. Tony Shin reports for NBC4 News at 5 p.m. from Lake Elsinore Friday, Sept. 12, 2014. (Published Friday, Sept. 12, 2014)

If Los Angeles hits 95 degrees or warmer, it will be the hottest day since mid-May, Egger said.

Pedestrians in downtown LA were feeling the effects of the heat wave Friday.

Sizzling Temperatures in SoCal Valleys

Shades, hats and lots of sunscreen were readily apparent as pedestrians battled the latest SoCal heat wave Friday. Annette Arreola reports live for the NBC4 News at Noon on Friday, Sept. 12, 2014.By: Jeff Scharping (Published Friday, Sept. 12, 2014)

"Today is pretty hot," said Manuel Bartl, who is visiting from Australia. "I should have used sun cream, but I will see that later when my skin is red."

Beach communities were expected to see temperatures in the 80s during the heat wave.

Downtown Hit With Punishing Heat

Pedestrians were trying to stay hydrated and cool as temperatures soared throughout Southern California Friday. Hetty Chang reports live from downtown LA for the NBC4 News at Noon on Friday, Sept. 12, 2014.By: James Wulff (Published Friday, Sept. 12, 2014)

The potentially record-breaking heat has weather experts warning Southern California residents to stay cool and to wear lightweight, loose-fitting clothes when possible.

"Stay hydrated, seek air conditioning, never leave kids of pets in a hot car," Egger said.

Scorching Heat in Inland Empire

A heat advisory was issued for the Inland Empire this weekend as temperatures are expected to reach past 100 degrees. Tony Shin reports live from Lake Elsinore for the NBC4 News at Noon on Friday, Sept. 12, 2014. (Published Friday, Sept. 12, 2014)

Hot and dry conditions will also bring an "extended period of elevated fire danger" to the Southland.

Temperatures were expected to drop by Monday.

AM Forecast

Temperatures will soar above 100 degrees Friday in some parts of Southern California. Elita Loresca has the forecast for Friday Sept. 12, 2014. (Published Friday, Sept. 12, 2014)