Colorado House Democrats thought Rep. Jenice May’s Aurora seat was so safe they put her in charge of a program to elect caucus members, but she’s losing by 110 votes.

“I got caught in the wave,” she said, referring to a strong Republican ground game that took Democrats by surprise.

May has not conceded yet to Republican JoAnn Windholz because the Adams County clerk and recorder is still “curing” ballots in House District 30. That includes calling voters who forgot to sign their ballots, or whose signature on the ballot didn’t match the signature on file. Still, 110 ballots is a tough hurdle.

“I’m the representative in limbo,” May said, Sunday.

She’s not alone.

Rep. Mike McLachlan of Durango is trailing sheep rancher J. Paul Brown, the Republican he unseated two years by 917 votes in a Democratic wave year. McLachlan has a much more difficult gap to close than May — he’s behind by 206 votes — but he said he’s taking a wait-and-see attitude. He also hasn’t conceded.

“I’m just going to ride out the storm,” he said. “I’m prepared for whatever happens.”

Democrats always knew that defending McLachlan would be tough. After he voted for tougher gun laws in 2013, his constituents tried to recall him but couldn’t collect enough signatures to force a special election. They vowed to get him at the election.

A third Democrat, Rep. Tony Exum of Colorado Springs, has already conceded the race. Two years ago Exum unseated Republican Mark Barker by 3,455 votes. Democrats initially thought he might be OK this year until El Paso County Republicans started returning their ballots in record numbers. Exum lost to Republican Kit Roupe by 294 votes.

When results started pouring in Tuesday night, Democrats were shocked to see several representatives in Adams and Arapahoe counties in trouble. A low turnout from Democrats, combined with a strong ground game from Republican Congressman Mike Coffman and Senate hopeful Cory Gardner, was producing results few expected — except former Denver Mayor Wellington Webb. He said when he examined precinct results the week before the election he made calls. He told some lawmakers who had assumed they were safe to quit campaigning for others and start campaigning for themselves.

Democrats never dreamt May would be in trouble. Two years ago, she won her first House race by 3,870 votes. She was appointed to the powerful Joint Budget Committee and her experience as a former human services employee gives her an insider’s knowledge of state government. She was assigned to chair the House Majority Project, which helps elects Democrats to the chamber.

“If I happen to lose because I focused on that, then I’m OK with that,” May said, adding she’s proud Democrats were strong against “the wave.”

No matter what happens, she’s still the representative for House District 30 and will be doing her duties until next January, when the new session convenes and lawmakers are sworn in. She has a budget meeting Wednesday.

It’s all pretty heady for Windholz, a Commerce City businesswoman who was told by some movers-and-shakers “we’d like to support you more but” as in but May is going to win. She said she and her supporters didn’t see May much on the campaign trail.

“I’m just so glad the county is 99.9 percent done with its counting,” Windholz said.

Democrats currently have a 37-28 majority. Even if May and McLachlan lose, Democrats will maintain the majority for the next two years.