BOULDER — For everybody involved, watching the Colorado football team sputter through a season-opening loss to Hawaii on Sept. 3 was painful.

It was a tough way to open the season for a CU team that came into the year with high hopes.

It wasn’t just the 28-20 loss that stung, though. The defeat, combined with a lackluster performance, may wind up hurting the Buffs at the box office too.

WATCH: Who has the better football program? CU or CSU

Saturday, Colorado will host Massachusetts in the Buffs’ home opener at Folsom Field. It could be one of the lowest-attended home openers in 40-plus years.

“Attendance will probably be in the low 30s,” CU athletic director Rick George said. “I’d hoped for better than that. I’m disappointed in that, but it’s where we are and we’ll continue to work hard to get people to support this football team and our department.”

Last week didn’t help. The Buffs built up a lot of goodwill over the summer by talking about how much they improved during the offseason. Although it’s difficult to quantify the impact on ticket sales, failing to live up to that hype, and looking too much like struggling CU teams of the recent past, may have hurt ticket sales for Saturday’s game.

At this point, the Buffs can’t change what happened in Honolulu. But they can begin the process of trying to prove themselves in front of the fans who do show up at Folsom Field, and to those who watch the game on TV.

RELATED: Michael Adkins quick to get on roll in CU ground game

“It’s really important,” cornerback Chidobe Awuzie said of CU having a good performance against UMass. “A lot of people have been doubting us. We’re confident. That’s the mind-set we have to have, that we can’t lose. As long as we have that confidence and Boulder’s behind us, there’s endless things we can do this year.”

The key is getting Boulder — and people in other parts of the state — behind them.

George, while disappointed in the game at Hawaii, believes this CU team is capable of getting fans back in the stands.

“Having watched this team this summer, I think (the game against Hawaii) was an outlier,” George said. “I think this football team has more maturity and I think we’re a lot more confident. I think we’ve got more talent. I’m hopeful that last week was an anomaly and (against UMass) we really show people what we’re about and start going in the direction that I think everybody wants.

“You find out a lot about a team when they have to come back from that. They’re opening at home and there should be a lot of excitement and I have every expectation that we’ll be the team that everybody thought we’d be.”

Massachusetts at CU

A look at three key story lines for Saturday’s game in Boulder:

1. Who benefits from last week?

CU played last week but lost 28-20 at Hawaii. Saturday is Massachusetts’ season opener. Do the Minutemen benefit more from getting to see what CU did last week and what Hawaii did to beat CU? Or does CU have the advantage because UMass will be dealing with first-game jitters while playing on the road?

2. Who plays in the running game for CU?

Senior tailback Christian Powell got the start last week but fumbled early and had only five carries in Honolulu. Junior Michael Adkins II, listed as No. 3 on the depth chart, got the bulk of the work, gaining 90 yards on 22 carries and scoring two touchdowns. CU coaches seem inclined to experiment further with the rotation, based on their comments this week. Will we see more of Powell, or will CU ride Adkins again?

3. The Buffs wouldn’t dare look past UMass, would they?

You wouldn’t think a team riding a nine-game losing streak would look past an opponent while playing its home opener, especially given that CU struggled to subdue UMass last year on the road (winning 41-38). But does CU have Colorado State in the back of its mind, with that rivalry game looming next week in Denver? CU needs a win to take some momentum and confidence into the CSU game.

John Meyer, The Denver Post

Saturday’s area college football games

Noon Massachusetts at CU, PAC-12M

1:30 p.m. Minnesota at CSU, CBSSN

2 p.m. Eastern Michigan at Wyoming, ROOT

6 p.m. Northern Colorado at Houston Baptist

8:15 p.m. San Jose State at Air Force, ESPNU