Two high-ranking Navy SEAL officials are scolding any current or former members of the service who would “advertise” their service or “seek recognition” for their actions.

A letter signed by Force Master Chief M.L. Magaraci and Rear Adm. B.L. Losey, commander of Naval Special Warfare Command, is believed to be a preemptive response to a Fox News documentary featuring an exclusive interview with a Navy SEAL who claims that he is the American who shot and killed 9/11 mastermind Osama bin Laden during a much-heralded operation.

Addressed to SEAL “teammates,” the letter is dated two days after the cable network debuted its promo for the bin Laden special.

Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com

At Naval Special Warfare’s core is the SEAL ethos. A critical tenet of our ethos is ‘I do not advertise the nature of my work, nor seek recognition for my actions.’ Our ethos is a life-long commitment and obligation, both in and out of the service … We do not abide willful or selfish disregard for our core values in return for public notoriety and financial gain.

“Each day, thousands of current and former members of Naval Special Warfare live as ‘quiet professionals,’ ” Magaraci and Losey write, adding:

The former SEAL who has come forward, identified by multiple news outlets as Rob O’Neill, 38, is a highly decorated, 16-year combat veteran.

Although at least one fellow former SEAL disputes that O’Neill was the “point man” who ended bin Laden’s life, O’Neill apparently identifies himself in the Fox special as “the shooter” in the raid that killed bin Laden.

O’Neill, a native of Butte, Mont., also is credited as being involved in rescuing Capt. Richard Phillips from Somali pirates and decorated war hero Marcus Luttrell from Taliban fighters in Afghanistan.

In giving up his anonymity and speaking with Fox News about his time in service, O’Neill risks legal action.

“Classified information is protected by law,” write Magaraci and Losey in the letter dated Oct. 31. “We will actively seek judicial consequence for members who willfully violate the law, and place our teammates, our families, and potential future operations at risk.”

The two-night Fox special, “The Man Who Killed Osama bin Laden,” will air Nov. 11 and 12 at 10 p.m. ET. It is expected that O’Neill will explain his decision to go public, risking not only punishment but flak from fellow SEALs.

Nothing but love for @AndersonColt #navyseal pic.twitter.com/f3tmslLorh — Robert O'Neill (@mchooyah) November 5, 2014

Read the full letter here:

Watch the latest video at video.foxnews.com