Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., makes his case for the presidency and explains why he is more than just a freshman senator.

Marco Rubio is appealing, but he will continue to face questions on his immigration stance

Buy Photo Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., meets with members of the Des Moines Register editorial board on Saturday in downtown Des Moines. (Photo: Michael Zamora/The Register)Buy Photo

"Hi, I'm Marco."

That's how Marco Rubio, the junior U.S. senator from Florida, introduced himself to the dozen or so Register staff members on hand for a Saturday morning editorial board meeting. He clearly wanted to appear informal, and although we were promised 45 minutes, Rubio stayed for an hour and seemed happy to go on but for an aide dragging him away.

The first thing you notice is that Rubio, who is 43, looks even younger. He wore a dark blue suit with blue shirt and tie. He wore a small American flag lapel pen and a white "ONE" bracelet worn by supporters of the antipoverty effort co-founded by Bono.

While he could be self-effacing and conversational, Rubio exhibited an impressive grasp of public policy detail. He held forth extemporaneously on a broad spectrum of issues that included the economy, immigration, health care, education, energy, the environment, Medicare, Social Security and a whirlwind tour around the globe to highlight all the threats to U.S. national security.

OBRADOVICH: Amnesty angst is not illegitimate

ON IMMIGRATION: Border security comes first

But first, we wanted to know where he stands on immigration after distancing himself from the reform bill he helped get passed in the Senate. He said he switched to opposing the bill after President Barack Obama's executive orders on enforcement, which Rubio said encouraged adults and children to head for the U.S.-Mexico border.

Rubio said he still supports major features of that bill, including giving undocumented immigrants who meet certain qualifications the opportunity to ultimately attain citizenship. But he said illegal immigration "must be under control" before he will support reform legislation. That, of course, lets him have it both ways: talking a good game while opposing actually doing anything, since he conceded borders could never be 100 percent sealed.

RUBIO AT FAITH AND FREEDOM FORUM: Expand American dream for future generations

RUBIO ON QUALIFICATIONS: 'No way' a governor is ready on foreign policy

LIGHTER SIDE: Rubio's kids excited for Iowa State Fair

Rubio's positions are solid Republican: He would replace Obamacare with an insurance marketplace where employer mandates are eliminated and people receive tax credits to buy their own policies. He would continue government surveillance of Americans' phone records. He would cut taxes and eliminate federal regulations when the costs exceed the economic benefits. He would engage threats abroad more aggressively, including China, Russia, Iran, North Korea and radical Islamic groups in the Middle East.

On that last point, he acknowledged spending must rise for troops and armaments if the United States is going to match a bellicose foreign policy with military might. That means Pentagon spending would have to be offset by budget cuts elsewhere to avoid growing budget deficits.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla) talks about bringing the national debt under control and reforming medicare and social security.

Medicare and Social Security will be big drivers of deficits long term, and Rubio would confront them head-on: He said future generations must be told retirement programs will "look different" than the ones enjoyed by earlier generations. That would include delaying retirement and changing how we pay for Medicare and Social Security. The longer those changes are put off, he said, the more disruptive they will be.

As the father of four young children, the future of this country is personal for Rubio. "In most places in this world, even to this day, your future is largely determined by what your parents did before you," he said. "For me, my parents were a bartender and a maid. I want my children to understand that the country they live in is a place where no matter where your parents started out, you could can have the same dreams and the same future as someone born into wealth and into privilege. I fear we have lost that."

That lesson clearly was not lost on Rubio, and it will be heard a lot in Iowa in the coming months.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla) says his daughters are excited to come to the Iowa State Fair with him this summer.

First impressions

About this series: The Des Moines Register has invited all declared candidates for president to meet with the editorial board. After each meeting, we will publish editorials giving our impressions of the candidates.

The Marco Rubio file

Personal biography: Born May 28, 1971, in Miami, Fla., to working-class Cuban immigrant parents. He and wife Jeanette have four children. He is Roman Catholic.

Education: Attended Tarkio College in Missouri on a football scholarship for one year; graduated from the University of Florida with a bachelor's degree and with a law degree from the University of Miami.

Career: First elected to the Miami City Commission, and then the Florida House where he was majority leader and speaker. Elected to the U.S. Senate in 2010. Announced his candidacy for the Republican nomination for president April 13.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1GztQQF