Not as it's written.

If you are a practicing Catholic, then Obamacare marks the end of your religion in the United States. Ever since arriving in office, Obama has been at odds with the Catholic Church. As many Catholics now know, Obamacare, as it is written, is unacceptable.

LOS ANGELES, CA (Catholic Online) - As millions of Americans sign up for Obamacare insurance, they will purchase insurance plans that cover procedures such as abortions, abortifacients, sterilization, and contraceptives. Those services will generally be free of charge.



Of course, we know that nothing is actually free. In reality, these services are being paid for by the premiums of people who purchased plans, even if they do not use the services. Furthermore, tax dollars paid to the federal government provide the subsidies that many people will receive so they can actually afford their insurance coverage.



There's no way around it, your payments either in insurance premiums and deductibles, or in tax dollars, are going to be used to pay for abortions, abortifacients, sterilizations, contraceptives, and other morally objectionable services.



This creates a very difficult situation for Catholics. Caesar has demanded that everyone pay, either through their premiums or their taxes. Even if you do not purchase an Obamacare plan, your dollars will still be used for these objectionable services. Effectively, Obamacare makes it physically impossible for Catholics to practice their faith in the United States without the taint of subsidizing morally objectionable services.



In many respects, is a terrible shame that Obama has insisted on these provisions in what might otherwise be a laudable health care initiative. The Catholic Church believes that medical care is a fundamental human right, and all humans deserve affordable access to it. However, the morally objectionable services that offend Catholics and other Christians so mightily, have nothing to do with health care. Had Obama left in these mandates out, or permitted all people of faith to exempt themselves from paying for these services, then most objections to the Affordable Care Act would disappear.



No plan is perfect. The Affordable Care Act is far from perfect. It will need a lot of work and revision over the coming years so that it does not bankrupt our national economy, and truly does what it was intended to do, which is provide affordable health care for every American.



Any plans to fix this act must include the restoration of religious freedom and freedom of conscience for every American. Every American must be allowed to exempt themselves from these onerous provisions. Even better, they should be entirely repealed.



Barring that, Catholics are now being forced to accept as the law of the land, one of the most objectionable and heinous policies ever devised by a sitting president for the people of the United States. As written, Obama care fundamentally violates the moral conscience of people of faith and values, and it tramples upon our First Amendment rights.



Let us hope that the current impasse in government, and the cases being brought to the Supreme Court, can provide us with some relief. If not, every Catholic will be forced to render unto Caesar homage upon the altar of child sacrifice.





Click here to learn about our Saint Michael the Archangel conference this Nov 1-3!





---





Copyright 2016 - Distributed by THE CALIFORNIA NETWORKRespect for Women: That in every country of the world, women may be honored and respected and that their essential contribution to society may be highly esteemed.Holy Rosary: That families, communities, and groups may pray the Holy Rosary for evangelization and peace.