COMMERCE CITY — With a late goal by Christian Nehme, No. 3-seed Cheyenne Mountain edged No. 1 Air Academy 2-1 to win the Class 4A state boys soccer title Saturday at Dick’s Sporting Goods Park.

Nehme scored his 10th goal of the season in the 77th minute to reclaim the lead for good for the Indians.

“We just got to fall back, stay in front of the ball and become champions,” Nehme said. “We did exactly that.”

For the Pikes Peak Conference rivals, this was their second meeting of the year. The teams met on Oct. 1 when Air Academy won 4-3 in double overtime.

“Air’s a phenomenal team. They’re definitely the most talented team in the state and deserves to be No. 1,” Cheyenne Mountain coach Tomas Martinez said. “But I told the guys they had to be better than them today and that’s all that matters.”

This match didn’t have the spectacular offense the earlier meeting featured, but it showcased two of Class 4A’s finer defenses, which combined for 24 goals allowed in 2013. The Kadets dominated possession throughout the first, but were unable to capitalize, getting just one shot on goal in the final minute of the half.

Forward John Herd got the Indians on the board first with a goal in the 38th minute of the game. For Herd, the team’s leading scorer, it was his 13th goal of the season.

Air Academy put the pressure on in the final 15 minutes of the game getting three shots on goal. With 6:09 remaining in the game, Kadets midfielder Alex Granados was awarded a penalty kick after being tripped in the box. Granados scored with a strike in the top right corner of the goal to tie the game.

“They were bringing pressure, bringing pressure, bringing pressure. Everybody felt it was inevitable they were going to get that goal somehow,” Martinez said.

Just a little more than two minutes later, Nehme was able to break through the Kadets defense and get a goal on goalkeeper Matthew Pipan.

“We just told our team we’re not losing our heads. These next six minutes, we’re going to get one and it’s ours,” Nehme said.

Air Academy finishes the season with a record of 18-2. Cheyenne Mountain is 17-3.

“They can say they dominated possession, everybody outplayed us — it doesn’t matter. We got the better score today,” Martinez said. “… We’re not the most talented team, but we’re the most hard-working team and I’ll take that any day.”

Joe Nguyen: jnguyen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/byjoenguyen