They have just finished filming the final series of their hit drama, Downton Abbey.

So it’s no surprise that the cast of the internationally loved show put on a stylish display as they begin their busy promotional campaign for the sixth season.

Michelle Dockery and Joanne Froggatt led the glamour as they joined fellow cast members for a photocall held in The Beverly Hilton Hotel in California on Saturday afternoon.

Scroll down for video

Lovely ladies: Michelle Dockery and Joanne Froggatt led the glamour as they joined Downton Abbey cast members for a photocall held in The Beverly Hilton Hotel in California on Saturday afternoon

Michelle – who plays Lady Mary Crawley – opted for an eye-catching green ensemble which featured a classy slit in the chest area.

Adding height to the look with gold open-toe heels, the 33-year-old actress wore her locks in loose waves and drew attention to her pout with red lipstick.

Joanne – who plays Anna Bates - looked radiant in a monochrome strapless dress which she teamed with red heeled sandals.

Gorgeous in green: Michelle – who plays Lady Mary Crawley – opted for an eye-catching green ensemble which featured a classy slit in the chest area

Monochrome magic: Joanne – who plays Anna Bates - looked radiant in a monochrome strapless dress which she teamed with red heeled sandals

All angles: Sporting her blonde locks in beachy waves, the 34-year-old opted to let her natural beauty shine through with fresh-faced make-up

Altogether: The stunning duo were joined by Laura Carmichael, Elizabeth McGovern and Penelope Wilton, while show favourite Hugh Bonneville cut a dapper figure as he posed alongside his female cast mates

The final countdown: It’s no surprise that the cast of the internationally loved show put on a stylish display as they begin their busy promotional campaign for the sixth season

Sporting her blonde locks in beachy waves, the 34-year-old opted to let her natural beauty shine through with fresh-faced make-up.

The stunning duo were joined by Laura Carmichael, Elizabeth McGovern and Penelope Wilton, while show favourite Hugh Bonneville cut a dapper figure as he posed alongside his female cast mates.

Downton’s creator Julian Fellowes has admitted that he wants to adapt the TV show into a movie.

Black to basics: Laura Carmichael kept her look simple but chic in a black dress and matching heels

A pro: Michelle charmed the media as she spoke about the upcoming series of the show

Show favourite: The cast teased what fans might be able to expect from the final series

The screenwriter confirmed that the upcoming sixth season of the period drama - which will air later this year - will be its last, but he already has a story in mind for a film version.

Speaking at the Chalke Valley History Festival in Wiltshire, England, the 65-year-old revealed: ‘I think I know what the spine of a story for a film would be. I think it would be fun, in a sense, because we'd be making it on a film budget.’

However, he recently admitted there are currently no concrete plans in place.

Dapper display: Hugh looked like he was ready to film another scene in his stylish three-piece suit

Picture perfect: Joanne and Laura pulled similar poses for the simple shots

White on trend: Elizabeth - who plays Cora Crawley - looked lovely in a white dress with black lining

He said: ‘At the moment there isn't but you never know. Or a stage show or anything else. So I think to have them all killed in a bus [in the finale] would be a mistake.

‘I think we bring various things to a conclusion and anything unresolved is unresolved. I'm open to the idea of a movie but I'm not anxious to do it.

The talented writer added: ‘In my experience, and naming no names, the movie of the series is often a disappointment.’

Heart it: Later in the day, the ladies were seen making their way out of Craig's restaurant in West Hollywood

Classy style: Once again, Michelle stunned in a navy halterneck jumpsuit