<p>Ferrell leaves AnMed Health after a visit with her health coach, Lindsey Ferrell.</p>

SHARE Photos by Ken Ruinard/Independent Mail Lynn Ferrell of Belton talks about controlling her diabetes, one of the ways to keep her from being a frequent visitor at the emergency room. Michael Cunningham, AnMed Health's vice president of advancement, talks about the Anderson Access to Care Coalition. Lindsey Sanders, left, an AnMed Health nurse and health coach, sits near patient Lynn Ferrell of Belton, both looking at Michael Cunningham, AnMed Health's vice president of advancement. Cunningham talked about the Anderson Access to Care Coalition, and ways patients can avoid making multiple trips to the emergency room.

By Kirk Brown

Lynn Ferrell went to the emergency room at AnMed Health Medical Center last year because she “just was not feeling good at all.”

A doctor admitted Ferrell for an overnight stay at the Anderson hospital after discovering that she had dangerously high blood pressure. The 61-year-old Belton woman also was diagnosed with diabetes.

In December, AnMed officials enrolled Ferrell in the Anderson Access to Care Coalition, an initiative that is striving to keep uninsured patients from making repeated trips to the emergency room.

Since then, her health has improved dramatically.

“I feel like a day at Disneyland,” Ferrell said in an interview last week. “I actually feel like getting out of bed in the morning.”

Ferrell credits her health coach, AnMed nurse Lindsey Sanders, and Williamston-based family physician Matthew Roehrs for helping to bring blood pressure and diabetes under control. AnMed also is providing her with more than $1,400 worth of insulin and other medications each month.

“God knows that I just could not do it without these people,” said Ferrell, who cares for her 93-year-old aunt. Together, they live on about $1,200 per month.

Ferrell is among 405 AnMed patients who are receiving assistance from the access to care coalition. Along with AnMed, the coalition’s members include the Anderson Free Clinic, Anderson-Oconee-Pickens Mental Health Center and the nonprofit group AIM, formerly known as Anderson Interfaith Ministries.

Across South Carolina, 58 hospitals have enrolled more than 10,000 patients in similar programs, according to the state Department of Health and Human Services. These programs target what are known as “frequent fliers” — patients who have visited emergency rooms four or more times in the previous year.

Gov. Nikki Haley praised the ongoing efforts in a statement that the health and human services department issued earlier this year.

“This program has been so successful because of the strong partnerships we’ve developed with the hospitals and health care workers in South Carolina,” Haley said.

Thornton Kirby, president and CEO of the South Carolina Hospital Association, offered an equally upbeat assessment.

“We are proud of our state’s hospitals and their valuable partners for making great strides to improve the health of high-risk, uninsured patients in their communities,” Kirby said.

The programs are part of a statewide Healthy Outcomes Plan approved by the state’s Republican-controlled General Assembly in 2013 as an alternative to expanding South Carolina’s Medicaid program.

Critics contend that the number of patients receiving assistance from the Healthy Outcomes Plan is far less than the 300,000 people who would have benefitted from expanding the state’s Medicaid program. Federal officials were offering to spend $11 billion over several years on expanding Medicaid in South Carolina. The expansion would have provided health insurance for an estimated 10,000 people in Anderson County who lack coverage.

AnMed’s program has focused on forging connections between uninsured patients and family medicine physicians, said Michael Cunningham, AnMed’s vice president for advancement. These physicians can help patients manage chronic conditions more effectively than emergency-room doctors, Cunningham said.

“The emergency department is geared up to really treat trauma and emergencies,” he said.

The program is making a difference, Cunningham said. Those patients who have enrolled are going to the emergency room less often, he said.

Sanders is one of three AnMed nurses serving as health coaches in the program. She is dealing with about 175 patients. Many of them have problems that go beyond health care.

“At times it is overwhelming because you have people that need basic life-sustaining requirements like a roof over their head,” she said.

Sanders helped Ferrell obtain food stamps and apply for health insurance.

Ferrell said the program has helped her physically and emotionally. As a result, she is able to enjoy spending more time with her two granddaughters.

“Now I feel like having them over to Nana’s for a sleepover,” she said.

Follow Kirk Brown on Twitter @KirkBrown_AIM