This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... but I do wanna mention ... tree principles ... that I think it should form ... the foundation of what we take the American people ... first ... we had to make the world safer ... second ... we have to make shore and provide opportunity for all Americans regardless of the neighborhood they live in ... and finally we have to look good people out of poverty ... I was former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney sounding very much like a presidential candidate late last week ... over Institution Research Fellow Landy Chen who is ... probably Steve posse advisor on his last presidential bid ... but joins me now ... when he ... are you still advising the Romney ... yet we do still talk quite often so im definitely in May with staking them carefully into this thinking so easy to run for president and why think he's he's going to do due diligence to figure out if he is or is that the topic is make a final decision on its ok we had an editorial in the paper to die in recent days Sara and cause a lot of ... controversy was called Romney recycle than we ask ... if Mitt Romney is the answer ... what is the question ... hadn't ... he ... would he say ... well reason for him to run you know I I think part of the challenge that has been thus far the TRT deletion of rationales well and process articulation stand the the important thing is to think about the substantive case ... for why Governor Romney on a run again and I think that he articulated that are begin to articulate on Friday night in Sandy a go which is a combination of a foreign policy rationale an economic rationale by the hit but those two things together ... there is a compelling case to be May is gonna come out against Obamacare because that was one of the biggest problems with his campaign last time around why I think Apsel in unity as he said on Friday night opposition to Obamacare is one of the most important elements of the campaign going forward in and the reality is that Republicans by the way half to happen replacement for food created in the studio LP Beren against the need to be fair I think what the president did was to take elements of what happen in Massachusetts and cobbled together their destructive way ... so what we have to decided that moment what I would say on Obamacare is this ... that any Republican ... is going to have to make a strong case against Obamacare but more portly for what will replace Obamacare down ... the forty seven percent comments ... but he is seen as ... a rich guy who never really explained in the American public why he wanted to be present in the re releases tax returns how is the Guinea get over those hurdles ... if he runs again what the party amazing thing about this is that a lot of Americans don't realize that Mitt Romney has been a generous guy ... the generous giver ... not just to visit France's he's a great guy but he's a terrible politicians land he lied IDC I ... but I'd I disagree with that assessment of the one I would say is this is important ... that if he makes a decision in the fourth inning he realizes this the people get to know him to get to see him a little bit more than they did in Alaska and I think that will be a focus if he decides ... not something we're going to see and hear a lot more from him running in the days to come ... the rescission research fellow when he can thank you very much ...