Bruce Herman, an internist and geriatrician who practices in Thiensville, attributed an accountable care organization’s success to its focus on the basics. Credit: Mike De Sisti

By of the

For the second consecutive year, an organization of independent physicians in the Milwaukee area led the state in providing care to people covered by Medicare at the lowest cost while meeting targets for quality.

The physicians — part of an accountable care organization, or ACO, set up by Independent Physicians Network — are participating in a Medicare program designed to reward physicians and hospitals when they provide quality care at a lower cost.

The organization saved Medicare $11.7 million last year, and the physicians will receive $4.4 million of those savings.

The organization — Accountable Care Coalition of Southeast Wisconsin LLC — previously generated $17.7 million in savings from April 2012 through December 2013 and received $8.7 million as its share of the savings. It had been the only accountable care organization in southeastern Wisconsin to receive payments from the program.

This year, ProHealth Solutions — an accountable care organization set up by ProHealth Care and independent practices — saved Medicare $6.4 million and earned $2.8 million as its share of the savings.

In an accountable care organization, health systems or doctors, or a combination of both, accept responsibility for the cost and quality of care provided to a specific group of patients. The organizations, an outgrowth of the Affordable Care Act, are one of several experiments to test new ways of paying doctors, hospitals and other health care providers.

The accountable care organization set up by Independent Physicians Network now has outperformed much larger health systems two years in a row. At first glance, it was an unlikely candidate to have the best performance in the state.

Its 350 physicians, who were gauged on the care provided to 11,400 people, have limited influence on the care provided by specialists or hospitals. And unlike health systems, its physicians don't work on one system for electronic health records.

Bruce Herman, an internist and geriatrician who practices in Thiensville, attributed the accountable care organization's success to focusing on the basics.

"That's the only thing that does it," said Herman, one of the organization's assistant medical directors.

The accountable care organization has worked to ensure that the sickest patients — those with chronic diseases such as diabetes and congestive heart failure — become engaged with their doctors.

"That's where we've seen the biggest impact on both quality and cost," said Michael Repka, executive director and CEO of Independent Physicians Network.

Case managers will contact patients who are overdue to see their doctors and will follow up with patients after they have seen their doctors.

The result has been fewer emergency room visits, hospitalizations and readmissions.

"When you look at the Medicare population, the biggest savings are with hospitalizations," Repka said. "That's where the dollars are."

Medicare spending is concentrated among a small number of beneficiaries — 5% of the people covered by traditional Medicare accounted for 39% of annual spending in 2010, according to the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, which advises Congress on the program.

The physicians also are much more engaged, Repka said. The accountable care organization has learned more about its patients.

Accountable care organizations are given information, for instance, that enables them to identify patients with the highest costs.

Accountable Care Coalition of Southeast Wisconsin was set up by a partnership of the Independent Physicians Network and Collaborative Health Systems, a unit of Universal American Corp., a health insurance company based in White Plains, N.Y.

The accountable care organization is installing a system to gather clinical data from the different systems.

"It will give us much better data," Repka said. "It will give us much quicker access to data."

The system, which will take at least 24 months to set up, has analytic tools that can help physicians determine which patients are the most likely to deteriorate and require hospitalization.

"That will take us to the next step," Repka said. "That will enable us to continue to improve."