Thousands of young drivers who are desperate to cut the cost of car insurance are being targeted by ruthless fraudsters selling fake policies online, over the telephone and even in person.

Inexperienced drivers are almost always forced to pay higher premiums, as the risk of an accident is deemed higher by insurers.

Those asked to fund an enormous monthly bill are typically college or university students who have never bought insurance products before – and have very limited budgets.

For some, shopping around online for the best deal has proved disastrous because of the rise of so-called "ghost brokers".

These are fraudsters posing as legitimate middlemen who can cut insurance costs. They are unregulated and tend to operate from residential addresses.

Many promote heavily discounted insurance policies on listings websites such as Gumtree.com and on student websites and university notice boards.

Some lure customers by claiming to work for well-known insurance brands.

The police unit dedicated to tackling insurance fraud across the country – the Insurance Fraud Enforcement Department – has launched a crackdown on this practice.

On October 9, it arrested 27 suspected ghost brokers in a series of dawn raids across the country.

Later in the month, two other fraudsters were finally jailed in what has been labelled Britain's biggest fake insurance scam. These ghost brokers had duped around 600 drivers, many of them insuring their first car, into buying worthless policies. The two criminals had pocketed £500,000.

AA Insurance said its fraud team blocks more than 10 suspected ghost brokers from obtaining car insurance every day.

There are three main types of ghost broking. The first is where a fraudster creates a false policy by compiling a document for a customer based on a copy of a genuine insurance policy. This type of fraud is the most crude and easiest to spot. The customer can check whether their vehicle is actually insured through the motor insurance database – askMID.com.

The second is where a ghost broker takes out a genuine policy on behalf of a customer and arranges for the certificate of insurance to be sent to the firm.

The idea is that the broker will then pass the documents to the customer. The fraudster uses the correct name and vehicle details so the customer can check on the askMID.com website that their vehicle is covered. So most people believe they have insurance for the year.

But shortly after the policy is taken out, the broker cancels it and does not tell the customer, pocketing any money refunded. The unsuspecting customer has a genuine certificate but does not actually have any cover in place.

The third type of scam is where the ghost broker takes out a genuine policy for the customer but falsifies some of the policy information. For example, the broker may register the policy at a different address or may say the driver is older than they are to benefit from lower premiums. In these cases there is a genuine insurance policy in place but as it has been purchased fraudulently, it is not valid.

Customers are usually asked to pay for policies in cash or by bank transfer, although some of the more elaborate scams offer payment by instalments to make the transaction seem more genuine.

Ghost brokers often communicate with customers via free internet messaging on mobile phones, such as BlackBerry messaging and WhatsApp.

Not only do duped customers lose their cash but they risk a criminal record. Driving a vehicle without insurance, or allowing your vehicle to be used by another driver without cover, is a serious motoring offence.

Those caught by the police face fines of up to £5,000, up to eight penalty points on their licence and in some circumstances an instant driving ban.

If the authorities suspect the customer was aware of or involved in the scam, they can seize their vehicle and arrest them for fraud.

One insurer, LV=, said it had identified more than 60 fraud rings so far and a growing number of innocent drivers have been in contact to complain that they are receiving documents, payment requests and cancellation notices from LV= for policies they have not taken out.

The Association of British Insurers warned there is a growing market for fraudsters as more people look to save money on their car insurance.

A spokesman for the trade body said: "With consumers searching for competitively priced motor insurance, the issue is not going away.

"We know that certain groups, such as younger drivers, are more vulnerable to this crime."

Gumtree.com said it has taken steps to stop ghost brokers from advertising on the site. A spokesman said: "Some time ago we reorganised site categories and have removed several as part of this re-structure. The insurance-related advert section is one of those that we removed because it was a higher risk category for our users and had limited traffic."

The police this week made a concerted effort to increase awareness of ghost broking scams.

An animated video has been launched on social media websites, aimed at young motorists, warning about the risk of rip-offs by fraudsters selling fake car insurance.

Dominic Parkin, deputy head of the City of London Police's Insurance Fraud Enforcement Department, said: "Ghost broking is a nationwide problem which is now being met by a national law enforcement response.

"The animation is designed to grab young drivers' attention and quickly inform them about the issue. We have asked police forces, insurers and universities to share it online with the aim to get it watched by as many motorists as possible."

How to check if you have a genuine insurance policy

1. If you are concerned about the insurance you have bought, the first step is to contact the insurer named on your policy directly. Ensure the company has the correct details for you and your vehicle. Ask for the policy documents and confirmation of a payment plan, if applicable.

2. Next, check that your vehicle is registered on the askMID.com website. This is a database of valid insurance policies and you should be listed if you own a genuine policy.

3. Did you use a reputable broker? The check is making sure that he or she was a member of the British Insurance Brokers Association (Biba) when you bought the product.

4. In future, use your judgment when dealing with anyone who asks you to pay in cash up front. Most reputable brokers will accept credit card payments and will have clear terms and conditions.

5. Beware of adverts guaranteeing significant undercuts to typical prices for certain types of cover, or offering fixed-price insurance. If it sounds too good to be true, it probably is.

How to save money on car insurance

You should certainly use comparison websites to shop around for the best price. But be careful – different insurers will offer varying levels of cover. Use more than one comparison website and delve right into the small print to make sure you understand exclusions and exactly what your policy will insurance against. The Financial Conduct Authority, the City regulator, is concerned that some insurers design policies specifically to jump to the top of comparison tables, rather than constructing them in customers' interests.

If you are a young driver, consider having a telematics box – also known as a "black box" – installed in your car. It uses GPS and motion sensors to detect hard acceleration, braking and speed limit infringements. This enables insurers to monitor drivers and reward careful motorists with cheaper premiums. This is especially helpful to younger drivers who are almost automatically presumed to be boy-racer types, whether or not they engage in such activities.