Brandon, SD

One week after responding to his final fire call 38-year-old Steve Ackerman was laid to rest Sunday afternoon.

The Valley Springs volunteer firefighter died in the line of duty fighting a house fire in Brandon. The house fire also claimed the life of 47-year-old homeowner David Smith. It's a fire that has brought grief to the community, but on Sunday it also brought them together.

"When that pager went off Sunday night Steve didn't waver he simply replied send me," Ackerman family friend Mike Harstad said during the funeral service.

More than 1,000 firefighters and emergency responders joined Ackerman’s family and members of the community to mourn the loss of the volunteer firefighter who went into a burning Brandon house to rescue the homeowner but never came out.

"Today's outpouring of grief and admiration is fitting to a man who dedicated his life to his family, to protecting and serving a community, a true local hero in every sense of the word," Harstad said.

The service offered comfort to the family and friends Ackerman leaves behind.

"Brother Steve is in a better place; this glorious place where there's no more pain, no more sorrow," Reverend Clyde Teel of Community Reformed Church said.

While Ackerman's faith can offer hope, those who knew him best say his life can serve as a model for others.

"Let us hold Steve up as an example for how we should live our own lives with valor, courage, but also with compassion, sacrifice, and love," Harstad said.

And as a bell tolled one last time to represent the firefighter's final call on Sunday Ackerman's fellow emergency responders let their fallen hero know they will now serve in his honor.

"Rest easy brother we'll take it from here," Harstad said.

Ackerman leaves behind a fiancée and her children. A fund has been set up for them at Menno State Bank.

The Steve Ackerman Memorial Fund

Menno State Bank

P.O. Box 345

Menno, SD 57045.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.