The Wall Street Journal

A small Brooklyn startup is quietly building out a roster of publishing partners and paying advertisers that would be the envy of many in digital media.

Across the digital publishing spectrum, sites like Business Insider, Dailymail.com and Slate, along with major traditional media companies such as Time Inc., Conde Nast, Bonnier and The Washington Post are running “Avalanche” ads produced by the firm Velocity Made Good (VMG).

What’s an Avalanche? And why are A-list brands such as Land Rover, Charles Schwab, Samsung, Verizon, Canon, Guinness, Porsche and BMW snatching them up?

The Avalanche product weaves an ad into a content carousel on a publisher’s website. Think of a squared off section of a site highlighting several editorial stories with images–and one of these images is an ad. If a reader mouses over an Avalanche ad, the advertiser’s image expands over the content hub.

The ads can fetch a higher price tag because they are tucked in among the publisher’s own content and more likely to catch a reader’s eye than an easily overlooked standard display ad. It comes a bit closer to mixing advertising with editorial without being intentionally deceptive.

Avalanche is the brainchild of VMG founder Chris Batty, who formerly worked in digital sales at Gawker Media and CNET. During those tenures, Mr. Batty said he saw how the display ad market was becoming commoditized. Publishers were on the lookout for better, more visual ad products but didn’t want to constantly produce brand new custom treatments.

“That’s the world where publishers live,” he said. “In the world of brand advertising, everything is ‘never been done before.’ And there’s all this investment in ad tech, but nobody is thinking about these systems for brands. So we thought we can help publishers take control of user experience and their own destiny.”

Mr. Batty said that 230 Avalanche campaigns have been run to date. The company worked with just four publishers in 2013, and that number jumped to 30 last year.