Buy Photo Ryan Turbeville is uninsured and has no plans to buy coverage. (Photo: Tom Wilemon / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

The Tennessean has followed how the Affordable Care Act has affected representatives of six key groups since people could first obtain health insurance on the federal exchange.

Four of these representatives are still without coverage either by choice or by circumstance. The penalty for being uninsured, which was just $95 for a single person this tax year, will more than triple in 2015. Single people and families face penalties of $325 per person ($162.50 for a child) or 2 percent of household income, whichever is greater.

However, the law provides for hardship exemptions. One of those hardships is being determined ineligible for Medicaid because your state didn't expand its program.

50-somethings

Angela Woods was determined to get signed up for Obamacare in 2013. When she got downsized after working at Opryland for 33 years, she found another job, but it didn't offer health benefits. She was buying a month-to-month bridge policy — coverage that insurance companies offer only temporarily. She could not afford a full-fledged individual policy because she has high blood pressure. It took her more than 150 tries to get coverage on healthcare.gov because of the problem-plagued launch of the website last year. This year, she signed up on the first attempt, but she is paying $30 more a month in premiums.

Entrepreneurs

Ryan Turbeville is uninsured and presently has no plans to buy coverage. "It's kind of a personal choice for me to go without it right now," he said. "Yes, it's risky, but I am starting a business and would rather not have that expense. I think I should have that right. I'm young and healthy." He will risk paying a penalty but said he would give the issue a closer look at tax filing time. If he does buy insurance, Turbeville said he is more likely to do it on the private market than through a federal government website.

Buy Photo Hassen Ahmed, a Pakistani immigrant and naturalized citizen, could qualify for coverage under the Affordable Care Act if he made enough money to obtain a subsidy to help him pay premiums. (Photo: George Walker IV / File / The Tennessean)

Immigrants

Hassen Ahmed is still uninsured and a patient at Siloam Family Health Center, a faith-based clinic. A Pakistani immigrant and naturalized citizen, he could qualify for coverage under the Affordable Care Act if he made enough money to obtain a subsidy to help him pay premiums, or if Gov. Bill Haslam obtains state and federal approval to expand Medicaid eligibility. Coverage under the law varies according to whether an immigrant is a naturalized citizen, a lawfully present immigrant or an undocumented immigrant. Undocumented immigrants do not qualify for any federal coverage or subsidies to buy insurance. Legal immigrants do qualify for Medicaid coverage, but there are several stipulations that vary by state. They can also buy coverage on healthcare.gov and risk paying tax penalties for going uninsured.

Buy Photo The Rev. Joel Perales does not have an employer-based health plan or make enough money to qualify for a tax subsidy to buy coverage. (Photo: File / The Tennessean)

Poverty workers

The Rev. Joel Perales, who founded Rio De Vida Assembly of God Church in La Vergne, does not have an employer-based health plan or make enough money to qualify for a tax subsidy to buy coverage on healthcare.gov. He and his wife go to Faith Family Medical Clinic in Nashville. Faith-based clinics continue to serve people despite the passage of the federal health law, but they have faced hurdles raising money to support that mission. Many would-be donors assume these clinics are no longer needed.

Buy Photo Paul Simpson tried to sign up for medical insurance on healthcare.gov last year but gave up because of problems with the website. However, he was able to buy a dental plan. (Photo: Larry McCormack / File / The Tennessean)

Young invincibles

Paul Simpson, who is in his early 30s, tried to sign up for medical insurance on healthcare.gov last year but gave up because of problems with the website. However, he was able to buy a dental plan. A bartender, he works for a small employer that does not offer health coverage. He has not given much thought to buying health insurance this time around, he said. Simpson may end up having to pay a tax penalty if he continues to go without coverage. Open enrollment ends Feb. 15.

Buy Photo Cindy Selph is presently uninsured. (Photo: File / The Tennessean)

Part-time job jugglers

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1AXQiRm