Free Retirement Calculator: When Can You Retire? —

Click Here to Find Out

How Soon Can You Retire? Free Test Shows You When —

Click Here

An Extremely Simple Way to Determine If You're Ready to Retire —

Find Out Now

The AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan, nongovernmental organization that advocates for senior citizens on issues like Medicaid, of which it is an avid supporter.Along with providing benefits to more than 37 million members, AARP takes stances on numerous political issues and controversial initiatives. It is an avid supporter of Medicaid. AARP’s Public Policy Institute asserted in 2013 that Medicaid is the largest provider of long-term support services for senior citizens because seniors tend to exhaust their life savings as a result of needing such services in their later years. Medicaid acts as a last resort for senior citizens with few remaining savings and assets in need of long-term healthcare.The South Dakota AARP branch released a statement in 2013 announcing that “AARP is continuing to press” for expanding Medicaid. When Montana Governor Steve Bullock signed the Montana Health and Economic Livelihood Partnership Act in May 2015 expanding Medicaid to an additional 70,000 Montanans, AARP called the bill's approval a “historic victory” and said “thank you” to all who supported the bill.Over 40 AARP offices across the country are utilizing members and volunteers to push for Medicaid expansion through lobbying efforts, advertisements, coalitions, and expert panels.Beyond state Medicaid expansions, AARP has been pushing for Medicaid expansion on the national level. “Expanding Medicaid will help millions of 45 to 64 year olds who have lost their jobs or who are struggling without health benefits” said Nancy LeaMond, AARP executive vice president, in a release . AARP also has credited itself with helping obtain Michigan governor Rick Snyder’s support on the issue.After the Supreme Court repealed the Affordable Care Act’s mandate requiring all states to expand Medicaid in 2013, AARP published a report showing the benefits of expanding Medicaid benefits for uninsured low-income adults. The report explained that midlife adults need Medicaid because of the prevalence of a variety of chronic illnesses, which can only be treated and maintained with long-term treatment. The Affordable Care Act mandate would grant Medicaid benefits to 4 million low-income, middle-aged adults, the report said.