Researchers used Gallup data from a survey that asks people about their health care access and how healthy they think they are.

Millions of additional people now have health insurance thanks to the Affordable Care Act.

But does that mean Americans actually have better access to health care?

Some intriguing, if tentative, new research suggests the answer is yes. It’s one more reason to think Obamacare is not the fiasco that critics claim it to be.

In a new paper for the Journal of the American Medical Association, a group of scholars attempt to produce a before-and-after picture of the health care law’s implementation. To do so, they draw on three years of data from Gallup’s ongoing “well-being index” survey, which asks respondents about health insurance status as well as their access to care.

Among the survey’s regular questions: Are you having an “easy” time paying for medication? Do you have a regular primary care physician? Do you feel like you’re in good health? That last question is important because, according to some previously published research, how people answer is a pretty good predictor of mortality. People who say they are in good health usually are.

The picture from the raw data is a little muddled. The number of people without health insurance has dropped precipitously, from 20.3 percent of working-aged adults before the Affordable Care Act’s coverage expansion took full effect to 14.5 percent at the beginning of 2015. And the percentage of respondents who say they “cannot afford care” fell from 20.4 percent to 17.8 percent during that same time period.

On the other hand, the percentage who said they have no personal physician remained basically the same, and the percentage who said they were in “fair” or “poor” health actually increased a bit, from 18.3 percent to 18.8 percent.

But the researchers didn’t simply pull numbers from the surveys. They adjusted the responses for variables like unemployment, in an attempt to isolate the effects of the health care law from other factors, such as the recovering economy. The researchers also looked specifically at the trends -- in other words, whether access to care was getting worse before the health care law’s implementation, and, if so, whether that deterioration stopped.

That lens produced a more consistent story. Every trend had been getting worse -- and then, with the health law’s full implementation, either stopped getting worse or started getting better. Lead author Benjamin Sommers, a Harvard economist and physician who used to work at the Department of Health and Human Services, said the difference amounted to 11 million more adults saying they can afford their health care and 6.8 million reporting they were in good health. (Sommers made these comments on a conference call that HHS, which sponsored and reviewed the study, held on Monday -- although the paper itself does not represent the agency’s official view.)