FORT WAYNE, Ind. (WANE) – Companies have been sending out prescription benefit cards during open enrollment for health insurance, causing some concerns for consumers about the legitimacy of them and how the consumers’ information was obtained.

UniScript is one of many companies offering prescription benefit cards that claims to give up to 75 percent discount on certain medicines. According to the company’s website, if you received a card in the mail, you can take it to a pharmacy and receive an automatic discount on your prescription without signing up or paying for the service.

NewsChannel 15 spoke with a customer service representative about how the company obtains consumers’ information. The representative said they receive information from third party vendors consumers have signed up with or from a friend or family member of a consumer with the intention of them benefiting from using the service.

Marjorie Stephens, Better Business Bureau of northern Indiana president and CEO, said the company has received an “F” rating because of the pattern of complaints that have come in about UniScript.

“They’re concerned that people are looking for information, fishing for information,” Stephens said. “They are just very concerned because they really don’t quite understand this company and what it’s all about.”

According to the BBB’s website, here’s the reasoning for the “F” rating for UniScript: BBB files indicate a pattern of complaints concerning company mailings sent to consumers and business practices/privacy policies of the company. Complaints are coming into BBB alleging issues with receiving unsolicited mailings from Script Relief LLC (or from one of its brand/subsidiary names containing prescription discount cards. Receipt of these cards is raising concern from consumers who are worried about potential identity theft, healthcare fraud, or that their personal information is being collected and distributed for unknown purposes. Some consumers tell BBB that documentation received from the company mimics official government notices by using a brand name such as United States Prescription Discounts, along with terms phrases such as “Form #” or “Resident Code”, as well as a Washington D.C. return mailing address. All of these factors contribute to some consumers reporting that they thought this is an official program of the U.S. government, or part of the Affordable Care Act.

UniScript has replied to and resolved most of the complaints as stated in the website. The last complaint that was filed against the company was Aug. 19, 2014.

NewsChannel 15 wanted to know how UniScript makes money off these prescription benefit cards, but we were given a vague response.

“We receive a fee from the pharmaceutical companies that was mentioned prior, we received that fee and that’s how we’re able to stay afloat,” said a customer service representative.

We did reach out to Walgreens and CVS to see if they accept these cards.

CVS’ spokesperson, Mike DeAngelis, released this statement: “We accept many different prescription discount card programs, including Uniscript. It is important to stress that these cards are not insurance. They are for discounts off the retail prices of prescription medication.”

Walgreens’ spokesperson, Phil Caruso, issued the following statement: “We accept many different prescription discount card programs, including Uniscript. They are for discounts off the retail prices of prescription medication.”

Stephens said if you’re unsure about these types of benefit cards, contact the BBB or your insurance company.