WASHINGTON–The Federal Reserve Bank of New York announced Wednesday significant changes in the terms of a program designed to provide the central bank with better control over short-term interest rates.

The bank said the minimum bidding size available to the large banks and money funds participating in what the Fed calls its overnight reverse repurchase agreement program now stands at $30 billion, from the previous limit of $10 billion. But the Fed also imposed a daily $300 billion overall limit on the effort, and has a formula to deal with large dealer bids in the event that cap is reached.

The Fed’s overnight reverse repos, as they are more commonly called, take in cash from program participants in exchange for one-day loans of Treasury securities. The Fed hopes that the rate it pays for these de facto loans of cash to the central bank, currently set at five basis points, will set a floor underneath short-term interest rates.

The New York Fed announcement followed the Fed’s monetary-policy meeting held Tuesday and Wednesday. As part of that gathering, central bankers updated their strategy to raise interest rates at some point in the future. The Fed explained how a new set of tools, including the reverse repos, will help it take the stance of monetary policy back to more historically normal levels.

The Fed’s strategy formalized that reverse repos will play a supporting role in any campaign to raise rates. In a press conference after the meeting, Fed Chairwoman Janet Yellen said the program “will only be used to the extent necessary and will be phased out when no longer needed to help control the federal-funds rate.”

Over the last year of testing, the reverse repos have seen extensive demand from program participants. Some Fed officials have become worried the program could serve as a destabilizing force with the potential to exacerbate market stress. The concern is that rattled investors might pull their money from private short-term securities in times of turbulence and park it at the Fed, creating a de facto bank run.

The Fed’s new reverse repo terms seem to take account of those concerns, most notably in the overall limit placed on the effort. The $300 billion daily cap is under the $339 billion mark seen on the final day of the second quarter. Recent operations have been hovering on either side of the $150 billion mark.

Quarter ends have frequently seen huge flows of money in the reverse repo facility. Many market participants blame such shifts on what is called “window dressing,” where some firms shift holdings temporarily into higher-quality investments purely for reporting purposes.

The daily cap also seems to suggest the Fed is mindful of rising concerns that it is becoming the dominant destination to invest cash short term, displacing private-sector financial firms.