Frontiers Media Logo

With the Affordable Care Act open enrollment period upon us, Frontiers Media has crunched data from many independent organizations, polled readers and sifted through anecdotal information to create the first-of-its-kind Gay-Friendly Doctors and Hospitals Guide for Los Angeles and the surrounding area. The annual directory will appear in the Dec. 11 issue of Frontiers magazine and in a special section of FrontiersMedia.com.

It seeks to answer ongoing questions that our readers face. Until now, knowledge of places and providers where patients can be safe—and get the best advice on health care decisions from an LGBT perspective—has been a matter of word of mouth. Now Frontiers readers and health care providers alike have a way to find each other both in the published print edition and the digital version, which will be updated throughout the year.

In addition to the Gay-Friendly Doctors List and hospital assessments, we’ll look into other aspects of LGBT life and health care needs, such as senior services and mental health. Special care will be paid to HIV/AIDS services, from obtaining the best care possible to the latest advice on PrEP and even the sometimes perplexing problem of finding a dentist while HIV-positive. Of course, we’ll also give advice on navigating Obamacare.

The data will be authoritative, and contributions from members of the community will keep it real.

Please join us in this final phase of the special issue’s creation. Suggestions and anecdotes from readers are welcome at editorial@frontiersmedia.com.

Press inquiries please contact Owen Phillips at o.phillips@frontiersmedia.com

Advertising inquires should go to sales@frontiersmedia.com or call 323-304-1499.

About Frontiers Media:

Frontiers is the 21st century’s LGBT media company, spanning digital, mobile, print and television. With the authority that comes with being a first to market in gay publishing 33 years ago and incredible access to the entertainment industry, we serve this sophisticated, influential and nuanced audience like no company has before. In addition to publishing a bi-monthly print magazine distributed throughout Southern California, Frontiers produces the online and mobile site at frontiersmedia.com for a global audience, events, expos and new digital television platform which kicks off with the gay Australian hit series The Horizon.