As 2013 winds down, we asked several venture capital investors to reflect on the past year and give us their outlook for 2014. Next in our series is Tracy Warren, general partner, Battelle Ventures.

Battelle Ventures Tracy Warren

Ms. Warren speaks about how life sciences needs to redefine itself, continued regulatory challenges and how the Affordable Care Act is creating opportunities for investors.

What surprised you the most about 2013?

What surprised me the most was the surge in life-science IPOs, with the field split among quality deals and deals that could not otherwise access capital, leaving the public shareholders to sort it out.

What do you think will be the biggest challenge that the venture capital industry will face in 2014?

The biggest challenge as it relates to life sciences is to redefine itself and reinvent its business model. Timelines and costs for regulated products are not going to change in the near term. VCs need to leverage strong academic partners or corporate relationships in creative ways. VCs have a responsibility to their limited partners to provide new avenues to investing in novel technologies. The Affordable Care Act is opening doors to previously underserved spaces, such as women’s health and pediatrics. The venture capital industry needs to find, fund and mature opportunities that improve quality of care and lower costs in meaningful ways.

Have venture capital returns improved enough to draw renewed limited-partner interest in 2014?

In traditional life-science funds I would say no. However, some higher-quality IPOs might have breathed life into select funds, improving chances for raising capital.

What will need to happen for the 2013 surge in biotech IPOs to be sustainable?

A critical indicator would be whether or not the stock prices of the 2013 IPOs are rising and those newly public companies are successfully executing. If they are, investors should remain engaged and be open to continued investment in quality deals.

–Interview by Brian Gormley. Write to Brian Gormley at brian.gormley@wsj.com