American Heart Association tips can help diners pick healthier menu options

A romantic meal doesn't have to be bad for you. The American Heart Association offers tips for choosing a healthy meal while dining out. ( Jeannie Lancaster / Special to the Reporter-Herald )

Valentine's Day will soon be here. It's the perfect time to take the one you love out for a romantic dinner, with candlelight, music and delicious food. But what if you or the one you love must follow a heart-healthy diet? Does it mean you have to stay home? Absolutely not! With a little planning and awareness, you can enjoy a delicious dinner out.

The American Heart Association (AHA) notes that, "You can eat heart-healthy if you know what to look for. Many restaurants offer delicious meals that are low in saturated fats, trans fats and cholesterol, or will prepare your food to order. With a little bit of effort, you can ensure that the meals you eat away from home are part of a healthy diet."

So just what is a heart-healthy diet? Jenifer Bowman, a registered dietitian with the University of Colorado Health, who works with cardiac patients, likes to focus on the positive. She encourages individuals to think of a plate sitting on the table in front of them. "Try to have half of the plate made up of fruits and vegetables, one fourth made up of lean meat and other proteins and one fourth comprised of starches, such as noodles, rice and pasta.

"The picture of the plate can help," added Bowman. "It resonates with a lot of people. There's no counting and no complicated math."

Before you go out, do your research. Most restaurants now post their menus online. Major chains usually post their nutritional information as well. By looking on the Internet, you can choose something ahead of time that fits your needs.

Advertisement

Many restaurants feature a "light" or "heart-friendly" section on their menus. If you're unsure about a certain item, call the restaurant and ask.

Know what to look for. Menus may seem confusing, but if you read carefully, you can decipher them. Things that are cooked in butter, deep fried, creamed, scalloped or sautéed likely have a higher fat content. Bowman suggests choosing food that is baked, broiled, grilled or stir fried.

Many local restaurants include heart-healthy or light options on their menu. At Biaggi's, Almond Pesto Chicken is a favorite. (Biaggi's / Special to the Reporter-Herald)

Don't be afraid to speak up. "Most foods on most menus will probably fit into a heart-healthy diet if prepared with lower fat ingredients and less salt," writes the AHA. "Ask your server if the kitchen can alter preparations to meet your needs, or call ahead before you choose your restaurant. If your food isn't prepared as you requested, send it back."

Asking for salad dressings and sauces to be served on the side is one way to still enjoy delicious food, but it puts you in control. Bowman recommends trying the fork trick. "Dip your fork lightly in the container of condiment and then get a fork full of food. You will have flavor with every bite of food without getting too many extra calories, fat or sodium from the condiments."

Watch portion size. You can avoid the urge to eat a large serving by asking either for smaller portions or a take-home box, when you order. Pop half of your meal in the box right away. Not only will you have eaten wisely, but you'll have a delicious lunch for the following day.

Many local restaurants are open to patron's requests. Several, including some chains, feature "scratch kitchens" where food, as the name implies, is made from scratch. This allows more flexibility on the part of the chef as to last-minute changes.

"We're always willing to work around diets," said Christopher Reeves, sous-chef at the 4th Street Chop House in downtown Loveland. "It's fun to be creative and come up with something. We love doing little last minute adjustments. We're mostly a scratch kitchen."

"Our servers get three to four hours of training, where we talk about the lighter side menu and allergies," said Kevin Mitts, managing partner of Biaggi's Ristorante Italiano in the Promenade Shops at Centerra. "We're a scratch kitchen, so we're amazingly open to guests making requests as to how their food is cooked."

The Inglenook in downtown Loveland is an intimate restaurant that features a variety of entrees. As a scratch kitchen, it is also open to making subtle changes to a menu item for individuals with special dietary needs, shared owner Rod Brubacher.

"Restaurants in general are trying to meet the nutritional needs of their customers," said Bowman. "I see the push overall for all kinds of varieties of food."

Dining out, whether it's on Valentine's Day or any other day of the year, can be a delicious experience for those consciously trying to eat for a healthy heart.