The United States Constitution holds a special place in the hearts and minds of most Americans. The document along with its history and bedrock principles of self-government are woven into the fabric of the nation's imagination.

That is not the case for state constitutions, however, including Iowa's. The story of Iowa's constitutions (there were three versions, in 1844, 1846 and the current version ratified in 1857) is a rich history of the formation of a new state carved out of the prairie by immigrants steeped in debates over the rights of black Iowans and seemingly arcane issues, such as creating schools and deciding who could issue bank notes in the new state.

Apart from a few legal scholars and dedicated historians, there has been little popular interest in this story.

That could be changing, however, thanks in part to efforts of the State Library and Secretary of State Matt Schultz. They announced recently that the original copy of the Iowa Constitution drafted in Iowa City in 1857 has been scanned and put on the state's website. The announcement has prompted a flurry of interest in the original Iowa Constitution, according to law librarian Cory Quist.

The only known original copy of the document, hand-written by pen and ink, has been on display in the office of secretary of state in the Iowa Capitol. Now it can be viewed on the State Library of Iowa website (http://tinyurl.com/kyxmk47).

In fact, there are several documents related to the Iowa Constitution available on the library website, including a collection of newspaper reports on the 1844 and '46 constitutional conventions compiled in 1900 by the legendary Iowa historian Benjamin Shambaugh. The two-volume transcript of debates at the 1857 convention is also there, along with other materials and links to other state documents online.

To get a perspective on this project, a video is on the site that includes interviews with state officials, including Iowa Chief Justice Mark Cady. It shows Secretary of State Schultz and Quist carefully boxing up and carrying the original document to be scanned in the State Library across Grand Avenue accompanied by an Iowa State Patrol trooper.

This gold mine of original documents was previously inaccessible to the general public beyond a small cadre of historians and researchers who knew where to look. Thanks to all of those involved, now average Iowans can read all about it from the comfort of their laptops.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1p0TpnA