AUSTIN — Dallas County is the country’s major metropolitan area with the largest potential premium increase next year for people currently enrolled in the most popular health insurance plan on the Affordable Care Act marketplace, a new report shows.

Collin County residents who also are enrolled in the popular, lowest-cost silver plan through Healthcare.gov face an identical predicament as their counterparts in Dallas County, according to a Dallas Morning News review of the underlying data in the Kaiser Family Foundation report.

In both counties, a 40 year old adult who doesn’t qualify for subsidies and purchased a Blue Cross and Blue Shield “Blue Advantage Silver HMO” policy for 2015 will have to pay $1,116 more next year if he or she doesn’t shop around in the state exchange — and switch.

Researchers for the Menlo Park, Calif.-based nonprofit think tank on national health issues said Dallas starkly illustrates the dangers for some marketplace shoppers if they simply let themselves be re-upped automatically in the same plan for 2016.

“There is concern that those who passively renew may no longer be in the plan that is best suited for them,” they wrote.

The good news is that in both North Texas counties, a 40 year old consumer can switch to a “silver” health maintenance organization plan with a different carrier and not just avoid a 27 percent increase for next year but pay 7 percent less than he or she is paying currently.

That product, the researchers found, is a Molina Marketplace plan available for $260 a month. That’s cheaper than this year’s $279 monthly premium for Blue Cross’ plan. Next year, the Blue Advantage silver HMO plan’s price jumps to $353 a month, they noted.

The researchers cautioned that in a majority of the marketplace counties across the country where there’s a deal to be had by switching to a cheaper silver plan, consumers will have to change carriers. That may mean having to change doctors or other providers. Consumers also should carefully scrutinize a new plan’s deductible, copayments and drug coverage, they said.

“The problem with that is people don’t like changing plans,” Austin-based health policy analyst Stacey Pogue, who is with the center-left think tank the Center for Public Policy Priorities, told me last week as I wrote this overview of the Texas marketplace during the current open enrollment period.

“It’s a pain,” Pogue said. “There’s a different formulary and a different provider network. But that’s actually how it’s supposed to work. We’re supposed to find the lowest cost one that meets our needs, and we switch to that. We’re just not used to doing that in health care.”

The Kaiser foundation’s analysis concludes that comparison shopping would pay off in nearly three-quarters of the 2,365 counties served by Healthcare.gov in 36 states. That’s because in these 1,721 counties, the silver plan with the lowest premiums in 2015 is no longer the lowest-cost plan in 2016.

In North Texas, the emerging picture of the 2016 marketplace is mixed. While in Dallas and Collin counties, consumers have a choice of more plans from more insurers than was true a year ago, that’s not true in Kaufman County.

As a reader pointed out to me Monday, Blue Cross is the only carrier serving Kaufman, and it’s offering just HMO plans — 12 of them. Last year, there were 43 plans offered on the exchange in Kaufman County by four carriers. Twenty were preferred provider organization plans, five were point of service plans and 18 were HMO plans. Aetna, Cigna Healthcare and Scott and White Health Plan pulled out of Kaufman County for 2016.