During the recent Republican debate, none of the questions concerned the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas took the opportunity of his closing remarks to reiterate his promise to repeal every word of the still unpopular health care reform law. Interestingly, Politico has a story published Tuesday about how he or any other like-minded Republican president could at least start that ball rolling without having to go through Congress. The instrument of Obamacare’s execution is within the law itself. All President Cruz would need is the cooperation of enough Republican governors.

Photo by Steve Pope/Getty Images

The provision, to go into effect in 2017, allows states to apply for waivers to avoid many of the onerous dictates of the Obamacare law in exchange for their own state-run system. The provision was meant to accommodate liberal states such as Vermont that desired to institute a single payer, government run system. But, in theory, the provision could also allow more conservative states such as Texas or Florida to institute their own more market-oriented systems, with health care savings accounts and none of the draconian mandates such as exist under the Affordable Care Act.

The provision has some specific criteria about what state systems have to do to qualify for a waiver. However, the interpretation of whether they do or not seems to be entirely at the discretion of the president.

The idea of eliminating Obamacare at the stroke of a pen for any state that wants to is a beguiling one. On the one hand, it would seem like a half-measure, going short of repealing and replacing the law. On the other hand, invoking the provision would be attractive to a president like Cruz, who is a big supporter of the 10th Amendment, which devolves powers to the state or the people not specifically spelled out in the Constitution. States that still want Obamacare could have it. States that did not want Obamacare could eliminate it.

Indeed, by setting up a system, entire legal under the health care reform law, in which each state has its own health care system, a subsequent repeal of Obamacare may just be a formality.