U.S. Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, D-Ariz., and U.S. Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., ask questions during a congressional hearing looking into the 2015 Gold King Mine Spill in Colorado. Kirkpatrick and McCain could face each other in this year's U.S. Senate general election. (Photo: David Wallace/The Republic)

Looking at a tough re-election campaign, incumbent Republican Sen. John McCain is going on the air this week with an ad attacking Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, his likely Democratic opponent in this year's Arizona election, over her support for the Affordable Care Act.

In McCain's first television commercial of the campaign, an announcer ticks off recent problems with President Barack Obama's signature health-care law and says, "Obamacare is failing Arizonans" before knocking Kirkpatrick for bragging about voting for the 2010 legislation.

“The Obamacare system is collapsing and tens of thousands of Arizonans are being forced to find new health-care coverage and brace themselves for higher premiums next year,” McCain campaign spokeswoman Lorna Romero said in a written statement to The Arizona Republic. “Democrat Congresswoman Ann Kirkpatrick’s continued support of the failed health-care system shows she is nothing more than a rubber-stamp for President Obama and the liberal establishment."

The ad is set to run Tuesday through May 23 on Phoenix broadcast television stations.

D.B. Mitchell, a Kirkpatrick campaign spokesman, responded by noting that the McCain campaign also was running a web ad against former state Sen. Kelli Ward of Lake Havasu City, one of three GOP challengers McCain expects to face in the Aug. 30 Senate primary.

“Today, Arizonans woke up to not one but two attack ads from John McCain, who is clearly running scared in both his primary and in the general election," Mitchell said in an emailed statement to The Arizona Republic. "McCain's tired old attacks about Obamacare are nothing new — and once again he disregards the thousands of Arizonans who now have health coverage because of the ACA and its Medicaid expansion. McCain's cheap attack on Ann is completely out of touch with the needs of these families because he's spent the last 33 years in Washington.”

Meanwhile, the Kirkpatrick campaign is preparing to launch a series of bilingual videos designed to remind Latino voters of McCain's much-discussed 2010 "danged fence" border-security TV ad.

Nowicki is The Republic's national political reporter. Follow him on Twitter at @dannowicki and on his official Facebook page.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/27tAG8m