FOREST CITY - Standing on a new pedestrian bridge over the Lackawanna River, Lackawanna Heritage Valley Authority officials cut the ribbon on a piece of a 70-mile trail that is projected to run from Pittston to New York state.

"This is a most important connection to us," Rail-Trail Council of Northeastern Pennsylvania executive director Lynn Conrad said. She said the connection is remarkable because it connects urban to rural, Lackawanna to Susquehanna and the D&H Rail Trail to the Lackawanna River Heritage Trail.

To connect the portion of the trail between Simpson and Vandling, the Lackawanna Heritage Valley Authority had to rebuild three bridges that span the Lackawanna River. The agency replaced crumbling wood with cement and placed benches near the new bridges.

The agency has dubbed the new section the D&H Extension, named for the Delaware & Hudson Railway that once ran through the area.

"Now we have a 70-mile trail that is basically usable," the rail-trail council's program manager Deb McNamara said. "I don't think enough people know that it's here."

Authority trail manager and environmental program officer Stephanie Milewski said the agency purchased the portion of the trail from a private owner whose family inherited it from a partnership that bought the land after the railroad abandoned it.

Lorne Possinger, natural resource program supervisor for the state Department of Conservation and Natural Resources said Northeast Pennsylvania residents are fortunate to inherit these railroad lands. He said his grandfather and great-grandfather both worked for the railroads.

"I often wonder when I'm out on the trail if the scenery I view when I'm riding is the same as my ancestors saw," Mr. Possinger said.

The woods along the trail hold countless reminders of coal mining and railroads. Piles of railroad ties are scattered here and there, now covered in moss. The trail runs past culm dumps now colonized by slender, white birch trees. Abutments of stacked stone rise from either side of the trail, remnants of narrow gauge railroad bridges that ran from mines to coal breakers across the Lackawanna River.

Ms. Milewski said LHVA received funding from the commonwealth's Redevelopment Assistance Capital Program, administered by the Office of the Budget. The National Park Service also paid for part of the project, she said.

Contact the writer: bgibbons@timesshamrock.com, @bgibbonsTT on Twitter