The last three years have brought an uptick in proposed or enacted legislation spanning the employment spectrum, including minimum wage changes at the state and federal level, the Affordable Care Act, San Francisco’s Retail Worker Bill of Rights and of course the proposed changes to the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). A National Retail Federation (NRF) commissioned study found that the cost to comply with the proposed FLSA, changes was estimated at $745 million and affect nearly three to five million workers. Regardless of your personal views on the issue, the simple equation for retailers is that the cost of retail labor is going up, substantially.



Those retailers who rise to the challenge during this period of turmoil, will gain a competitive advantage over their rivals. Retail winners will thrive by embracing their retail workforce as a strategic asset, while minimizing the financial impact of labor law compliance. Retailers can maximize their workforce by following three principals.



Attract and Retain the Best Retail Workforce

Quite simply tomorrow’s workforce will be significantly different than today’s. As Rainer Strack elaborated on his research in the Ted Talk “The Workforce Crisis of 2030” the future workforce is focused on culture and specifically on the personal relationship between employer and employee. Those employers who can provide the schedules, tools and interaction that create a positive culture will experience lower turnover and higher employee morale. The good news is technology is already available to help. Mobile applications that allow employees manage their schedules, swap shifts, enter time-off requests and review details such as hours worked, pending schedules and accrued benefits are growing in popularity. Further, advanced tools are providing retailers with prescriptive hiring and scheduling recommendations that allow Retailers to accurately hire and schedule their labor resources all while ensuring compliance with the rapidly evolving legal requirements.



Optimize Workforce Productivity and Compliance

Store managers cannot be expected to juggle variables, like associate requests and store sales requirements, and still arrive at an optimal schedule that ensures compliance with all legal requirements using only a spreadsheet or basic tools.



Today’s workforce also wants to feel empowered and productive. Associates want to help customers on their shopping journeys by providing the information and services customers need to complete their path to purchase. They can’t do that if the customer has more information at their fingertips than the associate has. Therefore, associates need visibility to enterprise-wide inventory, knowledge about current and upcoming promotions, and the ability to handle endless aisle and save-the-sale transactions through mobile devices or readily available kiosks. Both for efficiency and to empower the workforce, mobile task management tools must also be provided to support new complicated fulfillment options, like buy online pickup in-store and buy online ship-from-store.



Leverage Advanced Store Operations Tools

Retailers have gone to great lengths to streamline their supply chains and develop competitive merchandising strategies, however, the store associate has generally received far less investment. In the new, consumer-driven omni-channel marketplace, a well-trained and well-equipped associate is a critical part of the supply chain to drive revenue, provide seamless omni-channel shopping experiences and create loyal customers.



Workforce Management and Tasking systems will increasingly be integrated with other retail systems, such as a Distributed Order Management (DOM) solution, Transportation Management Solution (TMS), or even point-of-sale (POS). Using existing and new sources of data store associates and managers can complete prioritized tasks based on store traffic, inbound orders/shipments, sales trends, weather events and many other variables—all while maintaining compliance with work rules and labor legislation.



Winning at Retail

The evolving role of the store and the demand for omnichannel shopping experiences is putting greater emphasis on the retail workforce as a driver of retail success. Retailers who elevate their workforces to a strategic level will gain competitive cost and service advantage, while protecting themselves from the growing legal requirements.



-Tyler Owen, senior director, Global Solutions Strategy, Store Operations, JDA Software