More Video...

Panama City Beach Police are releasing the name of the 13 year old Indiana boy who fell from a 15th floor balcony Saturday.

Zachary Dickman was visiting from Plainfield, Indiana with his family.

Beach Police and the Fire Department received a call before 10 Saturday morning from his grandmother.

Officials say the two were checking out of Palazzo condominiums, when Dickman told his grandmother he left his phone upstairs.

He went to go get it, but didn't return for several minutes.

When Dickman's grandmother went up to check on him, she realized he fell off the balcony.

Officials are still waiting for the official autopsy results.

---------------

"It's horrible. I feel so bad for his parents. I have a two year old little girl and I couldn't imagine, couldn't imagine what they're going through," said Brittney Daniels, Palazzo Guest.

Hours after 13-year old Zachary Dickman fell to his death Saturday morning; Palazzo condominium occupants were still struggling to understand how it could have happened.

Panama City Beach Police and the local fire rescue arrived on scene around 10 a.m. after they received a call from his family.

The young man, who's identity has not yet been released, was visiting Panama City Beach.

Officials say the two were checking out of the condominiums, when the victim told his grandmother he left his phone upstairs.

"Grandmother waited for a few seconds. Started calling his name no answer, that's when she realized he fell off the balcony," Drew Whitman, Panama City Beach Police Chief.

It happened on the beach side of the condominiums.

Beach police say they're investigating it as an accidental death.

Visitors are in shock, saying they never expected something like this to happen.

"Everything that I've heard here is like just like crazy people like partying, but I've never heard of like deaths like this," said Marissa Clement, visitor.

"It looks like it's going to be an accidental death but it's a tragic event. Like I said he's a young man. 13 years of age and anybody that loses their life that young it's just horrible," said Whitman.