Topics: Barack Obama, deportations, Editor's Picks, Elizabeth Warren, field poll, isis, Liberals, The Left, Media News, News, Politics News

Except for the brief interregnum that separated the Republican Party’s George W. Bush era from its current Tea Party incarnation, President Obama has never enjoyed the kind of high approval ratings that used to accompany most two-term presidents. Whether it’s due to his race, our growing ideological polarization, the poor economy, or a combination of all of the above, Obama’s rarely known what it feels like to be a president of whom more than half of Americans approve. According to the Huffington Post, it only took until the tenth month of his first year before his number dipped below 50 percent.

Fighting as he is now to keep his approval rating north of 40 percent, November 2009 probably looks to Obama like the good old days. And mindful, perhaps, of how he’s previously looked on the verge of irrevocably losing the people’s faith, only to bounce back to his usual place in the mid- to high 40s, Obama may also believe that this current spate of bad polling will eventually pass. Anything’s possible; the economy could start booming. Unemployment could drop. Wages could rise. Obama could recover.

But I’m starting to think this time may be different, and that when it comes to Obama’s relationship with millions of former supporters, there’s no going back.

What’s got me thinking this way is a raft of new polls showing not only that the president is unpopular, but that he’s becoming increasingly so in the very places, and among the very people, he could usually count on for support. A release from Field Poll earlier this month, for example, found the president to have only a 45 percent approval rating in über-blue California. Most strikingly, the pollster reported that California Dems’ support for Obama dropped 8 percent during just this summer and was down 11 percent in Los Angeles alone.

The Field Poll wasn’t an outlier, either. This past week, Marist College released a poll from that other bedrock of the Democratic Party, the state of New York. No good news there, either: Only 39 percent of registered New York voters are happy with Obama’s performance, the lowest score he’s registered in the state throughout his entire presidency. As was the case with the California poll, Marist found a big drop in the number of New York Obama supporters in the past few months. He was at a passable 45 percent as recently as July.

It’s easy to see, then, that a good number of one-time supporters of the president are profoundly unhappy, and that their unhappiness has increased dramatically of late. It’s also fair to guess that unhappiness over the crisis in Ukraine, the new war in the Middle East and the decision to kick the can on a deportations-related executive order are all playing a role. But although these developments are recent, they’re not exactly new — liberals have been uncomfortable with targeted drone strikes and record-setting levels of deportation for years. Why only now do these disagreements represent White House failures so egregious that they justify withdrawing support?

Obviously, I can’t give you a definitive answer to that question, at least not yet. Polls aren’t predictions so much as snapshots of a particular moment in time — and they’re blurry ones, at that. We may find out in the future that this summer was a bad one for the U.S. economy, which could explain the president’s troubles more persuasively than a decision about U.S.I.C.E. bureaucracy or the international status of Donetsk. But assuming this summer swoon is no mere blip, and instead represents a permanent change in liberals’ judgment, I think timing may be the reason why.