Nuggets coach Michael Malone dismisses any opportunity to use injuries as a reason for losing whenever the subject comes up in news conferences.

And given his team’s extensive injury problems this season, it comes up a lot.

“I’m not going to use that as an excuse. I’m not one of those coaches,” Malone said. “There are plenty of coaches in the NBA that use the injury excuse to save their (butts). I’m not one of those guys. I don’t buy it.”

But there is reality.

And the reality is the Nuggets (12-17) have been challenged to win without many of their primary rotation players. Four who weren’t part of the 104-96 victory over the Suns in Phoenix on Wednesday — Danilo Gallinari, Emmanuel Mudiay, Wilson Chandler and Jusuf Nurkic — were projected to be among the Nuggets’ top-six rotation players this season.

Gallinari and Mudiay have been among the top six. Chandler never got started before his season ended because of hip surgery. Nurkic hasn’t played in a game yet this season; he is rehabbing a torn patellar tendon.

Coming into last week, no other NBA team had lost more games to injured players who were of significance (players averaging 15 minutes per game or more) than the Nuggets, who were tied with the Philadelphia 76ers at 99. And that was before the Nuggets lost nine more “man-games” with their games against the Los Angeles Lakers and Phoenix.

Yet the Nuggets are only one game out of the eighth playoff slot in the Western Conference. Keeping themselves relevant has been connected to some of their players developing faster than expected and others having career years.

Will Barton is at the top of the list of most-improved players. The fourth-year guard is averaging nearly 10 points per game more than his combined total with Denver and Portland last season, and a number of other areas are up as well.

Barton’s hot start has him being mentioned for the league’s sixth man of the year and most-improved player awards. He is a big reason the Nuggets have been able to stay afloat.

Gary Harris is up nearly seven points per game over last season. Gallinari is up five points per game over last season. And while Mudiay’s contributions have been expected, Nikola Jokic’s solid rookie season has been a pleasant surprise. Joffrey Lauvergne’s improvement over last season has been a boon as well.

Quality depth has helped the Nuggets stay competitive.

“On one hand, having that type of depth is always comforting as a coach. We’ve had so many injuries, guys can step up, take advantage of the minutes,” Malone said. “And if somebody isn’t playing well, you can go down the bench.”

That’s going to continue, because the Nuggets’ injury situation probably will take a while to sort itself out.

“We’ve got a lot of paid professionals to do a job,” Malone said. “Hopefully, we’ll get (Gallinari) back as soon as possible. But if he’s out, somebody else has to step up. But you’re not going to hear me crying the injury card. I’m not going to do that.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or @dempseypost

DENVER AT SAN ANTONIO

When: 6:30 p.m. Saturday

TV/Radio: ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Kawhi Leonard:

Could the former San Diego State star be on the shortlist for league MVP? Perhaps he’s already there. Leonard is the reigning defensive player of the year, and he was the MVP of the NBA Finals in 2014. Leonard has made another leap in performance this season; all of his stats except steals are up. He is shooting the ball as well as any other player in the league, hitting 50.9 percent from the field, 47 percent from 3-point range and 87.9 percent from the free-throw line. Also, he continues to be one of the league’s premier defensive players.

NOTEBOOK

Nuggets:

They haven’t beaten the Spurs this season — only five teams in the NBA have done that. The Nuggets are 0-2 against San Antonio this season and have lost nine straight to the Spurs overall. The last time the Nuggets defeated San Antonio was April 10, 2013, at the Pepsi Center. Their last win in San Antonio was March 4, 2012.

Spurs:

This is the second of back-to-back games for the Spurs, who played at Houston on Christmas. The Spurs have won the second game of every back-to-back set this season, going 5-0. They beat Denver 91-80 at the front of a consecutive-game set in late November, and now they get the Nuggets in the second game of a back-to-back set.

Christopher Dempsey, The Denver Post