Many different functional areas have to come together in order for a business to run. Since there are such varied job options in the business world, there are often plenty of business opportunities to be found in different disciplines.

Using median salary data, job prospects, rate of employment, stress levels, work-life balance, 10-year growth volume and 10-year growth percentage, U.S. News & World Report created the 2014 Best Jobs Rankings. Data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) was used to create these rankings.

For people who know they want to work in a specific industry, the rankings also included industry-specific jobs rankings. Twenty-two jobs were included in the Best Business Jobs rankings.

Part one of this article series covered the top five business careers of 2014. This article will continue with the business careers that ranked 6-10 in 2014.

Bookkeeping, Accounting and Auditing Clerks were ranked in the No.6 position for the 2014 business rankings. These detail-oriented positions work on keeping a company’s financial records organized, updated and accurate.

Specifically, bookkeeping, accounting and auditing clerks use bookkeeping programs, databases and spreadsheets to enter transactions, track finances, create financial reports and let the company know about any inconsistencies.

Some of the factors that contributed to this position being ranked No. 6 include an unemployment rate of 6.4%, over 200,000 expected job openings by 2022 and a median salary of $35,170. The BLS expects a lot of opportunities in this field because of how large the occupation is.

Though this position doesn’t require a particular degree, the BLS says that some companies may prefer candidates with college coursework in accounting or a related field. Certification might be required form some positions.

Marketing Manager was ranked No. 7 on the Best Business Jobs list. Getting a potential customer to purchase a product or service is the main goal of a marketing manager. Doing that means creating strategies that target specific groups that are likely to purchase the product or service.

Making sure that all marketing efforts have the right message that is consistent with brand standards are among the duties of a marketing manager. Teaching potential and current customers what makes a company’s offerings unique are also part of being a marketing manager.

Marketing managers make a median salary of $119,480 and have an unemployment rate of 5.2%. About 22,900 marketing manager positions are expected to open by 2022. A bachelor’s degree is usually required to become a marketing manager.

Financial Manager was ranked the No. 8 best business career for 2014. Properly controlling company finances is a major factor for successfully running a business, making financial managers paramount to a company’s success.

Overseeing financial information is one of the primary duties for financial managers. They keep an on eye on anything finance-related that happens within a company. Writing reports, analyzing projections and keeping compliant with current legislation are other duties for this position.

A low unemployment rate (3%) and six-figure median salary ($109,740) are among the reasons that financial managers were so well-ranked on the best business list. An estimated 46,300 jobs are expected to open in this field.

Becoming a financial manager takes a combination of education and experience. A bachelor’s degree is usually the minimum education requirement, though a master’s degree is often preferred. The degree can be in subjects like finance, economics or business administration. A minimum of five years of professional work experience is also a typical requirement for financial managers.

Meeting, Convention and Event Planner made the No. 9 spot on the best business list. Planning out the details of an event is crucial to assuring that everything runs smoothly. Finding the right venue, making sure that vendors have what they need and that everyone is complying with rules are some of the duties that this position works on.

Going to an outdoor music festival, industry conference or similar event can show how important meeting, convention and event planners are. Making sure that technology needs are met, spacing issues are resolved and displays are set up properly are other functions that this position may serve.

Meeting, convention and event planners have a median salary of $45,810 and an unemployment rate of 5.6%. About 31,300 jobs are expected to open up in this field from 2012 to 2022, a 33% increase in employment. A bachelor’s degree is typically required to work in this field.

Compliance Officer ranked in the No. 10 spot for the Best Business Jobs of 2014. Since businesses have to follow so many regulations and laws, compliance officers are increasingly important, especially in industries like finance and healthcare.

Job duties for compliance officers will depend on the specific position, but typically include finding and mitigating risks, making sure that companies are following all relevant legislation and auditing the company’s output.

Compliance officers have a low unemployment rate (2.6%) and make a median salary of $62,020. A bachelor’s degree is often needed for this position.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments