What ACA Means for People with Diabetes

Before purchasing a plan, there are important questions that you should ask about coverage.

“People with diabetes who need to see an endocrinologist, who need a yearly eye exam, who may be on new medications, are really having a real hard time figuring out what the exchange plans will and won’t cover,” said Catherine Carver, vice president for planning and advocacy at the Joslin Diabetes Center, the world’s largest diabetes research and clinical care organization.

This uncertainty is due to the vague language used to describe the 10 Essential Health Benefits all Affordable Care Act (ACA)-compliant plans must follow. Before purchasing an exchange or grandfathered plan, patients should call the insurer and ask the following questions. Even if they know the answer, they should still call to verify.

Here are some questions to ask:

If I have Type 1 diabetes, can I see my endocrinologist 4 times a year?

If I have Type 2 diabetes and need to see an endocrinologist, are there associated costs?

Will the plan cover diabetes self-management education?

Will this plan cover a yearly dilated eye exam? (Diabetics are prone to multiple eye complications.)

Does this plan cover mental health services?

Will this plan cover dental services? (Diabetics are prone to gum disease.)

What are the podiatric benefits? (Diabetics are prone to foot ulcers.)

Will you cover more than one Hemoglobin A1c test a year? (The American Diabetes Association recommends at least two a year.)

Will this plan cover me if I need to see an endocrinologist for a diabetic complication?

Will this plan cover all my diabetic medications and the medical devices?

Click here to see additional questions to ask.

Fortunately, not all the diabetic-related benefits are vague. ACA-compliant insurance companies will provide diabetics and high-risk patients with nutritional counseling, free wellness visits, diabetic medications (at least one from each drug class), medical devices, and will screen for diabetes in hypertensive and pregnant patients. Each state has to meet the national standard, but they still can determine what items to include in each benefit category. For this reason, review your state’s essential benefits package.

One of the Joslin Center’s goals is, through education, to ensure patients receive both excellent insurance coverage and medical care. According to Carver, “our job is to problem solve, identify barriers, overcome them, make a plan, and … give our patients the language and permission to ask the questions [of insurers and physicians] they need answered.”

So all patients need to speak up and be their best advocate. If they have something on their mind, they need to say so. While receiving cancer treatment, I failed to ask my physician and insurers certain questions. I wanted to look competent in front of my medical team (colleagues) so I refrained. Had I asked the questions, I would have saved hundreds of dollars and spared myself needless medical pain.

Patients shouldn’t put blind faith in their physicians. The patient’s observations and opinions, on a multitude of issues, have substantial medical value. Along with encyclopedic knowledge and superb technical skills, excellent physicians must display common sense. As an emergency room resident once told me, “most of medicine is just common sense.” All patients, not just diabetics, need to use common sense to ensure they receive excellent care.

For example, I needed to have a fine needle aspiration biopsy of my salivary gland to determine if the tumor was malignant. In anxious haste, I made an appointment with a physician whom I knew nothing about. At the appointment, he examined my jaw with the ultrasound probe. He looked diligently from every angle, but felt it was going to be difficult to get an adequate sample. At that point, I should have stepped in and asked to have it done under CT scan guidance. I’m not sure why I didn’t (Common-Sense Error No. 1). As a responsible physician, he should have suggested it be done under CT guidance to improve accuracy and reduce pain. Before he pierced my jaw with the needle, I asked about local anesthesia. He told me it wasn’t necessary for the procedure, so I let him proceed (Common-Sense Error No. 2). He blindly (no ultrasound machine) stuck me 12 times and didn’t get a usable specimen. Nonetheless, he billed my insurance company $1,100.

Along with covering direct patient care, ACA, through the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), provides the National Diabetes Prevention Program (NDPP). The program’s primary goal is to prevent pre-diabetics from becoming full-fledged Type 2 diabetics (Type 1 diabetes cannot be prevented). According to the CDC, 79 million American adults – one-third of the nation’s adult population – are pre-diabetic. NDPP’s goal is to “establish a structure of evidence-based lifestyle change programs designed to prevent Type 2 diabetes.” Community organizations, such as the YMCA, offer these resources. Click here to find a program in your community.

But an endless supply of valuable information is useless if patients don’t act on it. Even without “lifestyle training,” most Americans know their health will deteriorate if they eat junk food, don’t exercise, smoke cigarettes, and drink excessive alcohol. If they continue such behavior, health problems will slowly, often insidiously, develop. This can eventually lead to heart attacks, congestive heart failure, strokes, vision loss or blindness (retinopathy), peripheral nerve damage, limb amputation, and cancer.

It’s clear that many of these deadly habits are ingrained during childhood, which is why it’s so difficult for adults to change them. As Carver said, “It probably goes back to the schools. Kids have to learn how to eat and be active and learn how to enjoy it. It’s too late by the time they are out of high school.” Because of this, coaching and educating won’t be enough to shift course for most adults. Such radical change requires digging deeper into oneself. One newly available avenue for millions of Americans is mental health treatment. Patients with an ACA-compliant plan will have comprehensive mental health coverage benefits.

A few weeks ago, the federal government issued its final rules for the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act, passed in 2008. The act requires insurers to use the same financial requirements (such as co-pays) and treatment limitations (such as limits on office visits) for mental health and substance abuse coverage as they do for medical and surgical coverage.

Obviously, it’s up to the patient to take advantage of the above-mentioned tools and benefits. Healthy and able adults are in the position to prevent the destructive escalation of our nation’s Type 2 diabetes epidemic. The nation’s economy cannot financially afford to care for people who don’t care for themselves. According to the CDC, 75 percent of all healthcare expenditures go toward treating chronic diseases, many of which are preventable. Eventually, we will hit the tipping point and something will have to give. It’s unclear how that will play out, but it definitely won’t be pretty.

Send me your healthcare reform questions via email, follow me on Twitter, or post comments and questions directly on this page.

I look forward to hearing from you,

Ben