GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump (AP Photo)

(CNSNews.com) – GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump told “Fox News Sunday” that he will release his tax returns “at the appropriate time.”



“Well, we're having them made. They're extremely complicated. It's going to take a little while. I don't know if you ever saw the picture I gave, but I gave you a picture with about 2 1/2 feet of tax returns standing in front of me as I was signing. They're having them done, and we'll do at the appropriate time,” said Trump when asked when he will release his tax returns.





“Well, reporters have been asking for months, and you keep saying the appropriate time. You know, you -- I’m sure –” host Chris Wallace said.



“Well, mine is not a one-page –” Trump interjected.



“You talk about your empire, I’m sure you have a ton of lawyers and a ton of accountants. Don't voters deserve to get a look at your finances, sir?” Wallace asked.



“Oh, I think so. I’ve already given my financial statements more than anybody's given, but I’ve given --” Trump said.



“No, but the tax return?” Wallace asked.



“The tax returns at the appropriate time. There's no rush - at the appropriate time,” Trump said.

Trump told ABC’s “This Week with George Stephanopolous” on Sunday that he won’t release them before Super Tuesday.



“Finally, Mr. Trump, you told me several months ago you'd be releasing your tax returns. And ‘The Wall Street Journal’ editorial page came out yesterday and said Mr. Trump should release his returns going back at least a decade before Super Tuesday on March 1st so Republican voters can know what they're voting for,” Stephanopolous said.



“If Mr. Trump's tax records are as very beautiful as he says, he should be eager to release them for public scrutiny. Will you release them by Super Tuesday? Don't Republican voters have a right to know?” Stephanopolous asked.



“Well, first, no, I won't. No, no, no, I won't. I'm working on it. We're working on, they're massive,” Trump said. “You saw pictures of me, but let me tell you about ‘The Wall Street Journal.’ I have no respect whatsoever for ‘The Wall Street Journal.’ I don't think they know what they're doing. They have taken me on so much it's so ridiculous.



“Every day, editorials, bad editorials, and they had a poll come out, which was so wrong. I said they should fire their pollster, and they should fire their editorial staff, because I think these are people that don't know what they're doing. I don't even want to read it very much anymore,” he said.



“They're so wrong, but if you look at their polls that they came out with one day and two days, two polls before the election, they turned out to be so wrong that they should honestly, they should fire their pollster. So I don’t care what ‘The Wall Street Journal’ says, what they say doesn’t -- and, in fact, if anything, I would do the opposite because then it'll turn out to be more correct,” Trump added.



“So no release before you're a nominee?” Stephanopolous asked.



“No, at some point. Well, they'll talk about it. At some point we'll release. There's no rush. Why is there such a rush? I'm supposed to rush like crazy?” Trump asked.



“By the way, I released my financial statements which are much more important. I released my financial statements, and everybody was amazed at how big and how great the company is, much bigger than they thought, and it's a great company - very little debt, tremendous cash flow, some of the best assets in the world,” Trump said.



“And I say that only because that's the kind of thinking the United States needs now because our country is in financial trouble and military trouble. We're in every kind of trouble you can have. Our country's a mess. We're going to strengthen the border. We're going to do all of the things that you and I have been talking about for a long time now, George, and it's going to be great,” he added.