Update at 9:48 p.m. by Julie Fancher: Several major school districts, including Dallas ISD, Plano ISD, and McKinney ISD have canceled classes Monday due to the icy conditions.

Click here for a complete list of closures and delays from our partner KXAS-TV (NBC5).

Update at 8:01 p.m. by Julie Fancher: The city of Dallas said street services were increasing sanding operations to Ice Force Level 2, which is about 56 sanding trucks and 125 employees due to increasingly icy conditions.

Meanwhile the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) asked consumers to conserve energy as much as possible Monday morning.

“Based on the level of generation supplies that we expect to be available, we are asking consumers throughout the ERCOT region to reduce their electricity use as much as possible Monday morning,” said Dan Woodfin, ERCOT director of System Operations.

Update at 6:17 p.m. by Julie Fancher: The Winter Storm Warning has been canceled for Dallas and Tarrant counties, according to the National Weather Service.

Meterologist Jesse Moore said there shouldn’t be any more freezing rain or sleet in the area, except for maybe a small flurry or two.

Now that the precipitation has ended for the day, Moore said the biggest concern is for any wet roads that will freeze as the temperature continues to drop.

“It’s been an interesting day with thunderstorms, sleet and rain,” Moore said.

It is currently 21 degrees at Dallas Love Field and Moore said temperatures should drop to about 12 degrees overnight.

David Magana, spokesman for DFW airport, said more than 325 flights had been cancelled, which is about 34% of today’s flight schedule.

Update at 4:30 p.m. by Julie Fancher: With an expected wind chill in sub-zero temperatures, the National Weather Service has issued a Wind Chill Advisory for North Texas from midnight to 9 a.m. Monday.

While the high for Monday morning is expected to be around 12 degrees, meteorologist Joe Harris said it may feel like -5.

While temperatures continue to drop, Harris says areas of the metroplex will continue to see some sleet, causing parts of the roads to become icy, if they weren’t before.

Jennifer Dunn, another meteorologist with the National Weather Service, said areas throughout the metroplex have accumulated less than half an inch of ice and sleet.

Dunn said most of the precipitation today has been freezing rain and sleet.

Harris said any liquid that remains on the road between 6 and 7 p.m. will freeze making travel dangerous.

“If you don’t have to travel, don’t,” he said. “Travel is discouraged, especially across the northern regions of the metroplex.”

Any shaded areas, like underpasses, as well as overpasses and bridges have been collecting ice throughout the day. There have been many accidents reported throughout North Texas today, including one fatal crash in Arlington.

Dallas police said as of 4 p.m. they had answered 78 minor wrecks, 53 injury wrecks and 50 injury wrecks on freeways. Arlington police said they had responded to 5 major crashes since 10 a.m. and cautioned those on the road to slow down.

Harris said the precipitation should end around 9 p.m., but it will be “bitterly cold.”

As for the Monday morning commute, Harris said roads should begin to thaw by late morning as temperatures rise and the sun begins to filter in.

Update at 3:08 p.m. by Julie Fancher: Arlington police are investigating if poor weather conditions were a factor in a two-vehicle crash that left one person dead Sunday afternoon.

According to police, the crash happened around 12:30 p.m. in the northbound lanes of Highway 287 near Interstate 20.

Police found a pickup that was disabled on the side of the road just past the Highway 287 overpass. Police said the driver was outside the pickup when a second vehicle came off the bridge, lost control and struck the pickup and its driver.

The victim, who has not yet been identified, died at the scene. The driver of the second vehicle was taken to Medical Center of Arlington with non-life threatening injuries.

Police said the crash is still under investigation, but cautioned icy conditions may be have been a factor in the incident.

The northbound lanes of Highway 287 near Little Road are currently closed. Police are asking those on the road to drive slow due to current weather conditions.

— Arlington Police, TX (@ArlingtonPD) March 2, 2014

Update at 2:30 p.m.: As our Roy Appleton reports, the icy weather has forced the cancellation of the Mardi Gras parade in Oak Cliff. Dallas police gently suggested it would be a very bad idea to laissez les bons temps rouler down streets growing increasingly treacherous with each round of thundersleet.

Update at 2:20 p.m. by Liz Farmer: The bulk of the bad weather should clear Dallas County between 6 and 7 p.m., said Dennis Cain, meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Fort Worth.

Most precipitation is light with the heaviest appearing to the North and East of Dallas.

Scattered thunderstorms are causing the bulk of problems by dropping sleet onto areas all at once so there’s not time for it to melt, Cain said.

Temperatures are expected to drop into the teens tonight, which will make it easier for patches of ice to form around Dallas into the morning.

Update at 12:41 p.m. by Liz Farmer: DFW Airport announced that 270 departures have been cancelled today due to freezing drizzle and sleet with temperatures in the upper 20s.

The cancellations are about 29 percent of today’s flight schedule and the airport advises customers to contact their airline or check dfwairport.com/flights.

The airport will continue to monitor conditions and has treated runways and roadways throughout the day.

The Mardi Gras Oak Cliff Parade has just been cancelled due to safety concerns with the weather, according to the Go Oak Cliff Facebook page. McKinney’s Krewe of Barkus has been moved inside the McKinney Performing Arts Center.

Update at 11:32 a.m.: With thundersleet having been reported in Denton County, and frozen precipitation beginning to fall throughout much of North Texas, the National Weather Service has just issued Winter Storm Warning for an area that includes Dallas and Fort Worth. It will expire at 9 p.m.

Mark Fox, meteorologist for the National Weather Service in Fort Worth, says the warning is in effect from an area stretching from Gainesville to Dallas-Fort Worth to Ellis and Johnson counties to Paris.

We will see “more of the same” — freezing drizzle, with some sleet — until around 3 p.m., when the upper-level system passes through bringing the area a better shot of sleet.

Have fun at that Oak Cliff Mardi Gras parade, which, last I looked, is still a go.

Original item posted at 9:03 a.m.: It’s March 2, a day after temperatures climbed into the 80s, and Dallas is yet again under Ice Force Level 1.

Temperatures are already below freezing across North Texas: Dallas Love Field’s at 31 with freezing drizzle; Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport is reporting 32 with some rain; Fort Worth Meacham’s at 29 with clouds. And this is as good as it’s going to get today.

“If you have something to do, do it this morning,” says Dennis Cavanaugh, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service’s Fort Worth office. “It’s going to get wetter and colder throughout the day. We’re not expecting roads to become impassable; we’re not under a Winter Weather Warning, only an advisory. But it only takes on accident to shut down a road. Travel will get more dangerous. Play it safe.”

Right now there’s just a little precip out there associated with the passage of the cold front, which, Cavanaugh says, is stronger than models originally predicted, which is why we’re now looking at Monday forecasts barely above freezing. That drizzle-mist is from the Gulf moisture that built up in North Texas during two springlike afternoons fueled by a warm southerly breeze. The front is wringing it out of the clouds.

But there’s still the upper-level Pacific system well to our west, says Cavanaugh, spinning near the Arizona-New Mexico border.

“Once that gets closer, we’ll get some stronger lift, which is when we could see things like thunderstorms,” says Cavanaugh — or, depending on the temperatures at the time of its arrival, thundersleet. That’s due to arrive between noon and 3 p.m. How long it lingers depends on how fast the system moves once it gets here.

“The ground is still warm, so most of the rain that hits the ground won’t accumulate, but tops of cars and maybe bridges will begin to see ice. And if we’re in the the upper 20s and get thunderstorms, it’s not a big deal. But if its 23, that’s really bad. A lot of that will stick. It depends on the temperatures.” Says Cavanaugh it should be around 27 when the system passes through, but …

“The problem with the front is it’s been colder than expected by the models so far,” he says.

So the Texas Department of Transportation and the city of Dallas are leaving nothing to chance, the say: Collin and Denton counties’ roadways will be pre-treated this morning. Meanwhile, says the city of Dallas, “The Department of Street Services will begin its sanding operations Ice Force Level 1 today at noon to address hazards on the streets due to the forecasted weather conditions. There will be approximately 35 sanding trucks and 100 personnel monitoring bridges, overpasses and inclines throughout the city.”

Some flights are also being impacted at DFW Airport and Dallas Love.