BARTOW | Nursing mothers who want to pump milk at work have support from the Affordable Care Act.

The next Breastfeeding Part II In and Out class for women who want to continue breastfeeding while working will be 10:30 a.m. to noon Aug. 15 at Winter Haven Women's Hospital, 101 Ave. O SE, Winter Haven. It costs $15. Register at 855-314-8352. La Leche League of Lakeland, a longtime advocate for breastfeeding, meets at 6 p.m. the first Tuesday of the month and 10 a.m. the third Tuesday of the month at St. David's Episcopal Church in Lakeland. The league's website is www.llllakeland.org.

Businesses employing 50 or more people must provide "reasonable break time for an employee to express breast milk for her nursing child for one year after the child's birth each time such employee has need to express," the U.S. Department of Labor says in guidelines enforcing the law's nursing mandate, less widely known than some of its other provisions.

With the law coming up on its fifth anniversary, women who support breastfeeding are celebrating its passage and increased acceptance of nursing mothers.

"The law is something we in the lactation community would have liked to see years ago," said Kathie Lambert, an internationally board certified lactation consultant at Winter Haven Hospital.

She teaches its Breastfeeding Part II In and Out class for women who want to continue breastfeeding while working.

Lactation space must be someplace other than a bathroom, a place where the mother can't be seen and is "free from intrusion" by co-workers and the public.

That provision "was really a big step for our moms returning to work," Lambert said. "So many of our mothers, including my daughter, were having to go to a bathroom to nurse."

The rules apply to women who aren't exempt from a section of federal law that include overtime requirements, but Lambert said there's ongoing effort to broaden the rules to include salaried women, too.

In keeping with that, the theme of World Breastfeeding Week, which started Saturday, is "Breastfeeding and Work: Let's Make it Work!"

Businesses with fewer than 50 employees have an out if providing lactation space would impose an undue hardship. In determining size, however, all employees working for an employer, regardless of where they work, are counted toward the total.

Dr. Ulyee Choe, director of the Department of Health in Polk County, said he'd like all employers to consider having breastfeeding-friendly workspaces.

"Evidence is clear that breastfeeding is the most beneficial way to feed an infant," Choe said. "It is important for employers to be supportive of this nutritional benefit."

At its Bartow administrative offices, DOH in Polk has a site that scores high for privacy and prettiness. A large room, in an area visitors are kept away from, has murals painted on its walls of a winding road, fields, flowers and healthy foods, among other things. Discreetly added are the initials WIC for Women, Infants and Children, a program that provides formula but encourages its female clients to breastfeed exclusively until an infant is 6 months old.

"We want to have them breastfeed as long as possible," said Suzanne Wright, who directs WIC locally for the department.

Slightly more than 83 percent of its clients in April had tried breastfeeding, she said, compared to a little less than 79 percent statewide.

Lauren Hinton, finance and accounting director, has used the brightly painted lactation room on occasion for more than pumping.

Hinton brings Jacob, who turns 6 months old this month, to her office when her schedule allows.

She did the same during the first six months of her older son, Elijah's life. He's now 3 years old.

Having her mother-in-law, Diane, providing child care nearby and her husband, Matthew, doing some work from home, makes it easier to have Jacob there part of the day, she said, and the department's baby at work approval has been a big plus for them all.

"It certainly was a selling point for me," she said. "It kept me here longer."

Because of it, she felt comfortable coming back to work after eight weeks of family leave instead of 12.

The department allows female employees who are exclusively breastfeeding the opportunity to breastfeed their infants at work during breaks throughout their day, Public Information Officer Nicole Riley said.

Mothers can take advantage of this until their infant is 6 months old if it is feasible in their job. They also can use the private space to pump during their workday.

Continuing to breastfeed exclusively is "almost a miracle" if a woman returns to work earlier than 12 weeks after birth, said Christine Smith, a breastfeeding coordinator for the department.

"I'm a firm believer breast milk is healthier than formula," said Hinton, 31, who nursed Elijah for a year and wants to do the same with Jacob "if my body allows."

Elijah first came to the office when he was 9 weeks old, she said, and spent most visits sleeping in a stroller-carrier.

While most businesses aren't going that far, Lambert said the majority of employers are happy to provide private, comfortable lactation rooms.

During the past 10 to 15 years, Lambert said, she's seen a "dramatic shift" as more pregnant women opt to breastfeed.

Her hospital and others encourage that by having lactation consultants on staff.

Lakeland Regional Health provides a reasonable amount of paid break time in which its employees who are breastfeeding can pump milk, said Amy Barry, senior vice president and chief human resources officer. It has two hospital-grade breast pumps and comfortable chairs in a lactation room equipped by its foundation and Women in Philanthropy.

Employers aren't required to compensate nursing mothers for breaks they take to express milk. If employers provide paid breaks, however, an employee who uses her break time to express milk must be compensated in the same way other employees are, the labor department said.

Passage of the law and women's increased interest in breastfeeding has insurance companies more willing to cover breast pumps as durable medical equipment, said Smith, who is active in La Leche League of Lakeland.

"A lot of people don't know breast pumps are part of the insurance plan," Hinton said. "I had to work hard to get that breast pump, but I did."

Women who get support to pump milk at work are more productive and more loyal to the company, Riley said.

Like Hinton, they're more likely to return from pregnancy leave earlier.

One-day absences because of illness occur twice as often among parents whose infants aren't breastfed, Smith said, referencing the Office on Women's Health of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Babies who aren't breastfed visit the doctor more often and spend more days in the hospital than breastfed infants do, Smith said, causing parents to miss more work.

[ Robin Williams Adams can be reached at robin.adams@theledger.com or 863-802-7558. Read her blog at robinsrx.blogs.theledger.com. Follow on Twitter @ledgerROBIN. ]