BANGOR, Maine — The energy inside the Cross Insurance Center reminded Katie Abrahamson Henderson of her time as an assistant coach at the University of Maine.

An enthusiastic crowd turned out Saturday afternoon to watch the Black Bear women’s basketball team battle three-time defending conference champion Albany. It was treated to an entertaining game that went down to the wire.

Sarah Royals made all three free throws after being fouled by Sigi Koizar on a desperation 3-point attempt with 21.9 seconds remaining to help lift the Great Danes to a 49-43 victory over UMaine in the teams’ mutual America East opener.

“I think the atmosphere here is getting close to when I was with Joanne,” said Henderson, who served two seasons (1992-1994) under former UMaine head coach Joanne Palombo McCallie.

“It’s nice that the fans are coming back out for Rich (UMaine head coach Richard Barron), because I think he’s done a great job,” she added.

A gathering of 2,029 fans showed up to see whether the Black Bears could make a statement, but UAlbany spoiled the potential coming-out party and held on to register its 25th consecutive America East road victory.

Junior forward Shereesha Richards, the reigning America East Player of the Year, sparked the Great Danes with a 21-point, 9-rebound performance.

UAlbany (8-6) had built a 10-point lead midway through the second half, but was forced to withstand a determined rally by UMaine (8-5), which received clutch play from junior forward Anna Heise, who finished with 13 points, four rebounds and two blocked shots.

The Black Bears were not able to get over the hump down the stretch.

“I’m probably as disappointed for our fans as I am for my team because I wanted them to get to see that win, kind of that breakthrough moment,” offered Barron, whose team has dropped the last 10 meetings against the Great Danes.

“I still think we’ll have it. I think it’ll happen,” he added.

UAlbany prevailed because of its stingy matchup zone defense. The Great Danes limited the Black Bears to 35 percent shooting, including 24 percent (6-for-25) in the first half.

The hosts, who often settled for perimeter shots, made only five of 20 3-point attempts with Koizar and Lauren Bodine going a combined 3-for-15.

“Albany has great defensive pressure, but I don’t think they stopped us from getting open looks,” said junior Liz Wood (9 points, 6 steals, 2 blocks). “I just think we need to knock those (shots) down.”

Koizar wound up with nine points and three rebounds and had four of UMaine’s 18 turnovers.

Richards, an agile, 6-foot-1 forward, found enough room to make nine of 14 shots. She scored 13 of her 21 points in the first half. Richards also contributed four steals and two assists for UAlbany.

Imani Tate hit four big shots in the second half on her way to 12 points and grabbed five rebounds, while Zakiya Saunders chipped in with eight points and four rebounds. The visitors, who shot 71 percent (12-for-17) in the second half, committed 24 turnovers.

Heise gave UMaine a lift late. The 6-4 German nailed a 3-pointer from the corner, then converted a reverse layup off a pass from Wood with 48 seconds left that sliced UAlbany’s lead to 42-41.

“Honestly, I was just a little bit mad,” Heise admitted. “I just was like, OK, let me take some shots and … I made them.”

The Great Danes called a timeout and set up their offense, but were in trouble when Royals lost the ball , which rolled toward midcourt. Koizar pursued, but was whistled for a foul as Royals threw up a heave as the shot clock was about to expire.

“We could have gotten the ball back and missed the shot and they would have won by one,” said Barron, pointing to numerous UMaine shortcomings. “It wasn’t like we had the lead. The game wasn’t stolen from us on that play.”

Royals sank all three free throws to make it a four-point game, then Courtney Anderson’s errant pass on UMaine’s next possession led to two Saunders foul shots that clinched it with 12 seconds to play.

“I thought down the stretch we did a good job of staying poised when we were up,” Henderson said.