Everybody Thinks What Nobody Believes About ObamaCare

Last week Longtime Sharp VodkaPundit Readers™ learned that Americans with preexisting conditions had learned to game the ♡bamaCare!!! enrollment system, adding to the growing risk of a death spiral.

How bad is it really though? Bloomberg's Megan McArdle says it "poses a fatal threat" to the Totally Settled Law of the Land™.

Read:

UnitedHealth’s bombshell raised the specter, once thought safely in the grave, of the “adverse selection death spiral,” the phenomenon where sick people are more likely to buy insurance, which raises the average expenditure, which means higher premiums, which makes insurance a worse deal for the healthiest members of your insurance pool, which means they drop out, which means your pool is even sicker and average expenditure goes up even more … and there goes the insurance market. The mandate was supposed to prevent this, but the mandate has pretty skimpy penalties, meaning that it may be economically rational to forgo insurance, and buy it only if you get sick. This sort of strategic behavior was very risky before Obamacare, because insurers generally refused to cover pre-existing conditions that popped up while you were uninsured. With insurers forbidden to exclude such conditions, or price the insurance to cover their added costs, it suddenly became a viable tactic. Pundits and wonks worried a lot about this when the law was being debated, but over time, a consensus developed that restricting signups to open enrollment would make the system too hard to game for this to be much of a problem.

Where to begin?

Megan's an honest broker, but I have to wonder about a couple of her phrases in the passage I quoted. There was that line about the death spiral being "thought safely in the grave." And that "a consensus developed" around the idea that the law had made "the system too hard to game."

Maybe those lines were merely the rhetorical sugar required to make the medicine go down easier for the typical Bloomberg reader.

Or maybe the Blue Coastal Enclave Echo Chamber is so tightly sealed that from the inside, it really did seem as though ♡bamaCare!!! was too tough to game, and that the threat of a death spiral really had passed.

That's not what it looked like to us outside the Blue Coastal Enclave Echo Chamber, as readers here can attest.