Annual awards given to those making a difference in kids' lives

The 2015 Crystal Apple Award winners are, back row, from left: Sherman Early Childhood Center — Nichole Stone, Morgan Community College — Kim Maxwell, Cargill's Students' Choice Award — Chance Middlemist, Fort Morgan Rotary Club's Lifetime Achievement — Rob Carruth, Cargill's Making a Difference in Education — Cindy Schneider and Fort Morgan High School — Greg Edson; front row, from left: Fort Morgan Middle School — Abdinasser Ahmed, Green Acres Elementary School — Joy Erickson, Abner S. Baker Central School — Julie Frink, Pioneer Elementary School — Jessica Harding, Columbine Elementary School — Gina Schaefer and District Support Center/Bus Garage/Maintenance/Lincoln High School — Val Loose. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

Emotions were on full display Thursday night as the Fort Morgan Times, Morgan County Re-3 School District and many other partners recognized local folks who have made a difference in education at the 2015 Crystal Apple Awards Banquet.

Every year, it is a night of laughter, tears, food and fun — and gifts.

Area businesses and organizations sponsor tables at the banquet, also providing gifts to the people sitting at those tables.

But as Times Publisher Julie Tonsing pointed out, the gifts were only a small part of the night.

"We really are here to recognize those who have gone above and beyond on education," she said.

Re-3 School District Superintendent Ron Echols called the Crystal Apple Banquet an event worth attending.

Long-time school board member Rob Carruth gets a standing ovation as he accepts his Lifetime Achievement Crystal Apple Award at Thursday night's banquet at the Country Steak-Out in Fort Morgan. The crowd also sang "Happy Birthday" to Carruth, who was celebrating turning 60 Thursday. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

"I literally attend hundreds of meetings every year, and this one is my favorite by far," he told the full room at the Country Steak-Out in his opening address. "No other community recognizes teachers the way we do."

Drawing nods of agreement, he continued, "Every one of you have been influenced in a positive way by teachers, and that's who we're honoring tonight. We all remember that special teacher that reached out and touched us and made a difference in our lives."

Morgan Community College President Kerry Hart also spoke toward the beginning of the banquet, and he agreed with Echols.

"I look forward to this event every year," Hart said.

Advertisement

He told of how he first got into education, starting as a teacher before becoming an administrator. He shared stories of when it was really hard to be a teacher and questioning the career choice.

But his answer came from what he wanted to get out of and put into the world.

"I really wanted to make a difference and knew education was the one thing that can really advance civilization," Hart said, getting sounds of agreement from the audience.

From there, the awards were handed out, with leaders or principal or organization representative presenting it to the corresponding winner. There were stories, jokes and lots of emotion in these presentations.

Some of the winners spoke after accepting the award, others bowed out or simply said "thank you."

The winners were:

• Sherman Early Childhood Center — Nichole Stone

• Columbine Elementary School — Gina Schaefer

• Green Acres Elementary School — Joy Erickson

• Pioneer Elementary School — Jessica Harding

• Abner S. Baker Central School — Julie Frink

• Fort Morgan Middle School — Abdinasser Ahmed

• Fort Morgan High School — Greg Edson

• District Support Center/Bus Garage/Maintenance/Lincoln High School — Val Loose

• Morgan Community College — Kim Maxwell

• Fort Morgan Rotary Club's Lifetime Achievement — Rob Carruth

• Cargill's Making a Difference in Education — Cindy Schneider

• Cargill's Students' Choice Award — Chance Middlemist

About Stone, Sherman Principal Debra Lee said that while Stone works across the whole district, Sherman was "really pleased" to recognize her on behalf of Sherman.

"There is no doubt in my mind that Nichole's strategies and the help she had given has had a positive effect on all the students and staff at Sherman," Lee said.

Mary Ginther, human resources director at Cargill Meat Solutions, recognizes Cindy Schneider as the Making a Difference in Education Crystal Apple Award winner at the 2015 Crystal Apple Banquet Thursday night at the Country Steak-Out in Fort Morgan. (Jenni Grubbs / Fort Morgan Times)

About Schaefer, Columbine Principal Nancy Hopper said, "Even though she's been in this profession for 30 years, she's excited to learn more."

About Erickson, Green Acres Principal Sandra Bills said, "She's a wonderful person. She starts kids off right, telling them, 'Have a nice day!'"

About Harding, Pioneer Principal Rena Frasco told the crowd that she kept trying to convince Harding to come to Pioneer until she finally did. Frasco said Harding had liven up to her expectation, helping kids with some pretty big problems.

About Frink, Baker Principal James Farley said he had "begged and pleaded" Frink first to be a long-term substitute teacher, and then to come on full time, which she did this year. He said Frink had offered students opportunities outside of the classroom that they otherwise might not have had.

About Ahmed, FMMS Principal Jason Frasco said that the teacher, who splits time between FMMS and the Migrant Education Newcomers Academy, "helps bridge the gap between home and school for many families." The principal also revealed that Ahmed recently became a U.S. citizen.

Ben Bauman, the principal at FMHS, made honoree Greg Edson come up with him while he spoke. "If I'm going to be uncomfortable, you're going to be up here with me," Bauman said, but also quoting Edson's nomination, "Mr. Greg Edson is a great example of what public school teachers should be."

Assistant Superintendent Ron Pflug pointed out that Loose has one of the hardest jobs in the district: coordinating all of the school buses and who will drive them.

"Recruiting is hard," Pflug said, adding that he had a new recruitment slogan. "Be a school bus driver and all your problems are behind you."

Loose pointed out that most days she is on the job at 4:30 a.m., so she invited anyone who is up at that time to "give me a buzz." She also said she had many stories about the Edson and Carruth children (now adults), but that she knew she probably shouldn't share them in public, drawing laughs from the audience and a "thank you" from Greg Edson.

Of Maxwell, Hart said that she knows every single MCC student by name, which shows how much she cares.

When Greg Wagers from the Fort Morgan Rotary Club presented Carruth with his Crystal Apple, he had another surprise in store for the long-time school board member. Wagers knew it was Carruth's birthday Thursday, so he had the whole crowd sing "Happy Birthday."

"Rob is a home-grown treasure," Wagers said.

When Mary Ginther, human resources director at Cargill Meat Solutions, presented the Making a Difference in Education award to Schneider, Ginther had a hard time not bursting out in tears.

"When you think about all the things teachers do, behind the scenes is this woman," Ginther said of Schneider, who has taken pictures at local sporting events and activities on her own time over the years.

"I am a mom. That is my calling," Schneider said, adding that she was emotional after Ginther got emotional, and then thanking all the school officials for letting her take all those pictures and do all the volunteer work she had done.

Ginther had a bit more fun with announcing the Students' Choice winner. She spoke a bit about what no fewer than eight students wrote about FMHS science teacher Chance Middlemist.

"You can't make these things up," Ginther said. "He has am open mind, not an empty one."

She said that the students also cited Middlemist's willingness to help anyone, how he stays enthusiastic and smiles a lot, and encourages the students to make good choices.

Jenni Grubbs: jgrubbs@fmtimes.com, Twitter @JenniGrubbs or tout.com/jennigrubbs