Court Time for HR

As usual, the highest court in the land takes on cases that affect HR strategies and policies. And while the decisions may not be earth-shattering, some could have real implications in the HR space.

The United States Supreme Court often decides cases with potential impact on HR policy. The same holds true for 2014. Yet, while there are no blockbusters, there are a handful of cases - decided and yet to be decided - that touch employers.

Burwell v. Hobby Lobby

In a 5-4 vote, the court decided the Religious Freedom Restoration Act allows for a private, family-owned corporation to deny its employees the health coverage of contraceptives (to which the employees are otherwise entitled under federal law) based on the religious objections of that corporations' owner. The case, of course, gained nationwide publicity. While there is a much broader implication that goes well beyond the HR-related specifics of the case, legal experts say the case will be insignificant for the vast majority of U.S. employers.

"Unless an employer is a religious-based institution, then this will have not much impact," says Keenya Harrold, a labor and employment attorney with Cozen O'Connor in Houston. She adds that in the wake of the Affordable Care Act, however, you may see companies that have issues with healthcare reform file more suits like this one because the law contains provisions that they don't want to fund for a variety of reasons.

Steve Katz, a partner in the Los Angeles office of Reed Smith, adds that Hobby Lobby may be a big case in terms of broader issues about religion in society, but in terms of impact on employers, it is not a very big deal.

"It only applies to a very narrow set of employers," he says. "And most of them would be smaller employers, mom and pop-type companies."

NLRB v. Noel Canning

The issue here was whether or not President Barack Obama's three appointments to the National Labor Relations Board in January 2012, while the Senate was in recess, were constitutional. More specifically, was the Senate in true "recess" under the Recess Appointments. The D.C. Circuit Court found that since the appointments to the NLRB were done during a three-day recess and not during the recess between the Senate's annual sessions, the appointments were invalid and unconstitutional. In a 9-0 majority, the Supreme Court agreed. The case is significant because it limits the reach of the presidential recess appointment power, according to Cozen O'Conner's Harrold.

"From the HR vantage point, the case is more political than anything else," she says.

Joel Barras, a partner at Reed Smith, agrees that the true takeaway from Canning is that its impact on labor law is now much more minimal than it could have been, adding that after the President and the Senate reached a deal on permanent NLRB membership (same appointees as the recess appointees), the case shifted to a constitutional law issue.

"The NLRB will reissue the same decisions that were overturned with the Canning decision," he says. "Any employer that thinks the NLRB laws will change after Canning is taking a major leap of faith." In fact, Barras says, when talking about labor and employment law, his advice to employers is to expect no change in any subsequent NLRB decisions or rules.

Sandifer v. U.S. Steel Corp.

Decided in January by a 9-0 vote, the case had approximately 800 current and former U.S. Steel unionized employees file suit under the Fair Labor Standards Act, seeking back pay for the time spent "changing clothes," counter to their existing union agreement. The Court held that time spent "donning and doffing" protective gear qualified as "changing clothes," and as such was not compensable by the FLSA. The court did say that safety glasses, ear plugs and respirators are "equipment" and not clothes and concluded that if the vast majority of time is spent putting on and off equipment or other non-clothes items, the period is compensable.

According to Reed Smith's Katz, Sandifer also will have a very limited impact on the workplace.

"It's a very narrow issue," he says. "Suddenly you see employees trying to rewrite their union contracts in the courts. In this case, a contract is a contract."

Integrity Staffing Solutions, Inc. v. Busk

In a case related to Sandifer, the plaintiffs alleged that Integrity Staffing violated the FLSA and state labor laws by requiring employees to pass through an extensive security clearance at the end of each shift. They want compensation for the time. Employees say they waited up to 25 minutes to be searched, having to remove their wallets, keys and belts, and pass through metal detectors. The Supreme Court will address whether the security screenings are "integral and indispensable" to the workers' principal activities of "fulfilling online purchase orders," in this case.

"The Sandifer reasoning may offer some insight into how the court will approach Integrity," Harrold says, noting that Justice Antonin Scalia's reasoning in Sandifer could be applied to post-shift security screens as well. She adds that even though many workers must wait in long lines for their security screens, the Court may not find, out of a sense of basic fairness, that the wait is integral to their jobs. Integrity Staffing will strongly advance its own version of a fairness argument, she adds.

Newsletter Sign-Up: Benefits

HR Technology

Talent Management

HR Leadership

Inside HR Tech

HRENow

Special Offers

Email Address



Privacy Policy

"Security screenings have become ubiquitous; the Supreme Court will soon tell us whether the FLSA requires employers to pay their employees to wait in those lines," Harrold says. "The takeaway from Sandifer and Integrated Staffing is that, if you look at both cases, employers may actually have to start recording from the time employees enter the door to the time they actually leave. That is a scary idea from a cost perspective."

In other words, the added time can become a very expensive proposition for employers that conduct such searches, for good reason, and have a large number of employees.

"The question is, 'Is that time going through any employee's belongings compensable?' " she says. "Depending on how the Court rules, it could get very expensive."

"This could have an impact, a possibly significant impact, on any retailer of any size that requires a security check," says Reed Smith's Katz. "Either way, it's going to impact more employers in a much more direct way than Sandifer, though it is dealing with very similar underlying legal issues."

Mortgage Bankers Assn. v. Harris

In this case, slated to be heard during the fall session, the U.S Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit vacated the Department of Labor's controversial 2010 Administrator's Interpretation, which declared that mortgage loan officers do not qualify for the administrative exemption from the overtime wage provisions of the FLSA. In that 2010 action, the DOL issued its first ever "Administrator's Interpretation," without notice, reversing its prior position on the status of mortgage loan officers as exempt "administrative" employees. Harrold explains that the action was counter to a letter issued by the Wage and Hour Administrator on September 8, 2006, whereby the DOL had determined that mortgage loan officers generally met the requirements of the administrative exemption to the FLSA's overtime requirements.

According to Harrold, the DOL's abrupt change of its position in its 2010 Administrator's Interpretation puts employers (in this case mortgage lenders) in a very tough spot, as they had relied in good faith on the 2006 opinion letter that mortgage-loan officers qualified for the administrative exemption. But in 2010, the DOL created immediate liability for statutory overtime where none previously existed.

"This case is a scary one in the wake of all the other wage and hour cases we've been seeing," she says.

"Employers have been relying on this, and now they suddenly would be responsible for paying overtime," she says. "The significance is that it's creating liability for employers where it did not previously exist. It's like they moved the goal post."

Send questions or comments about this story to hreletters@lrp.com.