House Speaker Paul Ryan is hoping to release his agenda by March or April and top aides say it’s not feasible to craft a massive overhaul of health care or the tax code in such a short period of time. | Getty House GOP likely to avoid votes on big policy plans Paul Ryan's ideas may remain just that.

Speaker Paul Ryan has said he wants to “go big on ideas” in 2016 to give his party concrete policies to run on and voters an alternative to what Democrats are offering.

But those ideas might just remain, well, ideas.

Story Continued Below

Senior House Republican aides and lawmakers say they do not plan to hold votes on many of the agenda items the party plans to unveil — such as a health care plan to replace Obamacare, or tax reform — because of a tight legislative calendar over the next few months and the reality that none of the bills would be signed by the president, anyway.

Ryan (R-Wis.) is hoping to release his agenda by March or April — well before the Republican National Convention in July, to avoid being drowned out — and top aides say it’s not feasible to craft a massive overhaul of health care or the tax code in such a short period of time. Ryan does hope Republicans across the country will run on the ideas they develop, to provide a contrast with Democrats.

“I don’t think you vote on everything,” said Rep. Mick Mulvaney (R-S.C.), who met with Ryan Thursday during a meeting with leaders of conservative and moderate caucuses. “You come up with your wish list — your top five things — immigration and defense, so you have a national security component. Then you’ve got welfare reform, health care reform and tax reform. There’s no way you can do all five of those in one year, let alone do it before the convention.”

The execution of the GOP agenda will be a central topic of conversation next week, when Republicans gather in Baltimore for their annual legislative retreat. Ryan, House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) and Majority Whip Steve Scalise (R-La.) are seeking to discern the priorities of the House Republican Conference as they enter the new year. Some items might get a vote, but the most ambitious legislation is unlikely to come to the floor.

Ryan has been holding endless meetings with Republicans about how to proceed. Former Speaker John Boehner was often criticized for lacking a vision and lurching from crisis to crisis. Ryan has been widely praised so far by House Republicans for pushing the party to be ambitious in its thinking.

Ryan is intent on consulting the entire party before he makes any final decisions. But several aides and lawmakers involved in legislative planning say they highly doubt most of the newly formed GOP agenda will hit the floor for a vote. Of course, going that route could help Republicans avoid internal squabbling over details and tough votes for some members.

Ryan conceded Thursday that the agenda items “aren’t going to be things we’ll be able to get done this year.”

“This will require a new president,” he told reporters. “But if we want a mandate to do big things, if we want the mandate from our fellow Americans to fix this country’s problems and get us back on the right track, we’re going to have to offer a real agenda to the country. And we’re going to do that soon. This is what 2016 is all about for me. Go big on ideas. Get the country back on track. Restore a confident America.”

Asked about specific votes, Ryan said, “Everything’s an option because what we’re going to do is make this decision by consensus in our conference.”

“Let me just say one thing,” Ryan continued. “You think Barack Obama’s going to sign a bill repealing Obamacare? You think he wants to lower tax rates for all families, individuals and businesses? No he doesn’t. So we know that we’re going to have to go to the American people with a mandate, with an agenda so that they can choose. That’s what this is all about. The stakes could never be higher.”

Of course, not voting on some of these agenda items could expose the party to criticism. During their quest for the House majority in 2010, Boehner, McCarthy and former Majority Leader Eric Cantor promised they would release a replacement for Obamacare. They still have not. People close to Ryan say the party will put forward a health care proposal this year.

Still, GOP leadership aides say they're not concerned about not holding roll calls, because the plans they release will be specific enough to draw a contrast.

Coupled with a long-term highway bill and a rewrite of the No Child Left Behind education law that were signed into law late last year, Republican leaders believe they are giving their candidates a positive agenda to run on.

“In one bucket, you're going to have some very specific items that we will take up,” Oregon Rep. Greg Walden, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, said in an interview. “In the other bucket, you're going to have more general issues that may not have been fully developed. It depends on the issue and on the committee.”