The Republican presidential candidates will, for the third time, meet and debate Wednesday night. This time they're in Denver, Colorado – the city that raised Barack Obama up to his party's nomination way back in 2008.

It's a contrast the remaining candidates would do well to remember. Up to now their exchanges have had all the elan and poise of kindergartners squabbling over baseball cards married to an encounter session: "Candidate A, Candidate B said such and such about you. How does that make you feel?"

These are not serious discussions, made worse by the fact that they are drawing in record numbers of viewers. The men and woman who want the Republican nomination are not putting the best face on the party or its ideas. In fact, it's hard to identify any ideas besides "build a wall" that have been given anything more than momentary attention.

Several of the candidates have tax plans that are pretty good. One or two are excellent and should, if enacted, lead the economy to Reagan-like heights of growth and job creation. Who stands for what – as far as the voting public is concerned – is something of a mystery, because they're not talking about them.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

This is partly the fault of moderators whose questions are designed to drag everyone into the metaphorical mud. But mostly the responsibility for the level of the debate rests on the shoulders of the candidates themselves, none of whom apparently have the fortitude to drag the conversation out of the muck. And if they can't do it while standing together on the same stage, all ostensibly supportive of the same things in the broadest sense, then how can any Republican voter expect any one of them to do it face-to-face against Bernie Sanders or Hillary Clinton?

Hopefully one or more of the candidates tonight will seize control of the time – not for the purpose of bashing Donald Trump (or, in Trump's case, launching ad hominem attacks on whomever happens to pop into his mind) – in order to turn the discussion toward the light. It would be instructive to the electorate, as well as great fun, to see New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie – a former U.S. attorney – and Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul have a serious debate about the need for criminal justice reform and the reinstitution of mens rea into the federal code. Or to see Dr. Ben Carson and former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina discuss why now is the right time for America to have an outsider who has never held political office move into the White House.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Republican Party]