A group of film directors and actors host a chat after one of the film events during the Lifetree Film Fest in 2014 at the Rialto Theater Center. This year's film fest is Thursday-Saturday, April 16-18. ( Rodney Stewart / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

"Doing Life, Doing Good" has always been the motto of the annual Lifetree Film Fest. Rather than shock value to entertain, the film festival features films that lift up and do good in the world, said Craig Cable, event director.

Organizers took that mantra to another level this year and will ask patrons to vote on a top favorite nonprofit organization to donate a portion of proceeds to after the film festival this weekend.

The Lifetree Film Festival is Thursday to Saturday and will premier feature-length films each evening as well as short films.

Cable has selected several nonprofits to be in the running for a donation at the end of the weekend, but it's up to the moviegoers. Every night, attendees will vote on their top choice. Those votes will be tallied and one nonprofit organization will receive a donation.

"I think this will spotlight a lot of organizations doing amazing things in Northern Colorado. We're celebrating a lot of unsung heroes," Cable said.

The festival is also featuring a film with an event each night.

Thursday is "Dinner and a Movie." A portion of proceeds from food and drink at the Pourhouse, Mo' Betta Gumbo, Henry's, Generations or Next Door Food and Drink will be added to the pool for a nonprofit organization. People are encouraged to have dinner at participating restaurants before the feature film of "Father Unknown" at 7 p.m.

Friday is "Meet the Artists" at 5:30 p.m. Moviegoers can meet the judges, filmmakers and representatives from international and local nonprofits. The feature film that night is "The Boy from Geita."

Advertisement

The film festival is hosting a family-friendly children's movie and cereal bar for the first time on Saturday morning at 10 a.m.

"We heard from people that there wasn't much for families last year," Cable said. "So we created 'Kids and Kids at Heart.'"

Children will get to watch "Marshall the Miracle Dog" and choose from a variety of cereals as a free event open to the public.

The "Best of the Fest" award-winning short films will be shown starting at 7 p.m. Saturday evening. Cable said that there will not be a red carpet event this year, although there will be a photo booth set up outside. Families are welcome to come dressed however they want to.

"We decided (the red carpet event) may be a barrier. We wanted to make it more accessible to more people," Cable said.

Other short films will be shown at various times throughout the weekend as well.

Each film will also have some kind of question-and-answer session.

The Lifetree Film Fest received about 170 films this year of short and full-length films. Audience members will vote on an audience choice of the "Best of the Fest" films.

"We'll be sharing films you would never see otherwise," Cable said. "What's cool about this event is, it is not only an entire experience but it gives the audience so much more about these films and you learn the stories behind the story."

He also likes that the films have positive messages that celebrate the human condition rather than "shock for shock's sake."

If You Go

"Dinner and a Movie," Thursday, April 16

Festival-goers are encouraged to have lunch or dinner at participating restaurants before the feature film starts at 7 p.m. A portion of the restaurants' proceeds will go to local charities.

Films:

Feature "Father Unknown" (Directed by David Quint): A true story of a man's search for connection with his his family and the father he's never truly known (Live Q-and-A session with the filmmakers will follow the screening).

Food for Thought, Food for Life (Directed by Susan Rockefeller): Consumers want their food fast, convenient, and cheap but at what cost? This film invites viewers to think differently about what they eat and to consider changes that may impact their health, the earth and communities.

"Meet the Artists," Friday, April 17

Ticket holders will have a chance to meet the judges, filmmakers and representatives from international and local nonprofits starting at 5:30 p.m. in the Rialto's Devereaux Room. The feature film will be shown in the Rialto Theater at 7 p.m.

Films:

Feature "The Boy From Geita" (Directed by Vic Sarin): Adam, a young Tanzanian boy persecuted because of his albinism, finds a kindred spirit in Peter Ash, a Canadian man with the same condition. (Live Q-and-A session with the subject of the film, Peter Ash, will follow the screening.)

Hope on the Horizon (Produced by Charles Dourney): Four hikers, including the filmmaker, set out to summit the 48 highest peaks in the White Mountains of New Hampshire in a single trip on foot.

Saturday, April 18

Family Event for "Kids and Kids at Heart," Saturday morning at 10 a.m.: Family-focused event is free to the public and includes a cereal bar and a kid-friendly film at 10 a.m. (in the Rialto's Devereaux Room). "Marshall the Miracle Dog" is inspired by a true story and shares the adventure of Finn, a 13-year-old boy who has become the target of bullies at his new school.

Saturday Matinee, 2 p.m.: "GO FAR, The Christopher Rush Story" (Directed by Zack Arnold): At the age of 7 months, Christopher Rush was diagnosed with muscular dystrophy, and his parents were told he would be "no more than a dishrag, and dead by 2." Christopher lived to 30.

Best of the Fest, Saturday Night: The award-winning short films will be shown at 7 p.m. During the event, the audience will vote on their favorite film and nonprofit organization. (Live Q-and-A session with the filmmakers will follow the screenings.)

Films

It's a Plastic World: It's everywhere. We need and want it. We find it in places we wouldn't expect it. A world without plastic is inconceivable. But do we know the consequences of plastic consumption?

The Space Between: Examines the effects of poverty on health care through the story of a young mother battling cancer in a Kenyan hospice.

Love at First Sight: A story of a lonely young man's increasingly creative attempts to attract the attention of the girl of his dreams.

First Sight: WonderWork is a charitable organization that provides free surgeries for children in the poorest countries of the world.

I Am Red: A video poem highlighting the beauty and challenges of the Colorado River, which runs 1,450 miles across seven states and two countries, supplying water to 36 million people.

The Edge of Impossible: Showcasing the unlimited potential of the human spirit and friendship,

Details

Visitors will get chance to vote on which nonprofit they would like to receive a portion of the proceeds from this year's events. Participating local nonprofits include Loveland Habitat for Humanity, Project Self-Sufficiency, Healing Warriors Program, FOCO Café, Birthline of Loveland, House of Neighborly Service, Meals on Wheels, Alexa's Hugs, and the National Multiple Sclerosis Society. The Rialto Theater is located at 228 E. Fourth Street in Loveland. Ticket prices range from $8 for the Saturday matinee to $40 for an All Fest Pass. Festival information and tickets are available at www.LifetreeFilms.com or at the Rialto Theater box office. Call Becky Hodges at 292-4245 or email bhodges@group.com.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com