LITTLE ROCK, Ark. -- The vote was unanimous. A task force of lawmakers who spent six months studying the state's Medicaid system gave initial approval for Gov. Asa Hutchinson to pursue his vision of change.



"Right now it is time to make a decisive statement," Hutchinson said.



The task force statement: expansion of Medicaid now known as the Private Option, which gave government-sponsored healthcare to more than 200,000 Arkansans, should continue.



"Whenever you're trying to achieve the objective of a healthy, active Arkansas, access to healthcare is important," he said.



In order to keep the program going, the task force approved changes sought by the governor.



That means slashing nearly $850 million dollars in Medicaid spending over five years through negotiated cuts of $250 million to long-term care, $110 million to pharmaceuticals and $20 million to the dental program.



The governor and some lawmakers are looking at hiring a managed care company to hold down costs for behavioral health and the developmentally disabled.



But not all are on board.



"That money could be going toward care," said Sen. Linda Chesterfield, D-North Little Rock.



Others in the governor's Republican party don't buy predictions of cost savings achieved by continuing Medicaid expansion, pointing out it's a central tenant of the controversial Affordable Care Act.



"We have a chance as a legislature to end the Obamacare/Private Option Medicaid expansion in Arkansas," said Sen. Bart Hester, R-Cave Springs. "I think we need to do that."



The governor also wants to pursue Medicaid changes requiring federal approval.



They include forcing Arkansans to use employer-based insurance when available, referring able-bodied beneficiaries to work training and having those who earn over 100 percent of the poverty line pay a premium.



All of these issues will have to be worked out in a special session the governor says will be held in early April.

Copyright 2016 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.