Letters to the editor (Photo: File)

Lesbian article encourages a sinful lifestyle

From Patricia Cooper Seybert

Mountain Home:

No, you did not have to print the story about the lesbians. You could have refused and stood with and for the "right thing to do."

Man does not lay with man and woman does not lay with woman. The Supreme Court did not make you print the article, it was your choice to do so. In deciding to print this story, you are as wrong as they are in what they are doing. Any person, or business, who supports that lifestyle or actions needs to stop and think — what does God the creator and Father have to say about this type of living? What does God's son, Jesus Christ, say in the Bible about the gay lifestyle?

All need to cry out for forgiveness. Jesus Christ died that we all could be forgiven of our sins. After doing so, we never are to return to that sin. We all are sinners, and we have to pray for our sins to be forgiven. When we ask, God forgives. We must keep on God's narrow path and be saved. It is a free life. God will take care of us, his little lambs.

This is the last generation and the last days, according to God's Word. The heavens are his bulletin board. The book of Revelation and other books of the Bible tell all you need to know to prepare. If we do not turn away from sin, the pit will open after judgment, and those who have chosen not to listen and hear will go into that pit.

Please, do not print anything like this ever again. This is an encouragement to live a sinful lifestyle. We now have to be sure children understand the lesbian and gay lifestyles are not tolerated by God or his son, Jesus. To adopt that lifestyle is to choose death and eternal punishment instead of eternal life.

Take a stand for the right way to do things, not the world's way. You do not want to be responsible for children learning this kind of thing.

Another take on the Affordable Health Care Act

From Steven Obenauf

Gamaliel:

On June 27, a letter appeared in The Baxter Bulletin from Stan E. of Mountain Home. Mr. E. is thankful for the Supreme Court overturning the law written by our elected representatives in Congress. He gives thanks the court will provide health insurance subsidies. Mr. E. never has understood why so many people do not believe everyone is entitled to health insurance. He wrote health insurance companies consider previous health conditions when selling a policy.

How nice it would be if we did not buy home insurance until the house is burning down. Did Mr. E. ever consider the fact that health insurance is a commodity, a useful thing that is bought and sold? Health insurance is a commodity the same as a motorcycle, a camper, a larger home, etc. Did he ever think that thousands of American citizens used their freedom choosing to buy commodities other than health insurance? Remember, our military women and men died to keep our freedoms. Our government has taken freedom of choice away. What a disgrace.

Since the Affordable Health Care Act became law, the cost of my health insurance rose $188.60 per month. I don't necessarily have an extra $188.60 a month just laying around. Every member enrolled in my insurance company must pay the additional premium. Millions of people receive government subsidies. Mr. E. must think the subsidies are provided by the government. The government gets the money to pay the subsidies by taking money from U.S. taxpayers.

I doubt if Mr. E. or any of the millions receiving subsidies have given thanks for the outrageous tax rates and unfair insurance premiums my family and millions of others are forced to pay. If you receive a subsidy, thank your neighbors. They are paying your insurance. Mr. E., you need to know there are two sides to this coin.

No doubt Mr. E. would be thankful to have free community college. In the real world, a free community college would mean the building owner would charge no rent or other expenditures for the use of the building. The college instructors would donate their services with no salary or other compensations.

Mr. E., the truth is there is no such thing as free college or free health insurance. It costs American citizens millions of dollars. There is no such thing as free community college, please look at your real estate tax bill under Mountain Home School District. That tax pays for free grade school and free high school education.

Mr. E., consider how much better things would be if the medical community could criminally charge those that refuse to pay for the medical goods and services they receive. There are laws against theft of goods and theft of service.

Mr. E., please write more letters to the editor. A closed mind is a terrible thing to waste.

Read or Share this story: http://www.baxterbulletin.com/story/opinion/2015/07/03/letters-editor/29649465/