Bartel

Davison — Christine Bartel, 49, has been named president and chief executive officer of McLaren Homecare Group, a subsidiary of McLaren Health Care, the Flint-based firm said Monday.

A Colorado native with 19 years of health care experience, Bartel succeeds Steve Serra, who left McLaren to pursue other opportunities, according to company officials. Bartel started her job Monday at McLaren Homecare Group’s headquarters in Davison.

Bart Buxton, president and CEO of McLaren Lapeer Region, called Bartel “a tremendous addition to the McLaren team.”

“(W)e are excited about the health care experience and knowledge she will bring to her new position, especially with regard to home care services operations,” Buxton said in a statement. “The Affordable Care Act is changing the health care landscape, and Christine understands how to navigate these transitions to the benefit of our patients and our organization.”

Bartel’s background includes administration and executive leadership positions in which she oversaw clinical compliance, care coordination, finances and growth strategies, according to the announcement.

She started a home care services company in 2002 in Greenwood Village, Colorado, called Hope at Home Inc., where she supervised a staff of about 350 caregivers and created two branch locations. After growing company revenues to $8 million, Bartel sold the company to a private equity firm in 2008.

She has since worked as a consultant, helping financially struggling health care entities increase profitability.

“I’m looking forward to assessing the needs of McLaren Homecare Group and further enhancing integration across the many McLaren subsidiaries,” Bartel said a statement. “Home care services include expansive capabilities, and it’s important that these services are integrated in a way that’s beneficial for patients, physicians and caregivers. Better integration means better quality and value.”

KBouffard@detroitnews.com

Read or Share this story: http://detne.ws/1DypHeZ