The increasingly sturdy Affordable Care Act survived a major challenge Thursday as the Supreme Court rejected claims that could have dismantled the health care overhaul and cut off financial subsidies to nearly 1 million Texans.

Texans who rely on the subsidies expressed relief. The decision also pleased health insurance companies and hospitals, which had feared the insurance market would collapse in Texas and elsewhere if the decision went the other way.

“This will give me a chance to find work and provide for myself,” said Geoffrey Lachman of Dallas, who suffers from debilitating psoriasis and depends on a $259 tax credit to help pay his monthly premium.

Texas Republicans, such as White House hopefuls Ted Cruz and Rick Perry, blasted the decision and said it raises the stakes in next year’s presidential election.

For the second time in three years, Chief Justice John Roberts helped save President Barack Obama’s signature legislative achievement from a potentially crippling legal challenge. Roberts sided with the court’s four liberals and Justice Anthony Kennedy to say that although Congress included sloppy wording in the law, it clearly intended for federal health insurance subsidies to be available to all who qualify, no matter which state they live in.

“The tax credits are among the act’s key reforms, involving billions of dollars in spending each year and affecting the price of health insurance for millions of people,” Roberts wrote in the 6-3 decision.

“Whether those credits are available on federal exchanges is thus a question of deep ‘economic and political significance’ that is central to this statutory scheme; had Congress wished to assign that question to an agency, it surely would have done so expressly.”

Justice Antonin Scalia called the decision purely political.

“Under all the usual rules of interpretation, in short, the government should lose this case,” Scalia wrote in a dissent joined by Justices Samuel Alito and Clarence Thomas. “But normal rules of interpretation seem always to yield to the overriding principle of the present court: The Affordable Care Act must be saved.”

What Congress meant

Of the 50 states, only 16 created their own insurance marketplaces, called exchanges, where residents could buy individual coverage under the health care law. The other 34 instead let their exchanges be operated by the U.S. government.

The four Virginians who brought the case had insisted that federal subsidies provided for under the health care law were only for those who buy insurance from exchanges created by the 16 states. Those who live in Virginia, Texas and the 32 other states that refused to do so aren’t entitled to the subsidies, they argued. The Obama administration, though, maintained that Congress intended to give subsidies to those who qualified no matter which state they live in.

Had the court ruled the other way, the impact in Texas and elsewhere would have been dramatic. As many as 6.4 million Americans could have found themselves suddenly facing much higher premiums. In Texas, at least 830,000 people received subsidies to purchase insurance — with an estimated 190,000 of them in Dallas and Tarrant counties alone.

Even Texans who buy insurance without subsidies — there are at least 134,000 who don’t qualify for the help — would have been drastically affected.

Roberts’ opinion reflected the worries about the consequences if the subsidies were struck down.

“The combination of no tax credits and an ineffective coverage requirement could well push a state’s individual insurance market into a death spiral,” he wrote. “And those effects would not be limited to individuals who purchase insurance on the exchanges. Because the act requires insurers to treat the entire individual market as a single risk pool, premiums outside the exchange would rise along with those inside the exchange.

“It is implausible that Congress meant the act to operate in this manner.”

Many politicians in deep-red Texas lambasted the court’s decision.

“The Supreme Court abandoned the Constitution to resuscitate a failing health care law,” said Gov. Greg Abbott, expressing an opinion widely shared by other Texas leaders.

‘To fight another day’

Democratic state Rep. Chris Turner of Grand Prairie, though, noted that the Kaiser Family Foundation estimates the subsidies flowing to Texans are worth at least $2.5 billion a year.

“Despite nonstop partisan political attacks on the Affordable Care Act, thousands in our communities and across our state have affordable health insurance coverage,” Turner said.

Meanwhile, the impact of the decision was already felt in Rowlett, where one recipient of the subsidies said she appreciated the court’s allowing her to keep an $86 monthly tax credit.

“We still have a long way to go to expand Medicaid for the folks in Texas who are completely left out,” Daryn DeZengotita said. “We live to fight another day.”

Texas hospitals “can breathe a sigh of relief” because they didn’t lose as many as 1 million paying customers — the likely result if the decision had been to kill the subsidies, said Ted Shaw, president of the Texas Hospital Association.

“This is very positive for hospitals and health systems,” added Joel Allison, CEO of Baylor Scott & White, Texas’s largest not-for-profit health care system. “There was a concern that there would have been a real challenge for the health insurance industry in Texas, and the impact on hospitals would have been immediate.”

Officials at Parkland Memorial Hospital also were pleased. Dallas County residents who lost subsidies probably would have relied more on the already struggling public health system.

“These subsidies are important for Dallas County taxpayers as well as our patients,” said hospital spokesman Mike Malaise, noting that Parkland delivered $751 million in uncompensated care last year, most of it covered by local hospital taxes.

“The Supreme Court’s decision does not solve the issues Texas has in terms of health care funding and the high volume of uninsured patients,” Malaise said. “But it will help more North Texans maintain health care coverage, which would otherwise be beyond their reach.”

‘We dodged one bullet’

Other state health care providers, though, said huge challenges remain.

“It just means we dodged one bullet, and there are five left in the chamber,” said Tom Banning, chief executive of the Texas Academy of Family Physicians. He was referring to uncertainty over whether $6.2 billion a year in special federal Medicaid “waiver” money will continue to flow to Texas. Cuts in the federal health care law to some pools of money for hospitals’ uncompensated care are also a worry.

Community health clinics lobbyist José E. Camacho of Austin said a standoff over the Medicaid waiver between Abbott’s administration and the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services could not only remove the $6.2 billion a year but also force the state to roll back a recent expansion of Medicaid managed care, causing “tremendous disruption to the entire system.”

Camacho, whose group represents clinics such as Los Barrios and Mission East Dallas, said that even though the subsidies continue for the working poor and lower-middle class in the marketplace, there’s an even larger number of Texas adults with lower incomes who are completely shut out.

“The adults under 100 percent of poverty are not eligible for any kind of coverage because of Texas’ decision not to expand Medicaid or do any kind of alternative coverage expansion,” he said.

Even some conservatives saw Thursday’s decision as a chance for America and its politicians to move past fighting over whether the law should stay or be scrapped.

Conservative health policy analyst John Davidson of the Austin-based Texas Public Policy Foundation said state policymakers should concentrate on lowering health care costs.

“The Texas Legislature has allowed our health care system in Texas to remain behind much of the rest of the country,” Davidson said.

He said legislators should override the Texas Medical Board and encourage more use of telemedicine, while allowing advanced-practice registered nurses to “be primary care providers like in 20 other states.”

Michael A. Lindenberger reported from Washington and Robert T. Garrett from Austin. Staff writer Sherry Jacobson in Dallas contributed to this story.