Topics: Advertising, Advertisng, Barbie, Body Wars, Heidi Klum, Kate Upton, Mattel, Sports Illustrated, Life News

The legendary Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue has never been a paragon of authentic depictions of women. It’s instead famed for being pure fantasy. But for its cover this year, the magazine has decided to dispense with even the pretext of realism, by trotting out a bloodless, nearly 55-year-old female who’s a collection of fake body parts. To the pantheon of Christie and Cindy and Elle and Tyra and Kate, a new name has been added: Barbie.

The swimsuit issue has always been comfortable with stirring up potentially controversial swimsuit issues. It’s featured models wearing nothing but body paint. Just last year, it took a heap of flak for its use of people of color as “props” for its bikini-clad babes. But the choice of Barbie as cover girl is unusual for an issue generally understood to be primarily a self-pleasuring tool for dudes. Perhaps SI is now aiming for the 7-year-old girl demographic.

On the cover, the legendary blonde is called the “doll that started it all” and poses with her head turned saucily over her shoulder and her hand jauntily on her hip. And in SI and Mattel’s campaign for the cover, she comes bearing the defiant hashtag #unapologetic. This is not the demure, wide-eyed toy generations of girls have grown up with. She’s appearing in Target this month as Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Barbie, but you can also call her Suck On It, Haters Barbie.

Inside the new issue, an advertising spread by photographer Walter Iooss Jr., who has shot famed SI swimsuit models from Cheryl Tiegs to Kate Upton, pays homage to other “legends.” A Mattel spokesperson told AdWeek this week that “Every year the Swimsuit edition sparks conversations about women and body image, and Sports Illustrated stands unapologetically behind this issue that women, in reality, love. Unapologetic is a rally cry to embrace who you are and to never have to apologize for it.” In a statement, Mattel said the campaign celebrates “some of the world’s most famous swimsuit legends — like Barbie — who have gone on to break boundaries, build empires and shape culture.” The company added that, “As a legend herself, and under constant criticism about her body and how she looks,” posing for SI “gives Barbie and her fellow legends an opportunity to own who they are, celebrate what they have done and be #unapologetic.”

As a colleague notes, this is what is known as obvious trolling. You plan on getting mad again this year about hot, barely clothed women in a sports magazine again this year, world? Here. Here’s a plastic one. Here’s every woman’s first role model of an unattainable body image. Happy now?