Themes of being true to yourself and living through adventure carried through the speeches at today's Fairview High graduation ceremony at Broomfield's 1STBANK Center.

"I learned just how important it is not to let others define us," said Alice Bonan, Fairview's head girl. "Truly being ourselves creates the best moments."

Most Boulder Valley School District students received their diplomas this weekend, while New Vista high School seniors will graduate Saturday.

At Fairview's graduation, about 530 scarlet-robed graduating seniors received diplomas to the cheers of family and friends, with a few beach balls smuggled in to pass the time as the names were read.

Jenna Linsley looks happy with her diploma during the 2015 Fairview High School graduation at the 1STBank Center in Broomfield. For more photos, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

To start the ceremony, graduating senior Sonya Walker played the national anthem on the trumpet, followed by classmate Kaetlyn Arant singing "Astonishing."

The ceremony spotlighted the accomplishments of the seniors, with students graduating at the top of their class and 55 International Baccalaureate candidates receiving recognition.

"You're so wildly talented," said faculty speaker Rebecca Roetto.

Roetto, a biology teacher, said she turned to Twitter to ask for ideas for her speech and got three: mopeds, pandas and mermaids.

So she used mopeds to encourage them to care for the environment and each other, pandas to encourage them to slow down and eat their greens and mermaids to encourage them to dream.

Advertisement

"I do believe that faith, fantasy and imagination are essential," she said.

Student speaker Angela Fei compared herself to a mitochondria, "the powerhouse of the cell," and said she learned through failure when her grades looked like a milk label — 2 percent and 1 percent.

"Our circumstances don't determine who we are, we can always do better," she said. "Let's be, in the words of Pokemon, the very best that no one ever was."

Fairview Principal Don Stensrud went with a nautical theme as he gave his last farewell to the class of 2015. He told them they will soon be responsible for their own lives, comparing them to ships in a harbor.

Quoting author John Shedd, he said, "A ship in harbor is safe, but that is not what ships are built for ... Go out and live life go out and find your life through adventure and discovery."

He also urged the seniors to challenge themselves and the world.

"I don't want you to leave Fairview and just live," he said. "I want you to live extraordinarily."

Calvin Munson, the senior class president, used a chocolate chip cookie and the movie "Up" to talk about how they'll soon leave not just Fairview, but their homes and everything they know.

"Thanks for the adventure," he said. "Now go and have a new one."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa