PITTSBURGH — Peyton Manning signed more than 100 autographs Sunday behind the Broncos bench. He likes signing for nearly everyone on everything. Just not the Terrible Towel. As Manning went down the line, a woman leaned over the ledge and handed him a towel. He dropped it and moved on. Any doubt that it was intentional was removed when he skipped over three more autograph seekers dangling towels. In fairness, he signed for fans dressed in Steelers gear on caps, tickets, programs. Just don’t hand him a towel.

Bruton adds to injury woes. David Bruton was helped to the locker room by teammate Danny Trevathan and a trainer with an apparent right leg injury.

Bruton, clearly in a lot of pain, played the entire game but was checked by trainers afterward.

The Broncos’ safety had been dealing with ligament strains and a bone bruise in his left knee, which forced him to sit out last Sunday’s loss to Oakland.

The Broncos were again thin at safety Sunday. T.J. Ward (ankle) and Omar Bolden (hamstring) were ruled out Friday, but Darian Stewart had been listed as questionable.

Stewart tested his injured hamstring as Broncos trainers and coaches watched at Heinz Field a few hours before kickoff Sunday.

The team later ruled that Stewart would be inactive, leaving Bruton and Josh Bush, who both started, as well as Shiloh Keo as the only available safeties for the game.

Fuuuumble. For all of the Broncos’ issues with interceptions, their running backs entered Sunday fumble-proof. The streak ended on the Broncos’ second offensive play. Ronnie Hillman lost his first fumble of the season when safety Will Allen punched the ball out. Hillman recovered, finishing the first half with 42 yards on nine carries. The Broncos were held to a season-low 34 yards rushing last Sunday.

DT finds end zone. In a season that has been noted more for his dropped passes than his scores, Demaryius Thomas bounced back Sunday to catch two touchdowns — 18 yards and 6 yards — in the first half.

The game was Thomas’ first multiple-touchdown game of the season, and it moved him past Ed McCaffrey for the third in Broncos history, at 46 touchdowns.

Bush with the pick. With four safeties out of the game because of injuries, Josh Bush intercepted a deep pass by Ben Roethlisberger intended for receiver Markus Wheaton late in the first quarter, putting the ball back in quarterback Brock Osweiler’s hands at the 50-yard line.

The Broncos went on to score their third touchdown of the night on the ensuing drive, off a 7-yard rush by Osweiler.

Footnotes. Receiver Emmanuel Sanders (offense), cornerback Aqib Talib (defense) and linebacker Corey Nelson (special teams) were game-day captains for the Broncos at Pittsburgh. The game was Sanders’ first in Pittsburgh since he signed with Denver in March 2014. … Backup quarterback Trevor Siemian kneeled for his first regular-season snap in the final seconds of the first half as starter Brock Osweiler had his left shoulder checked out by trainers. Osweiler returned to start the second half. … The Broncos were seven-point underdogs, their largest margin since 2012. … Left guard Evan Mathis continues to deal with an ankle injury. Rookie Max Garcia started at left guard, and played the majority of the snaps. Troy E. Renck, Nicki Jhabvala, The Denver Post