Welcome to Tuesday, the 125th day of 2015 and the 90th year since John Scopes, a Tennessee high school science and math teacher, was arrested for violating the state’s Butler Act, which banned the teaching of evolution in public schools. In the so-called Scopes Monkey Trial, Scopes was convicted, but the evolution vs. creationism debate wasn’t formally settled until 1968, when the Supreme Court backed Scopes. Several 2016 Republican presidential candidates, however, think the Warren Court got it wrong, and Dr. Ben Carson, a retired neurosurgeon, put it in writing: “I find it as hard to accept the claims of evolution as it is to think that a hurricane blowing through a junkyard could somehow assemble a fully equipped and flight-ready 747.” Here is your Three-Minute Briefing, all the News You Can Use in a fraction of the time that it takes to read the graphic-novel version of “On the Origin of Species”:

Road Trip: Eight days on the job, Loretta Lynch goes to Baltimore to meet with authorities in the wake of the Freddie Gray riots and the arrest of six Charm City police officers charged in connection with his death. Though the violence has subsided, police and residents are still on edge: When cops chased a man with a gun and a weapon was discharged on Monday, word swept through the neighborhood and on Twitter that the officers had shot him, which wasn’t true.

Good Luck, Huck: The GOP presidential field is getting even bigger, as Mike Huckabee – former Arkansas governor, former Fox News host and former 2008 presidential candidate – reportedly will throw his hat into the cluttered ring with an announcement Tuesday. It’s the triumph of hope over experience, though: Propelled largely by evangelical Christians, Huck, an ordained Baptist minister, started strong in ‘08, but Sen. John McCain passed him in the backstretch, then went on to get crushed by President Barack Obama in the general election.

[READ: Conservatives See Baltimore as Proof Welfare Fails]

Who?: Still, with one presidential run under his belt, Huck’s likely to fare much better than Jim Gilmore, the former Virginia governor who, for some reason, is testing the Republican presidential waters, even though he’s on nobody’s radar. When last seen on the campaign trail, Gilmore was digging out from a 31-point landslide loss to Mark Warner, a Democrat and fellow former Virginia governor whom Gilmore challenged for the state’s then-open Senate seat.

Deep Thoughts: Besides using them to heal children, kindly ol’ Doc Carson often puts his Gifted Hands on the keyboard. He’s written several books, ranging from politics to advice for teens to the philosophy of risk-taking. Most of them include some of his more, shall we say, unorthodox, colorful views (see above), ranging from fighting space aliens to why homosexuality triggered the fall of ancient Rome and how legalized abortion proves NFL star Michael Vick isn’t guilty of abusing animals in a dogfighting ring.

Know When to Hold ‘Em: As a woman in a male-dominated world – a tech industry CEO – Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina says she ran with the big boys without using “the gender card” as her trump. But if the fates align and she finds herself running against Hillary Clinton for the presidency, Slate writes, Fiorina’s gonna put all those gender cards on the table: “She won't be able to talk about being the first woman president. She won't be able to talk about a war on women without being challenged. She won't be able to play the gender card,” they quote her as saying. Because Fiorina will play it for her. Or something.

[ALSO: Hillary Clinton Looms Large in Carly Fiorina's Presidential Bid]

Today in Hillary: Ahead of the release of the book, “Clinton Cash,” which comes out today and purportedly details shady dealings between the Clintons and overseas donors to their charity, Clinton 2016 announced The Briefing (catchy name), a Web- and social media-based rapid-response shop to spin negative info about the world’s most powerful grandparents and the bad headlines that pop up around them like dandelions after a spring rain. They’re likely to get a lot of work: Clinton’s agreed to testify before yet another set of hearings on Benghazi, but just once.

Today in Obama: The president is expected to nominate Gen. Joseph Dunford Jr., the Marine Corps commandant, to replace Army Gen. Martin Dempsey as Joint Chiefs chairman. Later, Obama will host a Cinco de Mayo reception in the White House.

Money Talks: A new campaign is afoot to redesign the $20 bill and give it a new face – a woman from American history. The effort to put someone like Eleanor Roosevelt or Rosa Parks on the sawbuck has been around for awhile, but it gained traction when Sen. Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire introduced a bill which would move the process along to a citizen committee, a step closer to convincing the Treasury Department to make the change.

Your Morning Video: Ben Carson, M. Deity:

Duly Noted: On this date in 1862, Mexican troops defeated French occupying forces in the Battle of Puebla, a victory now honored by sombreros and lots of tequila on Cinco de Mayo. What's believed to be America's first train robbery took place in 1865 as a band of criminals derailed a St. Louis-bound train near North Bend, Ohio; they robbed the passengers and looted safes on board before escaping. In 1934, the first Three Stooges short for Columbia Pictures, "Woman Haters," was released. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard Jr. in 1961 became America's first space traveler as he made a 15-minute suborbital flight aboard Mercury capsule Freedom 7. In 1973, Secretariat won the Kentucky Derby, the first of its Triple Crown victories. The Irish Republican Army hunger-striker Bobby Sands in 1981 died at the Maze Prison in Northern Ireland in his 66th day without food.

Happy Birthday, Taureans: Actress Pat Carroll (88), former AFL-CIO President John J. Sweeney (81), actor Michael Murphy (77), actor Lance Henriksen (75), Michael Palin of legendary comedy troupe Monty Python (72), actor John Rhys-Davies (71), rock ‘n’ roll correspondent Kurt Loder (70!), actress Melinda Culea (60), actress Lisa Eilbacher (58), former CBS News correspondent John Miller (57), rock singer Ian McCulloch of New Wave band Echo and the Bunnymen (56), NBC newsman Brian Williams (56), actress Tina Yothers, Alex Keaton’s little sister on ‘80s sitcom “Family Ties” (42), R&B star Raheem DeVaughn (40), soul singer Adele (27), R&B star Chris Brown (26).