Alex Devkar with his staff at Conspire. Conspire is a Boulder-based startup that analyzes e-mail patterns to help people improve their networking capabilities. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

A relationship formed in five minutes is different from one forged over five years.

That's the thinking behind the formation of Conspire, a Boulder-based startup developing a technology that analyzes e-mail data to help people build their professional connections.

"Your professional networks should recognize those different relationships," said Alex Devkar, co-founder and CEO of Conspire.

Since completing the TechStars Boulder startup accelerator program in 2013, Conspire's network has grown to surpass 26 million people. And while some in the tech industry say Conspire aims to be the next LinkedIn, the founders of the Boulder startup say they only want a piece of that action.

"The best thing that LinkedIn offers is putting everyone's professional history online ... that's not the business we're in," he said. "(The connections aspect), LinkedIn does that as well. That's where we think we could do a much better job."

The connections offered by LinkedIn, which has more than 300 million members, are not a true reflection of one's professional relationships, he said.

Conspire's technology analyzes e-mail headers — including the recipients and date — to determine communication patterns, how frequently people e-mail and how quickly they respond.

When that data is compiled from many users, it results in graphs that understand how people are connected, he said.

Many data points feed into Conspire's metrics, but some examples include "bi-directionality," or whether and how frequently the parties correspond and respond; recency of contact; and the length of a relationship.

Conspire's technology does not analyze the body of an e-mail or attachments, Devkar said.

"When you think about this product, privacy is the most important concern," he said.

After launching Conspire to those in the technology industry, the firm is broadening its user base to other markets, a move heralded by investor David Cohen.

Counter-clockwise from right: Paul McReynolds, Alex Devkar, Sarah Ross, Jeremy Frazao and Ryan Tanner work at Conspire on Wednesday. Conspire is a Boulder-based startup that analyzes e-mail patterns to help people improve their networking capabilities. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"The tech community is a great proving ground, but the problem Conspire is solving isn't unique to tech," Cohen wrote in an e-mail to the Daily Camera. "Building and accessing your network is something that professionals of all types need to do.

"Conspire has the opportunity to be the de facto professional graph for all industries."

Conspire officials hope to eclipse the 100 million mark by early next year, and the company is exploring expanding its technology to analyze other communication portals such as Twitter, calendar apps and LinkedIn.

To continue to succeed, Conspire needs to further grow its network, Cohen said.

"There are currently 26 million people reachable in the network, and it's expanding quickly," he said. "As the network grows, Conspire needs to deliver the value of that network to users in more and more ways.

"Job seekers, recruiters and sales and (business development) folks all use Conspire and have different needs."

Conspire recently raised $2.5 million, bringing its total funding to $3.5 million.

Contact Camera Business Writer Alicia Wallace at 303-473-1332 or wallacea@dailycamera.com