Re: “Obama’s disasters” [Letters, April 18]: Harald Martin listed classic Fox News sound bites, followed by exaggerated or untrue comments, in his support of Thomas Sowell. “How about Benghazi” is a particularly annoying example. After 32 congressional hearings, in spite of zero findings of any wrongdoing or stand-down orders, some people still choose to believe that “valiant people died because of (the president’s) inaction.”

Sowell is a well-respected economist and journalist, a senior fellow at Stanford’s prestigious Hoover Institute, but I, too, was surprised to see his nonspecific comment concerning the president’s seven years of “disaster after disaster.”

Ironically, each disaster mentioned by Mr. Martin – Obamacare, Eric Holder and Benghazi – has a link to Southern Orange County Congressman Darrell Issa. As former head of the House Oversight Committee, he chaired dozens of hearings and was known for his arrogance, suppression of defense witnesses and obvious politicking. He was criticized from both sides of the aisle and a true disaster for his party. Issa may well be the person that the GOP holds responsible for Hillary Clinton’s election.

Roger Iles

Rancho Santa Margarita

A progressive resistance to change

Re: “Misguided attack on tenure sidetracked” [Opinion, April 21]: Just a question, do the letter and commentary writers who protect the current education system ever offer up reasons other than “we don’t have enough money”? That’s all I ever see. It’s never about the current process needing reform, or a bloated administration structure, or misguided priorities or anything else.

It’s kind of like that with all government-centric services. It’s never about how they go about their business, it’s always we lack funds. We have it figured out; it’s just not properly resourced. And any ideas to change the status quo, like charter schools or merit pay, are dismissed as counterproductive.

For a group that likes to label themselves “progressive” they sure do resist change.

Bud Carbonaro

Lake Forest