KOKOMO, Ind. - Approximately 20 communities throughout Indiana will be impacted by FEMA’s decision to withhold all hazard mitigation grants and assistance to the state of Indiana, Call 6 Investigator Kara Kenney learned Friday.

The federal agency made the decision to halt at least $5.5 million in grants in response to the city of Kokomo's continued construction of an $11.5 million baseball stadium under construction in a flood-prone area of the city.

The city previously accepted federal dollars through the Hazard Mitigation Grant program and, as part of its requirements, must keep the space open.

PREVIOUS | FEMA to Kokomo: Stop work on baseball stadium |FEMA rejects Kokomo stadium redesign plans

Kenney learned plans and projects in the following counties are impacted by the withholding of hazard mitigation grants: Boone, Grant, Henry, Knox, Marshall, Miami, Monroe, Ohio, Orange, Parke, Owen, Pike, Ripley, Starke, St. Joseph, Allen, Washington, Tipton, Dubois, and Clay.

In Grant County, Emergency Management had planned to use FEMA hazard mitigation dollars to fund an access road for a trailer park that frequently floods.

“We want to put in an access road for more than 200 trailers, and this is the closest we’ve come in years,” said Bruce Bender, Grant County Emergency Management Director. “This is kind of a setback, if you know what I mean. I’m not going to give up hope.”

John Erickson, spokesperson for the Indiana Department of Homeland Security said $1.5 million is in jeopardy of being lost completely, because applications for the projects are due April 1.

“If Indiana continues to be ineligible as the deadline passes, the state will lose access to these funds completely,” said Erickson.

Other projects include a $1.1 million project in Fort Wayne, which would have allowed for the acquisition of 18 homes currently located in flood-prone areas.

Bradie Shrum Elementary School in Salem was in the process of being awarded $2.2 million in hazard mitigation funds which would be used to build a tornado safe room for the school, which would provide safe shelter to 900 students during extreme weather events.

“Obviously, we’re very concerned about the suspension of the hazard mitigation money from FEMA, and we’re looking at the immediate and long term impacts,” said Erickson.

A FEMA spokesperson told Kenney that, to their knowledge, FEMA has never suspended state hazard mitigation funding due to a lack of compliance with a grant agreement.

Indiana will also not be eligible for future hazard mitigation funding, potentially resulting in millions more dollars lost, officials said.

In January, the State Senate passed an emergency bill allowing IDHS to intervene to issue a cease-and-desist letter on the project.

READ MORE | Emergency Kokomo stadium bill passes Indiana State Senate

That bill remains in the House, which is frustrating to the bill’s author Sen. Jim Buck (R-Kokomo).

"Had we had this legislation, we may have been able to prevent an excess of money being denied for the rest of the state, as well as taxpayer money on a stadium in Kokomo that may never come into compliance," said Buck Friday. “I am quite saddened by this turn of events. And I was disappointed to see the House handle this in such a cavalier manner.”

Rep. Sean Eberhart, chair of the House Natural Resources Committee which heard and then held the bill on February 9, did not return Kenney’s request for comment on FEMA’s decision to pull funding.

The city of Kokomo filed a lawsuit at the end of January in an effort to continue construction on the Kokomo Municipal Stadium.

READ MORE | Kokomo files suit to build stadium

Randy McKay, operations manager for the city of Kokomo, issued a response Friday regarding FEMA’s decision.

“We firmly dispute FEMA’s assertions that the eight parcels in question are not in compliance,” said McKay in a statement. “We believe that the redesign plans are fully compliant with the deed restrictions placed on the parcels; that is why we filed suit against IDHS on January 26.

FEMA has not provided the City of Kokomo with any actionable, specific instructions for how to align the design with their demands.”

McKay said they have offered several alternative designs yet FEMA has provided no guidance or explanation for their position.

“We are in continued talks with IDHS regarding this issue and our related lawsuit,” said McKay in a statement to RTV6. “We know the state understands the overreach of the federal government; Governor Pence and his departments have actively fought, or filed suit against, federal government overreach on the Affordable Care Act, Immigration Reform, Education Policy and other issues. IDHS has indicated a willingness to concur and support Kokomo’s position in recent discussions.”

A spokesperson for Governor Mike Pence referred questions about FEMA’s decision to IDHS.

Buck told Kenney it’s possible a court could order the city of Kokomo to tear down the stadium or parts of it, thus resulting in a huge