LANSING -- Michigan residents who are buying health insurance through the federal exchange could be in danger of losing tax credits reducing the cost of those policies if a federal appeals court agrees with opponents of the credits, including the state's top lawyer.

Attorney General Bill Schuette is arguing an IRS rule offering tax credits to individuals buying health insurance on the federal exchange from states without their own exchanges violates the U.S. Constitution.

The argument was made in a "friend of the court" brief filed in a case before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit, where individuals and businesses from states without insurance exchanges are challenging the ability of the IRS to offer tax credits for buying insurance through the federally established exchange.

Schuette and the attorneys general for Kansas and Nebraska argue that allowing the IRS to offer the credits overrules the decisions not to set up exchanges under the Affordable Care Act that 34 states made and is invalid under the Tenth Amendment.

"[T]he plain text of the ACA manifests Congress’ clear intent to induce states to establish state exchanges. It deliberately limited premium assistance tax credits to state exchanges to achieve this goal. Now the IRS seeks to change the plain terms of the 'contract' Congress offered the states," the brief argues.

A lower court judge ruled the IRS had the authority to offer the credits, saying the provisions of the health care law do not limit the availability of the credits even in states without their own exchanges.

Schuette's brief argues that allowing the IRS to offer the credits means the individual mandate will apply to residents of states without exchanges, and gives states less authority than the IRS.

"The IRS rule would deprive states of the economic benefit of their decision not to establish state exchanges. Notwithstanding the IRS’ unlawful efforts to amend the statute by regulatory fiat, the plain language of the ACA authorizes states to choose not to establish state exchanges," the brief argues.

Michigan is among the states which is not operating its own exchange, although the state did enact an expansion of Medicaid eligibility to offer coverage to more low-income residents.

Mark Totten, the only declared Democratic candidate for attorney general, issued a statement criticizing Schuette and Gov. Rick Snyder for the brief.

"Schuette’s attempt to please the far right of his party by saddling a half-million working families with nearly $5,000 more a year in taxes is outrageous and wrong," Totten said. "Clearly the health law has problems, but we don’t fix it by raising taxes on Michigan families. Governor Snyder should immediately make clear that Schuette does not speak for the state."

Brian Smith is the statewide education and courts reporter for MLive. Email him at bsmith11@mlive.com or follow him on Twtiter or Facebook.