WHO: Sagewell Partners

Kristine K. Blanco, Esq. and Director of Compliance

Marisa Warford, SPHR, Director, HR Consulting Practice

WHAT: Complimentary breakfast seminar to help clients and prospective clients with the practical side of preparing for the Affordable Care Act (ACA), including a review of the look-back measurement method and how to prepare for the new reporting standards. One hour HRCI credit pending.

WHERE: Hilton Garden Inn, Pittsburgh-Southpointe

1000 Corporate Drive

Canonsburg, PA 15317

WHEN: Wednesday, October 1, 8:30 - 11:00 a.m.

DETAILS: On Wednesday, October 1st, Sagewell Partners will be hosting “ACA: The Practical Side of Preparation”, a complimentary breakfast seminar at the Hilton Garden Inn, Pittsburgh-Southpointe from 8:30 - 11:00 a.m.

Kristine K. Blanco, an attorney and the Director of Compliance, will be focusing on the practical side of implementing the look-back measurement method for determining full-time employee status, as well as preparing for the reporting requirements under the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

Kristine is a graduate of the University of Arizona College of Law and has been working in employer health and welfare plan compliance since 2006. She is experienced with a broad range of employee benefits topics, including HIPAA, ERISA, COBRA, and the ACA. With over 12 years of experience advising clients and working with them to understand their legal obligations, Kristine is a frequent speaker on a range of employee benefits topics, most recently focused on health care reform implementation.

Marisa Warford is a certified Senior Professional in Human Resources (SPHR) with over 25 years of related experience. She received her undergraduate degree in Communications and Business at Villanova University and has a Master’s Degree in Human Resources from St. Francis University. She is a critical part of the HR team for Sagewell clients by providing compliance, reporting, legislative, communications, research analysis, and consulting.

If you’re interested in attending this event, click for more details and registration. Seating is limited.

About Sagewell Partners

Sagewell Partners is a leader in benefits consulting services, solely and completely focused on health and welfare benefits solutions, services and innovations. In January of 2014, Sagewell Partners became part of Alliant Insurance Services, one of the largest specialty insurance brokers in the world. As part of Alliant Insurance Services, Sagewell Partners continues to focus on serving every client with focus and excellence.