When Storehouse Furniture closed at the Farm Shopping Center, I felt like a good friend moved away.

About half of the furniture in our house is from there. We spent many weekend afternoons walking the showroom floor, carefully picking the right piece for the right price. The first piece of furniture my husband and I bought together was a dark red corduroy Metro chair.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

But today Tulsa got some good news. A new friend is moving into Utica Square. WEST ELM!

(Pause for applause)

I love, love, love West Elm, a modern store from the same company that owns Pottery Barn and Williams-Sonoma.

In the interest of being prepared, I made a list of 10 things that I want to buy right now.

1. Party in a Box: So, the real question is, who doesn't want a party in a box? Not anyone I want to know. And it's even for sale. The kit includes decor, drinkware and serveware for $74.99! Seriously, five paper balls, two paper fans, six champagne coupes, a stainless steel cocktail shaker, a lacquered serving tray, six votive holders and confetti. All I need to do now is pick a date and get this party started. bitly.com/wepartybox

2. Zigzag Floor Pouf: The one I like is black and white and awesome all over. If I have a party with my new party supplies, I'm going to need more seating. bitly.com/wepouf

3. Brass Base Terrarium: So, my guests at this party are going to need something to talk about. A terrarium is a perfect conversation piece. And I just redid my dining room with dark gray walls and brass accessories. Win, win. bitly.com/weterr

4. Mercury Glass Octagonal Hurricanes: My new favorite thing to do is put battery-operated candles in glass vases. It makes a lamp without ugly wires. And there's the added benefit that you can fall asleep and not worry about burning your house down. bitly.com/wehurricanes

5. Organic Cotton Pintuck Duvet Cover: This is a West Elm classic. The duvet is soft and fluffy and just makes the bed look so inviting. I think I want one in slate. bitly.com/weduvet

6. Capiz Orb Pendant light: There's a dark corner in the dining room that is just crying out for a pendant light. bitly.com/wecapiz

7. Confetti Jersey Bath Mat: I have a bath mat, but they don't last forever, you know. This mat is fuzzy and has diagonal white and gray stripes. bitly.com/webathmat

8. Rochester Swivel Armchair: Here's how West Elm describes this square-shaped chair: "a modern take on the clubby Chesterfield, with a tuxedo-inspired profile, deep seat cushions and comfy grid-tufted back." Sold. bitly.com/wechair

9. Agate Bookends: I am loving the natural wood and stone pieces that are popular in home decor. These agate bookends are gorgeous and would make a unique addition to my black cube-shaped bookshelf. bitly.com/weagate

10. Mirrored Serving Trays: More things should be mirrored. I truly believe the furniture industry had a stroke of genius when it started making mirrored accent pieces and furniture. And I am still regretting the fact I failed to buy a mirrored cabinet from Bombay Trading Company before it closed in Tulsa. bitly.com/wetray

Check this stuff out at westelm.com and make your own list.