Home Depot is being slammed on social media because a Dallas woman who claimed to be an employee posted on Facebook that she was “down for randomly killing white people” in response to the massacre of blacks at a Charleston, SC, church.

But the woman, Patrice Pace, 23, who is black, says she doesn’t actually work for Home Depot and was just joking on her personal page among her friends. The national chain confirmed it can’t find “any evidence” Pace has ever worked there.

She said Sunday that she didn’t know why she picked Home Depot. Just random, she said.

“Same reason it says I live in Jamaica, like, I don’t know,” she said. “I’m pretty sure Home Depot’s getting plenty of phone calls and looking through their employee list looking for Patrice Pace.”

“I’m down for randomly killing white people, Rs,” Pace had posted. (Rs is sometimes used as an abbreviation for “real (excrement),” to mean someone is serious.)

“I’ll gladly walk into a pet store or Starbucks and just start bussin,” she wrote, adding two smiley faces.

Pace said in a phone interview Sunday she didn’t think anyone would take her seriously and she would never shoot anyone. She said she posted her comment in anger after hearing the judge in the Charleston case, James Gosnell Jr., emphasize that the shooter’s relatives are also “victims.”

“I was just like, ‘What is really going on in America? What’s really happening to black people in America? Is it blatant disrespect that we have to continue to take?’” she said. “I could’ve worded it differently. I could’ve worded it way better.”

Pace, who described herself as a mother and a caterer, said she thought she was only telling “a couple people based off my friends list,” and “half the people are laughing with me because they know me personally. They know damn well I’m not going to go shoot nobody.”

Somehow, the post she intended only for her friends got forwarded into the larger world, where it found an audience she had not imagined.

Conservative, black talk radio host Wayne Dupree on Saturday night posted a screenshot of Pace’s comments on his Facebook page, which has 58,000 followers.

“Hey The Home Depot, not sure I want to enter your place of business if Ms Pace is working for your stores,” Dupree wrote, tagging the national chain.

The backlash on Home Depot’s Facebook page was swift and dramatic, with many saying they would take their business elsewhere and calling for Pace to be fired.

“Are these the type of people you want working for you Home Depot?” a man identified on Home Depot’s Facebook page as John Griffin wrote.

“Fire the racist pig, otherwise I might be worried about shopping in your store,” wrote a man identified as Mike Pregon.

“My family, my friends, and I will be boycotting your company until she has been released from employment with you,” wrote a woman identified as Barbara Sue Brown. “I would not feel safe being around someone who feels as she does towards white people.”

The company is responding to commenters online, saying Pace has never worked there:

@Daily_Dish Like you, we’re appalled, but we’ve investigated this and can’t find any evidence that this person works for Home Depot. — The Home Depot (@HomeDepot) June 20, 2015

Pace said her phone, which had been linked to her Facebook page, was flooded with calls and text messages from angry strangers saying they would make sure she was unemployed.

“It was crazy,” she said. She deleted her posting and her Facebook profile.

A police officer, who Pace said she knows on a “first-name basis” because she has lived in the same home for a decade, knocked on Pace’s door and said someone had reported her.

“He was like, ‘How serious are you?’ and I was like, ‘Not serious at all,’” she said. He asked her to delete the post, and she told him she already had. He left.

Pace said she is surprised by her statement going viral.

“Everything is at a tense moment,” she acknowledged about her post. “But to me, it’s only the white people that have taken it seriously.”