It comes as a bit of a surprise that the News Journal would print a fantasy piece as an op-ed article. The so-called National Right to Work Committee would be less dangerous if they just deluded themselves, but by publishing their propaganda your paper only assists them in misleading more working families.

Workers hoodwinked by this nonsense like that offered by Mark Mix are seeing the 1 percent soak up an ever-greater portion of the nation’s wealth, while working people are growing more and more impoverished as the American middle class shrinks.

Unions are the solution.

Throwing around terms like “union bosses” and “coercive” is meant to obscure the facts, not illuminate them.

Here’s a fact: A solid majority of U.S. workers consistently tell pollsters that they would like to join a union if their employer would simply not interfere. Since the current unionization rate is about 12 percent of the workforce, that means over 40 percent of American workers want a union but do not have one.

That is the toll taken by groups like NRWC and the billion-dollar industry in union busting.

With all the vilification, it’s easy to forget the many benefits commonly enjoyed by all workers that were hard-won accomplishments of unions: the eight-hour day, paid sick leave, the weekend, paid vacations, minimum wage, child labor laws, workplace safety legislation, retirement security and many more.

“On top of driving broad improvements for all workers, unions offer one key thing: legally binding contracts,” said David Borer, general counsel of the American Federation of Government Employees, AFL-CIO. “Without a union and a contract, workers have few rights and little chance of enforcing them.”

What’s “coerced dues” in the rhetoric of the right, is also known as a fair share fee.

First, all employees covered by a union contract benefit from the union’s bargaining efforts. And, since the law generally requires that a union must represent all workers in a unit regardless of membership, a fee for the services rendered is only fair.

No business would ever be forced to allow customers to obtain its product without paying for it.

Likewise, a union that provides a service is entitled to payment.

“There’s a reason the vast majority of flight attendants and other airline employees are union members,” said Sara Nelson, international president of the Association of Flight Attendants-CWA, AFL-CIO. “Airline workers learn very quickly that without a strong union contract they have no rights and no job security.”

As for Labor Day, that may be the central fantasy in Mr. Mix’s op-ed. Labor Day grew out of a strike by the American Railway Union in 1894 after the Pullman Co. cut the workers’ wages.

The resulting boycott spread to a quarter-million workers across the country. After 30 workers were killed and President Grover Cleveland called out the Army, the strike ended but the outrage did not. Hoping to ease the lingering discontent, Cleveland and the Congress initiated Labor Day as a federal holiday.

So, in a very direct sense, Labor Day is indeed about unions and about workers.

Happy Labor Day.

Wazlavek is executive director of the Panhandle Progressive Coalition.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1rRoaxu