For 17-year-old Nico Fiorello, the mere act of walking without anyone’s help is one that may have seemed impossible in the wake of a devastating neck injury he suffered three months ago. But thanks to the decisive actions of the Nassau University Medical Center staff and Fiorello’s own ragged determination, it’s now a happy reality.

As reported by CBS New York, Fiorello, a Long Island resident, was the unfortunate victim of a bizarre accident at Jones Beach in Nassau County, NY, earlier this summer. Attempting to dive into the soft water, Fiorello instead dove head first into a hidden sandbar, breaking his neck instantaneously. He was rushed to the Nassau University Medical Center, but even with the quick surgical care provided by hospital staff, the chances of a full recovery were slim.

"There was a fracture in the bone here and the piece of bone had pierced into the spinal cord," said Dr. Elizabeth Fontana, Nassau University Medical Center’s director of neurosurgery, in a press conference held by the hospital Wednesday.

At first, Fiorello was only able to wiggle his toes, with the odds of someone with his type of injury walking again being as low as 10 percent.

"Oh my God, I was like, 'Was he ever going to walk again? He's 17, this can't be happening.' He's my baby, and he hates when I say that," said his mother, Lorraine Fiorello.

But within three months, Fiorello had recovered to such a degree so quickly that even hospital staff were amazed as he managed to stand under his own power. "I really think he's going to be normal. The odds of that are really non-existent," Fontana said. "For every Nico there's 100 patients that don't make this kind of recovery."

Though Fiorello still relies on his walker to get around, he will soon return to school for his senior year, and he’s dead set on rejoining his lacrosse team by next spring. He plans to attend college so that he can become a physical therapist in order to help those like himself.

"There's always hope, always a way to get better, you just have to believe," he said.