Read Part One

We’re going to leave, for a moment, the curious story about the 2012 decision by the voters of Colorado to legalize the use and sale of marijuana as a recreational drug, and take a quick look at another contentious social and economic issue: the American healthcare system.

I believe this issue will also play nicely into my theme: about the Republic of Colorado.

Brad Cochennet, CEO of the Pagosa Springs Medical Center, visited with the Archuleta County commissioners at the BOCC work session yesterday, to outline the progress on the hospital’s $12 million expansion progress, currently underway on South Pagosa Boulevard.

I believe the PS Medical Center is now the largest employer in Pagosa Springs, with 260 employees and 2015 revenues of about $46 million — almost double the 2013 revenues of $26 million, just two years earlier. Brad Cochennet showed the commissioners a chart of emergency room visits — an increase from 4,270 visits in 2012 to 6,983 in 2015. He pointed out the significant increase in ER visits, so far, during 2016 — as indicated by the short yellow bar on the upper left corner.

Another chart showed — with a linear estimate — the increase in the number of “procedures” (tests, x-rays, exams, MRIs, operations) at the Medical Center since 2009. The graph continues the line four years into the future, to indicate where we might be headed.

Either Pagosa Springs has a lot more sick people lately, or we are simply more willing to visit our local hospital and to order more procedures. I suspect the latter.

Mr. Cochennet shared some maps of the expansion project, and explained that the addition of a two-story primary care clinic was likely only the first phase of what will be ongoing expansion of the Medical Center in coming years.

This is not the map we saw at the BOCC meeting, but it shows the footprint of the current hospital — in purple — and the addition now underway, in blue.

The charts above were taken from the 2015 Annual Report, which is not easily available on the Medical Center website at the moment — but was included in a PDF I found through a Google search. You can download that document here.

Following the BOCC presentation, Mr. Cochennet headed back to work, but I was able to waylay him in the parking lot for a few minutes. I wanted to ask his opinion about ColoradoCare — since ColoradoCare, also known as Amendment 69, was going to feature prominently in my article series about the Republic of Colorado.

Did he imagine that Amendment 69 would have a significant impact on the Pagosa Springs Medical Center?

He had a few thoughts on that subject. But first, a bit of medical history.

Back in the late 1950s, an ambitious group of well-meaning Pagosa citizens came together to build a medical clinic for their little rural town. The project was supported in part by one of America’s largest corporations: Sears, Roebuck & Co. The monster Sears, Roebuck mail-order catalogue was the Walmart to rural America during the first half of the 20th century, and among the many items available in their catalog was a selection of complete home “kits” — all the parts and materials you needed to build your own house, ordered from Sears and delivered to your front door. (Except of course, you didn’t yet have a front door. But that was included in the kit.)

Sears also sold complete commercial buildings through their catalog, and the fine citizens of Pagosa Springs — looking to build the town’s first medical clinic — sought the support of Sears Roebuck to construct a building on some land across the street from the Spa Motel on San Juan Street. The land had been donated by the Town of Pagosa Springs.

The new clinic was named after one of Pagosa’s pioneer doctors — a homeopath named Dr. Mary Fisher.

The clinic operated at the San Juan Street location until 1996, when a different set of well-meaning Pagosans organized the construction of a much larger and more modern “Dr. Mary Fisher Clinic” on South Pagosa Boulevard, on some land donated by Tom and Mary Grant, the builders of the uptown City Market shopping center.

The vacated building became home to the Seeds of Learning Early Childhood Center for a few years, and then was demolished and replaced with a parking lot.

Meanwhile, the new, $2.5 million Dr. Mary Fisher Clinic was struggling financially, and gradually became the focus of considerable political controversy, leading to the closing of its doors in 2005. Another group of well-meaning citizens then banded together to propose a “Rural Access Hospital” at the clinic site. “Rural access hospital” is a federal designation for a facility in a relatively isolated community that benefits from augmented Medicare and Medicaid reimbursements. As our readers may know already, the Affordable Care Act — Obamacare — increased the federal subsidies for Medicaid, as a way to finance healthcare for America’s more impoverished citizens… the people who, for whatever reason, have no health insurance. According to the Pagosa Springs Medical Center’s 2015 annual report, about 57 percent of their Inpatient and Outpatient revenues appear to have come from Medicare and Medicaid — that is to say, government-funded reimbursements.

From a recent series of articles on the American healthcare crisis, published by PBS:

The Medicare population is growing. By 2030 it is expected to nearly double, to 76 million Americans. Medicare is already the third largest government program, and its spending, as a percentage of the federal budget has doubled in just twenty years. The number of senior citizens in the United States is increasing steadily, and advances in medical technology are keeping them alive longer and longer. As a result, there is growing concern about the cost of financing care for future generations. The challenges to Medicare are long-term. With the decline in the number of workers paying into the system through their payroll taxes, many experts believe we will need to find additional sources of funding for Medicare in the future. Possible approaches include new taxes on products like tobacco, or greater contributions from the nation’s wealthier seniors…

Or, maybe there’s another solution?

The Republic of Colorado? To the rescue?

Read Part Three…