Here’s a Financial Checklist When Leaving a Job

CHARLES ROTBLUT: Any time someone leaves a job, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, all employer-related financial accounts and documents should be reviewed. If laid off, spend the first day taking care of these documents; you’ll feel like you’ve accomplished something and you’ll be taking a positive step forward after the setback.

Medical and dental insurance always comes to a mind first because of Cobra rules. Depending on the employer, there may be other policies, including life and supplemental medical. Review these policies, find out if they can be maintained after the job has ended and what the costs are. If you want to keep the policies, do not delay filling out the forms.

Next, tackle your retirement savings. If you have a 401(k) or a similar type of account, you have a few options. The first is rolling it over to an IRA. You can either move it to an existing IRA account or set up a new one at a brokerage firm or mutual-fund company of your choice. You may also be able to keep it at the mutual-fund company that sponsored your employer’s plan or, in some cases, leave it in your employer’s plan. Before going this route, consider both the fees and the selection of funds; you may be much better off moving your account to an IRA with a different company.

If you move your retirement savings to an IRA (or a new employer’s retirement savings plan), invest the money as soon as possible. If you are concerned that you might need some of it to live on (and withdrawing retirement funds should be your last resort because you will get hit twice; first with taxes, including an early-withdrawal penalty if younger than age 59 1/2, and secondly with less assets to live on in retirement), allocate some of the funds to a money-market fund. Any savings you don’t anticipate needing to live on should be invested in a mix of stocks and bonds.

If there was a pension, speak to human resources about your options. Fill out any necessary paperwork as soon as possible.

Finally, set up reminders to change your addresses should you move residences.

These may all seem like relatively simple steps that can be postponed, but this can lead to unwanted headaches. So act quickly, and then focus on the next stage in your life.

Charles Rotblut (@charlesrotblut) is a vice president with the American Association of Individual Investors.