By of the

The higher the market goes, the more difficult the stock-buying decision gets.

Has the price finally gone too high?

Will a widespread market collapse cause the shares to tumble?

These are the types of questions that make it difficult to pull the trigger.

One solution, says Two Rivers money manager George V. Reis, is put options.

Investors who sell put options get an immediate payment in exchange for committing to buy the shares in the future at a discount to today's price.

"It's extra work. Some advisers, they just plunk people in mutual funds. This is extra work to implement and monitor," said Reis, president of GVR Investment Management Inc. The strategy not only provides current income, but it also helps investors to develop a buying discipline, he said.

Here's how it works: ABC stock is trading at all-time highs, so an investor who likes the company, but views its stock as expensive, sells one or more put contracts on it. Each contract is 100 shares.

The investor receives a payment that could be several dollars per share.

In exchange, the investor commits to buy a corresponding number of shares of ABC stock at a fixed time in the future for less than the current price.

"We're at a peak. If there's a correction and we can buy it 8% or 10% less than current market, that's a good strategy," said Pat Zur, a GVR associate.

Reis said he uses this strategy only with stocks he would really want to buy.

And if the stock gets near the price he agreed to buy it for, he can always buy the option back, often for less than the original premium he received.

Also, when they like a company, Reis and Zur said they might buy some of its shares outright, and sell put options on the remaining amount they'd be willing to buy.

United Rentals Inc. (URI, $112.04), Stamford, Conn., offers backhoes, boom lifts, general tools and other equipment for rent to corporate, government and individual customers.

As of January, the company operated 832 rental locations in the U.S. and Canada. United Rental shares have traded in a 52-week range of $52.39 to $114.95.

By using United Rental, construction companies and other customers avoid making big capital expenditures by renting equipment when they need it, Zur said.

Reis said he would write a put option that committed him to buy United Rentals at $100 a share in December. That would give him an immediate payment of $4 a share, which he says would represent an annualized return of 9.6%.

Lorillard Inc. (LO, $61.68), Greensboro, N.C., makes and sells cigarettes and electronic cigarettes under brand names that include Newport, Kent, True, Maverick, Old Gold, blu, eCigs and Skycig. The stock is trading in a 52-week range of $41.56 to $67.46.

Reynolds American Inc. has made a $25 billion offer for Lorillard that must win approval from antitrust authorities and is not expected to close until the first half of next year.

Reis said he would write a put option that committed him to buy Lorillard at $57.50 a share in December.

That would give him an immediate payment of $1.36 a share, which he says would represent an annualized return of 5.68%.

Yahoo Inc. (YHOO, $33.33), Sunnyvale, Calif., operates an Internet portal business. Its shares trade in a 52-week range of $26.75 to $41.72.

Yahoo has been jettisoning nonstrategic businesses and outsourcing its underlying search algorithm and operations to Microsoft, Reis said.

The company has good international exposure through its ownership of 35% of Yahoo Japan and 24% of Alibaba Group.

Reis said he would write a put option that committed him to buy Yahoo at $30 a share in October.

That would give him an immediate payment of $1.02 a share, which he says would represent an annualized return of 13.8%.

ABOUT THIS

The Journal Sentinel focuses on one Wisconsin money manager or analyst in this weekly feature, looking at a trend that helps investment pros make their decisions.