Buy Photo Letters to the Editor (Photo: USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)Buy Photo

Deciding between Johnson, Feingold is important

The November presidential election is vitally important, but an election of equal significance is the competition for the senate seat of U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wisconsin.

He is opposed by former Sen. Russ Feingold, who was defeated by Johnson in November 2010. A comparative evaluation between these two men is mandatory.

Feingold is a progressive, liberal, socialist Democrat who has always been a government employee, wants to expand government control and, despite 18 years in the senate, was never appointed chairman of a committee.

Johnson is a conservative Republican, started his own plastic sheeting business in Oshkosh in 1979, wants to reduce government control and was elected chairman of Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs in 2015.

Feingold denied Iran as an enemy, favored the Iran nuclear deal and agreed the timetable to remove troops from Afghanistan was strategically correct. He also favored President Barack Obama’s immigration policy and would not secure the border.

Johnson vigorously opposed and wants to eliminate the Iran deal, called for strategy to defeat ISIS, wants to secure the border and will fully vet all Syrian refugees. He believes cyber control is necessary.

Feingold favored the Obama stimulus package American Recovery and Reinvestment Act 2009, voted against a balanced budget four times and thought Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were fiscally sound. The result was more debt and no jobs.

Johnson voted for a balanced budget, conducted hearings on waste in government agencies and wanted government to be fiscally responsible to taxpayers.

Feingold proudly states his vote passed Obamacare on March 21, 2010. Johnson authored a bill to allow Americans to retain their health policies and emphasized the full cost of Obamacare and the loss of our health care freedom.

Feingold favored more EPA regulations. Johnson wants to protect farmers, manufacturers and property owners against controls and water rights. Johnson wants to replace Justice Antonin Scalia after the presidential election, has been aggressive on his help to the VA and he believes our national security has been breached by Hillary Clinton’s email scandals.

Weigh the balance intelligently between these two men, because this election is essential to the future of Wisconsin and the U.S.

John Goswitz

Manitowoc

County fair’s days are numbered without the grandstand and track

I can recall attending the county fair when it was still on the north side of town.

Clearly, it was constrained by the size of the facility and needed to be moved. The property it is now on was the site of the 1965 Farm Progress Days. It was owned by a then-county board member, if I recall correctly. A price was negotiated, and we purchased it while the previous owner went happily to the bank.

Who can forget the fiasco of the first years with the rain, mud, parked cars being pulled out by tractors and the mess with the concession stands? Then, as a testament to the foresight of the county board, the interstate highway cut it in half. Oh, the confidence that was inspired in our leaders.

Bit by bit, conditions improved. I recall the late Bill Wallander working tirelessly on procuring the funding for the grandstand and then to put a roof on it. I think he’d roll over in his grave if he saw what was happening.

I think anyone with any common sense knows that without the grandstand and track, the county fair’s days are numbered. It will turn into a glorified beer party with loud bands.

But wait — in a fit of wisdom, the county board is going to spend a considerable sum to build a new building at the site. I think the money from the sale is burning a hole in the pocket of the county board.

Kudos to our representative, Susie Maresh, for being conspicuously absent. We need to be sure we consult Jim Brey on these matters because he’s clearly visionary. It’s apparent in his eyes.

Bruce Klemm

Whitelaw

Read or Share this story: http://htrne.ws/26Meyph