I attended the funeral service for Rosemary Roach. She passed away Dec. 27.

I first met Rosemary in 1997 when she was elected chairwoman of the Cal Farley’s Girlstown, USA board — appropriate I thought, given that girls had already been part of the system for 10 years, and she was one of the first women to sit on the Cal Farley’s board.

I was the administrator of Girlstown, USA at the time. Rosemary would fly from Amarillo to the Levelland airport about once a month, and I would pick her up to spend the day with the girls.

Rosemary was such an elegant lady. Most of the girls had never met a woman of that caliber, and they were mesmerized by her. She cared a lot about making sure that the girls had everything they needed, not only for the moment, but in preparation for their adult lives.

She cared enough about their futures that she was one of the principle funders of the Cal Farley’s Alumni Support Center in Amarillo. Rosemary knew the challenges young people face today are so much different than when she was young. She wanted to make sure that we bridged that gap for youth between childhood and adulthood.

After her funeral service, I went back to my office and looked out the window across Monroe Street at the facility Rosemary helped us build, and I had a sense of satisfaction that she would be proud of the girls and boys who benefited from her consideration in giving us the gift of her time and financial resources.

Rosemary also had a little something to do with Tom Roach, her son, who has been on the Cal Farley’s board of directors since 2005. Not surprising given that his grandfather, Jack Roach, signed, with Cal Farley, the original charter for Boys Ranch in 1939. Tom was elected chairman of the Cal Farley’s board in 2009 and served in that capacity until October.

Tom helped guide the strategic direction of Cal Farley’s during an important time in our history. He took over the chairmanship during the financial debacle of 2008 and 2009 when we, like most nonprofit service organizations, were being challenged on two fronts.

First, unemployment was on the rise, which led to an increase in family stress, domestic violence and substance abuse. This drove more potential clients to call for our services. At the same time, our donors were being impacted by uncertainty in the financial markets, inflation and political threats to reduce tax deductions for charitable contributions.

Fortunately, the decisions we made during that period under Tom’s leadership enabled us to continue taking care of children and families — and this positive trend continues today, on the threshold of our 75th year.

I know Rosemary was proud of her son.

I want to share my condolences with the Roach family for the loss of a great lady, Rosemary.

At the same time, we celebrate the work sparked by Cal Farley with the help of people like Jack Roach, whose support continued with great people like Rosemary, and now her son, Tom. Because of them and others with the same passion, the children of Cal Farley’s will continue to thrive for years to come.

I will miss Rosemary dearly.

Dan Adams is president and CEO of Cal Farley’s, a social service organization established in 1939.