If the New Yorkers who buy health insurance from Oscar are anything like the folks who work there—young, good looking and, like the residents of fictional Lake Wobegon, above average—the startup insurance company will probably make heaps of money.

Of course, that remains to be seen. The company remains tight lipped about their enrollment numbers, preferring to focus on their consumer-focused marketing and innovative use of data.

Visit the SoHo headquarters of the health insurance startup company, Oscar, and the "startup" part of the company is immediately clear. A single long table stretches the length of a cavernous room on the sixth floor of the Puck building on the corner of Lafeyette and Houston Streets. Dozens of young staffers man the Mac laptops lined along the table, dressed in the work uniform of the day: dark jeans and beige, blue or khaki shirts. The company's three founders—Joshua Kushner, Mario Schlosser and Kevin Nazemi—echo the color scheme.

The three men believe that most of the issues in health care can be solved with technology, Mr. Kushner said at a breakfast presentation Tuesday that went from 10-to-noon, late even by journalists' standards. The small, wood-floored conference room overlooked Houston Street and a Calvin Klein billboard of a sultry young woman who might have counted as Oscar's target demographic.

"Amazon and Target knew when Mario's wife was having a baby," he said, indicating Mr. Schlosser, "but his health insurance company didn't know until three months after."

Oscar, with its clean user interface and playful consumer-facing ads, is trying to be the Amazon of health insurance. But so far, Obamacare hasn't been kind to the company, which sells plans in New York's nine southern counties. Oscar captured just 2% of new enrollments on the health exchange through the end of last year, according to data from the New York State of Health.

Mr. Nazemi won't reveal exact enrollment numbers until the end of March, saying only that they are in the "tens of thousands," and that members' average age is slightly below that of the state health exchange, which is 42. They prefer to tout their 90% bill payment rate—a point of envy for other insurance carriers, some of whom have complained that 30% of new members haven't paid their bills.

Oscar's sleek user interface is also a point of pride for the company. Members can search for doctors who use electronic medical records or treat many patients their age. They can also look up their symptoms in Oscar's database and see a range of treatment options, complete with price estimates. By showing consumers that a visit to an asthma specialist could cost $200, but a primary care visit costs $100, they hope to subtly encourage cost-saving behavior. When members sign up, they get a $10 gift card to fill out a detailed health history questionnaire. That information helps Oscar pinpoint chronically ill (and therefore expensive) patients, and encourage them to seek treatment.

Since their launch in October, Oscar's network has grown to include 82 out of the 85 hospitals in its service area. The company also contracts directly with physicians' groups, and with Teladoc, a telehealth provider, through which members can have a phone consultation for free. Details of the call, such as any medication that was prescribed, are tracked in the member's profile.

Some brokers aren't completely sold. "Marketing to consumers is probably the future," said Alex Miller, a partner at Millennium Medical Solutions. "But no matter how much technology you throw at it, [buying health insurance] is a human endeavor. It comes down to a lot of other factors than just making a Facebook for health insurance."

The company is still tied up with the quirks of the state health exchange. Oscar can sign up a new member on the phone in 15 to 20 minutes. But New Yorkers have to sign up through the exchange in order to get subsidies and a phone enrollment with the New York State of Health takes about 70 minutes. Starting next year, they'll be able to get subsidies when enrolling directly through the company.

Oscar is also in talks with several private exchanges, Mr. Schlosser said. (Private exchanges, offered by employers and benefits providers, allow employees to choose from a range of employer-sponsored plans). But for now, the company has cast its fortunes with individual insurance.

"The pressure is building," Mr. Schlosser said, "where there is a contingent of people coming to the market who will pay for care themselves."

Get Crain's Digital NY Alert Sign up for our FREE weekly Digital NY email newsletter. News on NY's fast-growing tech sector, with funding deals and executive moves. More Newsletters ›

Comments