Oneida Nation Representative Ray Halbritter also to address the Federal Bar Association’s annual Indian Law Conference regarding the agreement with New York State later this week

The Oneida Indian Nation will be honored at two distinguished national conferences this month. The Oneida Nation’s historic agreement with New York State will be honored at the Native American Finance Officers Association (NAFOA) annual conference, along with the Nation’s tremendous success at building a model of economic growth by creating a national tourist destination at Turning Stone Resort Casino, and the growth of the Nation’s other enterprises.

The Oneida Nation, along with the Seneca and St. Regis Mohawk Nations, will receive NAFOA’s Deal of the Year award. Oneida Nation Representative Ray Halbritter will take part in a panel discussion at NAFOA’s annual conference, Tuesday, April 15, in New Orleans, Louisiana.

NAFOA helps tribal organizations navigate economic and market trends, develop policy, discuss business opportunities, and ensure capital finds its way to tribal development. The annual conference has established itself as an important forum for tribal leaders, policy-makers, and finance and accounting professionals to gather and exchange ideas. Conference co-chairs are Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Wells Fargo and Capital One Bank. The conference strives to provide meaningful coverage on current financial and economic development trends across Indian Country. For more information on the NAFOA annual conference, go to nafoa.org/events.php.

Prior to speaking at the NAFOA annual conference, Halbritter will participate in a panel discussion at the Federal Bar Association’s annual Indian Law Conference, Friday, April 11, in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Halbritter will discuss how the Nation’s recent agreement with New York State is a new model for the resolution of disputes among Indian nations and other governments throughout the United States, and the shared prosperity the agreement will now work to create for the Oneida Nation, neighboring communities, and the State of New York. For more information on the Federal Bar Association’s Indian Law Conference, go to fedbar.org/2014-Indian-Law.