Australian thalidomide victims get $89 million in compensation from the drug's distributor after settling class action

Aust thalidomide class action settles A class action by Aust victims of thalidomide against its manufacturer has been settled for $89 million.

VICTIMS of thalidomide have won an $89 million settlement from the drug's distributor, but their lawyers say the drug's manufacturer behaved appallingly in not paying compensation.

More than 100 Australian and New Zealand victims, many of whom were born with missing or shortened limbs, will be compensated under the landmark settlement, announced to the Victorian Supreme Court on Monday.

The $89 million will be paid by the drug's distributor Diageo, with thalidomide's manufacturer Grunenthal not included in the settlement.

A class action against Grunenthal will no longer proceed.

Lawyers for the victims say Grunenthal's conduct has been appalling.

"Every single Australian thalidomider was injured by a drug made by Grunenthal in Germany," lawyer Michael Magazanik said.

Extraordinary devotion Meet the Melbourne family who have spent 50 years caring for their daughter born without arms or legs. Video: Andre Mauger

ANDREW RULE: THE LAST GERMAN WAR SECRET

"Despite that, Grunenthal still will not pay a cent to its Australian and New Zealand victims.

"Fifty years on, Grunenthal will still not 'fess up to its shameful behaviour in relation to that drug."

Lawyer Peter Gordon said the amount reached in the settlement was adequate without Grunenthal being included.

"The result we have achieved today is a vindication of their courage and it is a vindication of the proposition that right around the world there are people like them who have missed out and whose time has come," he said.

IN PICTURES: LIFE WITH THALIDOMIDE

Mr Magazanik said in some ways he regretted that the settlement meant they could take no further action against Grunenthal in this country but voiced hopes it will pay its dues elsewhere in the world.

"We think time is running out on Grunenthal and before too long its sorry secrets and its embarrassing and shameful conduct in relation to the drug will be exposed," he said.

The settlement comes after Diageo last year reached a multi-million dollar settlement with prominent thalidomide victim Lynette Rowe.

SAVING LYNETTE- THE ULTIMATE LOVE STORY

Ms Rowe, who was born with no limbs, was in court for Monday's announcement.

Thalidomide, a drug to counter morning sickness, was withdrawn from sale in 1961.

The drug was distributed in Australia and New Zealand around 1960 and 1961 by Distillers, which became part of Diageo in 1997.

Grunenthal apologised for thalidomide for the first time in August last year.

The settlement is subject to final court approval in February, with victims likely to receive payments as early as March.

ROWE'S PARENTS HIT OUT AT DRUG COMPANY'S APOLOGY

Meanwhile Mr Gordon said he had put retirement on hold to spend five years helping Australia's thalidomide victims get justice.

After leaving law firm Slater and Gordon in August 2009 he gave pro-bono help to Ken Youdale, a World War II veteran from Sydney whose daughter was a thalidomider.

Through that he met a man with two arms and one deformed leg, plus evidence his pregnant mother had taken the non-prescription morning sickness drug.

But "experts" said he was not a thalidomide victim because he still had one good leg.

"It was crazy, it was nonsense," Mr Gordon told reporters today.

Investigating further with his son Patrick, a recent law graduate, he realised the scale of the injustice.

So he set up a new law firm, Gordon Legal, to work solely for thalidomide victims in fighting a "tremendous injustice".

This was no straightforward case, he explained.

"It was 50 years, a lot of the evidence was gone, a lot of the people we wanted to help had trust issues, not just with us but with mums and dads who had never been able to talk about the whole thing.

"Most of the records about what Grunenthal had done had, following a (failed) criminal trial in Germany, been stored away in the Dusseldorf archive.

"They had never been translated."

But the documents were copied into English for the first time and more and more Australian and New Zealand victims were traced.

More than 100 were eventually involved in the class action, which has reached a settlement with the drug's distributor Diageo.

Mr Gordon said he would now take a break but would like to use the translated documents to help other English-speaking litigants.

"I think we would like to be a resource for other firms around the world."

LYNETTE'S HOUSE - A STORY TO WARM YOUR HEART