Thora the Bald Eagle from SOAR (Saving Our Avian Resources), who was named in honor of a man named Thor who died in Afghanistan, weighs about 10lbs and is approximately 5 years old. She is being treated for lead poisoning after ingesting leadshot from a deceased animal. The beautiful bird was on display during the Bald Eagle Watch at the Jester Park Lodge. Attendees could also use spotting scopes set up around Saylorville Lake to observe bald eagles in the natural setting and learn about our national symbol, view a Red-Tailed Hawk up close, and watch two rehabilitated Barred Owls released back into the wild. (Photo: Lee Navin / Special to The Des Moines Register)

About 250,000 hunters spend 4.2 million days hunting in Iowa each year, according to the most recent U.S. Census survey. They leave home with shotguns and boxes of shells and hope to return with a deer, pheasant or dove. But those who use lead shot are contributing to the sickening and killing of other wildlife, including eagles.

Lead is poisonous. When the small toxic pellets contained in a shotgun shell scatter across fields and forests, they look like the weeds and seeds birds eat and the gravel and grit they consume to aid digestion. One or two pellets can kill a small bird. Bald eagles and other large raptors may die when they feed on animals that ingested or were shot with lead ammunition.

In the first three months of 2016, 14 bald eagles were brought to Saving Our Avian Resources, a raptor rehabilitation center in Manning. Ten of the eagles suffered from high levels of lead in their blood and the center is awaiting test results on two more. As of last week only one of the 14 was still alive. Over the past decade, half the eagles tested at the center had elevated levels of the toxic substance and several had lead shot or shrapnel in their digestive tracts.

People who found the sick eagles describe the birds of prey as uncoordinated, unable to fly, acting blind and unaware of their surroundings — consistent with the impaired nervous system, breathing problems and vision problems caused by lead.

But preventing lead poisoning of wildlife is simple. Hunters should use nontoxic shot, including steel and copper, which is widely available. Many hunters already do.

Kay Neumann, the avian center’s executive director, has hunted her entire life and has not used lead shot in more than a decade. “It is not respectful to wildlife. You respect the animals you’re hunting and the animals in the wild,” she said. Scores of studies conclude lead is an environmental hazard.

But in Iowa, it’s up to hunters to do right by choosing nontoxic ammunition. State lawmakers and Gov. Terry Branstad have refused to require it. In fact, they’ve gone out of their way to ensure hunters can spread poison on land.

In 2011, the state’s Natural Resource Commission, a bipartisan board of individuals appointed by the governor, voted unanimously to ban lead shot for hunters who insist on killing small songbirds for a forkful of meat. The chairman of the commission at the time, Greg Drees, told a Register editorial writer at the time that he paid four cents more per shell for non-toxic steel shot and had not used lead ammunition to hunt anything in years.

“We got rid of [lead] from gasoline. We got rid of it from our paint,” he said. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service banned lead shot in hunting waterfowl 20 years ago. “The lead toxicity in the water environment is well-documented. How can people think the toxicity isn’t present in the uplands as well? There is solid science,” Drees said.

But lawmakers blocked the commission’s proposal after listening to complaints from hunters, including Marcus Branstad, the governor’s son. The next year, Branstad signed an executive order rescinding the commission’s ban on lead shot. The year after that, he appointed his son to the commission.

Iowa leaders have repeatedly shown they have no respect for Mother Nature. From lawmakers who refuse to fund a conservation trust created by voters to a governor who takes executive action to ensure mourning dove hunters can use lead shot, state officials should be ashamed.

It is up to hunters to do the right thing. If they continue to use lead ammunition, eagles and other wildlife will continue to pay the price.

State of Iowa silent on poisoning wildlife

The United States banned lead shot for hunting waterfowl in 1991 due to lead poisoning of birds. At least 26 states have restrictions beyond the federal mandate, according to Minnesota’s Department of Natural Resources. Iowa is not among them. The only advice the Iowa Department of Natural Resources offers relates to humans minimizing exposure to toxic shot when they eat venison.

Other states are more enlightened about the impact lead is having on wildlife:

Wisconsin cautions hunters about the dangers of lead ammunition. Its website includes a report concluding that 25 percent of trumpeter swan fatalities and 15 percent of bald eagle fatalities are attributed to lead toxicity. About 30 percent of dead loons tested were poisoned with lead. “Lead poisoning continues to be a significant mortality factor for several species of birds in Wisconsin,” according to the report.

Minnesota's Department of Natural Resources is considering requiring hunters to use non-toxic shot for small game on some wildlife management areas. Why? “Because of its toxicity…. State wildlife areas contain abundant wetlands and lead shot continues to be deposited in those wetlands as a result of upland game bird hunting,” according to a state report.

In Washington, it is against the law to possess anything other than nontoxic shot when hunting upland game birds, including pheasant and mourning doves. Violators can be fined $1,000 and lose small-game hunting privileges for two years.

California restricted the use of lead ammunition in 2008 because eagles, condors, swans and loons were being poisoned. California will become the first state to prohibit the use of all lead ammunition in all hunting when a ban is fully implemented July 2019.

Giving up lead is not difficult

Some hunters continue to use lead shot due to concerns nontoxic alternatives are more expensive, less accurate or damage shotgun barrels. The Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife addresses these concerns:

Cost: Though some nontoxic alternatives are more expensive than lead shot, steel shot prices have declined and are approaching the cost of lead. As more consumers demand nontoxic ammunition, prices are expected to further decline.

Performance: In numerous shooting tests, “wounding loss” from steel shot has been no different than from lead shot. Several of the new alternatives have ballistics properties similar to lead, helping to reduce concerns about effectiveness.

Barrel damage: Fears about damage from nontoxic shot have not been substantiated for the vast majority of shotguns.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1MKFSNO