Tonight during the CNN GOP Town Hall in Wisconsin moderated by Anderson Cooper Donald Trump was asked what he thought the three top functions for the federal government was.

His answer.

Security (ok, good…) Education (%$*#?!#) Health Care (#*!?%?)

He then shifts and says the top three functions are “security, security, security.” Yes we understand that you think that is the top of the top priorities, but moving back to what he first said… security, education and health care. He doubled down on that later when Anderson Cooper asked him to clarify.

Think about this…. the frontrunner for the Republican nomination for President believes that education and health care should be a priority for the federal government.

This is not the answer you want to hear if you want to see a limited federal government. This is definitely not the kind of answer you want to hear if you want to see a repeal of the Every Student Succeeds Act, let alone any type of reduction in the size of the federal government’s role in education. If you want to see the end of Obamacare how can we trust a candidate to repeal it when he thinks health care is a priority for the federal government.

Seriously was he channeling Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders because I could totally see both of them including education and health care in their top three as well.

Here’s the thing… I’m not so sure that Donald Trump wouldn’t give a different answer if asked this question tomorrow. I just don’t believe he thinks critically about these things. If he did this would be even worse.

Please somebody hand the man a Constitution and ask that he read it.

Here’s the video:

A couple other gems is that attacking another candidate’s wife is ok if he didn’t start it which Cooper rightly says is an argument for a 5-year-old.

Heidi Cruz didn’t start this either, and neither did Ted Cruz for that matter.

And surprise, surprise, Trump renounces his pledge to support the GOP nominee.

My only issue with this is that it is a broken pledge. This is a trust issue. Frankly whether he supports the nominee if it isn’t him or not isn’t the concern. It’s whether he would run as an independent. I’m not so convinced that he would, but then again my track record of predicting anything Trump will do hasn’t been very good so who knows?

Frankly these things pale in comparison when you realize that so many in the Republican Party want to nominate a man who has zero understanding of the Constitution.