LAWRENCEBURG — A must-see event for baseball fans will bring together some of the best 15-year-old All-Star teams from athe United States to Lawrenceburg for the Babe Ruth World Series on Aug. 13-20.

The World Series is big news for any community but this one is made all the more compelling for local fans because of the quality of the host team. You see, the Lawrence County All-Stars have been there and done that.

As 13-year-olds two years ago, many of the same players on this year’s team won the Tennessee State Championship and the Southeast Regional title in North Carolina. That earned them a trip to the World Series in Williston, N. Dakota where they finished runner-up to a strong California team.

Last year, as 14-year-old ’Stars, the Lawrence County boys repeated as state and regional champs and advanced to the World Series in Ocala, Fla. where the team advanced to the single elimination round following preliminary pool play.

Now, with the World Series headed to Lawrenceburg, the 15-year-old version of the Lawrence County teams gets to defend their home turf. It should make for some exciting baseball because the regional champions coming to town are guaranteed to be good and the home team- well, the record speaks for itself.

Anchored by an extremely deep pitching staff, the Lawrence County team also has the hitting, defense and speed to present a formidable opponent for any foe. Of the team’s 15 players, nine are in their third year together and five more are in their second year.

The team is truly an all-county group as the county’s three largest communities and high schools are each represented by four players, two are home schooled and one is from Collinwood which had a team in the local Babe Ruth League this season.

Since this year’s team was assembled following a 10-game league schedule, the team has played 23 games and won all but five (one tie) against primarily 16 and 17-year-old competition. With the practice games and league games combined with the spring high school schedule, many of the players have been in 70 games this year.

The host team is ably directed by former Major League pitcher David Weathers, the manager, and coaches Mike Crane and Josh Purcell, all in their third year with the local All-Stars.

Excitement for the World Series is at a fever pitch locally as scores of volunteers have joined forces with sponsors, local government and the state’s tourism department to put on a first-class tournament.

Play will be conducted on two adjacent fields named for Denver Trapp (new field) and Tom Crews (existing field, renovated) near Lawrence County High School.

World Series festivities will begin the evening of Aug. 12 at LCHS with a Banquet of Champions for players, coaches, officials and host families. Following the banquet, all-time major league legend Johnny Bench will speak in the school’s gymnasium.

World Series play will be conducted with the 10 teams (host team, East TN champs Giles County and eight regional champs) divided into two pools.

Each team is guaranteed four games, one each against the other teams in the pool. The top two teams in each pool advance to the semi-finals for a single elimination “Final Four.”

It’s going to be fun and exciting so don’t miss it! Either call 762-9767 or 762-1975 or visit any of the numerous ticket outlets for season or individual game tickets or for tickets to the Johnny Bench presentation.