Photo

If you believe that amendments to the Constitution should be used to protect and defend democracy – as opposed to furthering narrow partisan interests – it is hard to lament the withdrawal of Senator Marco Rubio from the presidential race.

According to a recent tally by GovTrack.us, a website that tracks legislation, Mr. Rubio has sponsored or supported constitutional amendments on five issues — to stop Obamacare, impose congressional term limits, balance the federal budget, outlaw flag burning and establish the “fundamental right” of parents to be free from government infringement in child raising.

But Mr. Rubio’s departure doesn’t mean the Constitution is safe. Senator Ted Cruz is the sponsor of an amendment “to define marriage as limited to the union of one man and one woman.” And like Mr. Rubio, he is the co-sponsor of amendments to limit congressional terms and balance the budget.

Donald Trump’s aim to end citizenship by birth, presumably for children of immigrants living in the country illegally, would require a constitutional amendment. His calls to “open up the libel laws” to make it easier for public figures (like himself) to sue litigants and journalists would also require a constitutional amendment or a highly unlikely reversal of existing law by the Supreme Court, as explained in this recent article by Bill Blum at Truthdig.

Gov. John Kasich is a long-time supporter of a balanced budget amendment, which sounds nice but is pure foolishness. Forcing the government to balance its budget is like telling a family it must pay off its mortgage and car loans, now, no matter its income or creditworthiness. It is no way to run a government.

On the Democratic side, Hillary Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders both support constitutional amendments to overturn Citizens United, the Supreme Court decision from 2010 that allowed for unlimited campaign donations by corporations and unions. Both of them also supported the Senate attempt in 2007 to revive the Equal Rights Amendment for women, which passed the House and Senate in 1972 but fell three states short of the 38 state legislatures needed for ratification.

There is a basic difference between the constitutional aims of Republicans and those of Democrats. Republicans generally want amendments that curb or eliminate legal rights — to health care, marriage or citizenship, for example. Democrats generally want to protect or expand rights — to fair elections or equal protection under the law, for example.

Amending the Constitution is a real long shot. So when candidates talk about how they would amend the Constitution, they are giving their idealized view of the world. Which world would you rather live in?