Edward-Isaac Dovere has a piece up at Politico examining the Democrats' "war on women" messaging, ramping up for the 2014 midterms, and the Republican response. As Dovere reports, Democrats are thinking beyond reproductive rights to recast income inequality, workplace protections, and possibly even immigration as "women's issues." Dovere casts that decision as a purely political one, but one reason the strategy works is because the evidence supports it: Women are disproportionately affected by i ncome inequality and a lack of workplace protections , and feminist organizing might is throwing itself behind the issue of immigration reform .

Dovere writes about this as if highlighting the way that your opponents differ with voters on major issues in hopes that the voters will pick you instead is somehow especially dirty or unusual, when it's actually just a perfect marriage of politics and policy that the Democrats would be crazy not to pursue. And the Republicans are apparently ready this time, prepared to fight back on this "false war on women."

Kukowski's party can try to wage its own counterwar, but it's gonna be tough: Female voters tend to be more supportive generally of progressive values on economics, for instance, which is one reason Democrats have decided to craft their pitch to women so that it addresses these economic issues. I have a better suggestion for Republicans: If you want the war-on-women narrative to go away, stop waging it. The reason that "war on women" is such a simple, evocative phrase is that you don't really have to explain what it means to the public. Indeed, the phrase was initially the "Republican war on women," but the "Republican" part fell off because it was so clearly implied in the other three words. Just as the phrase "just do it" immediately calls to mind an athlete ready to spring in a pair of prominently featured Nikes, the phrase "war on women" immediately calls to voter minds a bunch of middle-aged men in suits trying to figure out how to take away control of the nation's vaginas from the women who are currently sitting on them. The only way to erase that image is to stop waging the war, guys.