LOS ANGELES (MarketWatch) — Obamacare, cash reserves, dwindling drug pipelines and easy credit are all expected to contribute to heavy merger activity in the health-care industry in 2015, according to a new survey released Tuesday.

The poll of 735 merger professionals, conducted by consultant KPMG, puts health care well ahead of all other industries, as 84% of those responding expect heavy merger activity in the sector. The next most-active industry, technology/media/telecom category, saw 62% forecasting corporate marriages in the next year.

Next up was energy/oil and gas sector at 36%, then consumer markets at 34%, followed by manufacturing at 24%.

“We see a convergence of factors facing providers, health plans, and drug and device makers that are forcing them to make tough decisions about strategy and those decisions sometimes entail selling the business,” Bill Baker, an advisory partner in KPMG’s health-care practice, said in a prepared statement.

Overall, the technology sector ranked higher than several components of the health-care sector. The survey said 47% of respondents saw technology as the most active segment, while 33% saw the pharmaceutical/biotechnology sector as the most active.

Oil and gas came in third, while health-care providers were fourth, with 27% of those surveyed predicting mergers in that sector.

KPMG said the biggest driver for health-care sector M&A in 2015 will likely be the Affordable Care Act, but a jump in patent expirations for many drug companies was also seen as a potential driver of merger activity for that part of the industry.

Overall, the report says momentum for mergers is building, with 82% of those surveyed saying they planned at least one purchase next year. It said 19% plan at least two acquisitions.

“M&A in the U.S. has finally reached pre-recession levels,” the report said. There were 5,843 deals worth nearly $1 trillion announced during the first nine months of 2014, representing a 7% increase in volume and a 33% jump in value.

The survey includes merger experts from corporations, private equity firms and investment banks. It said 79% of those polled had already completed a deal in 2014, compared with 66% in 2013.

More from MarketWatch