The Michigan Chamber of Commerce has had a front-row seat to see two trends related to the passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA): insurance agents’ commissions are declining, and “everything got about a hundred times more complicated,” said Senior Director of Insurance Services Jason Russell.

The result is that insurance agents are putting in more work for less pay, Russell said, and having trouble meeting the needs of the small companies they serve.

To that end, the Michigan Chamber of Commerce announced it would launch a statewide, private health insurance marketplace on Sept. 1. The idea is to provide a simple tool where employers, insurance agents shopping for employers or individuals can access information and sign up for health care plans.

Exchanges are a hot topic ushered in by federal health care changes in the ACA, but this isn’t a government program. It’s a privately-run exchange, and differs from the federal exchange in that it also presents related insurance products, like vision and dental insurance.

“Starting September 1st, individuals and employers across Michigan, who can work with their licensed insurance agent of choice, will have a single source, multi-carrier, insurance solution for comparing and accessing available medical, dental, vision and supplemental insurance plans, as well as a wide range of other non-insurance related products,” said Barry Robinson, Vice President of Chamber Services & Membership Development. “Also available in the marketplace are calculators to help determine federal subsidy eligibility and potential tax consequences for failing to enroll in qualified health plans.”

To get federal subsidies on health insurance, people will still have to go through the federal exchange system, Russell said. But the site helps people determine if they need to go that route. Before now, that wasn’t an option.

“Individuals and small business owners in the state of Michigan if they wanted to buy insurance through an insurance exchange were going to have to go to the federal exchange to get it done,” Russell said.

The federal exchange website healthcare.gov was initially plagued by technical problems. Even without them, it can be complicated. But Russell said when the site launches it will be more user friendly.

“I think everybody who visits our site and starts to use it is going to realize that we’ve actually made it simple,” Russell said.

The chamber has been developing the product for about a year.

Emily Lawler is a Capital/Business reporter at MLive. Reach her at elawler@mlive.com, on Facebook or Twitter: @emilyjanelawler.