Call it “the look” of the 2015 USA Pro Challenge. It was the pivotal moment of the race, a glance that crowned the winner.

Rohan Dennis was standing up on his pedals Thursday as he pushed through the thick crowd on the final couple hundred meters of Breckenridge’s steep Moonstone Road. After more than 125 miles of high-altitude racing, he was pulling his teammate, yellow-jerseyed Brent Bookwalter. It was time to make a move.

Dennis peeked over his shoulder, prepping Bookwalter for the pending lactic crush. Bookwalter wasn’t there, and Dennis decided — three days before the finish — he would win the Pro Challenge.

“Basically, it was just a spur of the moment. I had the legs and went over the top as hard as I possibly could. I was working for Brent until he actually dropped the wheel up that climb,” said Dennis, who Sunday became the first non-American to win the Pro Challenge in downtown Denver. “That was sort of the moment where you could say it changed.”

Dennis didn’t show up in Colorado aiming for a win. He was looking down the road at next year’s biggest races. He has been a professional for only five years. Coming to Colorado, his highest-profile win was the first-stage time trial of this year’s Tour de France. The Pro Challenge was his high-altitude training ground.

PHOTOS: USA Pro Challenge 2015, Stage 7

But as the seven-stage race unfolded, Colorado became his training for podiums.

His punishing ascents — including that crusher up Moonstone Road — and an extraordinary time-trial performance in Breckenridge cemented the biggest win of his career. After a climactic sprint down Broadway on Sunday, which featured Dennis prominently fueling teammate Taylor Phinney’s dash for second place in the final stage, he claimed the Pro Challenge title.

Dennis arrived in Park City, Utah, only two weeks ago. He wasn’t adjusted to the altitude like his BMC teammates, who had just finished a second-place showing at the Tour of Utah.

The team went for a training pedal up the winding Guardsman Pass above Park City. There was no pressure. No talk about Colorado. No pushing Dennis into racing for the win the next week. Eyes were on long-term goals, said BMC Racing Team sport director Jackson Stewart.

The initial plan for Colorado was for Dennis to support Bookwalter’s bid for the overall win.

“But we saw very clearly that Rohan was in incredible form and everyone on the team knew he could win this race, but he didn’t want to focus on that. His focus was down the road,” Stewart said. “His efforts going up Guardsman that day, it was just a whole other level.”

Even if Dennis wasn’t into the win in Colorado, Bookwalter was more than ready to take charge, Stewart said.

But up on Moonstone Road above Breckenridge, Dennis decided he wanted the win. The next day, he cemented his position as the race leader with a dominating time trial victory. By Stage 6, it was his race to lose.

Dennis set blistering paces that not only thwarted many potential attacks on the steepest sections of the race but drove his team to near collapse. There were times when even his workhorse teammates — such as Phinney, Damian Caruso, Killian Frankiny and Michael Schar — were struggling to keep up with the rider who wasn’t supposedly racing for victory.

“He’s just one of those guys with natural talent,” Stewart said. “Earlier in the race, the guys had already said, ‘Hey, look, Rohan, we know you don’t want to go for the win, but could you not kill us at the same time?’ He’s just that good.”

Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374, jblevins@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jasonblevins