Clear skies welcomed airmen, automobile collectors and onlookers

Cole Mock of Cañon City supports his 3-year-old nephew, Russell Chaney, in the cockpit of a Diamond Katana trainer flown into the Fremont County Airport Saturday by 16-year-old Rachael McIntoch with her father/trainer Paul McIntosh (right). ( DC Spencer / Daily Record )

First-time pilot Rachael McIntosh, 16, in the cockpit of a Diamond Katana trainer plane with her father/trainer Paul McIntosh from Doss Aviation in Pueblo. (DC Spencer / Daily Record)

Transportation classics and modern marvels took the field Saturday at the Fremont County Airport's second annual Air Show, from military training craft and business-line planes to vintage automobiles and remote-control replicas. The mix of modes on the tarmac offered guests a unique walk through history.

"I've never seen an air display where the cars are mixed in with the planes," said Ryan Pritchett of Grand Junction. "But this is what the people came for."

Pritchett said he was impressed by the turnout since there were three other air shows in the state that day.

"To get this much activity, that's pretty good," he said.

Ben Sollenbarger and his 11-year-old son, Luke, flew in from the Rocky Ford area in a bright yellow 1942 WWII Boeing Stearman trainer.

"All cadets in WWII learned to fly in these," said Sollenbarger, who has owned the plane for three years and operates a crop dusting business near La Junta.

Orlo and Kim Ellison of Broomfield landed their shiny red and silver 1955 Cessna 180 for the show. It was their first trip to the Fremont County Airport, which took about 40 minutes from home, Orlo said.

Adults strolled among the aircraft and automobiles, many with their families, but nearly all the children ended up in the Civil Air Patrol building for hands-on experiences overseen by Lt. Sherrie Borders of Cañon City and other CAP members.

Trindon Botz, 12, said he plans on joining CAP.

"I've always had a love for this kind of stuff," he said as he maneuvered the computer-generated flight simulator. "It looks pretty cool to fly a plane when I get older."

CAP provided materials for children to build balsa-wood planes and space shuttle foam fliers, operate a robotic arm and view an astronomy video.

On the tarmac, Russell Chaney, 3, was speechless after sitting in the cockpit of a Doss Aviation trainer. Flown in by first-time pilot Rachael McIntosh, 16, and her father/trainer Paul McIntosh, Col., Ret. from Pueblo.

Potential pilot Bryce Ledoux, 3, of Cañon City brings "Pedal Pete" in for a safe landing Saturday in a Fremont County Airport hangar during the Air Show. (DC Spencer / Daily Record)

"We come up here almost every day," Paul McIntosh said. "If you want to be an Air Force aviator or drone pilot, you have to come to Pueblo" for the first phase of training. Fifty Doss Aviation planes make roughly 25,000 training flights annually, and the Fremont County Airport is a familiar stop, he said.

Just off the tarmac, Ed Vincent of Rockvale displayed several of his 40 radio-controlled planes. Vincent is the president of the Fremont County Radio Control Club, which meets the first Friday of each month at the airport. His prize craft displayed Saturday was a British WWII Spitfire replica. Coming in at roughly $600 to build and outfit, the radio control model is a bit more affordable than its $1 million counterpart.

Food vendors, a silent auction, sky diving and helicopter rides also were available during the air show. Eight classic cars and 14 local aircraft, including several colorful biplanes were displayed for up-close inspection and photo opportunities. Nine larger craft and warbirds were also on hand, such as a 1961 French Airfouga jet trainer, a Colorado Firefighting Air Corp single engine tanker and two Yak-52 Soviet trainers out of Syracuse, Kan.