Could states pull the safety net away from the most vulnerable in order to help those who can help themselves?

According to a new report by the Foundation for Government Accountability, the expansion of Medicaid under Obamacare creates “perverse incentives” to do just that for the 26 states, including Nevada, that have expanded the program.

Able-bodied, working-age adults; almost all of whom (82 percent) have no children to support, nearly half of whom (45 percent) do not work, many of whom (35 percent) with a record of run-ins with the criminal justice system. ObamaCare has picked this population as the winner of its Medicaid expansion. The losers? Low-income children, poor moms, the elderly, the blind, the disabled. The very people Medicaid was created to protect.

The Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”) created incentives for states to expand their Medicaid programs to cover those whose incomes are up to 138% of the poverty level by providing for the federal government to cover all of the benefit costs states incur until 2017 and approximately 90% of those costs beyond that time. The feds pay for between 50% and 83% of the benefit costs for current Medicaid enrollees, according to Johnathan Ingram, Director of Research at FGA and author of the report.

Past Medicaid expansions in states, according to the report, have resulted in enrollments and costs far exceeding estimates, resulting in reductions in Medicaid services, including elimination of life-saving treatments, cuts and delays in reimbursements to doctors and hospitals and increased costs to taxpayers and Medicaid enrollees.

In Arizona, for instance, the report notes that a similar expansion to the Obamacare expansion resulted in costs to taxpayers four times original estimates. Nevada’s neighbor to the south responded by cutting Medicaid coverage of life-saving transplants (heart, liver, lung, pancreas and bone marrow).

As a result, truly vulnerable Medicaid patients in desperate need of life-saving organ transplants died so able-bodied adults with no disabilities keeping them from employment could keep receiving free, taxpayer-funded Medicaid coverage.

The report notes the “immoral math” associated with Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion in which it makes financial sense for states to cut benefits to children and the disabled rather than to able-bodied adults.

Because of the federal matches, states must cut more than $1 in benefits to achieve $1 of savings to their budgets. For instance, if the feds match 50%, for a state to realize $1 of savings in its own budget it would have to cut $2 ($1 in state spending and $1 in federal matching).

According to the FGA report, the average state would have to cut $2.32 in current Medicaid spending to achieve $1 in savings in its own budget. For Nevada that number is $2.81.

The higher the level of federal matching the greater the cuts required to produce the same budget savings. In the case of the Medicaid expansion under Obamacare, even after the federal matching falls to 90% states would have to cut $10 in Medicaid benefits to realize $1 in savings to their budgets.

It is most cost-effective for states in this scenario to cut benefits to the portions of the program with the lowest federal matching. States achieve the most bang for the buck by cutting funding to current Medicaid enrollees, which include children, the disabled and the elderly, while maintaining benefits for the able-bodied, childless adults who are most likely to benefit from the expanded program.

From early indications Nevada may face this situation due to its elected officials’ decision to expand Medicaid.

Originally, the state estimated the Medicaid expansion would add an additional 78,000 enrollees by June 30, 2015. However, documents submitted to the June 2014 meeting of the Economic Forum, the committee tasked with calculating official revenue projections for lawmakers to use in the budgeting process, predict nearly 134,000 newly-eligible Nevadans will enroll in Medicaid by the end of June 2015.

The Economic Forum also revealed that the Medicaid expansion would cost taxpayers between $200 and $300 million per year when the federal government’s matching share is reduced to 90%. The Nevada Department of Health and Human Services predicted the state would incur more than $440,000 in costs from the Medicaid expansion through the end of June 2015, even though the federal government would cover 100% of the benefit costs incurred by newly-eligible enrollees.

With the number of enrollees nearly doubling original estimates and the state being forced to hire 400 new employees to handle the crush of enrollments, the real figure is certain to be higher. As these additional costs are dumped onto taxpayers in the next several years, they are likely to have negative effects on other areas of the budget unless Medicaid expenditures are cut. Those cuts, as the FGA report points out, would likely fall upon those for whom the program was originally intended rather than the newly-eligible, who are generally able-bodied, childless adults.

Michael Chamberlain Michael Chamberlain is the Editor of Watchdog Wire - Nevada. Please contact him at Nevada@watchdogwire.com for story ideas or to get involved in citizen journalism in Nevada. Follow Michael on Twitter: @michaelpchamber More Posts - Twitter - Facebook - LinkedIn - Google Plus

RELATED ARTICLES

COMMENTS