Topics: Arnold Schwarzenegger, celebrities, david hasselhoff, Editor's Picks, elizabeth hurley, Hollywood, Kim Kardashian, Lindsay Lohan, morgran freeman, raven-symone, Russell Crowe, sienna miller, Entertainment News

It seems like everyone’s PR team is asleep at the wheel this year. 2015 has been a very ugly year for publicists to the rich, famous and Caucasian, as white celebrities just can’t stop saying embarrassingly stupid things.

After Michael Caine, Helen Mirren and Charlotte Rampling all stoked controversy by dismissing the Academy Awards’ ongoing race controversy, Oscar winner Meryl Streep decided to die on the same hill. During a press conference for this year’s Berlin Film Festival, where she serves on a panel of judges, Streep was asked about the fact that all of the panelists are white. Would she be able to understand a movie from, say, the Middle East or North Africa?

“There is a core of humanity that travels right through every culture, and after all, we’re all from Africa originally,” she said. “We’re all Africans, we’re all Berliners.” Clearly she was having what Matt Damon was having.

Following Streep’s unfortunate comments, Eddie Redmayne decided join the foot-in-mouth party. On the BAFTAs red carpet, Redmayne was asked about playing Lili Elbe, the transgender painter whose story inspired “The Danish Girl.” The 34-year-old responded, “It’s extraordinary how trans issues have come into the mainstream media since we made ‘Danish Girl,’” appearing to take credit for the work being done by Janet Mock and Laverne Cox, as well as trans activists all over the world. (He later walked back the remarks.)

These myriad controversies were yet another reminder that it’s dangerous to put too much stock in what celebrities have to say because, well, Katharine Hepburn didn’t calling acting “the perfect idiot’s profession” for nothing. If you need further proof, here’s a roundup of the most tone-deaf, ridiculous and just plain dumb comments from famous actors.

1. Lindsay Lohan wants to turn your Hurricane Sandy frown upside down

In 2012, New Yorkers braced for the onslaught of Hurricane Sandy, but “I Know Who Killed Me” actress Lindsay Lohan refused to let a little thing like the bitterly destructive force of Mother Nature’s wrath get her down. “WHY is everyone in SUCH a panic about hurricane (i’m calling it Sally)..? Stop projecting negativity! Think positive and pray for peace,” the 29-year-old actress tweeted to her followers.

Sandy was the second-most destructive hurricane in history, causing an estimated $32 million billion in damage to the East Coast; 53 people were killed.

2. Russell Crowe thinks that women over 40 might get work if they weren’t so sad and desperate

Dear women over 40: Russell Crowe has heard your complaints about ageism in Hollywood, and he thinks they’re bullshit. In an interview with the Australian magazine Women’s Weekly, the Oscar-winner advised actresses to act their age. “The best thing about the industry I’m in—movies—is that there are roles for people in all different stages of life,” Crowe said. “I think you’ll find that the woman who is saying that [the roles have dried up] is the woman who at 40, 45, 48, still wants to play the ingénue, and can’t understand why she’s not being cast as the 21-year-old.”

The numbers, of course, prove Crowe wrong. The reason women’s roles dry up as they age is because there are fewer parts written for them. While men over 40 represent 53 percent of male speaking parts in films, women over 40 account for just 30 percent.

3. Arnold comes out against same-sex marriage—we think?

SCOTUS finally ruled in favor of marriage equality last year after a decade of heated debate on granting same-sex couples the right to marry. Back in 2003, former California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger announced his support for same-sex unions on Sean Hannity’s radio show—so long as the couple enjoying them is heterosexual. “I think that gay marriage is something that should be between a man and a woman,” Schwarzenegger said.

Many have claimed the Terminator misspoke, but he could have also been a big fan of Liza Minnelli and David Gest.

4. Elizabeth Hurley probably thinks you’re fat

Elizabeth Hurley is notorious for throwing shade at any woman who isn’t rail-thin. In 2005, the actress/model, currently appearing in “The Royals,” told the London Mirror that she was tired of women wearing clothing that was “too small or too tight, unless you’re slim and toned.” Hurley said, “I’m sick of seeing flab bulging out all over.” Her most notorious remark, however, was directed at famed beauty Marilyn Monroe. “I’ve always thought Marilyn Monroe looked fabulous, but I’d kill myself if I was that fat,” she once told Allure, remarking on the fact that the famed beauty was a size 16.

In truth, vintage sizes are very different than modern clothing, and today, Monroe would be a 4 or a 6. The average American woman, however, is a 14—meaning that Elizabeth Hurley would kill herself if she looked like the majority of women in the U.S.

5. Morgan Freeman and Stacey Dash are so post-racial

Proof that white people don’t have a total monopoly on saying really stupid things: Morgan Freeman called for an end to Black History Month back in 2005. His reasoning starts off sound: “You’re going to relegate my history to a month?” he asked “60 Minutes.” “I don’t want a black history month. Black history is American history.” But it quickly goes downhill from there.