(AP Photo/Charles Dharapak)

If your family is like many others (or, at least, the ones on TV), you’ll all go around the table on Thanksgiving and say what you’re thankful for. It’s a lovely tradition, so long as you give the right answer.

(Hint: Spouses and kids are generally safe picks. If you go with Obamacare or the right to bear arms, things could go from festive to testy in a hurry.)

What if the political press — like, the whole thing embodied in a single, turkey-munching person — were a guest at your dinner table? What would the media say it is thankful for?

Here’s a guess at the top five:

1. Donald Trump

Was there any doubt about who or what would be in this spot?

Some in the media love Trump. Some don’t. But almost everyone likes covering the bombastic Republican presidential front-runner. He’s a ratings machine — just ask him.

Twenty-four million people tuned in to see him on a debate stage for the first time in September, five months before the first primary votes are cast. That’s a huge number. It’s more people than watched any game of the World Series this year, and it smashed the previous record for a cable audience.

Whether voters love or loathe The Donald, they are extremely interested in what he has to say. And that means they will read, watch or listen to the media’s many, many reports on his movements, even at this relatively early stage in the campaign.

2. Bernie Sanders

Sanders has faded in national polls in recent weeks, but he has made the Democratic primary more compelling than expected. With Vice President Biden staying out of the race, the primary had the potential to become a dull march toward the inevitable coronation of Hillary Rodham Clinton.

Instead, the feisty, hand-flapping senator from Vermont has made Clinton work. He has drawn huge crowds to his rallies — more than 10,000 in some cases. At one point in September, Sanders held a sizable lead in New Hampshire. He still has an edge there and is within striking distance in Iowa, according to a recent CBS News/YouGov survey.

No one likes covering a one-horse race, and Sanders has provided enough competition to keep things interesting.

3. Twitter

It’s possible for members of the press to get in trouble in 140 characters or fewer (yes, fewer, not less). CNN reporter Elise Labbott stepped in it last week with her commentary on a House vote to beef up screening of Syrian refugees and was suspended.

House passes bill that could limit Syrian refugees. Statue of Liberty bows head in anguish @CNNPolitics https://t.co/5RvZwVftgD — Elise Labott (@eliselabottcnn) November 19, 2015

Everyone, It was wrong of me to editorialize. My tweet was inappropriate and disrespectful. I sincerely apologize. — Elise Labott (@eliselabottcnn) November 20, 2015

But think of all the great material Twitter delivers to the media. Trump’s account, alone, is a gold mine that never runs out, but there’s more. Twitter has also brought us such gems as …

… John McCain’s discussion of tax policy with a “Jersey Shore” star …

@Sn00ki u r right, I would never tax your tanning bed! Pres Obama's tax/spend policy is quite The Situation. but I do rec wearing sunscreen! — John McCain (@SenJohnMcCain) June 9, 2010

... Scott Brown’s “Bqhatevwr” …

… and Anthoney Weiner’s you-know-what.

4. Debates

Debate day for a political reporter is like game day for a sports reporter. It’s full of action, conflict, and there are usually winners and losers.

This year, the debates have been particularly intriguing. Well, mostly the third Republican one — the one run by CNBC in Boulder that prompted the GOP to suspend its partnership with NBC News on a future debate and had the candidates calling for handpicked conservative moderators, like Rush Limbaugh, Sean Hannity and Mark Levin.

That one event supplied two weeks’ worth of material for the press and might have yielded more, except that there was, you know, another debate to cover.

5. Polls

There’s sooo much you can do with a single poll and, even though surveys taken a year before the general election really don’t mean much, they do tell us who’s hot right now.

Knowing who’s hot right now is helpful for many reasons. It helps dictate who gets covered — and how much — and helps determine who gets to be on debate stages. But it also offers valuable insight into the mood of the electorate.

Many journalists remain skeptical that Trump or fellow outsider Ben Carson will ultimately win the Republican nomination, for instance, but their consistent place atop the polls suggests that many conservative voters are fed up with the GOP’s more conventional leading figures and want bolder leadership.

Knowing the public’s priorities helps journalists do their jobs better. And that’s something to be thankful for.