East Henderson's bats exploded in the seventh inning on Tuesday afternoon, and the Eagles won their season opener against county-rival Hendersonville 11-3.

The Eagles scored eight runs in the top of the seventh after a tight ballgame through six innings. East coach Sam Perry felt like toughness was the difference for his squad on Tuesday.

“We were simply the toughest team today,” the coach said. “When we were in trouble, we never let up.”

Their bats may have exploded in the seventh inning, but it was East's pitchers that got them to the seventh inning with the chance of victory, he said.

“Our pitchers pitched with a purpose and a different focus,” he said.

One of those pitchers was Jordan Hrabar. The junior earned the victory after taking over in the fourth inning.

“I really felt like we came together,” the junior pitcher said. “I felt like we were the better team here, but we could've played better.”

Hrabar teamed with Taylor Noble to lead the Eagles to victory on the mound.

In the seventh inning, Malik Alston walked and Jarett Parille followed that up with a single. Logan Jackson put the ball in play and an errant throw brought Alston home and sent Parille to third.

After that came a flurry of doubles. Beau Shealy, Hrabar and Cole Revis all doubled. When the dust settled, eight runs scored and the Eagles (1-0) had a commanding 11-3 lead.

“It started snowballing and kept rolling,” Hendersonville coach Mark Cook said.

The issue on Tuesday for Hendersonville was one that Cook saw coming. The Bearcats (0-1) graduated eight of their nine starters off of last season's team. Michael Schmidt is the lone returning starter for Hendersonville. On Tuesday, the senior played shortstop, catcher and third base at different times.

It's just going to take time for the team to gel, Cook said.

“We just got to go to work and keep rolling,” the coach said.

Hendersonville's three runs were scored by Sawyer Hunt in the first inning, Blake Ramey in the third inning and Tykel Landrum in the fourth.

Hendersonville will host North Henderson on Friday at 4 p.m. East Henderson will host Asheville on Friday at 4:30 p.m.