Con­gress re­turns to Wash­ing­ton on Monday with the threat of a gov­ern­ment shut­down loom­ing at the end of the week and the cam­paign to re­place John Boehner as House speak­er—and pos­sibly fill out the un­der­card—kick­ing in­to high gear.

Author Sarah Mimms is a staff correspondent for National Journal Daily, covering Congress. Previously at National Journal, she served as senior analyst for the Hotline, where she covered federal and gubernatorial campaigns in the South. Full Bio

The Sen­ate will vote Monday even­ing to ad­vance le­gis­la­tion that will fund the gov­ern­ment through Dec. 11, kick­ing the can on fed­er­al spend­ing in­to the winter and a Boehner-free Con­gress. The up­per cham­ber is ex­pec­ted to pass the le­gis­la­tion, which main­tains fund­ing for Planned Par­ent­hood over con­ser­vat­ive ob­jec­tions, as early as Tues­day, giv­ing the House just over 24 hours to send the fund­ing bill to Pres­id­ent Obama’s desk.

Boehner has said that he’ll do just that, in one of his fi­nal acts as speak­er, passing the clean fund­ing bill with the help of Demo­crats and Re­pub­lic­ans still loy­al to their de­part­ing lead­er. Con­ser­vat­ives had vowed to hold a vote to take away Boehner’s gavel if he forced a vote on a clean bill, but with that point now moot, con­ser­vat­ives are shift­ing their fo­cus to the up­com­ing lead­er­ship elec­tions and their next op­por­tun­ity to de­fund Planned Par­ent­hood—an­oth­er spend­ing bill in Decem­ber. A few dozen con­ser­vat­ive mem­bers are still ex­pec­ted to op­pose the CR, but even mem­bers of the House Free­dom Caucus ad­mit there will not be enough votes to take down the bill and force a shut­down. “It’s not go­ing to hap­pen,” Rep. Matt Sal­mon said Fri­day.

The real ac­tion in the House will come in the form of phone calls and whip lists clutched to the chests of the next would-be speak­er and oth­er mem­bers look­ing for a seat at the new lead­er­ship table. Though the elec­tion for speak­er won’t oc­cur un­til late Oc­to­ber, sev­er­al mem­bers are already tak­ing a look at the race, and Ma­jor­ity Lead­er Kev­in Mc­Carthy, the clear front-run­ner for the job, could face com­pet­i­tion. A host of oth­er mem­bers are look­ing to move up if Mc­Carthy wins.

Here’s what else is on tap this week:

Health Care

The Sen­ate on Monday will vote on a con­tinu­ing res­ol­u­tion that in­cludes Planned Par­ent­hood fund­ing. A spend­ing bill must make it through both cham­bers by mid­night on Wed­nes­day to keep the gov­ern­ment open.

The House will con­sider a bill that amends the small-group-mar­ket rules of the Af­ford­able Care Act. The le­gis­la­tion cur­rently has 187 Re­pub­lic­an and 45 Demo­crat­ic co­spon­sors.

The House Over­sight and Gov­ern­ment Re­form Com­mit­tee will hold a hear­ing on Tues­day in­vest­ig­at­ing Planned Par­ent­hood. Cecile Richards, the pres­id­ent of the or­gan­iz­a­tion, will testi­fy.

On Thursday, the Sen­ate Health, Edu­ca­tion, Labor, and Pen­sions Com­mit­tee will hold a hear­ing on health in­form­a­tion tech­no­logy. The Sen­ate Fin­ance Com­mit­tee will hold a hear­ing, also on Thursday, on im­prop­er pay­ments in fed­er­al health pro­grams.

Energy and Environment

The House En­ergy and Com­merce Com­mit­tee will take an­oth­er crack Wed­nes­day at passing a bi­par­tis­an en­ergy bill, which would touch on is­sues like elec­tri­city re­li­ab­il­ity, nat­ur­al-gas in­fra­struc­ture, and cy­ber­se­cur­ity. The bill was sup­posed to get a vote at a markup last week, but was pulled as both parties con­tin­ued to dis­agree about how to ad­dress is­sues such as cli­mate change and re­new­able en­ergy.

The Sen­ate En­vir­on­ment and Pub­lic Works Com­mit­tee on Tues­day will hear from En­vir­on­ment­al Pro­tec­tion Agency air chief Janet Mc­Cabe at a hear­ing on the eco­nom­ic im­pact of the up­com­ing rule on ground-level ozone and car­bon-pol­lu­tion stand­ards from power plants.

The House Sci­ence, Space, and Tech­no­logy Com­mit­tee will probe for an­swers on the search for life on oth­er plan­ets with a hear­ing on Tues­day that will con­vene one of NASA’s chief sci­ent­ists as well as ex­perts in as­tro­nomy, as­tro­phys­ics, and space.

Technology

The House En­ergy and Com­merce Com­mit­tee’s sub­com­mit­tee on trade will hold a hear­ing Tues­day morn­ing to ex­am­ine the policy im­plic­a­tions of the so-called “shar­ing eco­nomy” ser­vices like Uber and Airb­nb. Re­pub­lic­ans tend to praise these “dis­rupt­ive” com­pan­ies for chal­len­ging old busi­ness mod­els, while some Demo­crats worry the com­pan­ies may be flout­ing work­place and con­sumer pro­tec­tions.

White House

For the second week in a row, for­eign policy will dom­in­ate Pres­id­ent Obama’s sched­ule. After high-pro­file host­ing of for­eign lead­ers at the White House, he hits the road, go­ing to New York. There, on Monday, he will ad­dress the open­ing of the U.N. Gen­er­al As­sembly. Most of the fo­cus, though, will be on what hap­pens later Monday—his first one-on-one meet­ing with Rus­si­an Pres­id­ent Vladi­mir Putin in 15 months. The con­tinu­ing crisis in Ukraine and Rus­si­an policy in Syr­ia are on the agenda. Obama also will meet with In­di­an Prime Min­is­ter Nar­en­dra Modi and at­tend a U.N. sum­mit on peace­keep­ing, as well as a sum­mit Tues­day on in­ter­na­tion­al ef­forts to com­bat ter­ror­ism.