A New York congresswoman is slated to be honored Thursday with a first-of-its-kind award from a leading feminist group.

Rep. Louise M. Slaughter, New York Democrat, is scheduled to receive the first Lifetime Achievement Award from the Feminist Majority in partnership with the Feminist Majority Foundation.

Eleanor Smeal, president of the Feminist Majority Foundation, and Rep. Rosa DeLauro, Connecticut Democrat, will present the honor.

Ms. Slaughter, elected in 1986, is the first woman — and first female chair — to serve on the House Committee on Rules.

In addition to shepherding the Affordable Care Act, Ms. Slaughter has been instrumental in passing the Lily Ledbetter Fair Pay Act and Violence Against Women Act, and establishing the Office of Research on Women’s Health of the National Institutes of Health.

Eleanor Smeal, president of the Feminist Majority Foundation, which publishes Ms. magazine, ... more >

She is co-chair of the Bipartisan Congressional Pro-Choice Caucus, making her a prominent voice in abortion-related debates, and a former leader of congressional caucuses for the arts and for women’s rights.

Ms. Slaughter, the only microbiologist in Congress, also worked with the late New York Sen. Edward Kennedy on the Genetic Information and Non-Discrimination Act, a law Mr. Kennedy called “the first major new civil rights bill” of the 21st century.

Additional women to be honored at the Women Money Power Summit on Thursday include Democratic Reps. Donna Edwards of Maryland and Barbara Lee of California, and Amy Hagstrom Miller, founder and president of Whole Woman’s Health.

The event, held at the National Press Club in the District, is supported by groups including the National Organization for Women, Planned Parenthood Action Fund, American Association of University Women, National Education Association, National Congress of Black Women, National Latina Institute for Reproductive Health and the National LGBTQ Task Force.

Ms. Smeal is one of the co-founders of the Feminist Majority Foundation, which was started in 1987 to further women’s equality.

Among the foundation’s first projects were those to defend abortion clinics from opponents and promote RU-486, the abortion pill. In addition, in late 2001, the foundation took ownership of Ms., the ground-breaking women’s magazine that began publishing regularly under other owners in 1972.