Gov. Mike Pence says the Obama administration has chosen a biased source to evaluate the state’s alternative Medicaid program.

Buy Photo Indiana Gov. Mike Pence said he won't lobby for extra Medicaid funding from Congress, but will take it if it's offered. (Photo: Charlie Nye, IndyStar)Buy Photo

WASHINGTON — Gov. Mike Pence says the Obama administration has chosen a biased source to evaluate the state’s alternative Medicaid program.

In a letter sent Thursday to Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell, Pence asks that the federal review be dropped as the state has contracted with an independent evaluator.

“I do not believe (the Healthy Indiana Plan) will be objectively assessed by the chosen contractors,” Pence wrote. “I ask that you intervene in this matter immediately to terminate the second federal evaluation.”

Indiana is one of a handful of states that received permission to not follow some federal rules when expanding Medicaid coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

Indiana’s permission runs through Jan. 31, 2018.

One of the conditions of such waivers is that the demonstration program be evaluated to see whether it’s meeting the expected result. Indiana must submit an interim evaluation of the program by mid-2016.

For example, Indiana is testing whether requiring recipients to pay reduced monthly contributions if they use less health care will discourage unnecessary care.

Such aspect is based on high-deductible insurance plans with health savings accounts that are becoming increasingly common in private insurance coverage.

But Pence argues that the Urban Institute, one of the evaluators chosen by the federal government to assess Indiana’s plan, has previously been skeptical of using the health savings account model for Medicaid recipients.

In a May report on alternative Medicaid programs issued by the Urban Institute and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the authors wrote that “using HSA principles in Medicaid seems dubious.” The report also said that the health accounts are probably a weak deterrent to unnecessary care and the cost of administering the accounts could outweigh the benefits.

John Holahan, one of the Urban Institute's researchers who wrote the report, said it pointed out both positive and negative aspects of alternative Medicaid programs that are worth exploring further.

But neither he, nor any of the other report authors, will be conducting the evaluation of Indiana’s program, he said.

“We can certainly be impartial evaluators and have done it many, many times,” Holahan said of the institute’s contract with HHS.

Pence also says it’s extremely rare for the federal government to hire its own contractors to evaluate a Medicaid demonstration project.

Indiana has already contracted with the Lewin Group, an independent consultant.

Having a second evaluation, Pence wrote, “has the potential to create contentious outcomes which can impede fair, impartial, and empirical analysis of demonstration projections.”

A spokesman for Burwell said the secretary will respond directly to Pence.

A spokeswoman for one of the advocacy groups that pushed hard for Pence to expand Medicaid said she’s not concerned about anything an evaluation would find.

“We’ve been very pleased with the rollout of HIP so far,” said Caitlin Priest, director of policy and communication for Covering Kids and Families of Indiana. “We feel like anything that would turn up in an evaluation would be positive, or would give us constructive feedback about how to improve the program going forward.”

The state says more than 355,000 Hoosiers are participating in the Healthy Indiana Plan, including 170,000 who were transferred from a pilot program and from Indiana’s traditional Medicaid program.

Before the expansion, Indiana had one of the most restrictive programs. Other than pregnant women, parents generally could only earn up to 24 percent of poverty to quality for coverage. And childless adults without a disability were not eligible at all, unless they could get into a pilot version of HIP, which had been available for a limited number of Hoosiers since 2008.The 2010 Affordable Care Act expanded Medicaid eligibility to those earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level. That's about $16,243 for one person and $33,465 for a family of four.

The Supreme Court left the expansion decision up to states, and Pence said he would only participate if he could do it through HIP.

Participants in the approved version Pence called HIP 2.0 are required to make monthly contributions ranging from $1 to $25. A Hoosier in poverty who doesn't contribute is put in a "basic" plan that has fewer benefits and requires co-payments for care.

The state says nearly 70 percent of participants are making the monthly payments to give them better benefits. And nearly nine in 10 of those contributing monthly earn less than the poverty level.

Indiana was the first state to get permission to bar some adults from re-enrolling for a period of time if they don’t pay the monthly fees. Indiana also got approval to charge higher cost-sharing for non-emergency use of an emergency room and to make coverage effective when the first payment is made, instead of when a person applies.

Contact Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com or follow her on Twitter: @mgroppe.

Aspects of Indiana's alternative Medicaid program that will be evaluated:

Whether requiring participants to make monthly contributions to a health account that can be rolled over if not used for health care reduces the use of unnecessary care.

Whether reducing required contributions for participants who receive preventive care services improves a participant's health and reduces overall health care costs.

Whether the required monthly contributions affect enrollment and the use of preventive and other health care services.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1XKKTWj