Mike Able, owner of Haddrell's Point Tackle and Supply, is concerned that a roundabout planned to replace the intersection of Chuck Dawley and Coleman boulevards will divert traffic, and customers, away from his store.

When Mike Able and John Royall opened a bait and tackle shop 32 years ago, Coleman Boulevard was a two-lane road that slipped through the heart of old Mount Pleasant. Shrimpers filled Shem Creek, the town's population topped out at 15,000 and its first stop light stood in front of their building.

View a simulation To view a simulation of the roundabout's lanes and vehicle flow, go to www.tompsc.com/mediacenter.aspx?CID=7# and view item 2033 under the traffic channel options.

Able and Royall, who opened a hardware store next door, built their businesses in a row of old-timey looking buildings where Coleman meets Chuck Dawley Boulevard. They weathered recessions, the advent of big-box stores and the normal tides of running small businesses.

But now the men fear they might not survive what their local government has planned. A large, multi-lane roundabout coming to their storefront doors could threaten livelihoods built on decades of family sweat and customer loyalty, the men said.

"I never dreamed the thing that would hurt my business is my government," Able says. "But that's what is happening."

Able owns Haddrell's Point Tackle & Supply, an icon among local anglers with its big red barn-like facade facing Chuck Dawley. His shop and Royall Ace Hardware next door draw fishermen, construction crews and hobbyists by the droves, as evidenced one recent morning when a driver hauling a large boat pulled in to park somewhere - anywhere - amid a horde of work pickups, a UPS truck, a mail truck and several cars.

Theirs and several other small businesses share a cramped parking lot, one that will be made harder for customers to navigate - and virtually impossible for large delivery trucks - when the roundabout comes, they contend.

The roundabout will replace a traffic light at the intersection where Chuck Dawley dead ends and Coleman turns into Ben Sawyer Boulevard en route to Sullivan's Island. Like many issues stirring this booming town's political pot today, it is part of broader urbanization plans along Coleman and other major corridors aimed at controlling sprawl.

Able and Royall emphasize they don't think town officials mean to hurt them. They just think officials are too focused on their urban corridor plans.

"Just because we don't fit into the model doesn't mean you just don't pay attention to us," Royall says.

A 'suicide pill'

Able named his fishing-supply shop after an outcrop of land at the mouth of Shem Creek. Three decades later, his two sons want to take on the family business. Yet, he wonders if Haddrell's will survive.

Royall agrees. He owns most of the shopping center with his family and sat on a committee that studied the roundabout. He thought businesses could swallow the plans because he expected to get more parking.

"What they are giving us now is a suicide pill," Able says.

The roundabout is part of a larger $9 million Coleman Boulevard revitalization plan that likely will go out to bid in early 2015. Those plans aim to manage growth in a town whose population reached 75,000 last year, not to mention throngs of tourists who visit and traverse Mount Pleasant en route to East Cooper's beaches.

When construction on the roundabout starts will hinge on how the contractor tackles the overall revitalization project, which stretches from the Shem Creek bridge at Mill Street down Coleman and past Chuck Dawley.

"It's hard to pinpoint when it might get built," Town Administrator Eric DeMoura said. "When the contractor chooses to start construction will be up to the contractor. He may start the roundabout first, he may start it last, or may build it in the middle."

The roundabout plans aren't new. After a traffic analysis found it would be more effective at moving traffic than the traffic light, town officials supported the concept in the 2008 Coleman Revitalization Advisory Board's master plan. They discussed the plans at several public meetings after that. State Department of Transportation approval is expected later this month.

"These plans haven't deviated in a long time - like years," DeMoura says.

Royall concedes that he should have kept a closer eye on them but says he was under the impression that he would get more parking.

"I never thought I had to ride rough herd," Royall says. "But this is a game changer."

Today, the businesses' parking lot is about 55 feet wide. Under the current roundabout plan, they would have to leave space for two-way traffic flow within it. That would take up about 22 more feet, they said.

It leaves the remaining space too narrow for 18-wheelers to navigate, so they may have to stop in the two-way road and block it. Large trucks "already need a shoe horn to get in there," says Councilman Gary Santos, who voted against the roundabout along with Mayor Linda Page.

Paul Maschek, co-owner of adjacent East Cooper Sporting Goods, worries the plans also put the many children who frequent his store at risk of being hit by cars using a new exit that runs right in front of his shop.

"There's just not going to be enough room," Able says, worrying shoppers will go elsewhere.

Already, he faces mounting competition from Walmart, Charleston Angler and, soon, a Bass Pro Shops store in North Charleston - not to mention new Palmetto State Armory, Academy Sports and Dick's Sporting Goods stores all coming to Mount Pleasant.

Plus, the businesses are looking at 18 months of construction. "I don't see how even Bill Gates could survive this," Able says.

Dangerous crossing

The view is different from the large Christ Our King Catholic Church and its Stella Maris School, whose campus abuts the intersection across from Haddrell's.

Its pastor, Monsignor James Carter, recalls a man who was killed not long ago while trying to cross Chuck Dawley at the intersection. He'd done some work for the church and lived nearby.

"It's a dangerous thing trying to cross Chuck Dawley there," Carter says. He could recall about a half-dozen traffic wrecks, some serious, involving church members trying leave the campus at the intersection.

"I brought it to the attention of the town," Carter says. "It's very hard to get out because there is constant traffic."

Since January 2012, there have been 108 collisions at the intersection, according to Mount Pleasant police.

However, Carter worries the complex new roundabout might confuse people.

Roundabouts are popular traffic control devices all around Mount Pleasant. Residents near Park West Boulevard recently clamored to get one rather than a traffic light.

But with two lanes inside the circle plus a bypass lane, this would be the town's largest.

"It will be like a roundabout on steroids," Santos says. "I don't think people will be able to navigate it."

Santos, Carter and the business owners all says they worry the many out-of-towners who drive the stretch heading to Sullivan's Island beaches won't know how to navigate it safely.

"It's a puzzle to us as taxpayers why they are spending all of this money to put a traffic circle in," Able says. "To me, it's just fraught with problems."

The business owners plan to attend Monday's 11 a.m. Transportation Committee meeting when council members will receive an update on the roundabout plans. The process appears too far along to change anything major, but the business owners say town officials are trying to find them at least a few more feet of space.

"Sometimes that doggone snowball gets off the mountain, and you can't contain it," Able says.

Reach Jennifer Hawes at 937-5563 or follow her on Twitter at @JenBerryHawes.