FARGO - The reproduction is grainy and it's in black and white, but in some ways the photograph that appeared on Page H4 in the December 14, 1969 edition of the Sacramento Bee newspaper was ahead of its time. If only the University of Montana could have used it for an officials' review during the game.

It was the Camellia Bowl against North Dakota State and a key play from the Grizzlies' perspective was a reception by Bison receiver Chuck Wald, although photographic evidence indicated Montana defensive back Patrick Schruth ended up with the ball. This week, almost 46 years later, he maintains his innocence.

"You can't lie with those photos," said Schruth, who remains a loyal Grizzlies fan living in Missoula. "It really changed the complexion of the game."

Wald's reception was at the 9-yard line, which led to a Bison field goal and a 16-3 halftime lead. NDSU went on to win 30-3 to claim its third national championship.

The two teams are back at it again—meeting in a postseason game for the first time since the 1970 Camellia Bowl that was also in Sacramento. Schruth loves it, saying there is nothing better than two great programs meeting in the NCAA Division I FCS playoffs like they will today at Gate City Bank Field at the Fargodome.

"I love to see North Dakota State come to Missoula and vice versa," he said. "It's a great, great series. They were a class act in Missoula when they played in August. It should be a fun game to watch. I wish I could be there."

Schruth, by the way, is good natured about the controversial play. NDSU would have still won the game, he said, and the best part of the photo was he battled Wald, who retired as a four-star general. Not many players can say that.

Not many, like Schruth, can also say they played for Jack Elway, who was his position coach at Montana. The ball boy: 9-year-old John Elway.

"I never thought of getting his autograph at the time," Schruth said with a chuckle.

The No. 1 genius on the field in Sacramento, however, was Bison head coach Ron Erhardt. Schruth called him a brilliant man who was "way, way" ahead of his time.

Bruce Grasamke can relate—he was the Bison quarterback in 1969 who ran Erhardt's offense. He was 16 of 25 passing for 206 yards and one touchdown and ran for another.

NDSU went into the game ranked No. 1 and Montana was No. 2.

"I used to think that we were so well prepared in those days," said Grasamke, living in Elbow Lake, Minn. "Just the coaching staff was so good. Look where Erhardt went after NDSU, he ends up in the pros and wins two Super Bowls. That wasn't a fluke."

There were several plays in that game that still stand out to Grasamke. What he doesn't remember is the play that Schruth remembers.

"I was talking that over with my wife. It's very possible I was on the ground and didn't see what happened," said Grasamke, who was emailed the photo before being asked about it. "It didn't seem like such a controversial play to me, but the picture looks like he has the ball. There are other plays in that game that I remember."

Other plays like a third-and-9 pass to a stretched-out Wald for a first down on the game's first series. It led to Grasamke's 7-yard touchdown run.

"We got off to a good start in that game," he said.

Today is just the ninth time these teams have played and, appropriately, the series is tied at 4-4. One team will probably get off to a good start and the other team will probably rally. There is bound to be a play that will require a booth review and, unlike 1969, it will be immediately addressed.

"I'm still amazed 46 years later, to look at that photo with the three-frame thing," Schruth said. "All I can think is the Sacramento Bee was ahead of its time, giving photographers good cameras and getting them in the right position."