Team roper Jake Cooper eyes his steer at the Larimer County Rodeo on Sunday at the Budweiser Events Center. He and partner Tyler McNight brought their steer down in 4.9 seconds. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Any one faulty part can tear the whole exercise apart.

There are so many moving elements. Then you toss in time and an absolute necessity for precision. Yeah, team roping is never the main draw for a rodeo, but make no mistake — it might very well be the toughest event of the night.

"It's really unique because basically you've got three four-legged animals out there, so there are a lot of variables there," team roper Bob Grieves said. "Then you've got two guys and the conditions always change. It's really a game of adjustment by the split second."

The ultimate team players of the rodeo were on display Sunday at the Budweiser Events Center for the Larimer County Rodeo's opening night, including Severance's Grieves and his son-in-law teammate, Tyler Scales.

It all starts with a mad dash.

A steer loads up into the chute setting up the first variable every roping team deals with — timing. The steer is released from its shoot and is allowed a head start determined by the length of the arena. As the steer reaches its advantage point, the first rider, known as a header, is allowed out of his box in pursuit.

Start too early and the team is punished with a 10-second penalty. Too late and the team is dead in the water. The pressure sits firmly on the header's shoulders to give his heeler a chance.

That's where Grieves, competing with his son-in-law for the first time, must come through.

"It takes a lot of practice and really working on your run so my heeler always knows what I'm likely to do and what it will look like back there," he said. "I need to know where he'll position himself. We rope at home to practice, but this is the first time we've competed pro rodeo together."

Like any team sport, practice is essential to success, with Grieves and Scales going 20-30 times a day back in Severance. However, it goes beyond the two men as their horses are every bit as important to the dance.

Saddle bronc rider Cody Taton attempts to last the required 8 seconds at the Larimer County Rodeo on Sunday at the Budweiser Events Center. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

A mistake by either cowboy, or their mount, means a fruitless rodeo.

"It's a challenge. If I'm on my game and have a great day and the other guy doesn't, then you don't win nothin'," Scales said. "It's a must to practice a lot to be as one, and hopefully your on your day when they're on there's. That's team ropin."

The header's job isn't over quite yet. With good timing out of the chute, he still has to place a legal catch around the steer's neck and turn it left, using the strength of a larger horse to accomplish the task. Now it's the second cowboy's time to shine.

A "heeler" springs into action and needs precision to snare both of the steer's hind legs. Get just one and it's a 5-second penalty. None and the effort is wasted. Heeler's ride smaller, more agile horses in order to react to the steer's movement.

"It's all timing. You're looking at the feet and your swing needs to be in time to lay it down on the ground in front to set a trap and spring it. If you do it right, they can't get out of it," Scales said. "I got into it as a kid and was just around it all the time. It's a great adrenaline rush. It's just fun."

But who has the tougher job? The header or the heeler?

Scales looks into the distance and goes with the safest answer.

"Well, probably the header because they can't break the barrier and the pressure's on them to make the catch and swing," he decides. "If they don't catch, the pressure's off me; who knows how good I've been."

Cris Tiller: 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/cristiller