It’s the time of year where the flowers are in bloom and the high school students are going to prom. Before the big night, there are many preparations. People have to find the right dress, get the tux ordered and buy the tickets -- but before any of this, many people get asked to prom first.

Since the beginning of time, boys and girls have been asking each other to prom. Back in the day, guys used to walk up to a girl and ask, ‘Hey, would you like to go to prom with me?’ and the girl would say yes. Now, guys are going to extra mile to make the moment special.

"Promposal" is the new term for being asked to prom and one could say it is just as extravagant as asking someone to marry you. Some of the most popular ways that guys have asked are with sticky notes, some food or even huge signs.

Advertisement

Yet the question is, why do people feel the need to ask others in a cute way? Is it due to competition or is it just a thoughtful reason?

“Guys feel the pressure to ask girls in a cute way because it is a competition. The competition is not between other guys though, it is the girls. The girls always try to say ‘he asked me cuter’ and ‘Oh no, he asked me cuter’ and it makes guys feel they need to make it the best it can be. Yet sometimes it’s also the girls who demand that it better be cute or they won’t go with you,” said Sterling High School junior, Connor Sanger.

Yet other people sometimes have a different motive.

“(The reason I asked my date in a cute way was) because I told her that if she didn’t ask me that I would embarrass her, so I did,” said SHS junior, David Lock.

Lock had asked junior Shayla Klein at seven in the morning after one of her spring break practices with a huge sign with a multitude of balloons, a cupcake cone and had written a song called “The Shayla Klein Song” with lyrics that read, “Oh Shayla Klein, you are so kind…You are shinier than a dime.”

Some of the pressure also comes from the movies or TV shows. It seems that every person who asks someone to prom in a movie does it in some of the most obnoxious ways. For example, the popular '80s movie, ‘Can’t Buy Me Love’ where Patrick Dempsy shows up on a lawn mower and sweeps her off her feet.

“Personally, I feel that all guys should ask a girl to prom in a cute way. For them it may not be a special moment but for the girls at this age it means a lot. I really want it to be extravagant and fun because movies have set me to believe in love and romance,” said SHS junior Anna Kenney. “But I’m not afraid of not being asked in a cute way because all guys are doing it now. It is just kind of expected.”