As the media outlet for the rabidly xenophobic, "English Only" right wing, Fox News wants filthy immigrants to speak English because, as we know, that is Jesus' preferred language. The contempt with which Fox views those who do not speak English as a primary language was evidenced by Fox "news" guy, Jon Scott, who was aghast that radio stations weren't playing a parody song about the outrage of having to "Press One for English." Martha MacCallum was amused by a diner owner's sign that said "English Only." And now that the Affordable Care Act is offered in 150 languages, MacCallum and her fellow "news" host Bill Hemmer are in full mocking mode. America is a ethnically and linguistically diverse country - but not in "America's Newsroom," nosirreee!!!!

The Affordable Care Act will benefit those whose low paying jobs don't provide health care. As many of these folks are recent immigrants who are not fully conversant with the English language, HHS is providing interpreters “to answer questions, help people understand some of the terminology.” This was a source of amusement to Fox News hosts (and paragons of the Catholic conservatism that seems to be required of Fox News hosts, with a few exceptions) Bill Hemmer and Martha MacCallum. With a great big, shit eating grin, eligible bachelor Hemmer said something that was sure to get his audience's nativist juices flowing and pitchforks at the ready.

In reporting on the first ACA enrollment day, Hemmer said that “There’s also a report that says there’s 150 different languages available to those who wanted to sign up. If you want to make a phone call..." The leggy MacCallum jokingly interjected "we can test that out, we can try to call in and ask if they can answer our questions in..." (And that's funny because?) Hemmer chuckled as he said "how bout English." MaCallum retorted "Burmese" and "English, that would be a good start,that would be a good start." Hardeharhar

Wow. And the right wing accuse the evil, librul media of elitism. Way to bring ethnic minorities into that mythical GOP "big tent." But if you live, as do Hemmer and MacCallum, in a white world of English speakers only (who cares what the domestics speak because you don't need to talk to them), you wouldn't know about the vast variety of languages spoken by hard working immigrants who make this "melting pot" a better place. But for the Fox News chosen, the pot is frozen!

And BTW, another Fox blonde, Dana Perino, tweeted about the "absurdity" of offering Obamacare in different languages. Can't be providing health care to those people, eh? No English, no Obamacare. Let them die and decrease the surplus population, right, Dana?

Chris Hayes does, as usual, a great take down on these patriots.