Buy Photo The Music City Star. (Photo: Larry McCormack / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights If you live, work or play in Davidson County, quality of life is downgraded when commutes are bad.

A recent ride on the Music City Star helped generate a robust conversation on mass transit.

Whoever is elected the next mayor of Nashville will have tremendous influence over a transit and transportation funding conversation for Middle Tennessee.

There is no other choice because traffic jams are no longer just rush hour events – they happen constantly – and get worse when there are collisions, such as Wednesday’s multiple-car crash on I-440 or Thursday night’s multi-vehicle crash on I-24 west. Both closed roads for hours.

That’s why all Middle Tennesseans have a stake in the Nashville mayoral election. Whether they live in Davidson County, work here or seek entertainment in Nashville, quality of life is severely downgraded when a person’s commute becomes a nightmare.

Remember that the region is estimated to grow by 1.2 million people over the next 25 years, so without investing in our infrastructure and transportation options, the problem will only get worse.

On top of that, federal and state transportation funds have fallen with a gas tax that has stayed stagnant for two and nearly three decades, respectively. No long-term federal highway transportation bill has been passed in a decade, which means big roads and transit projects are severely underfunded. There are $6 billion to $8 billion in underfunded road projects in Tennessee alone.

Last Monday I took my first ride on the Music City Star train, a six-stop, 32-mile trek from Lebanon to downtown Nashville and back – it was a symbolic trip to hold an important conversation about regional transit.

The group I rode with consisted of officials and advocates from Nashville Metropolitan Transit Authority, the Middle Tennessee Regional Transportation officials, Cumberland Region Tomorrow, Moving Forward and the City of Lebanon, including Mayor Philip Craighead, whom I interviewed for a podcast for tennessean.com. You can read a transcript of our conversation in this article.

The ride helped generate a discussion about transit solutions and the need to expand options for commuters in Nashville and the surrounding counties.

The MTA and RTA are in the midst of a yearlong strategic planning process called nMotion to create new solutions, and the Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce founded the “Moving Forward” initiative to develop new transit options for our citizens.

The Music City Star has been operating since 2006, and Craighead estimates there are some 1,100 to 1,200 rides per day on the 32-mile track.

There have been numerous financial challenges, from the effects of the 2010 flood to a lawsuit filed by large railroad companies against the state of Tennessee over how they are taxed on diesel fuel – a funding source which helps pay for short-line rail service like the Music City Star.

The Music City Star has six stops: Riverfront (downtown Nashville), Donelson, Hermitage, Mt. Juliet, Martha and Lebanon. A commuter-oriented community called Hamilton Springs near Lebanon could one day have as many as three stops, Craighead said.

That morning we left at 6:40 a.m. from the Lebanon station and arrived at Riverfront Park at 7:30 a.m. The ride back from Nashville to Lebanon went from 7:45 a.m. to 8:40 a.m.

No traffic. On-time stops. The train received the most riders at Mt. Juliet and Donelson and became pretty full by the time it arrived in downtown.

Unlike my experiences on the bus, there doesn’t appear to be the perception by potential riders that it is unsafe or unreliable. The seats are comfortable and the experiences reminded me of my days taking the train to high school in Chicago. In fact, these trains were purchased from Chicago’s Metra system.

The cost is $5 per ticket, but frequency is still an issue as on most days there are only six trips out of Nashville and four trips out of Lebanon, with an additional evening route on Fridays.

At the end of the train ride, I walked to my car parked at the Lebanon station and started my drive to The Tennessean at 1100 Broadway in downtown Nashville. Google Maps directed me to Interstate 40.

As far as I could tell, there were no accidents, but traffic was bumper-to-bumper most of the way.

It took me nearly an hour to get to work.

Interview with Lebanon Mayor Philip Craighead on the Music City Star

Plazas: We are riding the Music City Star together and the whole notion is that we rode with a group to have a discussion about transit regionally, what this Music City Star has done for his community and also for the region of Middle Tennessee. Welcome, Mayor. Thank you so much.

Craighead: My pleasure. As we rode down, everybody was sitting side by side. The whole cars were full and it looked like it had a good day. When rain happens, people take that alternative form of transportation in going about the train.

Plazas: So, what has the Music City Star done for your community and the region?

Lebanon Mayor Philip Craighead (Photo: File)

Craighead: Well, as I told you earlier, I think we’re the envy of a lot of other communities because on the Music City Star is something we can build on being a transit-oriented community and we can build our identity on that in the future even more.

We have Hamilton Springs, which is a new development, transit-oriented community that is going to have the retail, the residential component and train stop right there at the development.

Lebanon has two stops now and has a temporary stop for the (Wilson County) Fair when have it. At Hamilton Springs we’ll have three stops. The thing we’re looking at trying to develop more ridership is that once we are able to offer three runs into Nashville every day. Right now we’re limited to two because of the logistics to get the trains around each other.

Plazas: How do you see this being a springboard for more transportation growth and transit growth here in the region?

Craighead: If you look at all the other cities around, the time frames it takes to get from their cities to downtown is increasing yearly for everyone when you go by regular, traditional interstate highways, but with the train, it’s constant. It takes the same time every day, it’s dependable and more and more people like that. Kind of like today’s people were just talking, they were listening to their music, people were reading, it’s whatever you want to do. It’s your time, your special time and to take advantage of that morning to get geared up to get ready to go to work. And I think more and more people like you, come in and move to an area and they want to look for those kinds of things they’re used to from where they used to live. Chicago. A lot of people I know used to live there and the train intrigues them. They want to be close because they know of the value of that.

Buy Photo The Music City Star pulls into the Riverfront station in downtown Nashville on opening day, which drew a large crowd to the new commuter rail service running from Lebanon to downtown Nashville, TN Monday Sept. 18, 2006. (Photo: Larry McCormack / The Tennessean)

Plazas: Now, you have been a mayor now for seven years and how do you essentially relay this message because you say you’re the envy of other cities. How do you relay this message of needing to grow and invest to the mayors around you?

Craighead: Well, the train is a very valuable asset. As we as leaders of the Nashville area, we realize that the growth is going to be huge in the coming years, and we can’t build enough roads. We don’t want to have people just sitting on the interstate and on the roads, trying to get from A to B, and taking an hour, when it should only take 10 minutes.

We’re going to have to make the decisions that are needed today to find the funding so that we can assure the future of being able to move our people in and out and get to where they want to be in a timely fashion.

Plazas: What’s your favorite part of the Wilson County Fair?

Craighead: The food, the shows, the fair is one of the best fairs in the nation. You have so much diversity. In entertainment, food, top act items, demolition derby. It goes on and on. Fiddler’s Grove, really unique. You can tell the story of our history. It’s well worth it. The train museum. My grandson - he loved it this weekend. I took him up there. He just sat in silence for 30 minutes looking at the trains go round.

If you can, try to join us this Saturday. We have the train rides coming from Nashville.

You can get your train ticket and ticket to the fair. It think it starts leaving downtown from 2 o’clock. It won’t return until 9 o’clock that evening, but you won’t have to worry about all the parking.

The greatest thing is that the kids are able to ride a train. So they are getting to start the fair early by getting a ride, a good long ride, and then going to the fair and then getting to ride again going home.

Plazas: Thank you, Mayor Craighead, for your time

Craighead: Thank you for your interest in transit here.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Ecf0lS