Berkeley health officials are alerting the public that a UC Berkeley student has a confirmed case of measles. The student rode public transportation in the Berkeley area and was on campus before being diagnosed and placed in isolation on Saturday.

The student has not been identified. Officials say the student was likely contagious as early as last Monday, Aug. 24. Measles is contagious before a person shows any symptoms, and both city and state health officials are working with the university to identify people who have been living or working in close contact with the student.

Measles is one of the most contagious pathogens known and can linger up to two hours after the infected person has left. The measles vaccine is considered more than 99 percent effective.

In a statement, Berkeley health officer Dr. Janet Berreman encouraged people in Berkeley to “make sure they and their children have received the required two doses. Obtaining records of your vaccination could prove critical in the event of a local outbreak.”

Measles is marked by a red rash that starts on the head and spreads to the rest of the body. Other symptoms include fever, runny nose and red eyes. According to the Centers for Disease Control, one out of four people who develop measles will require hospitalization.

Berkeley officials asks that anyone who develops symptoms and believes they may have been exposed to contact their doctor.

A measles outbreak tied to Disneyland theme parks in Orange County started last December and spread across the state and beyond. It ultimately sickened more than 130 people in California before health officials declared it over in April.

UC Berkeley’s health services recommends that anyone who is not already immunized to get vaccinated. If you are unsure of your vaccination status, you can be immunized — extra doses of the vaccine are not harmful, experts say.

In addition to those who are not vaccinated, those at highest risk from measles are infants, pregnant women and people with compromised immune systems, such as cancer or HIV patients. Those who have had the recommended two doses of the MMR vaccine are at very low risk, officials said.

Starting next fall, all students in the University of California system will be required to be vaccinated against several diseases, including measles. Currently, students are only required to be vaccinated against hepatitis B.

Bay City News contributed to this report.