Montana’s new Democratic Senate candidate says concerns about youth inheriting massive federal debt are ‘bull’

As a high school math teacher, you would think Amanda Curtis would be able to crunch the numbers a little bit better.

Curtis, a Montana state representative, is the Montana Democrats’ new U.S. Senate candidate after plagiarism allegations forced Sen. John Walsh out of the race.

While the polls already place the Senate race as practically unwinnable for Curtis, some of Curtis’s beliefs will certainly help push that over the edge.

As a state representative, Curtis vlogged after each day during the legislative session and some of her off-the-cuff remarks are way out there. Millennials should find at least one of her beliefs particularly troubling.

On April 4, 2013, the Montana state house was considering a resolution that they would send to the U.S. Congress decrying the state of the economy and the need for change so that the outrageous debts of today are not passed on to the millennial generation and beyond.

Curtis called this resolution all “doom and gloom” and “untrue.”

“I will not stand for fear mongering,” she said in her daily vlog.

She went on to make fun of the Republican who introduced the resolution.

“There was even a little bit of drama where he was crying for his nieces and nephews because they were going to inherit this debt. It’s bull and that’s the nice word for it,” Curtis said.

“I’m not making this up. It’s like science and mathematics. It’s arithmetic folks!”

Someone might want to tell the teacher to double-check her math.

Recent figures from The Can Kicks Back, a nonpartisan campaign focused on decreasing the national debt, found that the country’s real debt exceeds $200 trillion. This real debt factors in the current national debt — $17.6 trillion — as well as all unfunded obligations currently approved by the federal government.

To cover this staggering amount, future tax hikes would have to be as much as 65 percent, a number they estimate to be as much as 60 cents on every dollar that millennials earn.

Couple that with the more than $1 trillion today’s millennials owe on student loans and you have a generation that will be paying off the government for policies they couldn’t vote for and services like Social Security that they will likely never receive. Obamacare also majorly added to this debt, transferring the burden of healthcare costs onto healthy young people.

The Congressional Budget Office issued a similar warning back in July. CBO officials said that the national debt is about 74 percent of the country’s gross domestic product. The historical average of debt to GDP is 39 percent.

To stay at this already high level, the U.S. would have to see a 6.5 percent increase in new taxes each year or a 6 percent cut each year. To get back down to the historical average, the CBO estimates that it would take a $465 billion spending cut or new revenues in that amount every year until 2039.

Just who does Curtis believe will be paying for this?

We should be worried about the kind of math she is teaching her students.

Watch the full vlog from April 4, 2013 below:

The Montana GOP also put together a highlights reel from some of her other vlogs: