How Mass. Plans To Re-Enroll 450,000 Residents In Health Insurance

All of the estimated 450,000 Massachusetts residents who get health insurance through the Health Connector or MassHealth — some of whom have been in a confusing phase of temporary coverage this year — will soon begin the process of applying for coverage for 2015.

If the state’s new health insurance website is up and running — which the Patrick administration promises it will be — then residents will be able to beginning applying online Nov. 15. If the website still isn’t working, or using a computer isn’t convenient, then you’ll have to fill out a paper application.

Either way, you might want to keep a copy of this timeline handy through January. There are several different deadlines that may be tricky to remember. Here’s an explanation:

The key on the bottom left of the chart describes each diamond. Pay close attention to the red diamonds — these are the working end dates for your coverage. I say “working” because these dates assume insurers and the federal government grant the state’s request for extensions.

The state is seeking the extensions so it can spread out the re-enrollment period to avoid overloading members or the system. All the plans through the Connector and MassHealth are currently set to end on Dec. 31, but your coverage may be good for a few more weeks if the extensions are approved. Make sure to look for the coverage end date on any letters you receive.

If you have a commercial health plan through the Connector, find the gray QHP (qualified health plan) box on the top left of timeline and follow the timeline across. Look for your open enrollment package in the mail in early November. Your coverage ends on Dec. 31.

If you had a Commonwealth Care plan last year that has been continued this year, then look for the gold box. The state hopes to extend your coverage through January, so you’ll have two-plus months to review your coverage options.

If you have temporary coverage through MassHealth, then you will be reminded to re-enroll in waves based on when you signed up. You’ll fall into the purple, blue or green boxes above. According to this timeline, your coverage is expected to end sometime between Jan. 15, 2015 and Feb. 15, 2015. But again, the state does not yet have approval for that extension.

The Patrick administration is also waiting to hear if the federal government will give Massachusetts another $80 million to build the new health insurance website, or the $18 million requested to fund outreach, ads and other enrollment efforts.

Related Coverage: