Click To View Gallery

Founded in 1978, Whitman-Walker Health’s roots are in serving individuals who face barriers to accessing care, starting as the Gay Men's VD Clinic and evolving to become Washington, D.C.’s primary HIV clinic.

But as the healthcare marketplace has shifted over the years, the organization has had to adapt, reorganize, and reinvent itself to stay nimble, profitable, and, ultimately, able to carry on its present-day mission as a nonprofit committed to serving the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community and people living with HIV and AIDS.

In 2006, Don Blanchon was hired as executive director to lead Whitman-Walker’s transition from a service organization to a community health center model.

To start, Whitman-Walker brought in physicians through the Washington Free Clinic to provide primary care services. Its northern Virginia clinic was closed, leaving it with two Washington, D.C.-based sites: the Elizabeth Taylor Medical Center and the Max Robinson Center.

With the passing of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), Whitman-Walker had to address another challenge: what would its organization look like post-ACA? “We spent a lot of time on what that meant to Whitman-Walker and who we are, who we serve, and what we’re trying to do in service to our community,” Blanchon says.

Part of that plan identified the need for a new, modern healthcare facility that would enable it to expand care, meet the needs of its growing population base, and offer greater financial diversity to ensure long-term viability.

The new 43,000-square foot building is expected to open in late spring 2015.

Healthcare Design recently talked with Blanchon about the organization’s transition, the challenges it faces, and its strategy for remaining a viable member of its community.

Healthcare Design: Why was it important for Whitman-Walker Health’s future to transition from an AIDS service organization to a community health center model?

Don Blanchon: First and foremost, it was about the people we cared for. People with HIV were living longer because of the antiretroviral and they were dealing with other health issues, like hypertension and diabetes, and had other kinds of primary and preventive care needs.

We had patients getting their primary medical care somewhere else and their HIV care and other related services here, which led to a fair amount of fragmentation and poor outcomes. We wanted to make sure that we could do an integrated primary/HIV model so that we can take care of those individuals on a community basis here.

The second reason is the community role that Whitman-Walker has had over four decades. We were first a gay and lesbian center and, before the epidemic, our services were largely geared around gay men and lesbians and some direct care, mental health counseling services, and sexually transmitted disease or sexually transmitted infection testing. The board felt pretty strongly that in making the move back to a community health center model, it wanted to make sure that this was a place where the metro D.C. LGBT community could come and get care.

That was important because it reaffirmed who we were but it also helped destigmatize getting care here. If you are mainly providing HIV-only services and then you expand, you still have to have somebody cross the threshold and, in this day and age, there’s still stigma associated with a diagnosis. The organization felt very strongly that the best way to help destigmatize HIV and AIDS was to become a community center and then allow people to come here whether they’re positive or negative.

What’s your population base?

We served a total of 14,184 individuals in 2013. Seventy percent of them were from the District of Columbia, 16 percent were from Maryland, 11 percent from Virginia, and 3 percent from other jurisdictions.