Members of the new advisory board bring an unparalleled collection of healthcare experience that will enable Centauri Health Solutions to continue to develop innovative market-leading offerings. "Each member will be instrumental in advancing our commitment to integrate and enhance our solutions for our health plan and risk-bearing provider clients," Miller said.

Ken Goulet

Mr. Ken Goulet recently retired as executive vice president of Anthem and president of the company's Commercial and Specialty Business Division – the largest commercial business division in the United States. Prior to joining Anthem, Mr. Goulet was a senior executive with Cigna. Mr. Goulet comes to Centauri Health Solutions' advisory board with more than 30 years of experience.

David S. Katz

Mr. David S. Katz has enjoyed a 20-year investment career, most recently as a managing director and co-head of the Healthcare Team at GTCR, a Chicago-based private equity firm currently managing in excess of $7 billion. Prior to joining GTCR, Mr. Katz served as a managing director of Frontenac Company. Over the years, he has served as an investor and director of many public and private companies.

Martin B. Silverstein, MD

Dr. Martin B. Silverstein is a prominent health care executive with corporate leadership and consulting experience across the value chain, from innovative life sciences to health services. Recognized for his thought leadership and pragmatic approach to enhancing the performance of Fortune 50 companies and emerging industry leaders, Dr. Silverstein has been involved in many industry-shaping transactions as both an advisor and internal architect. Dr. Silverstein spent over two decades at the Boston Consulting Group where he led their Global Health Care practice from 2006 through 2011, and prior to that led their America's Health Care practice from 1999 through 2006. Dr. Silverstein most recently served as EVP and chief strategy officer at Anthem.

Nancy Taylor

Ms. Nancy Taylor is co-chair of the Health and FDA practice at Greenberg Traurig and has advised clients on health and FDA related matters for more than two decades. She has broad experience in areas relating to the Affordable Care Act provisions, CMS reimbursement and policy issues relating to providers and plans; she has also done a significant amount of FDA regulatory work. Prior to joining Greenberg Traurig, Nancy served 10 years as Health Policy Director for the Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources and worked on a number of significant health and FDA laws, including NLEA, Safe Medical Device Act, Hatch-Waxman, COBRA and ADA. She also served as CEO of a start-up medical device company.

Noah Waldman

Mr. Noah Waldman currently serves as senior client partner for Korn Ferry and has extensive experience working with private equity and venture capital portfolio companies. As an executive search professional with over 20 years experience, he has conducted more than 300 senior-level assignments with a primary focus on for-profit healthcare services, managed care, and healthcare information technology.

About Centuari Health Solutions: Centauri Health Solutions reveals care opportunities through its suite of products and services. We deliver data-driven services, private cloud-based software solutions, and comprehensive data management designed specifically for risk adjustment and quality-based revenue programs. We improve member outcomes and financial performance for health plans and at-risk providers by supporting initiatives in risk adjustment, RADV risk mitigation, HEDIS and Star Ratings.

Headquartered in Scottsdale, Ariz., Centauri Health Solutions also has offices in Tennessee and Florida. For more information, please visit www.centaurihs.com.

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/centauri-health-solutions-announces-formation-of-expert-advisory-board-during-the-tenth-annual-rise-nashville-summit-300238593.html

SOURCE Centauri Health Solutions

Related Links

http://www.centaurihs.com