Sioux Falls, SD

The riverfront skyline is going to drastically change as a massive art sculpture will arch over the Big Sioux River in downtown Sioux Falls.

Organizers say the tribute will further cement the state's largest city as an art destination for generations to come.

"That might be pretty cool if we can pull it off," Jim Clark said.

They're calling it, The Arc of Dreams. It will be a massive stainless steel sculpture that will span across the Big Sioux River.

The installation will be the length of a football field and rise between Sixth and Eighth streets in downtown Sioux Falls.

"Beyond the beauty of the sculpture is the symbolism of recognizing the dreamers, past, present and future and also the character and spirit of Sioux Falls," Clark said.

It will be the work of famed South Dakotan Artist Dale Lamphere and will be the capstone of the SculptureWalk created by Jim Clark more than a decade ago.

"It is unique. No other cities around the country have a sculpture of this magnitude that represents the character of the city like this sculpture will," Clark said.

Clark says the privately-funded installation will become a signature piece of art for the city, honoring a growing city lead by dreamers.

The Arc of Dreams is expected to be installed and dedicated in the spring of 2016. Organizers say it will be a huge asset to the cultural economy.

"It will cause people to come off the interstate and say, I have to see this Arc of Dreams that everyone talks about. So we are talking about cultural tourism, we are talking about economic development, we are talking about tributes, we are talking about inspiration. What more could you want," Paul Schiller said.

Designers are also going to build a walking path on either side of the arc, highlighting stories of the City's great dreamers.

News

Outdoors {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction:

A misspelling was corrected in this story.