Pin this on Pinterest Email this story

I’ll admit I watch more reality television than I’d like to admit, but some shows are just too interesting. Given I work in the freelancing arena, one that always captured my attention is the Bravo show, Blood, Sweat & Heels. Set in New York City, the program follows a handful of women paving their own way. From fashion bloggers to on-air personalities, many of them have seen great success, inspiring those walking down similar avenues to keep on trucking.

But contrary to certain assumptions, freelancing is not as glamorous as it appears. There’s no safety net or employee benefits that come with the hustle. A recent episode involving cast member Daisy Lewellyn showed this reality, which isn’t so alluring. Battling stage three cancer, the cameras caught a stressful moment as Daisy flipped through a series of high-priced medical bills. Trying to keep her peace, it’s pretty obvious the reality star felt up to her eyeballs in debts that are difficult to pay.

No matter how entertaining Carrie Bradshaw’s life was in Sex and the City — tons of money and exposure freelancing for Vogue — it’s not the reality of many freelancers. You don’t always score a book deal, live in a posh apartment, or even see the success you want to achieve. While you might think this is a pretty obvious concept to grasp, some folks outside the circle just don’t have a clue.

Yes there are perks to this career avenue that you can’t always get with a traditional 9-to-5 job. For starters, your pay might actually be higher than someone with a salaried position as companies don’t need to worry about things like retirement and benefits. While this does allow you to put a little extra in your pocket, you still need to cover these lacking areas on your own dime. I can’t tell you how thankful I am to have my husband–and his steady job–that grant me insurance coverage. Many are now looking to the Affordable Care Act for assistance that can help take some of the financial pressure off a freelancer’s shoulders. (Satisfaction with the Affordable Care Act is generally pretty high, according to a recent survey.)

I can recall my early days of freelancing in New York City. There was something exciting about filling my calendar with industry-related events that included brushing shoulders with celebrities and sipping on some of the best champagne I’ve ever tasted. While these made for fun memories, they unfortunately didn’t always pay the bills. Eventually I found a healthy balance and was able to create a life that satisfied my needs. It wasn’t easy or something that always looked so pretty. Sure there was blood and sweat, but more tears than heels.

With one in three Americans choosing this professional avenue over a traditional job, I can only hope they know what’s in store for them. Yes there are tons of examples of success and noteworthy individuals throughout various industries, but we don’t always see the efforts they exerted behind closed doors to get to where they are today. There is a wonderful freedom that comes with freelancing: you don’t have to rely on a single source for income. The other side of the coin is the uncertainty of your future as things constantly change and require adjustment.

Have you been thinking about trying out a freelancing position? Here are some reads that are worth a peek.

How to Turn a Freelance Job Into a Full Time Position

Keep Those Money Streams Flowing: Building Steady Income as a Freelancer

How to Handle the Loss of a Freelance Job

main image: instagram