Dani Volkman (Photo: Contributed)

We don't know all the factors that drove Danielle Volkman to make the decisions she made, and we can't ask her. She died at 16 because of complications from huffing solvents at her home in Weston.

We don't know what she would be like today, at 18. Maybe she'd be enrolling in college or vocational training. Maybe a lot of things.

From the perspective of Dani's parents, Kathy and Marc Volkman, the story of Dani's descent began three years earlier with a destructive romantic relationship. According to them, that relationship got her tangled up in drugs, law-breaking and, importantly, "depressed and alienated from all her friends," according to Kathy Volkman.

We cannot know the details of that relationship. We don't know why some young people are able to bounce back from depression, alienation, an abusive relationship, an addiction or any other personal issue while others never do — or never get the chance to.

But we know this: There are such things as unhealthy relationships, between young teens as well as adults. Some involve physical abuse; some involve emotional abuse; some may merely be a bad match that keeps them from growing into the adults we hope they will be.

Most of the bad relationships teens experience won't be harmful. Many will be learning experiences. Some will end in tragedy.

The Volkmans are living with the loss of their daughter. They told Dani's story to Daily Herald Media last week, and on Saturday are partnering with The Women's Community for Dani's Journey, a bowling fundraiser at Coral Lanes in Rothschild. They hope to use funds to bring a national expert on teen dating and relationships to the Wausau area later this year for educational presentations for parents and students.

There are warning signs of abusive or unhealthy relationships, and parents and teens both should be aware of them. Parents and friends cannot always choose with whom their kids will become romantically involved — it is an old story. But the way others in their lives react, offer support and assist in connecting those in need to community resources, parents and peers can make a difference.

Dani's Journey is one of several ways The Women's Community is observing April's national Sexual Assault Awareness Month. Unhealthy teen relationships are one facet of a much broader, deeper set of problems encompassing domestic violence, abusive relationships and sexual assault.

The next event is Friday's Rock Against Rape, a $5 concert at Dale's Weston Lanes, 5902 Schofield Ave. in Weston. For more information, call The Women's Community at 715-842-5663.

Whether or not either of these fundraisers is for you, find a way this month to support the mission of The Women's Community and other organizations that provide shelter from domestic violence, education about the reality of the issue and advocacy for change. Life is never simple and solutions can be hard to come by. But a real conversation, real information about these issues is a place to start.

That's what the Volkmans hope telling Dani's story can lead to, and we hope so, too.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1FKgAYV