SPCC Elders Meeting Start Again By Adriana Fehrs ST. IGNATIUS – After a Summer hiatus, the Salish-Pend d’Oreille Culture Committee (SPCC) elders are back to hold their monthly elder’s meetings. Arlene Big Crane gives Birthday Girl Dolly Linsebigler a big Happy Birthday hug. (B.L. Azure photo) Arlene Big Crane gives Birthday Girl Dolly Linsebigler a big Happy Birthday hug. (B.L. Azure photo) Birthdays

The only elder celebrating a birthday for the month of October is Dolly Linsebigler, who turned 87 on October 14. Tribal Forestry Department

Steve McDonald, Mark Couture, and Duane Plant from the Tribal Forestry Department addressed their new logging project. McDonald says just a couple of weeks ago the department began the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) process in order to obtain permission to harvest timber in the Rainbow Lake area located ten miles southwest of Hot Springs on Hwy 28. The department will do shelterwood cutting, which is a progression of forest cuttings that lead to the establishment of a new generation of seedlings of a particular species or group of species without planting, as opposed to clear cutting. Tribal Forestry is aware of several scar trees and an eagle nest located by the east side of the lake, and is taking precautions to avoid that area. SPCC Elder Mike Durglo, Sr. advised the crew of the huckleberry growth in the Rainbow Lake area, and the department responded by saying they will make efforts to avoid harming any native species. Winter logging will also reduce the impact on the native species. The department says mitigation is in place for road maintenance, both before and after logging. They hope to begin timber production by April 2015. Tribal Preservation Department

Kisha Etches and David Matt from the Tribal Preservation Department a human remains were discovered at the Grant Kohrs Ranch Historical Site near Deer Lodge. Etches said the department buried the remains in a confidential location. The department also dealt with the Jocko Finley burial remains. Two pipes, originally buried with Finley, were removed when Finley was reburied and accidentally left out. The department has put out notices to contact descendants, to determine what actions to take with the pipes. Currently, the department is also working with the Spokane, Cour d’Alene, Colville and Confederated Salish and Kootenai tribes to determine what to do with the remains. They will have a consultation in Spokane on Tuesday, October 21. Matt then updated the elders on the Northwestern Energy power line that runs from the Hot springs substation, through Moiese, and to the south fork of the Jocko. The department has surveyed thirteen of the eighteen miles of the jocko. The remaining sections of power line run through recently identified culturally significant areas. One area identified is the Vanderburg jocko trails, which intersect the power lines, says Matt. The pair requested the elders identify other culturally significant areas intersecting the power line. Pelah Hoyt of the Five Valleys Land Trust discusses its efforts in the Salish aboriginal territory. (B.L. Azure photo) Pelah Hoyt of the Five Valleys Land Trust discusses its efforts in the Salish aboriginal territory. (B.L. Azure photo) Five Valleys Land Trust

Germaine White, Natural Resource Department Information and Education, introduced Pelah Hoyt from the Five Valleys Land Trust and her upcoming projects. Five Valleys Land Trust has expressed interest in working with the culture committee and Tribal Preservation Department. “The landowners, who have conservation easements on their land, would like to work with [Five Valleys Land Trust] to put up interpretive signs on their properties,” says Hoyt. Five Valley Land Trust invited the SPCC and the tribes to work on the project with them. The two properties are located in Rock Creek and Drummond. “It will be a more honest, more balanced, history,” says White. The People’s Center

Marie Torosian, People’s Center Education Coordinator, gave updates on the center’s education trunks and their upcoming monthly activities. Torosian said she asked local schools to fill out a survey for the People’s Center. Torosian found that information on animals was heavily requested. The center has an animal trunk, filled with puppets and flash cards that have both the Salish and Kootenai names for the animals. The trunk will be available for schools to check out once Torosian is done correcting the flash cards. She says she plans to hire an SKC intern to help. Salish Elder Felicite McDonald peruses typical information the SPCC Elders Committee give input on. (B.L. Azure photo) Salish Elder Felicite McDonald peruses typical information the SPCC Elders Committee give input on. (B.L. Azure photo) The center also plans to develop a curriculum that teachers can use in their classroom. A lot of the teachers suggested putting all of the info on a DVD that they could play in the classroom. The second trunk will be the people trunk, which holds information on the tribes in general, different types of traditional clothing, a fan, drum, CD with traditional Native songs, information on the Hellgate Treaty, and aboriginal territory maps. The Center wants the two trunks ready by spring. Second part is the education programs and activities that center around the Salish and Kootenai meaning of the month. They will be looking for help with the education presentations. The People’s Center also mentioned that Steve Clairmont, from S&K Holding, will be conducting a review of the center, and will help make a new business plan. Torosian says the center is doing well, attendance has increased, but school field trips to the center have decreased. She says that could be contributed to schools choosing to attend the Annual River Honoring as their Indian education requirement. Torosian says the center has undergone two big budget cuts in the past ten years, resulting in the elimination of two positions. Shelly Fyant

Shelly Fyant, Tribal Council Representative and Two Eagle River School (TERS) Board member, says TERS is considering reestablishing an elder’s week. “Elder’s Week used to be a way of honoring elders who have helped teach at the school,” says Fyant. This year marks the 40-year anniversary of the operation of the school. Currently, the board has scheduled April 27 to May 1 as Elders week. Fyant then reported that the Tribal Council recently passed a resolution last week to use all of the funds from state tax sharing for elders. Salish Elder Eneas Vanderburg is doing well and is back at the SPCC Elders Committee meeting. (B.L. Azure photo) Salish Elder Eneas Vanderburg is doing well and is back at the SPCC Elders Committee meeting. (B.L. Azure photo) The revenue sharing from state taxes, one from motor fuel taxes and one from alcoholic beverage sales, adds up to approximately half a million dollars a year. Elders 65 and older are eligible, but will have to go through an enrollment process. Those enrolled will receive an estimated $400 check every January. Fyant says the extra funds will be non-taxable and will not affect benefits. Tribal Council is still working out the details, but checks are expected to be in the mail this January. Tribal Council also approved a $27 million loan to Gray Wolf Casino, and a $4 million loan to KwaTaqNuk Resort for expansions. “Gray Wolf is at a site where it is the only grizzly bear crossing on the Flathead Indian Reservation. If there is a big expansion around the wildlife reserve, wildlife could potentially become a problem,” says Fyant. Fyant explains that there was $67 million left in the remaining Salazar Settlement fund. The tribes voted to loan Energy Keepers Inc. $30 million to capitalize over the next 20 years at a six percent interest, which will bring back a steady stream of revenue to the tribes. S&K Gaming received a $31 million loan for the casino expansions at six percent interest over the next 30 years. The settlement is currently in a short-term investment account, which earns less than a one percent interest. Valley Creek resident and Salish Elder Louie Adams comments on an issue while Lloyd Irvine looks on. (B.L. Azure photo) Valley Creek resident and Salish Elder Louie Adams comments on an issue while Lloyd Irvine looks on. (B.L. Azure photo) Swan Lake Massacre Site

Thompson Smith, of the SPCC, spoke on a new dilemma concerning the Swan Lake Massacre site. The historical Swan Lake Massacre site in the Swan Valley is located on private land. The previous owner, Warner Lundberg, allowed people to visit the site and pay their respects. Lundberg placed a conservation easement on the land so it would remain untouched. Lundberg passed away in 2006, and the SPCC recently learned that Lundberg’s relatives sold the property in 2012. Ralph Cruz, a wealthy small business owner from Florida, purchased the property. Cruz and other local residents are petitioning Lake County to abandon the road, and revert the road to a private drive, which would potentially restrict access to the Swan Lake Massacre site. Currently, the Tribal Council is aware of the issue; a letter was sent out to the county to urge them not to abandon the road. “We want to preserve the ability of elders and visitors to see the site,” says Smith. Lake County Democrats

Caryn Kallay, Native American Outreach Director for the Montana Democrats, says that November is important for Native Americans. Though mid term elections have a lower voter turn out than a Presidential election, it is still important for Natives to vote on November 4. “It is crucial to get Amanda Curtis and John Lewis to D.C. with Senator Jon Tester. Daines is in the process of a land grab, selling federal lands, and he has also repeatedly tried to repeal the Affordable Care Act, which provides healthcare for Native Americans forever.” Kallay urges everyone to tell his or her family and friends to vote this year. “I would like to see CSKT have the highest voter turn out. I want to make sure our voice is heard.” Pend d’Oreille Elder Pat Pierre comments on logging in the Dog Lake area. Noel Pichette is on the right. (B.L. Azure photo) Pend d’Oreille Elder Pat Pierre comments on logging in the Dog Lake area. Noel Pichette is on the right. (B.L. Azure photo) Kallay also explains, “LR-126 is on the referendum, which eliminates same day voter registration, and many natives use same day registration, so when you receive your ballot in the mail, vote ‘no’.” Lake County Democrats is also offering free transportation to voting polls, for residents on the Flathead Indian Reservation. “We don’t want anything to get in the way of voting,” says Kallay. Doug Morigeau

Doug Morigeau is working with the Tribal Education program to take over a Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Grant. Morigeau says his program has money for cultural activities, and is seeking input. He has talked with people in the communities and the Tribal Council to discover what kinds of activities need funding, or additional new activities they would like to see created. Morigeau says he would like to be able to help with the SPCC cultural camp, hunting camp, and Nkwusm Salish Language School. “We just want to show kids an alternative to using drugs and drinking,” he says. Morigeau will report to the SPCC on a monthly basis on his program’s activities. “We will mostly fund existing program, but we will create a couple of new activities.”