Don’t miss out on the 17th Annual Defenders of Justice Awards

When: Thursday, May 14, 2015, 6:00-9:00 p.m.

Where: William and Ida Friday Center, 100 Friday Center Drive in Chapel Hill

Each year, the North Carolina Justice Center presents its Defender of Justice Awards to honor individuals and organizations that have made significant contributions in the fight against poverty in four areas that reflect the scope of the Justice Center’s work – legislative advocacy, policy research and advocacy, litigation, and grassroots empowerment.

CLICK HERE TO BUY TICKETS

CLICK HERE FOR SPONSORSHIP OPPORTUNITIES

Click here for photos from last year’s event.

THE 2015 HONOREES:

LEGISLATIVE ADVOCACY

Rep. Susan Fisher, for her support for a higher minimum wage and paid leave policies, increasing the supply of affordable housing, protecting consumers from predatory lending practices, and addressing the state’s drop-out rate.

Sen. Gladys Robinson, for her decades of work devoted to improving the health and welfare of all North Carolinians and her fierce advocacy for public education at the General Assembly.

POLICY RESEARCH & ADVOCACY

Center for Responsible Lending, for its work to protect against predatory, abusive lending practices for low-income and moderate income families, communities of color, seniors, women, service members, and other vulnerable North Carolinians.

Tom Vitaglione, Senior Fellow of Health and Safety at NC Child, for his commitment to improving the lives of the children of North Carolina through increasing access to health care and banning corporal punishment in our schools.

LITIGATION

The University of North Carolina’s Center for Civil Rights, for their impact litigation and local advocacy work focused on civil rights – including education, housing and community development, economic justice, voting rights, and for giving a voice to underrepresented communities of color in North Carolina.

Former Justice Bob Orr, for his long history of public interest litigation, including his work opposing the use of economic incentives to lure businesses to the state, opposition to a state lottery, support for public education, and advocacy on behalf of student athletes.

GRASSROOTS EMPOWERMENT

Ajamu and Rukiya Dillahunt, for their advocacy, community organizing and leadership throughout the Triangle on issues of race, education, the school-to-prison pipeline, and workers’ rights.