Dunkin' Donuts in Loveland will hold a fundraiser Tuesday for a construction crew member who helped build the store

Jeff Huttinga, right, and Jerry Campbell, left, Creative Construction Company employees, talk Monday, June 8, about the work they have done so far to the space that will soon house Dunkin' Donuts in the Palmer Gardens shopping center in Loveland. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

The grand opening activities for the first Dunkin' Donuts store in Loveland are a bit different from the norm.

When the doughnut, coffee and sandwich store opens at 102 E. 29th St. in the Palmer Gardens shopping center Tuesday, there will be a ribbon cutting, prizes and games, as is customary. However, instead of giving away free coffee, prices will remain the same as they would be normally — because the store is holding a fundraiser.

Ten percent of the proceeds from the day's sales will go toward Jeff Huttinga, supervisor of Creative Construction Co. in Loveland, which built the Loveland store.

Earlier this year, Huttinga, 38, was diagnosed with ALS, or amyotrophic laterals sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, a motor neuron disease that affects nerve cells in the brain and the spinal cord. His doctors told him he had two to five years to live, but he wants to try stem cell treatment out of the country because it is not legal to do so in the United States.

Creative Construction built the Loveland store and the stores in Fort Collins and Windsor in the past eight months as Dunkin' Donuts makes it way from the East Coast to the West with plans to open several stores in Northern Colorado.

Advertisement

"He's just kind of part of the family," said Doug Patterson, co-owner and president and chief executive officer of the three Northern Colorado stores. "As we told him, we've got his back, and we'll do whatever we can do to help him out. That's how we are."

Fundraising for Treatment

To help pay for the treatment, Dunkin' Donuts held fundraisers at the two other stores and the Huttinga family had a GoFundMe account for $18,000 in the spring that raised the entire amount in two weeks. The GoFundMe money will pay for the first injection, which is not covered by insurance and will be in early September. If the injection is successful, Huntinga will get additional injections at a cost of $3,500 each that will be paid for by the additional fundraisers.

"We are doing what we can," said Sadi Huttinga, Jeff Huttinga's wife.

In May 2014, Jeff Huttinga thought he had a torn left triceps muscle from a work injury after dropping a truss. By November, he noticed he lost some of his gripping ability and had atrophy in his left hand. And in January 2015, he was told he could have ALS and the diagnosis was confirmed a couple of months later.

"He just can't do much with his left hand anymore. The right hand is being overused and overworked," Sadi Huttinga said.

The twitching that started in his left arm moved to other parts of his body, and he has experienced muscle loss in his left arm and is continually fatigued, she said.

"He loves working construction and does not want to take it easy despite the ... doctor telling him he needs to find new work," said Sadi Huttinga, in a written statement about Jeff Huttinga's story. "He is my unbelievable, crazy, live-life, caring, great dad, Christ lover/follower, fish-out-of-sea, snowboarder, hunter, wanta-be military, beautiful-eyed husband."

Wanting to Help

When Patterson and Cameron Stapleton, owners of Dawgs & Donuts II LLC, franchisee of Dunkin' Donuts of Northern Colorado, learned about Jeff Huttinga's condition, they wanted to help, Sadi Huttinga said.

"They have been so supportive," she said. "I don't know how God put him in the right place at the right time to get the support we needed. From other companies, you'd probably never get this."

Jeff Huttinga said he is overwhelmed by the support of the owners and corporate team.

"It's amazing that a big company like Dunkin' Donuts would care about the normal person," Jeff Huttinga said. "They've been wonderful, so patient and caring."

Creative Construction Co. will bring a dunk tank — the Dunkin' Donuts dunkin' tank — to the opening event, and teachers from the Huntinga children's school, Loveland Classical Schools, will volunteer to sit in the hot seat.

The activities will start with a ribbon cutting at 9 a.m. that includes the store's Loveland team, Loveland Mayor Cecil Gutierrez, city officials and the Loveland Chamber of Commerce.

From 9-11 a.m., there will be several activities for a charge that also will raise funds for Jeff Huttinga. The activities include a Dunkin' Donuts Plinko game to win products and swag, a bean bag toss and a ladder ball game.

The corporate team will match what's raised from the games as an additional donation.

The store, which is 3,100 square feet, will have indoor and outdoor seating, a meeting/party room and a drive-thru window. The store will sell 52 varieties of donuts, fancy and brewed coffee, tea and breakfast and lunch sandwiches and will be open 5 a.m.-10 p.m. seven days a week.

"Loveland is a very busy small town, but it also seems to be family-oriented," Stapleton said. "That's what we thrive on as a company, being a family donut shop and coffee shop."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm