Is having home exercise equipment a good idea?

It depends on what your goals are, but also on personality and temperament. If you are the social type of person, you might be better off joining a gym, however, if you don’t care for the weight room scene, then home exercise equipment may be the right choice.

January is the time of the year when people are motivated with New Year’s resolutions and want to get in shape and lose weight.

Home exercise equipment stores are stocked up and have extra personnel to help with the influx of customers looking to purchase the perfect piece for them.

For consumers, it is difficult to choose, especially if they haven’t done their homework researching brands and types of machines they are interested in buying.

So that is the first order of the day, doing some research as to what’s out there and what the price ranges are.

But where to start?

Consumer Reports is a good source and they rank home exercise equipment they have tested with all the details as to performance and price.

In 2014, the magazine says treadmills are a great choice to help with weight loss and named the Proform Pro 2000 a Best Buy for around $1,200. It folds and is easy to store. That’s not a bad starting machine.

For newbies or those with knees, back, or hip problems elliptical machines are a great choice when it come to home exercise equipment as there is minimum impact. Consumer Reports recommends the AFG 3.1AE for $1,100.

If you like biking, a spin bike is in order and your best bet is the Diamondback 510ic for $800. It has a built in work-out program that keeps you moving.

Rowing machines have become very popular, but can be bulky. The first thing to do is make sure it fits in the space you have available and the best rated home exercise equipment for this category is the Concept2 Model D, which goes for about $900.

These machines give you a complete workout — as opposed to a treadmill or bike — which mostly works your legs and gives you a good cardio workout. Rowing machines are recognized as a full body piece with which you can burn a ton of calories.

One other thing to consider is whether you will actually use the home exercise equipment on a regular basis. Will you stick to your resolution or will the machine sit and collect dust after the novelty has worn off?