The Avalanche came into this four-game homestand knowing it probably needed to gain ground on the Minnesota Wild in the chase for a wild-card playoff berth before heading back on the road for four consecutive games in Canada.

Yet the combination of the Avalanche’s third-period collapse in a 5-2 loss to the Nashville Predators at the Pepsi Center on Saturday and the Wild’s 3-2 shootout victory at Buffalo dropped Colorado two points behind Minnesota.

It didn’t end the Avalanche’s playoff hopes, of course, but it was a major setback, especially if it foreshadowed a continuation of this team’s wildly inconsistent play — or worse — in the final 15 games.

The Avalanche had a 2-1 lead after two periods before a familiar pattern unfolded. James Neal’s goal at 1:02 of the third period tied it, and Mike Fisher made it 3-2 with his ninth of the season at 9:44 before the Predators added empty-netters from Shea Weber and Mikka Salomaki.

“Our third period needs to be better,” said Avalanche coach Patrick Roy. “If you look at our record in the last four games we’re 1-3, and in all those games we were even or ahead going into the third period. We need to be smarter in the third period. We have to learn how to play those situations much better.”

Said defenseman Erik Johnson: “That was a tough one to forget right away. But you have to move on to the next one.”

The Predators haven’t lost in regulation in 12 games, going 8-0-4 during that stretch, and with 78 points and a six-point lead on Minnesota, they now seem likely to claim at least the first Western wild card and even have climbed to within five points of third- place St. Louis in the Central Division. So what not long ago seemed a three-team race for the West’s two wild cards has come down to the Wild and Avalanche for the final slot.

“Most of their goals were kind of broken plays,” Avalanche goalie Calvin Pickard said of the Predators. “I got off to a good start, and our team was playing well the first couple of periods. A couple of bounces went their way in the third, and that was the difference in the hockey game. We’re still there, we’re two points back, but we can’t let this turn into a losing streak.”

On Nashville’s third goal, after Pickard bobbled the puck and defenseman Andrew Bodnarchuk’s one-handed attempt to get it out of trouble failed, Fisher — whose wife, singer Carrie Underwood, will follow the Predators into the Pepsi Center for a March 30 concert — put it past Pickard.

“It was going about six feet wide, and I just wanted to get something on it in case it hit that crowd in front,” Pickard said. “It just kind of laid there, and there was kind of a lull there for a couple of seconds, and all of a sudden (Fisher) had it right on his tape in front and he made a good shot over the pad, and that was the difference.”

Blake Comeau and Gabe Landeskog scored the Colorado goals, and Pickard finished with 35 saves.

Pickard made 15 saves while holding the Predators scoreless in the first period — meaning he had 39 saves in a two-period span, starting with a franchise-record 24 in the third against Florida on Thursday.

Each of the Predators’ first two goals — from Filip Forsberg at 15:30 of the first period and then Neal’s — came off Colorado turnovers, and Neal’s score came when he was unattended and knocked in a loose puck in front off the rush.

Johnson hadn’t gotten completely back on the play, and it was a continuation of the Avalanche’s top defensive pair, Johnson and Francois Beauchemin, having an inconsistent season, albeit while playing major minutes and often against top lines.

How are they playing?

“I think you know the answer to that,” Johnson said. “Not as well as we did at the start of the year. We have to be better, for sure. It’s probably lots of different areas, but I think the biggest thing is our gaps aren’t as good off the rush. When we play against top lines, I don’t think we’re in their faces enough. I think we back off a little bit too much. We have to be a little bit more aggressive. We might be a little on our heels. We have to play more in-your-face hockey.”

Roy said: “I thought E.J. had a better game today. He knows he could bring more. Things haven’t gone the way I’m sure they want. They’ve got a lot of ice time, and those things happen.”

The third game in the Avs’ four-game homestand is Monday night against the Arizona Coyotes.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei