MIAMI--(BUSINESS WIRE)--QualMetrix, a healthcare analytics company delivering actionable insights to payers, providers and employers to help them reduce cost while enhancing the quality of healthcare, has completed the acquisition of the healthcare analytics platform of Visual Intelligence LLC.

Visual Intelligence is a progressive business intelligence and advanced analytics solutions provider that has focused on helping its customers implement the next generation of high impact, rapidly-deployed, and cost effective business intelligence capabilities.

“We are very pleased to add the healthcare analytics platform and capabilities of Visual Intelligence to our already leading edge capabilities,” said Lawrence Schimmel, M.D., Chairman. A general and vascular surgeon and the former CEO of Allied Health Group, Schimmel co-founded QualMetrix in response to the uncertainty surrounding the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, which requires all healthcare stakeholders to do more with less while improving the quality of care. “We feel the synergies between the two organizations and our product offerings at this key period in our growth will further enable our customers maximize the benefits from the QM(x) software platform and our medical expertise.”

“The Visual Intelligence healthcare acquisition significantly accelerates our software and platform development efforts,” added Adam House Sr., Chief Executive Officer. “Together with the recent addition of Cristian Ilie, formerly with VI, as our CTO, this acquisition provides us with an expanded platform as a service (PaaS) framework with their portal integration solution, existing customer and partner relationships, skilled offshore product development resources, and HIPAA hosting and infrastructure services. Their ICD-10 Financial Neutrality tool and cost reduction metrics are in use by some of the largest and most progressive stakeholders in healthcare. This move significantly expands our capabilities and client offerings in the healthcare analytics marketplace.”

“The QualMetrix acquisition enables Visual Intelligence to better focus all of its energy and resources with key customers in social media analytics, Customer Relationship Management analytics and business strategy consulting and solution hosting,” commented Dan Rider, Co-Founder and Principal at Visual Intelligence. “While at the same time enabling VI to maintain a close working relationship with QualMetrix on the hosting and consulting side.”

About Visual Intelligence

Visual Intelligence, based in Newtown Square, PA, is a leader in Social Media & consumer intention analytics, Big Data management & analytics, data center hosting services and a pioneer in advanced data visualization. VI continues to serve customers in various markets.

About QualMetrix

QualMetrix delivers high value healthcare analytics, actionable insights and innovative reporting to payers, providers and employers. Built by medical directors for medical directorsTM, QualMetrix delivers the answers healthcare leaders need to drive improvements in quality, cost and performance—so they can do better with less.