Another taxpayer-funded Obamacare consumer plan is teetering on the brink of collapse, according to a leading GOP senator who accused the administration of failing to prevent problems with the law's co-op plans.

More than half of the 23 taxpayer-funded, consumer oriented and operated plans have failed, and now one in Maine is on the verge of financial insolvency, according to Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah.

Hatch chaired a hearing of the Senate Finance Committee on Thursday that focused on problems with Obamacare.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

So far, 12 of the 23 Obamacare co-ops have shut down, and the leading culprits are a lack of federal funding and too much enrollment to cover costs. The federal government is trying to regain the more than $1 billion in taxpayer funds doled out as start-up funding to the plans.

Hatch said the Maine co-op is failing despite efforts by Medicaid to keep it solvent. The staunch Obamacare opponent called the co-ops a "failed experiment."

Maine's co-op said late last year that it would suspend enrollment in 2016 due to high enrollment and too many claim costs. The decision is one that has befallen other co-ops that enrolled too many people on the outset and couldn't cover claim costs.

But co-ops say another top reason for closure is a lack of federal funding, which the GOP-controlled Congress restricted.

The program is called risk corridors, and is intended to pay Obamacare insurers for substantial losses and force insurers to pay into the program as a result of high profits.

Also from the Washington Examiner G7 warns Brexit would pose risk to global growth British Prime Minister David Cameron won the backing of some of the U.K.'s closest allies in the battle to persuade his country's voters to remain in the European Union. At their annual meeting, this year in Ise-Shima, Japan, G7 leaders issued a statement arguing that the "Brexit," or Britain's decision to exit the EU, would pose a "serious risk" to world growth. "There are potential shocks of a non-economic origin," the leaders said in a declaration issued during their summit. "A U.K. exit from the EU would reverse the trend toward greater global trade and investment, and the jobs they create, and is a further serious risk to growth." Members of the G7 include Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the U.K., and the

The goal of the program is to help insurers as they navigate an entirely new insurance market. Insurers had no idea who was going to enroll in Obamacare when the exchanges opened in 2013.

However, Congress included a provision in the 2014 spending bill that the program could pay out only what it could take in. This was in response to assertions by the administration that the program would be revenue-neutral.

As a result, the program paid out only about 12 percent of the nearly $3 billion in funding requests.

Democrats on the panel lashed out at what they called criticism of the co-ops instead of offering solutions to the issue.