Seventy-five years ago today, an inventor named Irving Nachumsohn received a patent for the first commercially successful electric slow cooker. A few decades later, his device was more than just a beloved accessory in millions of American kitchens. The Crock-Pot was also seen as evidence that consumer goods could no longer be sold just to housewives but also would need to serve the needs of working women as well. Some credit the Crock-Pot and other home appliances with helping increase the number of women in the workforce.

The history of the slow cooker, whose sales have been booming recently, reflects a still-raging debate about how consumer appliances have changed — and failed to change — the gender balance at home as well as at work.

The Crock-Pot did not liberate women from the social stereotype or common burden of being the one responsible for cooking. Rather, the device, along with countless other home appliances like the washing machine and dryer, has simply made it easier for women to take on work outside the home. A recent government survey showed that in 2013, the average American woman still spent more than two hours a day on household activities, compared to about only an hour and 20 minutes for men. Meanwhile, after a decadeslong rise, the percentage of women working has been gradually declining.

"All these appliances are marketed with the promise that they'll make life so much easier for women, that they'll save women infinite time. Inevitably those promises never really pan out," said Amy Bix, a historian at Iowa State University.

Today, slow cookers continue to hold a special place in the homes of many American consumers, though perhaps for different reasons. Sales have nearly doubled since the turn of the millennium. Chefs have penned cookbooks with sophisticated recipes for slowly cooking everything from lamb tagine to cheesecake. The reasons are varied, analysts say, but the most striking is that men are buying more of them — like the $59.99 Crock-Pot emblazoned with the logo and colors of the Washington Redskins — the result of a deal between manufacturer Jarden and the NFL to market the device to men hoping to cook Chicago-style hot dogs and New Orleans Cajun wings on Game Day. Other reasons, analysts say, include more people cooking at home in a weak economy and a growing nostalgia for retro goods — plus less time to prepare dinner in today's hurried schedules.

Nachumsohn, who went by the surname "Naxon," invented the slow cooker to be able to cook cholent, a traditional stew eaten by Jews in eastern Europe on the Sabbath. Since they were forbidden from cooking, the Jews would bring pots of stew to a nearby bakery the day before. They would cook slowly in the residual heat from the ovens, his daughter Lenore told NPR last year.

"The advent of the slow cooker — it saved the Jewish housewife," said Laura Frankel, the executive chef in Wolfgang Puck's kosher division in Chicago and author of "Jewish Slow Cooker Recipes."

The slow cooker, like other home appliances, relied on the rapid electrification of the country during the first half of the 20th century. Many economists also say they encouraged women to work outside of the home. Single women — and some married women — had long worked as teachers, domestic servants and as factory workers during World War II. With electrification and indoor plumbing, some women had a new choice: They could continue doing the laundry with a washboard and clothespins, or they could work and pay for a washer and a dryer in installments. As appliances became available at lower prices, the second option took less and less of a woman's time.

Some researchers have found that technology was crucial in allowing women to enter the formal economy. One study by Daniele Coen-Pirani, an economist at the University of Pittsburgh, found that home appliances could account for about 40 percent of the increase in work outside the home among married women during the 1960s.

An examination of data from developed countries found that cheaper home appliances led women to enter the labor force between 1980 and 1994. Another study found that in South Africa, where about a quarter of the population gained access to the grid between the end of apartheid and 2001, electrification led to significant increases in women's employment within just a few years. "You can look at countries where some of these technologies have become cheaper, faster. In these countries, you see more of an increase in labor force participation by women," Coen-Pirani said, adding that it's also possible, though, that companies began marketing more goods to women as they increasingly took on jobs and had higher incomes.

Some historians, however, see it differently. In 1982, Ruth Schwartz Cowan argued in her classic "More Work for Mother" that technology had simply created new tasks for women. With a washer and dryer, they were expected to do the laundry more regularly, for example. And as cars became more common, they were expected to drive their children from activity to activity.

"The advertising copy said all of these things — the refrigerator, the washing machine, the dryer — were going to revolutionize housework. None of them did," she said.

Cowan maintains that changes in society's beliefs and attitudes toward women, not technology, is what led them to work outside of the home. "Married women entered the workforce because they needed to and wanted to, not because they were released from anything in particular in their homes," she said.

In the early 1970s, the Crock-Pot officially hit stores. Over the following years, the percentage of women working went from 43 percent to 60 percent, fueled by a range of policies such as the Equal Rights Act, as well as "developments in labor-saving household technology," White House economists said in a report last year.

In many ways, there was nothing remarkable about the Crock-Pot. People had always cooked things slowly in pots. "The Crock-Pot existed for hundreds of years before it was electrified," Cowan said. "It was an old idea, electrified."

Rival, the original manufacturer of the device, had found a new and expanding market. The Crock-Pot was "perfect for working women," declared a Sept. 25, 1975, advertisement in The Washington Post.

That was the year that Mable Hoffman published "Crockery Cookery."