Montrose clinic gets $1 million from feds

A division of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services announced an influx of federal funding this week for community health centers across the country, including $1 million that will go to fund a sprawling new health center in Montrose.

The money will go to the River Valley Family Health Center, which currently operates centers in both Olathe and Montrose.

The $1 million covers much of what it will cost for River Valley to rehab the former Montrose Athletic Club, at 100 Apollo Court, which now encompasses about 26,000 square feet of empty space at the location.

When complete, the new health center will largely continue the integrated services offered by River View — primary health care as well as mental health services. The new center will add dental services as well, according to Debby Harrison-Zarkis, chief operating officer of River Valley Family Health Center.

As a federally qualified health center, River Valley offers health care to an underserved segment of the population, including patients on Medicaid and the uninsured.

“We take anyone and everyone, so (the Health Resources and Services Administration) is really seeing the need in the country, especially with the expansion of Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act, for clinics to see these newly insured patients, or uninsured patients,” Harrison-Zarkis said.

“As the feds are seeing more and more the value we’re providing, they’re putting more money toward us — to help us with expansion, to help us meet our clinical measures, (and) open and start new programs to serve our communities. They’re just very supportive of community health centers,” she said.

“Providing funding to help health centers renovate their facilities will allow them to provide care to more patients,” said HRSA Acting Associate Administrator Jim Macrae, in a press release announcing the funding awards.

Harrison-Zarkis said a recent report pegged the number of people in Montrose who are on Medicaid and without a primary care physician at 4,000 to 5,000. She said the estimate for Delta is about 3,000.

“There’s still a lot of folks out there who are not being served,” she said.

In addition to the three major areas of service to be offered at River Valley — primary care, mental health, and dental services — the health center also provides numerous other health-related programs and services. Among the list are cooking classes, chronic disease classes, mental health support groups, preventative health education, even outreach and enrollment specialists who can help people on site to sign up for insurance or navigate the center’s sliding-fee scale.

According to HRSA, more than 1,400 health centers serve 23 million people each year. The program doled out nearly $4 million in the funding round this week, which is in addition to more than $2.2 million distributed in September 2015. The money comes from the Affordable Care Act’s Community Health Center Fund.

When the new health center in Montrose is complete, the current clinic at 100 Tessitore Court, Suite B, will be folded into the new facility. River Valley’s Olathe location, at 308 Main St., will remain open because of the need in that community, Harrison-Zarkis said.