Floods, theft and illness no match for this duo

Doug Padilla dries metal work that had been plated at KMG Industrial Screening & Metal Finishing last week. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

Kim and Mike Bossley are nothing if not survivors. Acts of God. Acts of man. An ever-changing business environment. Bring it on.

Or not. They could probably use a more peaceful 2014 after the year they had last year.

KMG Industrial Screening & Metal Finishing is celebrating its 10-year anniversary this month and the six-month anniversary of when the St. Vrain River overflowed its banks and invaded their Boston Avenue shop.

The couple's business is a combination of screen printing — T-shirts for consumers and industrial cases for commercial customers — and "anodyzing" — covering metal objects with various types of protective or decorative coating.

It had been a normal, if not rainy, Thursday morning last September when, "We got the order to get out. We got the reverse-911 call," according to Kim Bossley.

She said out of instinct, she started grabbing the computers and putting them on shelves. The hazmat team soon arrived, aware of the harsh chemicals KMG uses in its day to day operations. But they weren't there more than a couple minutes before the water started coming down Boston.

The couple was allowed to get to higher ground while the water flowed down the street, but knew by the amount of water that their business was getting hammered.

"We lost two full bays of screen printing equipment," Kim Bossley said. "We lost the T-shirt press, screens, printers.

Advertisement

"After the flood we got in and everything was floating. And all of the mud was clogging the screens. They're made of silk, and all the mud was just sticking in them."

The screens cost between $45 and $60, she said, and they were a total loss as the company had no flood insurance.

"I'd say 90 percent of them (dozens and dozens) were lost," said Mike Bossley. "They were in the mud under two feet of water."

Mike and Kim Bossley, owners of KMG Industrial Screening and & Metal Finishing. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

Fortunately, the plating and metal finishing side of the business was not as badly damaged. Still, they decided to move rather than restart their business in that location. They found a space at 1331 Sherman Drive with the help of the city and the Longmont Area Economic Council, Kim Bossley said.

But their trials weren't finished yet.

"We were in the process of moving here," she said. "We shut down the shop the second week of October to do the move."

But their chilling unit, a critical piece to their operations for which they had to rent a semi to have moved to their new building, got ransacked one night before they were even back in business. Someone ripped the cover off and stole all the copper wire out of it.

"They got $42 worth of copper," Kim Bossley said. "That's what the police report said."

The thieves returned the next night and stole the condenser out of the unit.

"It was very depressing — with the flood and the moving," Mike Bossley said.

Added Kim, "We were anticipating only being down two weeks; we ended up being down eight."

Luckily insurance did cover the cost of a new chilling unit. It was also fortunate that during the flood none of the toxic chemicals were mixed into the flood waters. The water crept up the side of the containment tanks but stopped short of overflowing them.

And with all of the damage to the screen printing side of the business, the couple estimates that about 90 to 95 percent of their business is now the metal plating side of it.

They're not back up to their pre-flood revenue, they say, but they're getting there.

"We had a lot of customers who really stepped up when we needed it," Kim Bossley said.

The company's customer base includes some huge companies, such as Ball Aerospace and Lockheed, but Kim Bossley wanted to single out Hirsch Precision Machinery as one of her most supportive. They've been there since the very beginning and continue to be a strong customers 10 years later.

KMG Plating was formed by Kim (then McGuire) in 2004. She had learned the business working in her dad's machine shop and ended up buying him out.

That same year Kim bought out Precision Silk Screening Co. in Longmont, a 25-year-old business. And in 2007 she bought out neighboring screen printing business NEO Graphics. She later consolidated the three businesses under the one name she has today.

Kim and Mike got married in 2009; he had been working at the company for a couple years before that. He's the company's plating manager and vice president.

There's one other reason why Kim Bossley counts herself as one of the lucky ones, she said. The very day of the flood, she got a call from her doctor saying she had been accepted into a clinical trial for an experimental drug to treat Hepatitis C — Stage 4 liver failure, a life-threatening disease she had been battling.

Six months later, she wrote in an email, "I am happy to report that ... I am showing no signs of HCV in my body."

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com