Related 2013 Multicultural Awards Late mother inspired this award winner Multicultural awards celebrate 25-year legacy

When organizers of the Multicultural Awards were getting ready this year to put together their 25th anniversary program, they admitted they were a little surprised to still be granting the awards. And it wasn't merely because it was difficult to believe that so many years had passed.

"One of the things we said in the beginning was that when people of color were recognized as equally as others in the community, we would stop doing (the awards)," says Janet Heimer of the Boulder Community Action Program, which puts together the program. "That hasn't quite happened."

Heimer says that although much progress has been made, the award still serves an important purpose.

"I think it is something that has filled a gap in the community," she says.

With the award hitting the quarter-century mark, Heimer says the group decided to dedicate the program this year to those who have worked long and hard to better the multicultural community in Boulder County.

The program, called "Honoring Our Elders," looks at the service of local folks 70 years and older.

Advertisement

Here are the award recipients, many of whom continue to work to make life better for all in Boulder County:

Lifelong activist

Betty Ball and her late husband, Gary, were activists for many years in Boulder, working with such groups as the People's Clinic and the Rocky Mountain Peace and Justice Center on causes ranging from advocacy against racism, environmental issues and peace and justice efforts. Ball has continued in the work and is described by those who work with her as a role model with an iron will and a big heart.

Education promoter

Dorothy Bustamante, who works at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, has served on the board of the Boulder County Latina Women's League, helping to mentor Latina students and encourage them to stay in school. She also serves on the board of the YWCA of Boulder County and on the advisory board of the Boulder County Community Action Program. Those who have worked with her describe her as an inspiration with her upbeat attitude and hard work.

Tireless advocate

Mariagnes Aya Medrud, a former Boulder Valley School District teacher who spent her early years in a World War II Japanese internment camp, has spent her life in community service working to integrate multicultural youth into the community. She served on the Multi-Ethnic Action Committee of the school district and, after retirement, served as co-director of the Rosa Minoka-Hill Fund, which provides scholarships for Native Americans students to attend preparatory schools. She has served on several boards and commissions with the city of Boulder, as well as spending decades teaching art and working on the Pine Ridge Reservation. In 2013, she received an honorary doctorate from the University of Colorado. Now living with Parkinson's, she continues to be a role model and advocate.

Energetic volunteers

Lee and Beverly Springer can be found working on community projects such as mailing out books to preschoolers as part of the Mayor's Book Club. Over the years, they have served on various government committees and nonprofit agencies and helped with elections. Their support has been particularly crucial to the OUR Center in Longmont and Intercambio, where they have worked to remove barriers to self-sufficiency.

Kept on working

Euvaldo Valdez could not quit working. After retiring from Boulder County Aging Services in 2006, he returned to help seniors figure out the Medicare Prescription Drug Plan, Part D, and still helps out every year during the enrollment period. He volunteers with the Hispanic Education Foundation and the Niwot Business Association and is active in his church.