Image Matters delivery coordinator Jason Dotson tests a new Xerox 5325 printer for a customer Wednesday at the company's headquarters on Sutherland Avenue. Some companies -- such as Image Matters -- say they had already decided some time ago that they needed to provide employees with health insurance. (AMY SMOTHERMAN BURGESS/NEWS SENTINEL)

By Ed Marcum of the Knoxville News Sentinel

Some businesses see offering health insurance as a good way to attract and retain top notch employees; others would like to offer it, but say they just can't afford it.

But when new provisions of the Affordable Care Act take effect in Jan. 1, some companies that balk at the expense of providing health insurance will have to deal with it anyway. The law will require that any business with more than 50 full-time employees offer health insurance or face penalties that can amount to more than $2,000 per employee.

Companies that have nearly 50 employees may have to consider whether expanding their businesses will push them into a zone of prohibitive expenses. Some companies, such as Knoxville-based Image Matters, with about 30 full-time employees, say they had already decided some time ago that they needed to provide employees with health insurance.

"If you want to have great people, you have to provide them with the services that your major competitors do, such as health insurance and retirement plans," said J.D. Sullivan, co-owner of the company.

Cindy Hollander, owner of Innovative Designs Inc., an engineering company, said her company hovers around 50 full-time employees, but she built the business from the beginning with the idea it would provide health-care benefits.

Likewise, Denark Construction, which has about 50 full-time workers, has always provided health insurance, said Grant Rosenberg, vice president of business development.

However, for Comfort Keepers, providing health insurance to employees will be a major challenge, said Knoxville franchise owner Tammy Brogan.

Her company has 80 to 110 employees, with a mix of full-time and part-time workers. The firm provides in-home care to mostly elderly clients who have little income, so to keep fees low, it offers limited pay and benefits to employees, she said.

"Before the ACA, we could offer catastrophic coverage plans for a reasonable amount — about $20 to $40 per employee per month, but now to buy insurance would cost hundreds of dollars per month per employee and there is just no way we could pass that along to our clients," she said.

Lisa Helton, with Shafer Insurance Co., works with Comfort Keepers and other businesses on employee benefits. About 10 percent to 15 percent of her new clients have come to her because of the new ACA rules, she said.

"It will affect a lot of companies in the service industries and construction," she said.