HealthCare.gov underscores a public-sector culture that turns off creative minds. Silicon Valley lures talent D.C. craves

SAN FRANCISCO — Blame it on heated toilet seats, free daily transport or the uninhibited joy of invention. Silicon Valley and its environs continue to lure the tech talent Washington craves.

The perks and prestige of Bay Area companies have always served as a powerful draw for young engineers — incentives the federal government and its community of contractors can scarcely match.

Story Continued Below

And while the Obama administration has worked to reverse this trend, HealthCare.gov’s pronounced stumbles underscore a public-sector culture that often turns off creative minds, limits ingenuity and fails to attract those hoping to influence the next generation of technology.

( Sign up for POLITICO’s Morning Tech tip sheet)

“It’s perception of opportunity,” said Mike McGeary, co-founder of Engine Advocacy, a San Francisco group that helps engage start-ups in public policy. “I don’t know anyone who majors in computer science at Stanford and says, ‘I’m going to be a government bureaucrat.’”

It’s not just the feds. States and nonprofit organizations also lose promising engineers to the private sector, which the National Science Foundation estimates pulls in 70 percent of computer science and math graduates.

Part of the allure appears obvious on a Google or Facebook campus: three to four times as much pay, on-site amenities like yoga and catered meals, and Wi-Fi-enabled buses that scoop up workers from hipster neighborhoods in San Francisco.

The government also struggles with less tangible factors, including a Valley perspective that encourages employees to run with ideas and “break things,” rather than adhere to protocols and sign-offs. It’s a world of MacBook Airs and coffee shop conversations in the Mission instead of BlackBerrys and solitary cubicles in McLean.

( Also on POLITICO: Full technology policy coverage)

“There is not a sense that these are the places to solve cutting-edge problems,” said Alan Davidson, Google’s former public policy director and a visiting scholar at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. “Government, especially in the IT world, can be very stifling. It doesn’t support risk taking or experimentation.”

Another aspect has to do with the mind-set of a younger generation that believes tech companies can contribute as much, if not more, to society as public agencies.

“More and more, people understand that you can innovate and do good in both government and the private sector,” said Nick Papas, a former White House spokesman now with Airbnb, a San Francisco-based start-up that helps people rent out their homes.

A new Freedman Consulting report, commissioned by the MacArthur Foundation and Ford Foundation, examines the flow of technology talent away from the public sector. It attributes the gap to recruitment barriers such as compensation and concludes young engineers need more education in policy matters. Such steps are critical, the study warns, because technology increasingly affects every aspect of society — from insurance access to privacy rights.

“If we don’t take drastic actions to improve this tech pipeline,” report co-author Sam Gill said, “we’re going to have a government that is not really relevant to the governance of the 21st century.”

( Also on POLITICO: Obama techies sell startup to NGP VAN)

Others consider the Silicon Valley vs. Washington dynamic a tired — and outdated — story line.

“What we are finding is there is a great deal of talent in the country yearning for the opportunity to serve their country,” said Aneesh Chopra, the former White House chief technology officer.

Chopra pointed to the Presidential Innovation Fellows program launched last year that enables industry leaders to assist with government projects. He noted new federal initiatives to hire outside traditional recruitment channels, provide more government data to the public and establish prizes for innovative ideas.