Aetna’s exit from the industry’s largest trade group, America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP), has industry watchers talking about what it means and who may be next.

Aetna follows on the heels of UnitedHealth Group, which left AHIP at the end of June. AHIP's members include 200 of the leading health plan and insurance companies.

In a company statement, Aetna said: “Aetna has decided not to renew our AHIP membership for 2016. We will continue to partner with groups that are working, as we are, toward expanding access to high-quality, affordable healthcare.”

Stinneford

Aetna’s decision to leave AHIP is not surprising, given UnitedHealth’s decision to leave the trade organization last year, says Bill Stinneford, senior vice president at Buxton, a consumer analytics company that works with healthcare providers.

“The statements both companies made suggest that they feel their primary concerns no longer align with AHIP’s, justifying the decision to leave,” Stinneford says. “Given the proposed Aetna and Humana merger, it would not be surprising if Humana is the next major insurer to elect to leave AHIP.”

Marty Hauser, former CEO, SummaCare, and now partner, Chandler Group, agrees. "Assuming the Aetna-Humana merger is approved, it would probably not make sense for Aetna to maintain two memberships so it remains to be seen whether they maintain a membership once the merger is finalized," Hauser says.

John R. Graham, senior fellow, at the National Center for Policy Analysis, believes that the industry is seeing a collapse of consensus among health insurers.

“Each has a big decision to make about how they respond to health reform: Dig their heels in to defend Obamacare; or get onboard repealing and replacing it?” Graham says. “It is not an easy business decision. On the one hand, they won strong bipartisan agreement on a one-year moratorium on the health insurance fee [in the tax extenders/omnibus last December] and they can be optimistic they can keep rolling it over every year.”

Graham

On the other hand, Graham says, they are losing money in the exchanges and there is no bail out. “Are they willing to just exit the exchanges and write off 10 million customers? Other lines of business are doing well: Medicare Advantage and Medicaid managed care are thriving, so some insurers will decide just to give up on Obamacare itself. Others will do what they can to rescue the exchanges, but that will be a heavy lift.

“The industry thought Obamacare was a done deal, and it is not,” Graham continues. “So, it is not surprising to see them unravel with respect to the next steps. It provides a great opportunity for new ideas for health reform to get a hearing without running into the protective wall the insurers had built around Obamacare.

Next: Trade associations: Still relevant?