EAST ROCKHILL >> For approximately 20 months, Pennridge School District teachers have been without a new contract, but all that ended in a 9-0 vote Monday night when the Pennridge School Board approved a new collective bargaining agreement with the Pennridge Education Association.

The PEA had ratified the agreement earlier in September, according to district officials.

The teachers have been without a contract since June 2014, and the new four-year contract covers July 1, 2014, through June 20, 2018.

Salaries will increase an average of approximately 1.25 percent during the contractual period.

Advertisement

Here is the annual salary breakdown:

• 2014-15 School Year: Teachers had a salary freeze while under status quo, which means the agreement did not changed from the previous year.

• 2015-16 School Year: Teachers will see an estimated 1.61 percent increase.

• 2016-17 School Year: Teachers will see an estimated 0.07 percent increase.

• 2017-18 School Year: Teachers will see an estimated 1.26 percent increase.

The first wage increase is slated to go into effect in January 2016.

In addition, effective January, medical benefits will now include an up-front deductible requirement of $300 for an individual and $600 for a family. For employees hired on or after Jan. 1, it will increase to $450 for an individual and $900 for a family, according to the agreement.

Furthermore, benefits include 100 percent of coinsurance for network benefits, and employee’s share of premium costs will decrease from 12 percent to 10 percent.

The shift to an up-front deductible was a “difficult change” for teachers to get behind, school board President Peter Yarnell said in a follow-up interview Tuesday afternoon, stating that the decrease in premium costs was a compromise to address the new deductible requirement.

The current self-insured disability benefit will be eliminated and replaced by a disability insurance policy provided by a third party. As a result, this will free up the administration that did a lot of the paperwork for those benefits to focus on other things, Yarnell said.

Provisions were also made to decrease teacher work days from 196 to 193 days a year, officials said, as well as for an “expedited dispute resolution process” if health care benefits become subject to excise taxes under the Affordable Care Act beginning in 2018, which Yarnell said was a very important part of the agreement.

“You never fully get what you want,” Yarnell said. “There were things we didn’t get and there were things the teachers didn’t get. You never get all you want, but I think it’s a fair contract.”

PEA President Timothy Deose could not be reached for comment.

Although the collective bargaining agreement has been reached with the teachers union, the district is still working on a collective bargaining agreement with the Pennridge Educational Support Personnel Association — the union that represents groups such as bus drivers, custodians and teachers aids.

Reaching an agreement with support staff, Yarnell said, is complex because the PESPA represents a diverse group that has varied interests.

It has been without a contract for more than two years.

The district is also working on a standard agreement with the cafeteria employees, who have been without a new agreement since June 2014, Yarnell said.

He said he is optimistic that in the next month an agreement with both parties will be reached.