TRENTON — A group of health care advocates warned that 210,000 New Jerseyans who used tax credits to buy insurance under the Affordable Care Act could lose their coverage if the U.S. Supreme Court decides the landmark law excluded New Jersey and 33 other states that relied on the federal government to run their insurance marketplaces.

Without the tax credits — which provide the average policy holder $3,708 off their premium a year — these people would not be able to afford their policies, explained Ray Castro, senior analyst for New Jersey Policy Perspective, a liberal leaning research organization. They will lose their coverage, he said.

"The loss of tax credits would cause a crisis in our state," Castro said. "Not only would those receiving them be affected, but the insurance costs for those without them would dramatically increase as well."

Castro predicted premiums also would rise for the 42,000 people who did not qualify for tax credits and the 100,000 who purchased a policy outside the federal marketplace. "These increasing costs would likely mean only the sickest keep their insurance, driving costs up even further," he said.

Health care advocates, patients and other community leaders gathered at the Statehouse Monday to discuss the worst-case scenario for New Jersey should the nation's highest court deny cash assistance to a total of 9.3 million citizens nationwide in the King v. Burwell case. The court is hearing arguments Wednesday, and a decision is expected in June.

The case, filed by business owners and other individuals who oppose the law, hinges on a "quirk of language in the law itself," according to an analysis by Joel Cantor, director of the Rutgers Center for State Health Policy. "Specifically, in one section the law states that private insurance subsidies are to be administered 'by marketplaces established by the states.' "

The Obama administration and advocates for the law argue the intent was always for everyone enrolled in a marketplace plan to get the tax credits if they met income guidelines.



If the court — which upheld the constitutionality of the landmark health care law in 2012 — decides the subsidies are available only to state-based exchanges, the decision would upend coverage for millions of people and likely dismantle the program, advocates said.

"The Affordable Care Act is working by making a difference in the lives of hundreds of thousands of people all across our country," said Maura Collinsgru, health program director for the consumer organization, Citizen Action. "This is not a case of King v. Burwell. This is a case of King versus the more than 200,000 New Jerseyans and others like them all across America who have health coverage of tax credits."

Mariel Harrison, an advocacy organizer for the New Jersey chapter of the National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence, said she has helped people in recovery apply for Obamacare.

"The beautiful thing I have been able to witness in the last six months is people crying when finding out what their subsidy is going to be, and that they are going to be able to have health coverage," Harrison said.

Harrison, a 28-year-old Point Pleasant resident who said she has been sober for eight years, said she neglected her teeth and gums when she was using drugs and alcohol. She sees the periodontist every three months.

"It breaks my heart this could be taken away from so many hard-working, deserving New Jersyeans," she added. "Health care would be inaccessible to me without a subsidy."

If the court rules against preserving the subsidies, the greatest number of people who would be affected live in largely suburban congressional districts, Castro said.

U.S. Rep. Bill Pascrell (D-9th Dist.) whose district covers portions of Bergen, Hudson and Passaic counties, represents the largest number of people, at 17,141, who used tax credits to buy coverage; Rep. Chris Smith (R-4th Dist.) whose district covers portions of Mercer, Monmouth and Ocean counties, represents 16,764 policy holders, according to the analysis.

"The stereotype that these folks tend to be in urban areas is not the case. These are working class individuals through the state," Castro said. "We are hoping this is going to convince our entire delegation to do something if there is an adverse decision."

Gov. Chris Christie and the legislature could also take action by creating the state's own online insurance marketplace, also known as an exchange Castro said.