A debate in the state's 40th Senate District on Wednesday between Republican Rep. Mario Scavello and Democrat Mark Aurand began tensely and hardly eased up.

The attacks were reciprocated, despite Scavello's more energized delivery overshadowing Aurand's composure.

Never were they more at odds than when asked about their positions on women's rights issues, a question that for Scavello brought up Aurand's recent TV ad accusing Scavello of co-sponsoring a controversial bill that would require women seeking an abortion to undergo an ultrasound to verify the age of the fetus and for responding to a questionnaire that he opposes abortion "in all circumstances."

Scavello blamed Aurand's ad for a recent threat he received.

"Because of that commercial, someone called my office and threatened our lives. Myself and my staff. " he said. "There's going to be charges filed in the next couple days."

"I'm sorry that that happened," Aurand replied. "It shouldn't have happened. But it's not because of the ad that it happened. You made the decision to fill out the Scranton Diocese's questionnaire, where you had options about what your position was on abortion. And you chose the one that said I'm against abortion in all circumstances, rape, incest and health of the mother. I didn't choose that for you. The ad didn't choose that for you."

Mark Aurand and Rep. Mario Scavello debate Wednesday in a forum hosted by the League of Women Voters of Northampton County. (APRIL BARTHOLOMEW / THE MORNING CALL)

The exchange continued as Scavello argued that social and religious issues are misplaced in this race.

"No business at all in a Senate debate. No business at all in a Senate race," he said.

That stance, Aurand said, ignores the rights of millions of women in Pennsylvania.

Another Aurand ad earned a mention during the 75-minute debate, held at the Forks Township Municipal Building and sponsored by the League of Women Voters of Northampton County.

While Aurand's commercial blasted Scavello for voting for an increase in the gas tax to fund transportation improvements, Scavello challenged the Democrat to identify which taxes he would raise to fix roads and bridges or fund his campaign blueprint.

"We're not going to raise taxes on the middle class and working people, because you have already done that," Aurand said. He would have imposed an extraction tax on natural gas drillers, closed the Delaware loophole and opposed $1.2 billion in corporate tax breaks, he said.

The candidates disagreed on legislation to repeal property taxes, how to encourage job growth and economic development and the impact of Obamacare on Pennsylvania, but they agreed on imposing a severance tax, increasing the minimum wage while exempting some teens, support for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgener anti-discrimination legislation and legalizing medical marijuana.

Scavello advocated for all-day vocational technical school that would prepare students for trades in need of highly skilled workers and listed employers who've brought jobs to his district during his tenure.

Aurand repeated criticisms of more than $1 billion in corporate tax cuts, namely through the ongoing phase-out of the state's capital stock and franchise tax, and inadequate education funding.

The two are vying for a new senate seat, creating by post-census political remapping that moved the 40th District from western Pennsylvania to the Lehigh Valley and Poconos. It covers much of Northampton County north of Route 22, including the Nazareth area and Slate Belt, as well as eastern Monroe County. Those areas saw population growth between 2000 and 2010.

Democrats account for 45 percent of the district's 174,045 registered voters, Republicans 37 percent. But voters both south and north have elected Republicans to the state House in recent elections: Scavello in Monroe every two years since 2002, and Joe Emrick in Northampton since 2010.

Republicans also swept Northampton County Council races last year.

Scavello is a well-funded Republican from the north side of Blue Mountain, former mayor of Mount Pocono and former chairman of the Monroe County Board of Commissioners.

Aurand, of Lower Nazareth Township, is a partner in the Allentown law firm Davidson & McCarthy, practicing commercial and business law and health care law. He beat Scott Parsons and Joe Capozzolo for the Democratic nomination in the spring, posting a big win in Monroe County but losing his home county.

samantha.marcus@mcall.com

Twitter @samanthamarcus

610-820-6583