U.S. Rep. Tom Rice, R-S.C., is sponsoring a resolution that would compel the House to take President Barack Obama to court over his “failure to faithfully execute the laws,” should it be adopted.

The resolution points to Article II, Section 3 of the Constitution, which defines the president’s responsibilities, and charges that Obama and his administration have abused executive power and failed to execute the laws of the United States faithfully, according to The Weekly Standard.

“[I]t is therefore necessary and appropriate for Congress to turn to the courts to ensure the faithful execution of the laws as required by the Constitution,” states the resolution.

Michelle Obama hits hubby with death glare seen around the world

“President Obama has adopted a practice of picking and choosing which laws he wants to enforce,” Rice wrote in a letter to House members asking them to co-sponsor this resolution, The Weekly Standard reported.

“In most cases, his laws of choice conveniently coincide with his administration’s political agenda,” Rice continued. “Our Founding Fathers created the Executive Branch to implement and enforce the laws written by Congress and vested this power in the President. However, President Obama has chosen to ignore some of the laws written by Congress and implemented by preceding Presidents.”

In the letter, Rice highlighted four instances in which Obama may have overstepped his authority:

1. President Obama recently announced an “administrative fix” in regard to cancelled healthcare plans due to Obamacare. Of course he plans to provide a “fix” which will substantially alter his signature legislation without involving Congress. 2. Over the summer, President Obama’s Administration announced a one-year delay in Obamacare’s employer mandate without involving Congress. 3. Last year, President Obama’s Administration granted temporary status to illegal immigrants who entered the United States as children without involving Congress. 4. In June 2012, President Obama’s Administrative provided a waiver initiative for the welfare work requirement under TANF without involving Congress.

There are currently 29 members of Congress co-sponsoring the resolution, to include three from Florida: Bachmann (MN-06), Bridenstine (OK-01), Chaffetz (UT-03), J. Duncan (SC-03), DeSantis (FL-06), Franks (AZ-08), Gowdy (SC-04), Harris (MD-01), Lamborn (CO-05), LaMalfa (CA-01), Marino (PA-10), McClintock (CA-04), Meadows (NC-11), Nunnelee (MS-01), Pittenger (NC-09), Posey (FL-08), Tom Price (GA-06), Ribble (WI-08), Salmon (AZ-05), Sanford (SC-01), Schweikert (AZ-06), Stewart (UT-02), Stockman (TX-36), Walberg (MI-07), Weber (TX-14), Wenstrup (OH-02), Williams (TX-25), Joe Wilson (SC-02), and Yoho (FL-03).

Read the full text from Rep. Rice here:

http://www.bizpacreview.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/STOP_leg_text.pdf