Health cost study stirs little interest

GOP legislators don't want spike in their premiums

Some Front Range Republicans don’t like the idea of doing a study to see why some parts of the state have higher health care premiums than others.

That’s because they are in regions of the state with relatively lower premiums compared to the Western Slope and don’t want to see their rates go up, those senators said in opposing a bill that won preliminary approval in the Colorado Senate on Tuesday.

The measure, HB1336, would require the state’s insurance commissioner to study why rates are so high in some of the nine regions that have been created to determine health insurance premiums, and to see if creating a single region — the entire state — would help get them lower.

But Sens. Kevin Lundberg, R-Berthoud, and Tim Neville, R-Littleton, spoke out against the idea, saying it would have a “deleterious” impact on their own rates.

“Representing Larimer County, I know what this bill will do if this is actually implemented and we do create a single region, and that is the medical premium costs for the people in Larimer County will go up,” Lundberg said. “There’s no question (premiums) are too high, but to simply take those costs and shift them around the state isn’t going to fix the problem.”

Like Neville, Lundberg said the real problem is government involvement in health care, primarily through the federal Affordable Care Act.

Proponents of the measure, which was introduced by three Western Slope lawmakers, said the bill does nothing but study the issue. Why would anyone be opposed to getting information, they asked.

“I guess I’m not sure why we have a problem getting information before we make further decisions that definitely impact my constituents on a daily basis,” said Sen. Ellen Roberts, R-Durango. “It’s a little confounding as to why you would not care about how life is for 80 percent of the state that is on the other side of the divide trying to make ends meet. Asking for a study on this is entirely appropriate.”

According to the sponsors of the bill, Sen. Kerry Donovan, D-Vail, and Reps. Millie Hamner, D-Frisco, and Bob Rankin, R-Carbondale, health premium costs for the mountainous parts of the state saw a 26 percent increase this year compared to an average of 9.8 percent statewide.

“The reason we want a study to be conducted is because over the past handful of years we have been trying to figure out what is driving health care costs,” Donovan said. “It has been like shouting these questions into a black box. We have not been able to get answers from anyone who is involved in this field as to why we might be seeing these costs and what possible solutions we might have.”

Neville said the reason is clear. The federal health care act has taken the free market out of the picture.

“I happen to be in the insurance business,” Neville said. “Can you imagine a bill that said all insurance companies must rate according to the state of Colorado on your auto insurance? It doesn’t matter where you live. You live in a high-crime area, you live in a high-traffic area, you’re going to pay the same amount on your auto insurance as somebody who lives in an area that has hardly any accidents, hardly any problems. This is a cost-shifting bill.”

The measure, which requires the study to be completed by Aug. 1, needs a final Senate vote before it can head to the governor. It cleared the House on a 54-11 vote, with only Front Range Republicans opposing it.