Healthcare.gov offers health-insurance policies that qualify for federal subsidies under the Affordable Care Act. (Photo: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.)

Iowans who want to buy subsidized health insurance under the Affordable Care Act will no longer be able to choose a policy from the country’s largest carrier, but they can switch to the state's main health insurer for the first time.

UnitedHealthcare will no longer sell individual health insurance policies in Iowa, the state insurance division announced Monday. The company said it had lost hundreds of millions of dollars by selling on the Obamacare marketplaces, also known as exchanges. Most of those policies were sold via an online marketplace that allows people with moderate incomes to qualify for federal subsidies under the Affordable Care Act. The insurance division said the shift would affect about 9,000 consumers.

In Iowa, UnitedHealthcare’s withdrawal could be offset by the entry of the state’s dominant health insurance carrier, Wellmark Blue Cross & Blue Shield. Wellmark previously has declined to sell policies on the Obamacare exchanges, but spokeswoman Traci McBee confirmed Monday that it will sell policies there for 2017.

"Although other carriers are choosing to exit this distribution channel, we believe that this is a critical time for us to be on the exchange as our members seek access to subsidies to help reduce the cost of their health insurance premiums for themselves and their families," McBee wrote in an email to the Register.

Insurance Commissioner Nick Gerhart said he was disappointed but not surprised by UnitedHealthcare's withdrawal from Iowa's version of the Affordable Care Act exchange.

"I think it's more of a national decision than a state-to-state decision," he said in an interview.

Gerhart said consumers who purchased UnitedHealthcare policies on the exchange should not panic, because their coverage will last through 2016, and they should have other good options for 2017 when they re-enroll in the fall.

Gerhart said he expects other health insurance carriers to seek premium increases when they file their proposed 2017 rates next month, though he's not sure how high they'll be. He predicted the carriers' arguments for price increases will include that Affordable Care Act measures to cushion them from risk have not been as effective as they expected.

Monday's announcement doesn't affect the tens of thousands of Iowa Medicaid recipients who recently were enrolled in UnitedHealthcare plans to replace Medicaid coverage. UnitedHealthcare was one of three national companies hired to manage the state's Medicaid program, which insures about 560,000 poor or disabled Iowans. That arrangement is continuing.

The subsidized policies sold on the Obamacare exchanges are for consumers with moderate incomes who don't have employer-provided insurance. UnitedHealthcare was one of three carriers that sold subsidy-eligible policies in most of Iowa for 2016. The others were Coventry and Medica. A total of about 55,000 Iowans purchased such policies for this year. Most received federal tax credits to help pay the premiums.

The Iowa system had previously been hampered by the 2014 collapse of CoOportunity Health, a health insurance co-op that was formed with millions of dollars in federal grants and loans under the Affordable Care Act.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Sv5lbj