WINTER STORM ANNA THROUGH TONIGHT

During the rest of the evening and overnight, Winter Storm Anna will continue to bring all sorts of difficult weather to most of Connecticut, but not all. All warnings and advisories continue; please click here to see the alert latest map.

Snow. Some people will continue to have heavy snow. Some people will get light snow. Some will continue to hardly have any. It is amazing to see the disparity in snow among the towns. Torrington, Simsbury, Enfield – all of northern Hartford and Litchfield Counties – have hardly seen any snow. The dry air surrounding the periphery of this storm has proved to be insurmountably stubborn. These towns are the “have nots” of the storm; there appear to be no forces that will bring much change to the lack of snow. Here we’ll bet less than an inch of snow, if anything.

The Shoreline is the exact opposite. Hours and hours of heavy snow will bring a much deeper snow pack. We will have snow totals of 5”-10” in most places, with many locations at even a foot or higher. We’ve already seen reports of close to 6” in New Haven and 8” in Darien with snow continuing at this time.

In between, 3”-6” is still likely. Hartford and points southeast, along the Interstate 84 Corridor, including Farmington and Waterbury, will receive that type of snowfall. Within that area, a few pockets may receive a little more.

Snow will continue to come down moderately and heavily at times, with snow rates sometimes going to between one and two inches per hour. Snow this intense will easily cover roads just plowed and reduce visibility to a quarter mile, making driving a truly dangerous exercise and even more so at night.

Wind. Wind gusts will continue to be strong. Gusts could go to 40 MPH or higher, drifting snow and further lowering the visibility. Snow falling heavily during high wind can be disorienting. Blizzard conditions are still possible along I-95, where a Blizzard Warning still exists.

Coastal Flooding. Round two of coastal flooding along the Shoreline will happen tonight. High tides are between 8:49 PM and 11:00 PM and will be unusually high again at one to one and a half feet above normal. Although this level of high tide will not be as high as this morning’s and all advisories toward that end are expired, it could still be the cause of at least some minor flooding, especially along our western Shoreline.

Timeline. The storm will continue through the evening, but slowly start to taper from west to east overnight. Steady snow will become showery after midnight. All snow will have tapered off completely by dawn Sunday and Anna tracks out to sea.

MUCH QUIETER SUNDAY AND MONDAY

Sunday will prove to be the bright spot of the weekend. Partly to mostly sunny skies and a brisk northwesterly wind will greet us as we open the door with shovel in hand. High pressure will build into the region during the course of the day; it is this system that will give us a reprieve from the stormy weather. It will also help to bring temperatures up into the 30s. So, once you clear what little or lot of snow you have, the sun will finish the job.

Monday will be nice and mild. Sunshine will rule the sky. After a cold morning with lows in the teens, highs will go into the upper-30s to near 40 degrees. There will be considerable snow melt, making roads glisten in the sun. Be careful in the evening as the sun sets and the air cools to freezing; ice may form where melt water refreezes.

ISOLATED SHOWER LATE TUESDAY

Tuesday will be a changeable day. It will start off sunny as high pressure is retreating. As the system continues to retreat and low pressure moves into the region from the Great Lakes during the afternoon, clouds will thicken up so that, by lunch time, skies will be cloudy. Very late in the day, this system will bring a few rain showers – yes, rain showers! The air ahead of the storm will be milder; by afternoon, highs will peak in the 40s.

The storm will clear Tuesday night so that the sunshine will rule again Wednesday. A westerly wind will help bring morning temperatures in the upper-20s and lower-30s to lower 40s during the afternoon. Very late in the day, a cold front will approach…

COLDER LATE IN THE WEEK

Colder weather will be here Thursday and Friday. By Thursday, the cold front will have passed through the state and brought temperatures low to more normal levels. Instead of lows near 30, they’ll go into the teens and instead of highs in the 40s, they will be in the lower-30s.

CHANCE FOR SNOW SATURDAY

We may have a little snow Saturday, especially in the morning. A quick-moving, moisture-starved system will race from the Great Lakes and into Connecticut. Although it’s far away in time, it does appear that this storm will be far, far weaker than Anna and, therefore, far less impactful on our weather.

WINTER STORM NAMES

The theme this winter is “First Ladies”, since this is a presidential election year. The first name on the list is Anna, after Anna Harrison. The rest of the list goes as follows: Barbara (Bush), Caroline (Harrison), Dolley (Madison), Eleanor (Roosevelt), Florence (Harding), Grace (Coolidge), Helen (Taft), Ida (McKinley), Jacqueline (Kennedy Onassis).

WFSB has been naming winter storms since 1971 and we continue to tradition today independent of the Weather Channel, which names winter storms that affect the entire country. The storms we name are the ones that only impact Connecticut with 6” of snow or more for most of the state and/or ½” or more of ice. Both scenarios would severely impact the state.

Meteorologist Mike Cameron and Chief Meteorologist Bruce DePrest

“Copyright 2016 WFSB (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved”