Anthem-Cigna deal would create ‘Big 3’

Posted: 6 am ET

If the deal is approved, Friday's announcement that health insurance giant Anthem has agreed to acquire rival Cigna for $48.3 billion would create the largest health insurer our American multi-payer health care system has ever produced, with more than 53 million customers across the country.

By Anthem's estimate, the merger would result in a company with combined revenue of roughly $115 billion and create $2 billion in annual cost savings for the new top dog.

The move, coming less than a month after the proposed $37 billion Aetna-Humana merger, would reduce the reigning health insurance power players from the "Big 5" to the Big 3, including UnitedHealth Group. While bringing together Anthem and Cigna would create the largest overall membership, UnitedHealth Group is expected to well outdistance its competitors financially, with a projected annual revenue of $154 billion.

A good match?

Anthem operates Blue Cross health plans in 14 states and maintains a strong Medicaid presence, while Cigna is best known for its employer and supplementary plans, including dental and disability. Anthem has been a major player on the Obamacare health exchanges; Cigna, not so much.

But both recent merger proposals have resulted, in part, from the increased pressure placed on insurers by health care reform to cover pre-existing conditions, reduce overhead and increase price transparency. The merger trend has further been fueled by last month's U.S. Supreme Court decision to uphold the federal health care subsidies that put the "affordable" in the Affordable Care Act.

Are these mergers good news for consumers? History would say no; in most cases, less competition translates into higher prices.

That said, because America's idiosyncratic, state-regulated health care system doesn't always conform to financial norms, there's a chance that the same health reform forces that prompted the mergers could persuade insurers to pass some of their savings on to consumers.

Impact remains to be seen

"The premise of the merger for both of these transactions is that they can achieve cost savings and economies of scale, and they, of course, maintain that will lead to their ability to price even more competitively," Richard Zall, chair of health care for Proskauer law firm, told The Washington Post. "It will take some time to see 1) if they can implement the mergers and achieve those savings, and 2) is there still sufficient competition in various markets that it won't lead to price increases?"

Nor is a regulatory green light a given. Federal antitrust officials in the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission will be taking a very close look at whether these two mergers will hurt consumers. Their decision may also depend on what, if any, merger news should emerge from UnitedHealth Group.

Final action on the Anthem-Cigna and Aetna-Humana mergers is not expected until late next year.

Follow me on Twitter: @omnisaurus.

Get more news, money-saving tips and expert advice by signing up for a free Bankrate newsletter.

Veteran contributing editor Jay MacDonald is co-author of "Future Millionaires' Guidebook."