Key Democrats frustrated by Election Day losses say President Obama better get in gear and get the party back in shape — that the base needs his leadership.

“The base craves his leadership,” said Democratic National Committee vice chairwoman Donna Brazile, recounting to Politico the gist of a recent discussion she had with White House political director David Simas. “They want him in the mix, talking about what Democrats accomplished, what Democrats are fighting for and what the president has done to make lives better.”

Mr. Obama has stated that the election devastations weren’t really commentaries on his leadership skills — and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, who was just re-elected to her role, said the same, pointing to the failures of Democrats to get out the vote as the main reason for the Republicans’ wins.

But other Democrats say the president ought to step up and represent the party properly in the coming months.

“He may or may not be the best messenger” for the Democratic Party platform, said Vic Fazio, a former Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee chairman, Politico reported. “But at this point, he is still our messenger. And the first year is very important.”

Democrats say the president is in charge of focusing the party’s message — and that it shouldn’t be something that simply says, “we’re not the Republicans.”

“A strong party is the key to a lasting legacy,” said one senior Democratic strategist, Politico reported. “Whether it’s for our ideals as Democrats or it’s for his personal legacy — if we lose the White House and continue to get gutted down ballot, they will repeal the ACA [Obamacare] and everything else we’ve fought so hard for, and all of this will be for naught.”

Meanwhile, Ms. Brazile suggested Mr. Obama needs to dig deep and prepare for a fight.

“The Republicans have not retreated from the battlefield, so why should President Obama surrender? He can’t give up, he can’t waver,” she said, Politico reported. “All of that looks to Democrats like he doesn’t stand for much and it’s not the truth.”

Rep. Bill Pascrell, from New Jersey, put it this way: It looks as if the Democrats “have lost our way,” and the party needs to have a “deep discussion, not just a philosophical but a tangible discussion, about where we are as a party. It’s kind of difficult … to do that because we have not had that kind of relationship” with the White House, Politico reported.