“A Republic, if you can keep it,” famously quipped Benjamin Franklin in 1787 upon being asked what type of government America was to enjoy. For almost 230 years, America has sought to keep our Republic intact, leaning on the stalwart text of the Constitution in an era of ever-increasing political tumult and policy divide.

In the Huffington Post this week, however, Chris Weigant said that the current defenses being made by Rick Perry in the indictment against him will “provide an easy equivalence” to the potential defenses made by President Obama.

Hardly. They’re actually opposites, in a sense. The latter concerns an actual – and important – federal constitutional question, while the indictment is a laughable empty shell of an accusation.

The Rick Perry indictment is a desire to criminalize policy preferences. The claim contains two felony counts, both of which originate from Perry’s decision to veto funds for a local prosecutor, and subsequently talk about it. Under the Texas Constitution, the governor enjoys explicit authority for such vetoes, and under the U.S. Constitution, politicians enjoy authority to talk about their vetoes as core political speech under the First Amendment. There is no case against Perry.

As such, everyone has largely dismissed the lawsuit on the right and left – even David Axelrod, recently tweeting that the indictment “seems pretty sketchy.”

House Speaker John Boehner’s lawsuit against Obama is no doubt also politically charged. However, it’s one regarding boundaries of both implicit and explicit federal constitutional authority. For instance, Obama has essentially rewritten laws. He all but amended the Affordable Care Act, and enacted” other “laws,” such as the DREAM Act. The President is circumventing Article 1, Section 1 – the very first legally binding statement in the Constitution.

Therefore, if a court grants standing, the Obama lawsuit is an actual place to talk about legitimate separation of powers questions, particularly the amount of implicit authority granted to the unitary executive, and about the legitimacy of courts in resolving disputes between the political branches.

Courts typically shy away from cases with staggering political underpinnings or disputes between the branches. However, courts are neither meant to purposely bow down to any question tinted with political controversy, nor are they meant to bully the political branches into enacting their own desired outcome. Rather, courts are there to interpret the Constitution, engaged within upholding the tenets of the Constitution, and subsequently providing an objective check on the political branches in doing so.

It’s tempting to equate any case by or against a politician with being a political play. Of course it’s a political play, on some level. But by equating the silly indictment against Rick Perry with the suit against Obama, Democrats are actually belittling the importance of maintaining separation of powers and the court’s ability to critically examine rightful executive authority. Attempting to “equate” the straightforward use of an explicitly granted state veto power with flagrant, repeated executive overreach by our President is a misinformed means of dismissing the Constitution.

As America is increasingly disgruntled with the political branches, this pair of cases presents us with an opportunity to see beyond the inflated rhetoric inevitably infused with any case against a politician. It reminds us to instead focus on the constitutional text, and revive a conversation about the role of courts in interpreting that revered document. The Constitution, time and time again, provides more answers than any political pundit. We must keep it that way.