SHERIDAN — A provision in Gov. Matt Mead’s budget, which would have provided health care to about 20,000 Wyomingites, failed in committee Wednesday morning.

“It’s not terribly surprising,” said Hollis Hackman, a Sheridan resident who works with Healthy Wyoming.

The provision failed by one vote in the Joint Appropriations Committee, which is meeting in the days prior to the 2016 legislative budget session, which begins Feb. 8.

Medicaid expansion in Wyoming is still possible, though unlikely. This year’s legislative session is a 20-day budget session and in order for bills to be introduced for debate, two-thirds of legislators must find them worthy. Legislators also only have 20 working-days to pass the state’s biennial budget.

The provision in Mead’s budget proposal would have provided $268 million in federal health care funding. In a year when the state has cut more than $30 million from the Wyoming Department of Health’s budget, Medicaid expansion proponents said its failure is unacceptable.

“Expansion will benefit every sector of our economy — small and large businesses, health care providers, hospitals and more than 20,000 Wyomingites who work hard but can’t afford insurance,” Healthy Wyoming Co-chair Briana Jones said in a statement.

Better Wyoming Executive Director Adam Croft expressed disappointment in the provision’s failure as well.

“My general reaction: It’s pretty deplorable with the state facing an economic downturn and the legislature not passing a program that benefits Wyomingites. The worst part is that there are Wyomingites who have died as a result of not having access to health care,” Croft said.

Rep. Tim Stubson, R-Casper, made the motion to strike the provision from the governor’s budget. Stubson said he made the motion because policy issues do not belong in an appropriations debate.

“Some legislators say it (expanding Medicaid) shouldn’t be discussed as a part of the budget — it enhances the budget,” Croft countered.

After the provision failed, several committee members expressed their disapproval and pointed out that the Legislature will need to find $33 million in health care funding that the governor expected to receive from the federal government.

Of that, $11.4 million would have gone to Wyoming’s involuntary hospitalization program, also known as Title 25.

Sen. Drew Perkins, R-Casper, spoke in opposition of expanding Medicaid.

Perkins said other states that have expanded Medicaid have gone over budget and that able-bodied people refuse to work as a result of not having to pay for health insurance.

Rep. Cathy Connolly, D-Laramie, said the people being denied health insurance are regular Wyomingites.

“These are the folks who could be moved to Medicaid. It’s a 35-year-old with diabetes. These people are invisible to us,” Connolly said.

Connolly added that the JAC makes more than 500 decisions during their pre-session meetings.

“This is one of the most important,” Connolly said.

Medicaid expansion is a result of the Affordable Care Act passed in 2010. After the act went into the law, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that states have the option of accepting federal dollars to provide health insurance to residents whose household income is below 133 percent of the federal poverty level.

Medicaid expansion advocates also feel that accepting federal funds is the fiscally responsible decision with Wyoming facing a $617 million budget shortfall.

Attempts to contact Sen. Bruce Burns, R-Sheridan, who serves on the JAC, were unsuccessful.

If the provision passed, Wyoming would have been the 32nd state to expand Medicaid.