Changes to the rules that govern employee share ownership can help Qantas fly into a better future. Photo: Bloomberg

With the Qantas annual general meeting due to be held next week, there's likely to be very little good news to follow the recently announced $2.84 billion loss. Even a few green shoots of recovery will be cold comfort for long suffering shareholders and concerned employees.

In more normal times, a fall in the price of fuel, the end of Qantas' capacity war with Virgin and the airline's progress in restructuring would have at least engendered some mild optimism, but given Qantas' recent past, many observers will be seeing yet another false dawn.

Even the Qantas share price has given up its recent gains following on from Alan Joyce declaring "the worst is over".

You may well ask, what can be done for Qantas that lays the groundwork for a return to prosperity, a rebirth for this great Australian company and its iconic brand? Recently, Qantas announced that the business would soon be able to attract new foreign investors after the Qantas Sale Act was changed to allow greater access for large foreign interests.

Advertisement

A sensible increase in foreign investment would be a good thing, but where would those new investors come from given the current state of the business? In any event, foreign ownership in Qantas is all but full up, the airline competition unrelenting and Qantas's cost structure remains unattractive to institutional investors.

Whether you're a long time follower of the Qantas story or new to the ups and downs of our national carrier, it's only too clear that everyone has a different view of what's wrong with Qantas and how to fix it. "Qantas is at war with its workforce", "the unions are driven by bloody-minded self interest", "shareholders haven't had a dividend for five years", "the product is tired and old", "management gets paid far too much for the continuing failures on their watch" are some of the kinder things I've heard said in recent times.

In my view, what's missing in the Qantas story is a means of unifying the different interests that people bring to the problem. Almost without exception these same people – management, staff, investors, the travelling public and, yes, even politicians –want to see Qantas succeed and again feel that surge of pride that used to be felt when the "Flying Kangaroo" appeared on our TV screens or at airports around the world.

The good news is that the means of bringing the key people together may not be far away. The Australian Government is close to finalising new employee share ownership rules to enable a "new age of enterprise" – a term recently used by Liberal MP Tony Smith.

While nothing's guaranteed, the changes to the rules that govern employee share ownership can help Qantas and, in my view, at least make the impossible possible – and here's why.

At present, institutional investors find Qantas' cost metrics unattractive and Alan Joyce is struggling to get the type of costs reductions he needs to turn that around. The Qantas workforce is suspicious and distrustful of management given what has been 10 years of slash and burn, and any realistic chance of major work practice change was thrown away following the 2011 industrial disputes and Qantas' decision to ground the fleet.

But, all is not lost, because, as Tony Smith says, "We know from overseas experience that for a whole range of businesses, employee share-ownership boosts productivity and breaks down industrial barriers."

In my submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Economics inquiry into Qantas, I said that majority foreign ownership does not, by itself, pose insurmountable challenges provided it's balanced by employee share ownership that would, in turn, drive the necessary change, engagement and productivity. After all, it's only human nature to want to be part of a team and see that risk and reward are shared.

In the United States employee share ownership has a small but growing acceptance. In the airline industry during the 1990s, United Airlines recovered from bankruptcy proceedings using employee equity as the element that brought together otherwise fiercely competing stakeholders.

My hope is that the Australian Government's changes to employee ownership legislation, together with Qantas' willingness to genuinely use the legislation to re-engage with its workforce, can be used to produce a turnaround outcome that once again makes us proud of Qantas as a great Australian company that takes Australia to the world.

With the Qantas AGM imminent, perhaps a well-placed comment by Leigh Clifford, the Qantas chairman, can lead the way. A challenge to Qantas stakeholders to "check their egos at the door", and get on with an employee-backed turnaround that brings about cost reductions and attracts new investors. All this could be made possible under a new employee ownership regime, using employee equity as the catalyst.

Ian Woods is a former Qantas pilot and aviation analyst.