HOLLYWOOD, Calif., July 9, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- The Supreme Court issued a landmark ruling in King v Burwell upholding, for the second time, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act known by most simply as ObamaCare. While some disagreement exists, most statistics indicate that access to healthcare has improved.

Employment and economic numbers continue to advance but most agree more must be done to improve the number and quality of jobs in the market. "Financial health is as important as human health," said Ace Underhill. "As far as the latter is concerned, regardless of your views on ObamaCare, at least we have some certainty and a path forward. Financial health, however, remains elusive for most Americans. We believe it's only achievable by gaining financial independence, which in turn can only be accomplished through a proper and healthy mix of sports and finance. Financial independence is a right for all not a privilege for a select few and that's precisely why we will seek to amend the California state constitution through The Sports Vote public initiative while simultaneously seeking federal certainty for a national rollout of the World's First Sports Stock Market trading real money. Our nation is at a crossroads and we invite all lawmakers, regulators and stakeholders to be part of this dialogue and shape the future of our country. "







U.S. Supreme Court (public domain via Wikimedia Commons)





The Sports Vote (image credit:belimitless.com)

The NBA and others are pushing hard to legalize sports betting. Mark Cuban, owner of the Dallas Mavericks, and a vocal supporter of legalized gambling just invested in an e-sports betting startup. Meanwhile, a report emerged that Pete Rose has placed bets when he was a player and Phil Mickelson, the famous golfer is linked to a gambling operation.

"Corruption and betting reaches far and wide," commented NHL legend Bernie Nicholls. "Look at FIFA.... the unexpected news from the Rose camp... the latest on Mickelson and E-sports betting making a move. All of this happened over the course of 30 days. A well-functioning sports market creates more fans, more jobs and brings the purity back. It finally combines sports and finance correctly establishing the platform to draw sports fans into learning finance through their existing passion for sports and offering the chance to become financially independent and control their destiny. We can only hope that one day, people of America will celebrate their financial independence like they do the 4th of July rather than wondering why anybody ever considered legalizing sports betting in the first place."

There is a better way: The sports leagues can have the best of both worlds by embracing the concept of a "sports stock market" that will give them the revenue they seek without creating a massive disconnect with their fans. The world of sports investing is one well worth consideration and it is the future of fan engagement. As the old saying goes, "What happens in Vegas, stays in Vegas!" Regulated sports betting is just one of the many things that should stay there. Real money sports team investing is not here just yet... but it will become a reality with your support. You can test drive the free market at http://AllSportsMarket.com/ (follow #SportsFolio) and sign the online petition at http://TheSportsVote.com/ (follow #TheSportsVote)

AllSportsMarket (ASM) is the World's First Sports Stock Market trading your favorite teams 24/7 with dividends paid on every win. Global sports traders compete to earn cash and win prizes. ASM is operated in Hollywood, California by The New Sports Economy Institute, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization established to teach finance through sports. The market technology is international patent pending in 148 nations. Bernie Nicholls is ASM's spokesman and sports industry liaison. Bernie was an explosive scorer who accumulated over 1,200 career points while playing for six NHL teams. Recently, Bernie helped coach the Los Angeles Kings to their first Stanley Cup ever in their 48-year history. Ace Underhill is the sole technical architect and creator with over 15 years' experience working in movies, television and music videos with such luminaries as Eminem, Snoop Dogg, Coldplay, Rihanna, Foo Fighters, Ariana Grande, Eddie Murphy, Christopher Titus and other top personalities worldwide. For more information, visit: http://AllSportsMarket.com. ASM Free! is available now for nearly all platforms worldwide including Apple (including Apple Watch), Android, BlackBerry, tablets, notebooks and desktops. The DeLorean Time Machine will be given away on Back to the Future Day, Oct. 21, 2015, in Hollywood. Sign up FREE (no credit card) using the referral code "DELOREAN" for a chance to win and 10 FREE shares in your favorite MLB team. Stop by the forums to chat with Bernie, Ace and sports traders everywhere!

Contact:

Jason Henry - AllSportsMarket (ASM) Media Relations

iPhone (705) 772-7066 or Email

http://AllSportsMarket.com/

Cameron Wynne

DeLorean Motor Company California

(714) 842-0040 or Email

http://DeLorean.com/

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150709/234506

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150709/234507

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/us-supreme-court-upholds-obamacare---is-the-sports-vote-next-300111219.html

SOURCE AllSportsMarket

Related Links

http://allsportsmarket.com