Two months after signing with the Broncos, Emmanuel Sanders continues to undergo an altitude adjustment.

Sanders considers Denver “wide receiver heaven.” His lungs have a different opinion.

“The biggest difference is the altitude,” Sanders said Wednesday. “Just working out, running all these routes, I’ve definitely got to get my conditioning up.”

Sanders left Pittsburgh, where the elevation is 1,223 feet at its highest point. A sign above the visiting team’s locker room in Denver reads: “Elevation 5,280 Welcome to Sports Authority Field at Mile High.” The Steelers know the challenges of altitude after safety Ryan Clark suffered a splenic infarction in Denver in 2007 related to his sickle cell trait. Clark, now with the Washington Redskins, had his spleen and gall bladder removed. Despite being medically cleared, he has not played in Denver since.

“Of course we knew that. But I never realized how big of a difference it is until I came out here,” Sanders said. “Switching up to a no-huddle, and going to a fast-paced offense, it’s brilliant. When teams come here, they can train all they want, but you’re going to be tired, and we are going to be in tiptop shape.”

Wish list. During the offseason, defensive coordinators are like kids at Christmas. They want everything, but expect reality to clobber them over the head.

Denver’s Jack Del Rio couldn’t believe his gifts this spring.

“I said, you know, if I could make it happen, it would be a dominant rush end, a strong safety that will come up and really strike fear in an offense and really be a tone-setter, and a premium corner. There’s no way we’ll get that done, but I’d love to see that. Any way you can make that happen, Mr. Elway?” Del Rio said at “A Night with Coaches” on Tuesday for suite holders and sponsors. “But John pulled it off! You’ve got to be kidding me!”

High praise. Dallas Cowboys executive vice president Stephen Jones said Wednesday that cutting ties with DeMarcus Ware was one of the most difficult decisions he’s been involved in.

“He’s a Hall of Famer,” Jones said on Sirius radio. “I would never bet against him.”

The pass rusher became a salary cap casualty because the Cowboys are attempting to become younger.