Topics: From the Wires, News

BURLINGTON, Vt. (AP) — The sound system next door is making it hard for Olga Lopatina to love thy neighbor: Christ the King church.

Since last summer, the church has been broadcasting the sounds of bells and hymns to its Burlington neighborhood, a joyful noise unto the Lord that some here think is just an unholy racket.

It’s not just the volume, but the timing and type of tune that irks Lopatina, who said she loves the natural sound of bells after growing up in Ukraine.

“It’s not really music,” she complained of the hymns as she stood in her backyard one recent evening after yet another unwelcome serenade. “This one, it t sounds like a teenage iPhone recording, like the first generation ring tones that you pay 99 cents.”

The dispute has fueled online jokes — some that posters felt were disrespectful of their faith —and complaints that the bells violate Burlington’s noise ordinance. A meeting with a mediator was scheduled for March but was postponed until May 18.

It is perhaps not surprising the tolling of the electronic bells has struck a chord with some neighbors in the largest city in Vermont, a state deemed the least religious in the nation by a Gallup Poll last year.

Larry Miller said not only is the noise intrusive but he finds it offensive from a religious perspective. “It’s not my religion,” he said.

The recorded chimes are played three times of day from the church which also has a school — at noon, when the kids are let out of school at 2:45 p.m. and at 6 p.m. — and after funerals and weddings. The church, which did not return a message seeking comment, had agreed to some modifications to the volume and length of the recordings but critics question whether it has stuck to them.

Some in the south-end neighborhood enjoy the chimes and music or at least aren’t bothered by them.

David Workman, a parishioner whose daughter attends the school, said as a Roman Catholic the ringing of bells and playing of hymns “are religiously significant.”

It would be nice to have a bronze cast bell and someone to pull on the rope but that would be costly, he said.

“I’ve always liked living in a place where I could hear bells. You used to be able to hear the St. Joe’s bells or the congregational church bells in downtown Burlington,” he said. “There’s something I like about that. It makes the city seem not too big.”