Topics: Donald Trump, Grey Lady, Media Matters, New York Times, Business News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on Media Matters

Comparing former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to a “mischievous child,” the New York Times editorial page has endorsed the idea that the Democratic front-runner be held to a new disclosure standard and compelled to release transcripts for the paid speeches she gave to banks as a private citizen.

She needs to do so, the Times insists, to prove that she’s an honest person, otherwise “Mrs. Clinton fuels speculation about why she’s stonewalling.” It’s all about bad optics, the Times claims: “Mrs. Clinton is laboring to convince struggling Americans that she will rein in big banks, despite taking their money.”

The paper is sure that after winning Democratic votes in Iowa and Nevada and being heavily favored to do so again in South Carolina on Saturday, and in most of the Super Tuesday primary states next week, Clinton is “laboring” to convince voters of her intentions.

The key here is that a lot of other people have made money off paid speeches — including speeches to financial institutions — before becoming presidential candidates, and they weren’t told over and over to release dozens of transcripts.

That list includes:

Mike Huckabee

Donald Trump

Ben Carson

Jeb Bush

Carly Fiorina

Mitt Romney

Herman Cain

Newt Gingrich

Rudy Giuliani

Do you spot the same trend I do? And note that some of those Republicans gave paid speeches while running for office.

Responding to a speech inquiry from the press, Clinton recently said she’d release the transcripts “if everybody does it, and that includes the Republicans.” The Times deemed that to be a “terrible answer” and seemed to suggest all other candidates don’t have to disclose their speech transcripts, only Clinton.

“Public interest in these speeches is legitimate, and it is the public — not the candidate — who decides how much disclosure is enough,” the Times instructed, focused only at Clinton.

And that’s always been the giveaway on this gotcha pursuit: If the point is to demand more transparency from candidates (and that’s a good thing), then all candidates would be asked to do the same thing. If the point is to hold Clinton to a separate standard that nobody else has to match, then publish editorials demanding she jump through hoops that every other candidate is allowed to walk around.