Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

»

If you go What: "There's No Success Like Failure" When: 9-10:20 a.m. Monday Where: University Memorial Center East Ballroom, CU campus, Boulder Cost: Free More info: colorado.edu/cwa

It was Bob Dylan who penned the line, "There's no success like failure," memorably followed by the observation that "failure's no success at all."

"There's No Success Like Failure" is also the title of an offering on Monday's first full day of the 67th annual Conference on World Affairs, and four panelists are charged with delving into the deeper meanings of those words.

Or, in the alternative, talking about whatever else they want to talk about.

Feargal Lynn, it might be argued, could have the most relevant qualifications for this panel. He's a folk singer and storyteller from the Glens of Antrim, on the northeast coast of Northern Ireland.

Like Dylan, he plays guitar. Unlike Dylan, he plays the tin whistle and bodhran as well. He has contributed to radio, television and storytelling festivals. For several years, Lynn played in Belfast's Europa Hotel, often referred to as "the most bombed hotel in Europe."

Lynn said in an email that for him, with this assigned panel title, "Dylan springs to mind immediately. I do agree that there is no success like failure, in that failure for me has provided insight and learning."

Advertisement

As for the following line of the song — it's called "Love Minus Zero/No Limit" — Lynn added, "I wouldn't agree that failure is no success at all, for that reason. I think Dylan liked to write lyrics to make us think, or at least think differently."

Lynn, who participated in the 2012 and 2013 editions of the conference, allowed that like most people, he is no stranger to failure.

"I failed miserably at maths for many years, but still have a successful small company," said Lynn, who is also a qualified psychiatric nurse who in 2010 established a company to own and manage a small residential facility for the elderly.

"I failed my motorbike road test and certainly learned about why I failed and I don't make the same errors on the road now, which probably makes me safer," he said.

Fellow panelist John B. Smith is a first-timer at the conference, although his identical twin brother, James B. Smith — the previous United States ambassador to Saudi Arabia — has participated, and advised him on what to expect.

"He has told me that on your (assigned) panels, on about a third of them, you're expected to be one of the experts," Smith said. "On a third, you probably know something, and on a third there's no reason you should be there and you're kind of expected to ask the dumb questions."

So which category does this panel fall under for Smith? Although he said he likes Dylan, he hadn't made a connection between the panel title and the artist. But he, too, knows something about failure.

"If I look back on my career, I've had a tremendous amount of fortune in that career, but I've been restructured once," Smith said. "Somebody decided they didn't really need my services. But, at the end of the day, I was in a better position."

Most recently, Smith worked with Kraft Foods to design a supply chain work system called Integrated Lean Six Sigma, incorporating high performance team design, servant leadership, total quality management and total productive maintenance. He's currently leading the transformation of the largest operation in Kraft, working at its plant in Champaign, Ill.

"I look at what I'm doing right now, and it's some of the most satisfying work I can do," Smith said. "We need to be putting ourselves out there, willing to sometimes challenge the system. If we go where it's uncomfortable, ultimately we will be more successful that way."

Filling out this panel will be Julie Arostegui, who leads Women, Peace and Security Program for Women's Actions for New Direction, and James Tanabe, of IC2, a consulting firm he co-founded to serve firms in the creative sector, providing business development advice, creative forecasting services and production management expertise.

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan