In light of the Affordable Care Act and a new emphasis on the cost of health care, Nerd Wallet Health (www.nerdwallet.com) has built a Best Hospitals tool to help patients investigate the cost of hospital care in their local areas. Using this data, they analyzed the 100 most common treatments at 47 hospitals in Washington, to identify the most affordable hospitals.

They asked the following questions:

1) Which Washington hospitals offer the highest number of affordable treatments?

2) What are these treatments?

3) How satisfied are patients of these hospitals?

Grays Harbor Community Hospital Ranked 5th in the listing of top 10 most affordable facilities. Tom Jensen, CEO said, “We understand that healthcare can be very expensive; Grays Harbor Community Hospital works to ensure that our costs are fair and competitive, especially in our rural community.”

“Our goal is to ensure that these cost effective services remain available in our area. We are asking the community to support us as we move forward in requesting voters’ approval of a Public Hospital District #2 in Grays Harbor County. Being ranked as one of the most affordable hospitals in the entire State of Washington is further evidence that Grays Harbor Community Hospital is worth fighting for,” said Tom Jensen, CEO.

For more information please visit: http://www.nerdwallet.com/blog/health/2014/03/10/best-hospitals-washington/

Methodology:

Affordability: Using CMS Medicare Provider Charge Data, we calculated which of 47 hospitals in Washington has the lowest price for each of the 100 most common medical procedures, and then summed the number of times that each hospital had the lowest price. The data are for services billed for Medicare patients.

Procedures/diagnoses: For the procedures that each hospital was least expensive, we presented the most commonly known.

Patient satisfaction: Patient satisfaction rates were obtained from HCAHPS, a nationally administered survey on patient satisfaction. “Satisfied” was taken to be patients who reported, “I would definitely recommend this hospital” on this survey.

Hospital characteristics: Individual hospital websites and U.S. News & World Report Best Hospitals.

###

About Grays Harbor Community Hospital: Grays Harbor Community Hospital (GHCH) Aberdeen, Washington, is a comprehensive regional medical center providing quality care to a community of over 90,000 residents covering the 3,000 square miles of Grays Harbor and Pacific counties. Established in 1959 Grays Harbor Community Hospital is a 501c 3 nonprofit community hospital. Licensed for 140 beds; services include a level-three trauma designated Emergency Department, Critical Care Unit, Surgical Services, and Family Birth Center. GHCH’s outpatient services include Diagnostic Imaging, Rehabilitation Therapies, Wound Healing Center, Surgical Services, and Physician Clinics. Learn more at www.ghchwa.org or www.twitter.com/ghcares.

Comments