Leading healthcare service provider Tenet Healthcare Corp (NYSE:THC) is close to acquiring the privately held United Surgical Partners International Inc. (USPI), according to people familiar with the matter. The said purchase would be another merger amid the ongoing healthcare reforms by President Obama’s Affordable Care Act.

The deal, which is expected to be announced today, is estimated to be valued at more than $2.5 billion. However, according to sources privy to the matter, the deal might not finalize.

Founded in 1998, USPI focuses on providing high-quality surgical services and is one of the major leaders in ambulatory surgery and short-stay medicine. The Dallas-based company is led by the private-equity firm Welsh, Carson, Anderson & Stowe and currently has 10,000 employees. It maintains alliances with over 3,000 physicians and at least 30 health systems in the US. It also operates approximately 219 short-stay facilities in almost 27 states and caters to over 9,000 physicians and one million patients every year.

USPI, having generated almost $641 million in revenue and $16.6 billion in operating revenue for 2014, will prove to be a highly accretive acquisition for Tenet, if the deal actualizes and passes the final regulatory and shareholders’ approval stages.

Tenet, which is also headquartered in Texas, provides top-quality care to its patients via various services under its six major health plans including primary care as well as chronic care management, advanced diagnostics, outpatient surgery, rehabilitation, and acute hospital care. While operating 80 hospitals as well as 214 outpatient centers, Tenet currently has a market valuation of almost $4.9 billion and is fully equipped to use the expedited growth achieved by USPI to its advantage after the potential purchase of the leading companies in short-stay medicines.

However, this would not be the only deal of this sort. Various healthcare providers have been bolstering their efforts to strike deals by acquiring leading health companies. This is being done to fully equip themselves to survive the wave of reforms imposed as part of President Obama’s Affordable Care Act.

Most recent and prominent alliances include the second-largest hospital chain in the, Community Health Systems’ (NYSE:CYH) partnership with Health Management Associates Inc. (NYSE:HMA) in a deal worth $4 billion, which was struck last year in July. The deal aimed at realizing significant cost savings and fast growth in the hospital care space marked by various financial difficulties and reduced insurance compensations. The other most noticeable deal was Tenet’s purchase of its rival Vanguard Health Systems, Inc. (NYSE:VHS) in June 2013, which was valued at almost $1.8 billion. The acquisition highlighted the focus of Tenet’s efforts in expanding its patient base that would enjoy insurance as part of Obama’s healthcare reforms.

Tenet, with its plans to acquire USPI, will further strengthen its reach in the current hospital-care business, which is bound to yield expedited growth for the company in 2015 and beyond.

Tenet stock is bound to soar when trading resumes today.