Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz Ted CruzWhat happens when the GOP base abandons the party platform? Fiorina returns to attack Clinton's 'lust for power' Trump clinches GOP nomination MORE touted his tax plan on Monday, one day after "Tax Freedom Day" — the day when Americans have earned enough to pay off their complete tax bill for the year.

"It shouldn’t take us a third of the year simply to pay the government, much less spend billions of hours and dollars of our time to do so," Cruz said in a USA Today op-ed.

ADVERTISEMENT

Cruz said his tax plan "scraps the existing tax code and replaces it with a much simpler, fairer and more pro-growth system."

The Texas senator's plan involves a flat tax for individuals with a 10 percent rate and abolishing the Internal Revenue Service. He would also replace the current corporate income tax with a "business flat tax."

While many tax experts, including those at the free-market Tax Foundation, call Cruz's business flat tax a value-added tax (VAT) — a type of consumption tax placed on a product whenever value is added during production — Cruz disputes that claim.

"The Cruz tax is not a sales tax imposed on consumers," he said. "And unlike European VATs, the Cruz Plan is not imposing an additional tax on top of existing taxes, in fact it eliminates several other existing taxes altogether: the payroll tax, the death tax, the ObamaCare tax and more."

Cruz said the Tax Foundation estimates that for every dollar of revenue loss under his plan, $23 would be created in the economy. On the other hand, the tax plan of rival GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump Donald TrumpWhy superdelegates shouldn't support Sanders Young Turks host offers million for Trump, Sanders debate An all-female ticket? Not in 2016 MORE would only create $1.45 in the economy for every dollar of revenue loss.

Cruz said his tax plan is "only one element of our growth platform." He said he would also audit the Federal Reserve, stabilize the U.S. dollar, eliminate agencies such as the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and curb the power of federal regulators.

"Our plan for growth, starting with tax, monetary, and government reform, will get the government out of Americans’ lives and spur tremendous opportunities for Americans from every walk of life to innovate, open new enterprises, and achieve their aspirations," he said.