A worker at a Boots pharmacy has been given a caution by police after the death of a blind pensioner who was given the wrong prescription.

Douglas Lamond, 86, did not realise he had been handed someone else’s medication after collecting the drugs at a branch of the chemist.

The widower from Felixstowe, Suffolk, complained of feeling unwell after taking the drugs and died in hospital in May 2012.

Suffolk Police confirmed after two investigations lasting nearly three years that the drugs had contributed to his death.

A 35-year-old woman was last week given a police caution for supplying a wrong prescription to Mr Lamond which is an offence under the 1968 Medicines Act.

The Crown Prosecution Service had initially decided in March last year not to bring any charges over the case.

Rex Mix up: A Boots worker was given a police caution for the blunder

But the family of Mr Lamond asked for the decision to be reviewed and a second investigation led to the Boots employee being cautioned last Wednesday.

The name of the branch where the woman worked and the type of drugs involved in the blunder has not been revealed.

But police confirmed that ‘corrective procedures’ had been put in place at the branch concerned to stop a mix-up happening again.

Mr Lamond was born in Scotland and lived for most of his life in Felixstowe where he worked as an import clerk at Britain’s biggest container port.

His first wife Jean died in 1982, and he remarried five years later.

Second wife Cynthia died after a long illness in 2009.

Mr Lamond’s family described him as “an endearing man who will be missed by all who knew him”.

His daughter Dianne Moore, 61, of Hintlesham, Suffolk, said: “The family have agreed not to say anything more.

“All the information will come out at an inquest. It has taken a long time because of the lengthy investigation.”

Suffolk Police spokeswoman Anne-Marie Breach said: “A 35-year-old woman has been cautioned under the Medicines Act following the death of an 86-year-old man in May 2012.

“Suffolk Police were contacted by Ipswich Hospital which reported on May 12, 2012, that Douglas Lamond had been admitted to accident and emergency feeling unwell and had subsequently died.

“Concern was raised that he may have been given the wrong prescription drugs.

“A post-mortem examination was carried out, along with further toxicology tests, which confirmed that medication Mr Lamond had taken would have been a contributory factor in his death.

“Following enquiries made it was established that prior to his death, Mr Lamond had been given an incorrect prescription from his pharmacy.

“A detailed investigation into this incident was carried out by the Joint Norfolk and Suffolk Major Investigation Team, with close support from the General Pharmaceutical Council.

“A file was then submitted to the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) as to whether any criminal prosecution should be brought against the pharmacy or any relevant staff involved.

“Initial CPS advice was receive that no further action should be taken.

However, in March 2014, Mr Lamond’s family sought a full review of this decision.

PA

“Following extensive consultation with CPS lawyers and Mr Lamond’s family a decision has been taken to caution a 35-year-old woman with an offence under the Medicines Act 1968 for supplying the wrong prescription.

“She has been cautioned for supplying a product that was not of the nature or quality demanded by the purchaser.

“A file will now be passed to HM Coroner for the purpose of progressing inquest proceedings.”

A Boots spokesperson said: “At Boots UK, patient safety and customer care are at the heart of our business.

“As soon as this incident was brought to our attention, we conducted a thorough investigation and appropriate remedial action was undertaken. We would wish to reiterate our most sincere condolences to the family.”