Obviously, President Obama took office in January 2009 amid much fanfare. Mr. Obama’s rhetoric from the 2008 presidential campaign convinced many people he could work wonders on the United States, which many felt had been destroyed by the George W. Bush administration.

Mr. Obama hasn’t exactly been a miracle worker.

Famously, two White House economists predicted the $787 billion February 2009 economic stimulus would keep the unemployment rate below 8 percent. However, unemployment hit 9.5 percent in June 2009, and it didn’t fall below 8 percent until late 2012. As of January, the unemployment rate was 6.6 percent; Team Obama claimed the stimulus would have it at 5 percent.

When ABC News – no conservative bastion – fact checked the president’s January State of the Union address, one of its sources, economist David Jones cast doubt on Mr. Obama’s assertion that record corporate profits and stock prices indicate the economy is stronger. According to Mr. Jones, “Profits are partly strong because corporations are cutting costs significantly, and stocks are mainly high because the Federal Reserve is pumping a huge amount of money into the economy to try to stimulate the recovery.”

As a candidate, Mr. Obama decried the increase in the national debt that occurred under Mr. Bush’s watch. “That’s irresponsible. It’s unpatriotic,” he said on July 3, 2008. Of course, the debt increased more during Mr. Obama’s first three years in office than it did during Mr. Bush’s full eight.

It has become clear the Obama administration will go to some extreme lengths to ensure no one finds out the truth behind the deadly Sept. 11, 2012 attack on the American consulate in Benghazi, Libya. The Internal Revenue Service’s harassment of conservative groups that applied for tax-exempt status between 2010 and 2012 was alarming, and sets a terrible precedent.

Then there’s Obamacare. Even though, it was never especially popular, the Obama administration and its congressional supporters made it out to be among the best laws ever passed. (Remember Vice President Joe Biden’s “BFD” comment upon Obamacare’s adoption?)

Of course, the Obamacare sign-up website – which was designed by a questionable Canadian company with personal ties to the president – has been plagued by dysfunction. Millions of health-care plans that people were happy with have been canceled, despite Mr. Obama’s 2009 assurance to the contrary; the president admitted this happened because the legislation was not properly constructed. Not to mention, many Americans have seen their work hours cut as a result of Obamacare.

It seems the above happenings account for 59 percent of respondents to a CBS News/New York Times poll saying they are disappointed in Mr. Obama’s presidency. The same survey had his overall approval rating at a paltry 41 percent.

Writing about the president’s popularity woes last Dec. 18, I asserted, “Things definitely have changed – no pun intended – for Mr. Obama since that cold, sunny (inauguration) day in January 2009.” I think that’s even more true now than it was two months ago.