With misuse of opioid pain medication rampant, local doctors and health care institutions are reviewing prescribing practices as well as looking for fresh avenues to manage chronic pain for patients.

The recently released Guideline for Prescribing Opioids for Chronic Pain from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) addresses a rising epidemic that is prevalent both nationally and throughout Western North Carolina.

“As an institution, we need to ensure that our physicians are treating chronic pain appropriately,” said Dr. David Ellis, chief medical officer at Pardee Hospital. “Given that a large portion of people who develop a dependency on opioids start out using them for acute pain, such as after surgery, we feel that if we decrease the amount of narcotics necessary to treat post-operative pain, we will decrease the potential for dependency in this population.”

Pardee is addressing the issue head on by developing best practices for prescribing, taking what is typically within the purview of physicians to an institutional level.

In the past few months, Pardee’s Medical Executive Committee has formed a subcommittee to develop protocols for the prescribing of opioids for the treatment of chronic pain, Ellis said.

Options like a system of “multimodal pain management,” in which various types of non-narcotic medications are prescribed for treating post-operative pain and narcotics are used only for breakthrough pain, are being explored.

In outpatient situations at physicians’ offices, the hospital is also looking to develop a protocol to assist doctors in treating chronic pain.

“Additionally, we are monitoring the amount of narcotics that are prescribed after outpatient surgery by individual providers in an attempt to develop best practices so that patients have an adequate but not excessive amount of medication for pain relief,” Ellis said.

The CDC guideline is threefold, addressing “when to initiate or continue opioids for chronic pain”; “opioid selection, dosage, duration, follow-up, and discontinuation," and “assessing risk and addressing harms of opioid use.” The guideline is not direct policy, but has the power to inform decisions regarding care.

At Blue Ridge Community Health Services (BRCHS), physicians and staff have been aware of issues around prescribing opioids, participating in state programs like Project Lazarus that aim to rein in the epidemic and prevent accidental overdoses.

“Perhaps the medical establishment has been too quick to use these (medications),” said Dr. Richard Hudspeth, chief medical officer at BRCHS of why the CDC produced the new guideline. “It’s really asking the medical establishment to step back.”

The team-based care approach at BRCHS, which includes a behavioral health department, helps to monitor issues with patients and offers systems of support, like pain management groups, providing solutions for fighting addiction.

The community health center has recently received $350,000 in Affordable Care Act funding designated to improve and expand delivery of substance abuse services. Exactly how this will be applied is currently under deliberation.

The funds will allow for more screenings, to suggest a patient’s potential for addiction. While Hudspeth said these screenings are not a perfect tool, they give providers a better idea of risk. “Human perception of pain is a complex issue,” he said.

Hudspeth cites a general lack of education among medical professionals around how to treat chronic pain, something that Pardee is addressing.

Programs to educate Pardee’s primary care physicians are in place to ensure that they understand the ultimate goals of treating chronic pain.

“The CDC makes it clear in their recommendations that the treatment of chronic pain should be goal-oriented and those goals should revolve around function, not necessarily a pain-free state,” Ellis said.

In June, Pardee will have additional capabilities as it begins implementation of a new electronic medical records system currently in use throughout most of the UNC Health Care system, according to Dr. Scott Donaldson of Pardee Urological Associates.

“We will be able to look at prescribing trends among our medical staff membership, which can allow for investigation and education,” Donaldson said.

Donaldson thinks highly addictive substances like opioids are not to be taken lightly; even while taking “very small, short doses,” addiction can occur.

“It's been shown that a small percentage of (those having) taken narcotics, even postoperatively for a short period of time, can show some level of addiction,” he said.

In the emergency department, where some people misusing medication often seek new prescriptions, Pardee already has a system in place in which physicians can access records from prior ER visits. Also, doctors have access to a website where they can view who has prescribed what to whom, Donaldson said. “The more difficult part is just telling people no.

“Uniform policies work well, but what we need more is a cultural change of all providers,” he added. “Narcotics are part of our treatment tools, but there are a number of other drugs we can use which are non-addicting, and many people respond well to, ‘I know this hurts; however, these narcotics can lead to addiction. Let's get a good treatment plan in place.’ ”

Reach De Bona at beth.debona@blueridgenow.com or 828-694-7890. Follow @BRNBeth