WASHINGTON -- On the 70th anniversary of the Nazi surrender in Europe, President Barack Obama Saturday (May 9) hailed the "generation that literally saved the world."

Obama, in his weekly radio address, noted that 70 years ago today General Dwight Eisenhower announced the end of World War II in in Europe with little fanfare. "The Mission of this Allied Force was fulfilled," Eisenhower said.

"But his simple message belied the extraordinary nature of the Allied victory -- and the staggering human loss," Obama said. "For over five years, brutal fighting laid waste to an entire continent. Mothers, fathers, children were murdered in concentration camps. By the time the guns fell silent in Europe, some 40 million people on the continent had lost their lives."

Obama said Saturday is a day to pay tribute to those troops who saved the world from tyranny.

"They were patriots, like my grandfather who served in Patton's Army -- soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines, coast guard, merchant marines -- and the women of the WACs and the WAVES and every branch," Obama said. "They risked their lives, and gave their lives so that we, the people the world over, could live free. They were women who stepped up in unprecedented numbers, manning the home front, and—like my grandmother—building bombers on assembly lines."

Obama called on Americans not to just simply mark this historic day, but to "rededicate ourselves to the freedoms for which they fought."

"Let's make sure that we keep striving to fulfill our founding ideals -- that we're a country where no matter who we are or where we're from or what we look like or who we love, if we work hard and take responsibility, every American will have the opportunity to make of our lives what we will," Obama said. "Let's stand united with our allies, in Europe and beyond, on behalf of our common values -- freedom, security, democracy, human rights, and the rule of law around the world -- and against bigotry and hatred in all their forms so that we give meaning to that pledge: 'Never forget. Never again.'"