Christopher and Sophia Elder. 2015 Midwestern Sectionals (Photo: KrPhotogs Photography LLC)

The new year will be holding a lot of promise for nine dedicated skaters from Louisville Skating Academy. These skaters have just secured a place at the U.S. Figure Skating Championships, to be held in Greensboro, NC in January.

The country’s top 12 single skiers or teams in each of the competitive levels will compete and, at the senior level, spots on the 2015 U.S. World Skating Team will be determined.

Ten Louisville Skating Academy skaters just competed at the U.S. Midwestern Sectional Skating Championship in Geneva, Ill., for a chance to compete on the national stage. Medalists, first through fourth from the Pacific Coast, Midwestern, and Eastern sectional championships advance to the national event.

The brother-sister team of Christopher and Sophia Elder won the gold medal, the sibling team of Claire and Luke Purnell finished with the silver, and the team of J.T. Michel and Josephine Hagan secured the bronze medal.

The Elders, ages 13 and 11 respectively, are students at St. Margaret Mary and won their third consecutive gold medal at a sectional championship. Their winning free dance was set to a medley of Russian music.

Claire and Luke Purnell, 14 and 15 years old, are both students at Kentucky Country Day. They achieved a personal best score in the compulsory pattern dance portion of the event and skated their free dance program to “Feelin’ Good” by Michael Buble.

J.T. Michel is a 14-year-old who attends Highlands Latin School while his dance partner, Josephine Hagan, 12, is a student at Crosby Middle School. They set a personal high score in with their free skate swing medley which includes “Jump Swing Blues” and “Diggy Diggy Doo.” All three teams are making repeat trips to the U.S. Championships. Michel and Hagan were the 2014 U.S. Champions in the juvenile ice dance event.

In this year’s Juvenile Dance event, Will Shawver, age 13 and a member of Louisville Skating Academy, and Isabel Blahunka, age 12 and a member of the Winter Club of Indianapolis, won the gold medal.

Will Shawver is a student at Westport Middle School and competed with his sister Sara prior to forming a partnership with Isabel. Will and Isabel train primarily in Louisville and skated their winning free dance program to a medley from the musical Chicago.

Another gold medal for LSA came in the Novice Pairs event, with the team of Kate Finster and Eric Hartley. Kate, age 10, represents Louisville Skating Academy and is a home schooled student. Eric, who is 16, represents the Queen City Figure Skating Club where his parents are both coaches. Kate is making her second trip to the U.S. Championships in a pairs event. Kate and Eric finished first in both the short and long program segments of the competition. Their short program was skated to a version of “As Long As I’m Singing,” and the free skate portion was set to music from “La Strada.”

In singles skating, Chase Finster, who is 13 and also home schooled, finished in fourth place in the juvenile boys event. As the pewter medalist, he is advancing to the U.S. Championships, where the top 12 juvenile boys in the country will compete. Chase was the gold medal winner at the Eastern Great Lakes Regional Championship last month, which qualified him for the sectional championships. In singles skating, there is an additional step in the qualifying process. Chase skates to “Beyond the Sea” by Kevin Spacey.

The skaters are coached by more than 15 professionals who work with skaters of all ages and levels. Donny Adair and Kelley Morris-Adair, a husband-and-wife coaching team from Indianapolis, work with all four dance teams and many other Louisville skaters throughout the week.

“I am extremely proud of all our dancers at LSA. They have increased their level of training, improved their skill set tremendously and exceeded our expectations with their performances at the Midwestern Sectional Championships,” said Morris-Adair, “As a coach of 35 years, it is still a thrill to see a child’s face after they know they have just performed to their potential. We will continue to train hard, and we are looking forward to representing Louisville Skating Academy at the US Figure Skating Championships in January.”

Read Stuart Ungar’s Youth Sports blog at http://blogs.courier-journal.com/youthsports. Email Stuart at stuartungar@me.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1rAbDim