More Video...

Orlando, FL---While we need to wait a month for a college champ, as the Sharks faithful in Port St. Joe know, it's title time in high school football.

The celebration carried up to the Panhandle from the Citrus Bowl, where Friday night, the Tiger Sharks won the 1A State Championship with a 16-0 shutout over Hamilton County.

Momentum was all in P-S-J's control after recovering a fumble on the opening kick. Workhorse Jarkeice Davis then ran in for a 12 yard score to put the Sharks up 7-0.

That was plenty for this Sharks defense, which has been stellar all year, only allowing 125 yards against the Trojans.

With the same score in the second quarter, Davis added another TD, a 22 yarder to go with the 12 yard score earlier. He finished with 146 yards rushing and two touchdowns to put PSJ up 14-0 at the half.

Port St. Joe added a safety in the third quarter and sealed it in the 4th with Jak Riley's interception, the third turnover forced on the night.

The Sharks come away with their seventh shutout this season, their third in a row in the state playoffs, and earn the school their fourth ever state championship.

"We've been very good at playing defense," said head coach John Palmer. "We've been very good at close games actually. And I think that's a tribute a little bit to the style of offense we play as well. We're a grind it out type team, so we can do that when the clock needs to wind a little bit.."

In their last 12 quarters of play, Port St. Joe's allowed zero points. Now they have a trophy to show for it.

"It means a lot to be able to play so well on such a big stage," said senior Cole Cryderman. "The 7th shutout of the year obviously means a lot. We take a lot of pride in our defense. We don't want other teams to score on us."

"We just came out here and did it," said senior Jak Riley. "I believe in my boys. And (this is) the "No Fly Zone" right here. These boys I go to war with every day. I would do nothing without them."

The 2014 Sharks join the 1971, 1984, and 2005 Port St. Joe squads as state champs, the last two, both won by Palmer, who returned to the program as the head coach for a second stint this past January.