WESLACO — A dynamic group of business, education and community leaders were honored this week at the Weslaco Area Chamber of Commerce Awards Luncheon.

Held annually, the luncheon recognizes the efforts of chamber members, volunteers and more. Awarded at the event on Wednesday were Luis Reyes of Magic Valley Electric Cooperative, as Chamber Board Member of the Year; Carla McCaleb of McCaleb Funeral Home, as Chamber Volunteer of the Year; Shirley Atkins was posthumously selected as Citizen of the Year for her work at Tower Theater of Weslaco; Affordable Homes of South Texas, for Business of the Year, Weslaco ISD Assistant Superintendent Sue Peterson, as Woman of the Year; and Weslaco Parks and Recreation Director David Arce, as Man of the Year.

Reyes was credited for creating a model for the nCourage program, a joint effort of the chamber and Weslaco ISD to mentor 90 Weslaco seniors in 38 Mid-Valley businesses.

McCaleb, who like Reyes is a new member on the chamber board, was praised for the support her business affords the city as well as for facilitating many functions held throughout the year.

Accepting Atkins’ Citizen of the Year honor on her behalf was daughter Rise Morris. Atkins was a beloved figure in the community who died in November at the age of 80. She was involved at Tower Theater for 42 years, impacting the lives of hundreds of children through theater and music. In addition, Atkins enjoyed teaching vocal and piano lessons for children.

As the Business of the Year, Affordable Homes of South Texas was honored for its work providing more than what the company name entails, but free educational courses to the public as well. Currently in the process of constructing four subdivisions in Weslaco, Affordable Homes was also credited for helping citizens prepare for home ownership and for creating new jobs in the city.

Robert Calvillo of Affordable Homes accepted the award.

Peterson’s recognition came after a career in education that’s highlighted by several accolades, including her previous selection as H-E-B’s Principal of the Year for the state of Texas. The former Weslaco East principal and current assistant superintendent for WISD is also an active member of the Weslaco Rotary Club, and teaches Sunday school at First Presbyterian Church and volunteers at Su Casa de Esperanza.

Arce received high praise for more than his work as the parks and recreation director for the city, but for taking an active role in nearly every significant event in Weslaco. Already recognized for assisting the chamber with its annual 5K, Texas Onion Fest, the monthly Alfresco events as well as the Mid-Valley Lighted Christmas Parade, Arce was also credited for his work in developing youth sports in Weslaco — as a coach and in various other capacities.

mrodriguez@mvtcnews.com