From a volleyball state championship to an unforgettable boys soccer postseason , it was a year to remember for the sports teams of Secaucus High School.

Here's a look back on the Patriots' top sports stories from 2014:

Last winter, a pair of senior wrestlers closed their high school careers in style at the state championships in Atlantic City. Sean Roesing, who picked up his 100th career victory earlier in the season, took seventh place at 170 pounds, capping a 38-2 senior season. Meanwhile, Jan Castellanos finished sixth in the state at 182 pounds.

This fall under first-year head coach Chris Garcia, the boys soccer team finished the season with a respectable 12-9-1 record. But it was in the postseason where the Patriots made their mark, winning three games and advancing to the NJSIAA North 2, Group 1 sectional final.

There, Secaucus dropped a 2-0 decision to eventual Group 1 champion Harrison, but showed progress and improvement against the West Hudson power.

"I'm in awe (of their playoff run). I'm proud as can be," Garcia said following his team's season-ending loss. "These kids gave me everything and that's all you can ask for."

Elsewhere this fall, the football team stumbled to a 2-8 record, but the girls cross country team won its third consecutive NJIC Meadowlands Division title.

Yet, no one in Secaucus had as impressive a season in 2014 as the school's girls volleyball team, which claimed the NJSIAA Group 1 state championship and finished the season with a 33-2 record. Once again, the Patriots dominated the competition in Hudson County, winning their sixth straight Hudson County Tournament title. Coach Sheila Rivera's group then went on to win the program's first state championship since 2006, defeating defending champion Bogota.

Yesterday, The Jersey Journal revealed that the volleyball team's historic season was the No. 8 sports story of 2014 for Hudson County. (See Page 28.)

"I feel like we really deserved it and we played with heart," outside hitter Julia McClure told New Jersey Advance Media after winning the Group 1 title. "I feel like we wouldn't have beaten Kinnelon (in the semifinals) if we didn't want to win this championship. We pushed through that game, so we weren't here for nothing."

McClure, who spearheaded the championship season, had quite a memorable year individually as well. Shortly after she was named the NJ.com Player of the Year for volleyball and a First Team All-State selection, the senior athlete committed to play basketball at Wagner College next year.

Meanwhile, fellow senior Kendall Caruso also picked up an impressive accolade, being named a Second Team All-State selection for volleyball.