Topics: Ancient Greece, Archaeology, Books, Editor's Picks, History, Indiana Jones, Lives in Ruins, Marilyn Johnson, Nonfiction, Revolutionary War, Science, What to Read, Entertainment News

Several years ago, while researching a story on biblical archaeology, I had the chance to talk to a leader in the field by telephone. At one point, he kindly provided me with a lengthy explanation of pottery seriation, the means by which archaeologists track the history of a particular site. Styles of pottery change over time and vary from culture to culture, so if an archaeologist excavating a heap of broken shards encounters a layer of pieces radically different from the one below it, it’s likely a sign that a new population had moved in. “I’m sorry,” the archaeologist laughed when he finished. “It’s pretty boring.”

To the contrary. “I get paid to look at people’s trash” said one of the itinerant archaeologists interviewed by Marilyn Johnson for her new book, “Lives in Ruins: Archaeologists and the Seductive Lure of Human Rubble,” and she wasn’t wrong. The man who told me about pottery seriation has spent his life studying broken crockery, after all. But the great and undying magic of archaeology is just how much ancient rubbish can tell us. Sherlock Holmes may have used his encyclopedic knowledge of tobacco ash to catch criminals, but archaeologists can use animal teeth and plant seeds to change our understanding of the world.

Biblical archaeology is part of an intellectual project over two centuries old, one that has attempted to establish just how much of the Old Testament is an accurate representation of the history of ancient Israel and Judah. This project was challenging the literalist interpretation of the Bible long before Charles Darwin came along. As Johnson puts it, “to the archaeologist, treasure is something that was buried that has been brought to light, a pebble of information around which the narrative of history now needs to bend.”

The archaeologists Johnson visited while researching her book worked in Peru, Cyprus, the Caribbean and upstate New York, among other places. Perhaps the most glamorous of the bunch, NYU’s Joan Breton Connelly, has dedicated her life to excavating a tiny island in the Mediterranean topped by a temple to Apollo that Connelly believes was built by Cleopatra. Her less celebrated counterparts include Bill Sandy, a “contract archaeologist” (brought in to survey a piece of land in advance of development), who was hired to check out the site of a proposed strip mall in Fishkill, New York. Underneath the top layer of soil he found what would turn out to be “the largest cemetery of Revolutionary War soldiers in the country.” It had been completely forgotten in the historical record.

Yet that plot of land in Fishkill, not far from Route 9, near the location of a major supply depot for the Continental Army, remains in a state of limbo. Development can’t proceed, obviously, but no preservationist organization has stepped forward to buy the lot, let alone fund further excavation. On Memorial Day in 2011, Johnson found herself standing in the weeds with Sandy and a few dozen other faithful, honoring the ordinary, unsung men buried there, all of whom died for this country.

That’s the real flip side of the dashing image of Indiana Jones — a character archaeologists adore to the degree that they gave Harrison Ford an award “for Public Service to Archaeology.” It’s not the fact that, rather than battling Nazis, actual archaeologists spend most of their time grubbing around in the dirt. (You “have to be an earth whisperer” Connelly told the author after rhapsodizing about the various colors of soil.) The real difference is that almost nobody wants to pay archaeologists, and half of them are out of work.

Still, we love them. One of the more gainfully employed people Johnson interviewed works for the Department of Defense, designing training programs to help soldiers avoid destroying cultural treasures. (The program was founded after the infamous looting of the National Museum of Iraq in 2003 and, a year later, the inadvertent bulldozing of the site of an ancient temple by U.S. troops setting up a base.) This archaeologist told Johnson that the military officials she works for were thrilled to have her onboard, even when she discovered a “sacred Native American site” on their artillery range in Fort Drum and they had to set part of it aside. “My bosses,” the woman reported, “say ‘This is so exciting,’ or ‘My wife is Native American,’ or ‘We watch the Discovery Channel at home.'”