Revealed: How a simple spelling error helped bring down $630 million Obamacare website

A typo in the phrase 'not recommended' hamstrung the Obamacare website's system for determining which insurance plans were fit to offer

The result: Consumers saw fewer options with higher prices

Obama promised in September that 'the average American will have more than 50 different plans to choose from'

'War room' meeting notes, released by a Republican-run congressional committee, revealed hundreds of tech problems



A spelling mistake in the words 'not recommended' on the Obamacare website led to the site going down, it was revealed today in internal notes from 'war room' meetings of experts scrabbling to breathe life into the shambolic operation.

The error limited the choices Obamacare shoppers were offered in October and often presented them with overpriced options.

Ultimately, at least some of the website's many outages were brought about by this simple typo, as technicians struggled to give the public an experience that mirrored President Obama's promises.

'In states where the federal government helps run these marketplaces, the average American will have more than 50 different plans to choose from, with different levels of coverage,' the president claimed during a September 26 speech in Largo, Maryland.

'And because insurance companies are competing against one another for your business, a lot of Americans will pay significantly less for their insurance than they do now.'



In large measure, that didn't happen. And a tech team met at least once per day in October to sort out this and hundreds of other technical problems with the ill-fated roll out.

One of the reasons the Obamacare website ground to a halt so often in October was a typo in the system that determined whether states had certified insurance companies to participate in the federal health care exchange As a result of the spelling error, so few insurance plans were green-lighted that insurance shoppers started seeing ' fewer options than would be desired to promote consumer choice'

In a section of the group's October 28 notes titled 'Certification suppression updates,' a meeting secretary recorded that '[p]erhaps due to a misspelling in "not recommended," there are errors in the certification suppression data.'

It's not clear how the phrase was mangled, but 'recommended' is commonly misspelled with an extra letter 'c.'

'[T]his misspelling was not recognized in the system,' the notes continue, 'and it is not updating accurately as a result.'

Certification and suppression refer to the thumbs-up and thumbs-down rulings made on each health insurance plan carried on the Obamacare website. The decisions are based on insurance companies' ability to show that their home states have approved their participation in the federal government-run marketplace.

But when the eligible plans began to show up on the website in October, their numbers were suspiciously few in many of the 36 states covered by the exchange.



As a result, the meeting notes show, 'in some cases, there will be fewer options than would be desired to promote consumer choice and an ideal shopping experience.'

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Servics chief Marilyn Tavenner supervised the Obamacare website's creation, which led to late-night comedy jokes and left a flood of politicians from both sides of the aisle scrambling

'Additionally, in some cases there will be relatively high-cost plans' since the low number of options limited competition.

The meeting notes were released this week by the Republican-controlled House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, whose chair Rep. Darrell Issa of California has been critical of the Affordable Care Act and its reliably problematic launch.

An official with one of the private contractors tasked with delivering healthcare.gov to the federal government confirmed to MailOnline that the Obamacare website's policy certification and suppression system was 'down more than it was up for the first two weeks of October.'

'It was a huge problem,' he said, speaking on condition of anonymity because he is not authorized to comment publicly about his company's work.



Another promise ignored? The president claimed in September that 'the average American will have more than 50 different plans to choose from' -- but a typo limited that number severely

Hot seat: Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius testified before a Senate panel on Wednesday but didn't face questions about innocuous-looking typos

The Obamacare team has had problems from the beginning navigating the tricky task of deciding which health care plans qualify for inclusion in among those offered on healthcare.gov.

On October 8, one week after the site's premiere, the war room meeting notes show that a project manager requested 'a schedule to suppress/un-suppress' insurance policies at least once per week.

A decision was made that day, while millions of Americans were already trying – with little success – to use the website, to submit each Friday a 'weekly suppression list' of plans that should not have been included, with computer experts culling them over the weekend.

'How many changes are we approving? Hundreds,' according to the meeting notes.

Those changes also included tweaks to the insurance policies, including one Oklahoma plan whose issuer decided late in the game that it wouldn't cover weight-loss surgery, since its competitors had already decided not to.

In another case, the website was offering a dental provider's plans even though they were supposed to be 'suppressed' from public view.

'[W]e cannot independently confirm if they are suppressed or not,' the war room heard, 'and we do not know if the problem is wide-spread.'



By October 15, the team discovered another massive fly in the ointment.

MailOnline went to healthcare.gov on Wednesday to see available plans in states covered by the federal exchange, but waited more than 10 minutes after trying to create an account ...

... and ultimately the website was unable -- three times -- to register a new user

Discussing the System for Electronic Rate and Form Filing (SERFF) that insurers must use to submit their plans through the government's Health Insurance Oversight System (HIOS), they learned that the weekly updates of 'certified' plans would wipe out the entire database and force them to start from scratch.

'This resubmission (HIOS and SERFF) will wipe out all certification/suppression statuses in the universe,' the notes show they determined, 'so we will need to get OIS a file with new statuses for everyone, yes?'

'Yes, if an issuer resubmits a template with just one plan change, it changes all the plans for the issuer, so it is good practice to have a full file.'

On the following day, according to the meeting notes, the team heard that they now had 'a good process for determining if an issuer should be suppressed/unsuppressed, but it won't be ready by noon tomorrow.'

Many of the plans that were hung up behind red tape were those that saw steep rate increases, triggering a requirement that their state governments re-evaluate them before the Obamacare system could offer them to the public.

'For a lot of them, they have rate filings with rate increases of 10% or greater,' the group heard on October 21, 'and the state has to put in a rate filing determination and they haven't. That happened for about half.'