update:

Sessions campaign spokesman Bruce Harvie responds that “Pierson is frustrated because the voters of the 32nd District aren’t interested in her dishonest campaign. Pete has stood firmly against Obamacare and he was a successful leader in removing Nancy Pelosi from power. Folks in the district know this very well and are appreciative of his conservative leadership that gets results.”

WASHINGTON – The tea party group FreedomWorks showcased Katrina Pierson on Monday along with other challengers for House and Senate seats around the country.

Matt Kibbe, president of FreedomWorks PAC, called her “one of the best activists in Texas who has been working overtime trying to help Pete Sessions find his way back home.”

Sessions, R-Dallas, a member of the House GOP leadership, is seeking a 10th two-year term. He has raised $1.3 million compared to Pierson’s $76,000. Neither she nor FreedomWorks officials would specify the support—funding or volunteers —the group and its affiliates is providing to her. Time is running low, with the primary looming in 22 days.

Pierson expressed frustration that Sessions has kept a low profile, avoiding joint appearances (other than a joint meeting with this newspaper’s editorial board last month).

“For someone who is such a `strong conservative, man of the people, he should defend himself and tell people why I’m wrong, and he won’t do that,” she said.

Pierson singled out Obamacare as her top issue and accused Sessions of not working hard enough to block it at the outset or to repeal it in the last three years.

“He’s always been shifty. The Obamacare situation has been a perpetual shift,” she said, asserting that while Sessions championed repeal during the 2010 elections, “he didn’t really actively engage” by taking the case to the public in the way that Sen. Ted Cruz did last summer.

“They sat in Washington, DC, with the bureaucrats and kicked the can down the road,” she said, accusing Sessions of seeking “Band-Aids” rather than full repeal.

“At what point are we going to say that this lawlessness has to stop. We are essentially running this country ad hoc. There are zero checks and balances,” she said. “Obamacare should be the tool that we use moving forward to govern all policy considering how, not only does it affects our debt, it affects the Constitution and it affects the citizens, considering how my state finds the amnesty discussion to be pretty darn important, and the simple fact that these folks are exempt from any of these fees is going to cause a humungous burden on our state even further.”

FreedomWorks invited reporters to its headquarters near the U.S. Capitol to meet with several House candidates and two Senate candidates, including Matt Bevin, who is challenging Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky.