Not everyone realizes that the Legal Aid Society of Cleveland is an important resource for helping low-income residents secure and retain decent affordable housing. The Society provides much more than just an attorney in court.

Legal Aid handles a number of housing concerns including: foreclosures,evictions, public housing, private landlord-tenant problems, HUD subsidized housing, Section 8 voucher programs, low-income tax credit program and more.

"The most common cases we see are loss of housing through eviction," said Abigail Staudt, managing attorney of the Housing Law Practice Group with Legal Aid's Cleveland office. "Tenants come to us at several different stages. They may have received some sort of notice from the landlord, even something verbal, to having eviction papers served from court. To help clients best, we'd like them to come to us when they receive a notice. It's hard for us to do much when it's just a verbal notice. A lot of times a landlord might threaten something and not act on it."

But get that written eviction notice to the Legal Aid Society as soon as possible. If the letter is given to an attorney too close to the court date, Staudt said there isn't enough time to evaluate the case.

It may be that the client in an eviction case will still be ordered to move. But in some cases, Legal Aid can negotiate certain conditions that make it easier for the tenant. That can include avoiding a judgment of eviction on a client's record, which makes it much more difficult for that individual to find other decent housing. Also, more time may be awarded to a tenant to look for a new home.

In addition, the Legal Aid Society can help tenants retain a housing subsidy they are in danger of losing. It also represents clients in utility shut-off situations (especially if there is a medical necessity in the home) and lock-out situations.

"We also will give advice on condition problems, including mold, repairs and infestations and advise people about rent deposits that are paid to the court instead of the landlord while the problem is being resolved," said Staudt, one of Legal Aid's 42 staff attorneys and 2,616 pro bono attorneys.

One landlord/tenant case the Society recently handled involved a woman who had multiple issues with her rental space, a non-working furnace being the main one. Despite several attempts by a non-professional to fix the furnace, and winter setting in, the renter was still without heat.

"We were able to get some money for damages to her and the landlord was barred from renting (the home) all over again to someone else until a certified HVAC (heating, ventilation and air conditioning) repairman could fix it," said Staudt. "It could have been a dangerous situation. It was a long battle, but we happy for our client. Our entire staff celebrates our clients' victories, big and small."

Owners of single-family houses, too, can benefit from the services of Legal Aid. The group's consumer unit addresses foreclosure involving mortgages and/or tax liens, and utility shut-off issues. In addition, owners of manufactured homes can receive similar assistance.

"It's a big loss to a mobile home owner to be evicted. Their homes aren't really mobile and it costs a lot of money to move one. So they generally walk away from their home," explained Staudt.

In 2014, 8,286 cases were handled by the Legal Aid Society of Cleveland. Cases by counties include: Cuyahoga – 79 percent; Lorain – 9 percent; Lake—6 percent; Ashtabula –4 percent, Geauga –1 percent and Other -- 1 percent. Forty-eight percent of households helped included children, 14 percent were older adults; and 670 cases involved U.S. veterans.

Eight-five percent of households which were helped make less than $25,000 per year, according to Legal Aid. Fifty-nine percent of clients were African American, 31 percent were white/Caucasian, 7 percent were Hispanics, and 3 percent Other.

In 2014, Legal Aid successfully prevented 99 percent of evictions and 59 percent of foreclosures. It increased assets and income, and reduced debt by $18 million dollars for clients helped that year, the latest data available.

There are several ways to apply for Legal Aid help. Potential clients can call the Intake line at 888-817-3777 any weekday. Hours are 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Monday, Wednesday and Friday and 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Tuesday and Thursday. In-person in-take applications are accepted 9 a.m. to 1 p.m., Tuesdays and Thursday. The Cleveland Office is located at 1223 West Sixth St. Brief Advice Clinics are also available. To see the current schedule, visit www.lasclev.org.

Staudt recommends having available any notices that the tenant receives, a copy of the lease agreement, and "any other papers related to the case, including delinquent bills, receipts for rent, withdrawal information, etc."

Staudt realizes that many clients are somewhat nervous about appearing in court if a case goes that far. But the attorneys do most of the talking and it is usually to a client's benefit to appear in person.

"The most common cases we see are loss of housing through eviction." --

Abigail Staudt, managing attorney of the Housing Law Practice Group for the Legal Aid Society of Cleveland.

The Legal Aid Society of Cleveland helps low-income tenants and homeowners with many housing concerns, including eviction and foreclosures.

Jill Sell is a freelance writer specializing in real estate, home and garden. Sell can be reached at jillsell22@windstream.net.