Schiller Park mom makes first appearance on terror charges

Schiller Park mom Medy Salkicevic is accused of a crime that carries a sentence of up to 30 years in prison: providing material support to ISIS terrorists.

But the Bosnian immigrant and mother of four smiled and even cracked a joke during her first appearance in court Saturday morning.

“I’m not the only one, then!” she told U.S. Magistrate Judge Jeffrey Cole, when Cole revealed that his wife often complains that he doesn’t speak loudly or clearly enough.

Arrested at her northwest suburban home Friday afternoon, Salkicevic is accused of raising and wiring money that was used to arm and equip a fellow Bosnian fighting for ISIS in Syria.

The series of $1,000 PayPal payments she sent was used to buy surplus military gear, including a sniper rifle scope, combat boots and uniforms, federal prosecutors alleged in an indictment unsealed Friday night.

She chatted with five co-defendants about the plot on Facebook using codewords, the feds say.

The co-defendants were charged alongside her in Missouri, where they allegedly bought the military equipment in surplus stores. Salkicevic will likely be taken to St. Louis next week.

During Saturday morning’s brief appearance in court, Salkicevic, who wore a hijab with her bright orange jail scrubs, asked to be freed on bond so that she can drive herself to St. Louis — a topic the judge said he would revisit on Monday.

Her attorney, Andrea Gambino, said Salkicevic was “anxious” to reunite with her children, and Salkicevic told court officers that she suffers from seizures.

But Salkicevic dispensed with the services of a Serbian translator and spoke in clear, confident English as she addressed the court. She seemed relaxed as she spoke to a relative who was supporting her in the courtroom, and even winked at an FBI agent.

Her Facebook page contains few clues to the illegal fundraising activities she’s accused of, suggesting only a devoted Muslim. Her profile picture has the words “Hijab is my personality” written on it.