Early evidence suggests that competition in the new Affordable Care Act marketplaces is working, at least in some areas. Health insurance premiums in major cities around the country are barely rising.

That’s the conclusion of two studies of data about newly public insurance rates. One, from the Kaiser Family Foundation, a health research group, looked at 49 cities and found that prices for a popular type of plan are actually going down, on average. A second, from the actuarial firm Wakely Consulting Group, looked at the largest county in each of the 34 states with marketplaces run by the federal government and found an average rate decrease of one percent.

Decreases in the price of health insurance are basically unheard-of. The individual insurance market that these new marketplaces replaced experienced annual increases of 10 percent in recent years. In the employer market, premiums went up by a record-low rate of 3 percent this year, but even that increase can’t compare with what’s happening in many exchange markets.

“Usually, health insurance premiums have gone in one direction, and that is up,” said Cynthia Cox, a senior analyst at Kaiser who was a co-author on its paper. She said that the widespread premium decreases really stood out when she ran the numbers.

The studies suggest that, in large cities, at least, the new health insurance marketplaces are working as intended: Health insurers, competing for business, are keeping prices low. That’s great news for the federal budget, since the government is paying subsidies to help some 85 percent of people on the market pay their bills. It’s also good for consumers who will be coming to the market for the first time during open enrollment, which begins Saturday.

But just because the type of plan that the researchers examined — the second-cheapest plan in the “silver” category — is showing modest changes, that doesn’t mean that every plan is a great deal. The Wakely analysis highlighted that many of the most popular plans from 2014 are getting much more expensive, while many of the cheapest plans will be new to the market in 2015. That means that consumers who simply renew their plans without shopping could get stuck with a substantial increase.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In September, my colleague Amanda Cox and I looked at rates that were published early and found a similar pattern outside large cities. For an interactive map of the early rate data and a detailed explanation of the trade-offs between shopping and saving, read our article. (We’ll be updating it soon with the new prices.)

History suggests that a lot of people will avoid shopping again and simply renew their old plans. That will be a mistake. Some will miss out on savings. Others may face miscalculations of their federal subsidies and a surprise bill come tax time. “Consumer beware,” said Jon Kingsdale, a director at Wakely, and a co-author on its paper.

The good news on rates was not universal. In Anchorage, Alaska, for example, where very few people signed up for insurance this year, premiums are going up by 13 percent for a 40-year-old nonsmoker, according to the Wakely analysis. But if you take out the outliers on either side — premiums in Jackson, Miss., went down by 25 percent — most of the rates are either single-digit increases or single-digit decreases, moderate changes for health insurance.

A full picture of the insurance exchanges will depend on filling in the missing parts of the country. Neither analysis looked at states in their entirety. And rates from Massachusetts and Hawaii won’t be public until Saturday. But the city data looks promising for savvy consumers — and the federal budget.