An initiative included in the state's proposed budget for fiscal 2016, at the request of Republican lawmakers, would provide reserve funds to help individuals with costs for birth control coverage should any business not provide such coverage mandated under the Affordable Care Act.

The initiative is item 1599-0321 in the budget that Gov. Charlie Baker sent to legislators who have returned it for final review, and allocates $300,000 to create the the Women's Preventative Health Reserve

The description of the reserve references the Public Health Services Act and how it mandates coverage of preventative health services to women.

The federal act requires free coverage to women through their insurer for "Food and Drug Administration-approved contraceptive methods, sterilization procedures, and patient education and counseling, as prescribed by a health care provider for women with reproductive capacity (not including drugs)." It adds that this "does not apply to health plans sponsored by certain exempt 'religious employers.'"

This means house of worship are exempt, and there is an opt-out option for non-profit religious organizations, and more recently for some for-profit corporations. A number of such religious organizations have challenged the opt-out option as making them complicit in providing forms of contraception that violate their beliefs. The courts have generally not ruled in their favor, though the United States Supreme Court ruled in favor of the family-owned corporation Hobby Lobby last year, and a order of Catholic nuns has a challenge pending in a federal district court.



The addition of the item to the 2016 appropriations act was led by Rep. Bradley H. Jones Jr., R-North Reading, and other Republican lawmakers, including Assistant Minority Leader Bradford R. Hill, from Ipswich, and Reps. Todd M. Smola, of Warren, and Nicholas A. Boldyga of Southwick, who was among the co-sponsors.

A statement from Jones' office on the initiative said its funds "will go towards mitigating the costs incurred by individuals affected by health plans sponsored by businesses that don't cover women's preventative health services," and references legal action that is or had been pending in federal appeals courts.

"Due to pending litigation around the country, there is the potential that health plans sponsored by employers in Massachusetts may not cover counseling for contraceptive methods or the dispensing of contraceptives to women covered under their health plans. This reserve would cover the costs of contraception for these women," the statement reads.

It adds the state, which initiated universal coverage in 2006, "has been a leader in providing health care coverage to both adults and children," and says including the initiative in the budget "continues that leadership, ensuring that all women in Massachusetts have access to preventative health services."

It also states that the "contraceptive methods covered by the reserve only pertain to birth control, not to the early termination of pregnancy in any form."