Alcohol (Photo: Thinkstock.com )

The University of Kentucky agriculture college is proposing undergraduate certification courses for students interested in distilling bourbon and making wine.

The Lexington Herald-Leader reports the courses would cater to the beverage business, which is booming in Kentucky.

The college's undergraduate curriculum council has approved the proposal for an undergraduate certificate in distillation, wine and brewing studies, but it still needs final approval from the university.

The certification would be offered to students who complete at least four classes: spirit chemistry and wine, brewing and distillation science.

Program director Seth DeBolt says he has teamed up with chemistry professor Bert Lynn, viticulture professor Jeff Wheeler and other faculty to provide the program, which has been developed with input from the Kentucky Distillers' Association, and from local breweries and Kentucky wineries.

"This is a huge industry, and there wasn't a single class in it," DeBolt said. "I wanted to make students aware that there's opportunity and this is out there."

Back in Business: Hardin County now a legal bourbon producer

Celebrating Our History: Jefferson Bourbon

A horticulture professor with a doctorate in viticulture, DeBolt would like to see UK provide educational as well as research resources for the spirits industry. He says he knows there is interest among students in learning more — when he began offering his first overview, his room was filled to capacity.

Some of the other class offerings would include Kentucky bourbon tourism, food sanitation, thermal processing and sensory analysis,with more probably added, though it won't replace existing degree programs.

"It's not like a master's in wine or a graduate degree focused on one subject," DeBolt said. "We kept it purposefully broad, to give a basic introduction. They will still need to get an internship and work their way up."

Wheeler said the biggest limitation currently facing Kentucky's wine industry is the lack of trained workers.

"If we can give them even a year or two of experience, it's immensely helpful," Wheeler said. "Knowing how to grow grapes and make wine is a long process. It takes years to learn to make high-end wine. … I want to introduce students to commercial grape growers, try to set up job opportunities or internships."

The college hopes to begin offering the certification next year.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1qNgxCH