After Sandy: Rebuild, not repeat

Brooklyn: In the aftermath of superstorm Sandy, I joined residents of Far Rockaway in their cleanup efforts. Working in the entertainment industry, I never thought I would swing a sledgehammer let alone partake in demolition work. I never thought I would wear a Tyvek suit and respirator to remove dangerous mold. But that’s exactly what I did. The damage was so widespread that volunteers, even inexperienced ones, were needed to help in areas that the government could not immediately attend to.

Three years later, Far Rockaway is still rebuilding. As emission of greenhouse gases continues to accelerate climate change, we will experience extreme weather events more often. As we respond to the damage of the past we must simultaneously prepare for a more sustainable future. That is why I support efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as well as investments in renewable energy and green infrastructure. Our city and state officials have been proactive in these efforts, as has our President. And I am hopeful that the people of New York will give them the political will to build on the progress.

Malia Renée Brown

Food for thought

Floral Park: Really? No increase in Social Security next year because the price of oil is down? I guess oil is the new food staple. The price of food is very high. It’s either feed my family or feed the car. How can I drive the car if I don’t put food in my belly to stay alive? Patsy Maggiulli

Poor little rich boy

Manhattan: To show his Everyman side, Donald Trump told Matt Lauer on NBC’s “Today” show that he got a “small loan” of $1 million from his father to kick-start his real estate business. What needs to be understood is that, while $1 million is still a lot of money, in the 1970s it was worth six times more than it is today. It’s clear that poor Donald was, thanks to Daddy’s help, lucky Donald. No self-made man was he. Richard Kahn

Classroom royalty

Port Jefferson Station, L.I.: When I was growing up, teachers had the status of near-royalty (“Outrage in classroom,” Oct. 27). They could do no wrong. God forbid a call was made to my house due to bad classroom behavior; I was toast even if I was in the right (which was extremely rare). Today’s students could give a rat’s patooty about respecting a teacher. The young lady in South Carolina should be suspended from school until she learns how to act in a correct way. Bob Cavaliere

Death of the dream

Bayside: The American Dream is not to live in low-income housing. The American Dream is to own your own home. Yet in New York City, all the mayor talks about is building low-income rental apartments. How about training our young people to work in better-paying jobs? Give a man a fish, he eats for a day. Teach him to fish . . . you know the rest. Bill Caramico

Tale of two public servants

Somerset, N.J.: Lois Lerner of the Internal Revenue Service will not be indicted for managing the delay of applications from conservative groups. No one but Lerner knows if this was her own idea, but she was rewarded with a $100,000-plus job for President Obama’s PAC on top of her federal pension benefits. Meanwhile, Kim Davis refused to issue a marriage license to a gay couple and was put in jail. The moral of the story is it does not matter which law you break; it matters which group you offend.

Peter Provenzale

Does not scan

Manhattan: I agree with Dr. Marc Siegel on the stupidity and dangerousness of the proposed new rules about mammograms (“Obamacare makes a mammogram mess,” Op-Ed, Oct. 26) except for one thing: It was the American Cancer Society that promulgated the recommendations, not the Affordable Care Act. The tenuous link he makes between the two is that the ACS study was “fueled by Obamacare to cut costs,” though there is no evidence that this is true. Siegel has discredited his otherwise sound argument by blind partisanship against President Obama. In doing so, he not only does a disservice to himself and to the President, but also to the truth. Cheryl Bulbach

Cancer confusion

San Carlos, Calif.: Re “Cancer SHOCK” (Oct. 21): The American Cancer Society’s new screening guidelines are confusing for patients, conflict with the National Comprehensive Cancer Network’s leading recommendations and raise concerns among all cancer patients and patient advocates. While more patients have access to research, information and resources than ever before, clinicians still need to drive preventive care and start the conversation about screenings, risk factors and checkups as early as possible. As a 10-year lung cancer survivor and founder of the Bonnie J. Addario Lung Cancer Foundation, I fight on behalf of patients every day for better and more frequent screenings, especially as more and more low-risk patients are diagnosed with lung cancer. The new ACS guidelines are a huge step backward for all cancer patients. Bonnie J. Addario

Floating an idea

Pompton Plains, N.J.: It looks like funds in the Chris Christie campaign are starting to get a little low since he’s now traveling by train. Rumor has it that he wanted to travel by balloon, but the environmentalists stopped him. They argued that it would take so much hot air to get him off the ground that it would speed up global warming. Joseph Brown

Fade to black

Trumbull, Conn.: I’ve written before about the horrible changes with TCM programming. After a month of listening to women cry about the lack of attention in the movie field, I noticed TCM didn’t even mention the death of two actresses, the great Maureen O’Hara being one of them. Please go back to the old format. It’s getting unbearable. I miss the old way. Lori Jones

Chill Hil

Brooklyn: A thought for anyone who thinks that Hillary Clinton had changed her strategy: In becoming more pleasant in her demeanor, by not ranting and raving during the Democratic debate or the Benghazi committee hearing, perhaps she took Valium beforehand. Fred Silfen

She’s the one

Belleville, N.J.: To Voicer Mark R. Woloshyn: All your blind hatred of Hillary Clinton does is show that she is well qualified to be the next President. She did not lie to the American people, despite the best efforts of the Republican hatchet squad. Stop drinking the Fox News Kool-Aid. Michael Schnackenberg

Why the Second Amendment

Bellerose: To Voicer Mary Anne Scardino, who states that the Second Amendment is “void” and “no longer applies”: It is this very amendment that kept us free from governmental tyranny and invasion for over 200 years. The right to bear arms allows us to defend ourselves and protect our culture and way of life so that government cannot dictate to us and also so that others cannot invade our country and impose laws on us demanding that we conform to them and their religion. Stephanie Tetro

American radical

Lindenhurst, L.I.: I understand President Obama plans to use the blue hats of the United Nations on our streets against “extremists.” I am one of those extremists, as far as Obama is concerned. I peacefully protest in front of abortion mills. I speak out against same-sex marriage, abortion, assisted suicide and attacks on my religion. I demand freedom of religion and the right to act according to my conscience. Stop the Communist in the White House now, before we have the USSR right here! Louise Perrotta

No rush

Manhattan: Tom Brady and the New England Patriots defeated the Jets, 30-23, in predictable fashion. Brady passed 54 times, completing 34 of them for 355 yards. He was the rushing leader, too, gaining 15 of the team’s 19 rushing yards. Ever since the early ’70s, the NFL has adjusted the game’s rules to favor passing, which yields higher scores. Pass defenders increasingly have been constrained by Draconian pass interference rules. The running game has been literally ruled out. The game has been reduced to a lively imitation of flag football. When will the NFL restore the balance? A true fan of football should be allowed to see both sides of the offense, rush and pass. Richard J. Carhidi