CHICAGO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Copernicus Capital Management, LLC (“Copernicus”), a healthcare-focused long/short equity fund manager headquartered in San Francisco, and Aurora Investment Management L.L.C. (“Aurora”), a Chicago-based alternative investment manager, have entered into a strategic relationship whereby Aurora has provided early stage capital to investment funds managed by Copernicus.

Copernicus Capital Management was founded by John Rende in early 2013. Prior to Copernicus, Mr. Rende was the Senior Portfolio Manager responsible for the long/short healthcare portfolio at Weintraub Capital Management, LLC, a multi-strategy hedge fund based in San Francisco. Previous to Weintraub, he worked for Wells Fargo as a credit and fixed income analyst and as a Portfolio Manager in its Asset Management Group. Mr. Rende began his career in healthcare at American Bionetics, a biotechnology firm specializing in the research and design of HIV confirmatory tests. Mr. Rende received an MBA from the John E. Anderson Graduate School of Management at UCLA, and has a joint degree, magna cum laude, in Biology and Economics from Claremont McKenna College. Mr. Rende said the following about the partnership: “We are very excited to enter into a strategic relationship with one of the preeminent investors in the alternative management space. Aurora Investment Management is known for their long term support and commitment to managers like us, and we are pleased that our patience in building a strong track record has led to such a partnership.”

Copernicus employs a disciplined and objective research process to generate a concentrated portfolio of stocks across the spectrum of life science and healthcare service companies. Through a process-driven methodology, Mr. Rende and his team seek to utilize their domain expertise, which spans over 25 years in the healthcare sector, to generate superior risk-adjusted returns while minimizing drawdowns to achieve both growth and preservation of capital.

On the outlook for the strategy, Mr. Rende said: “The combination of a much-improved FDA review process for new drug applications, along with the 2010 passage and implementation of the Affordable Care Act, will provide a strong backdrop for healthcare investors over the coming decade. Given the sector’s inherent diversity and underlying volatility, we believe our strategy of risk management and our historical ability to generate alpha is attractive for long-term investors.”

Mr. Rende is joined by an experienced director of research, Dean Dillard (previously a Senior Research Analyst at Invesco Capital Management), as well as Chief Financial Officer and Chief Operating Officer Craig Skaling, who recently joined Copernicus after two years as the Chief Financial Officer at Two Ocean Capital.

In its more than 27 years of identifying investment talent, Aurora has consistently sought to identify skilled alternative investment managers early in their business cycle, and has been an early stage investor with many successful hedge fund managers. Aurora Portfolio Manager Patrick Sheedy commented on the agreement: “John’s vast experience and proven approach to long and short stock selection in the healthcare sector present a compelling investment opportunity for our clients. Copernicus is well-positioned for success as the healthcare landscape continues to evolve, and our strategic partnership strengthens the firm’s position going forward.”

About Aurora

Aurora is one of the world’s leading managers of hedge fund portfolios in the alternative investments industry. Since its founding in 1988 with the launch of Aurora Limited Partnership, Aurora has managed hedge fund portfolios, pursuing investment results with a consistent investment philosophy, a commitment to superior due diligence, and a disciplined investment process. Headquartered in Chicago, Aurora manages assets for institutional clients, including corporate and public pension funds, foundations and endowments, insurance companies, and healthcare organizations. Since 1995, Aurora has provided customized portfolio solutions to clients to help them meet their specific investment objectives. Further information is available at www.AuroraLLC.com.