1. The emphasis should be on the candidates, not the moderators.

It's understandable that FOX News wants to promote some of its on-air talent, but there really is no reason why a debate should need more than one person at the table.

Moderators at a debate should be professional, which means no self-congratulatory smirking or joking about how uncomfortable the candidates are. Leave that kind of garbage to the mainstream media. The whole atmosphere felt unprofessional, like the sort of thing a local affiliate might put together, not at all appropriate for a national forum.

Bret Baier was the most professional of the moderates. He maintained a reserve. He asked questions formally and seriously. If not, bring back Brit Hume. If FOX News wants to be taken seriously, it can best do that by being serious, instead of asking what it thinks are tough questions.

2. Talk issues, leave the petty fights at home

This was a unique opportunity to introduce Americans to the 2016 presidential candidates. It shouldn't have been filled with gotcha questions. It's reasonable to challenge candidates on their views, but asking them about their personal history is the sort of thing you reserve for interviews.

With ten candidates, and not enough time for most of them, we got too few issues and too many water cooler moments. That adds to the impression of the circus atmosphere that the rest of the media is already trying to foster.

3. Ten candidates is too many

The format didn't work. Ten candidates is too many and the overflow on the stage and emphasis on the moderators made this less of a debate and more of a bizarre mashup of speed dating and morning show interviews.

The so-called kiddie table debate actually worked better.

It would make more sense to have 15 or fewer candidates, broken up into groups of 5 or 4. Eliminate some of the obvious non-candidates, e.g. Pataki, Graham, who have no shot at doing anything, and arrange a series of debates so that all of the candidates will face each other at some point.

The Candidates need more face time so that we hear more from them than their handful of applause lines. There need to be serious exchanges, like the one between Christie and Huckabee, on actual issues, instead of vague sentiments, and discussions of what they would actually do, rather than what they feel.