ENLARGE U.S. Secret Service agents surround Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump during a disturbance as he speaks in Dayton, Ohio, on March. Photo: Reuters

Doug Heye is a former communications director for the Republican National Committee and deputy chief of staff to then-House Majority Leader Eric Cantor.

In the past week, a protester at a Trump event in Fayetteville, N.C., was sucker-punched, and the man charged with assault later said, “The next time we see him, we might have to kill him.” In St. Louis on Friday, a protester had his face bloodied; a Trump supporter was arrested and charged with assault. A Trump rally in Chicago was canceled Friday evening and fights broke out inside and outside the arena. Secret Service agents rushed the stage at a Trump rally on Saturday amid a disturbance in the crowd.

That many of the altercations have involved fighting between whites and blacks makes this violence even more disquieting.

This was not merely student activism. MoveOn.org hosted a petition advocating canceling the Chicago event, and the pro-Sanders Twitter account @People4Bernie celebrated the event’s shutdown to its 44,000-plus followers. Some protesters wore Angela Davis shirts and waved banners depicting the Nazi swastika. Yes, there have been student protesters, but organized disruptions by leftist activists play into Mr. Trump’s message of division.

What these activists have responded to, and taken advantage of, is the hateful rhetoric coming from Mr. Trump since the first days of his campaign.

Three recent examples:

Feb. 1: “Knock the crap out of them, would you? Seriously. Okay, just knock the hell. I promise you, I will pay the legal fees. I promise. I promise.”

Feb. 22: “I’d like to punch him in the face.”

“I love the old days. You know what they used to do to guys like that when they were in a place like this? They’d be carried out on a stretcher, folks.”

Feb. 27: “In the good old days, they’d have ripped him out of that seat so fast.”

The violence has not been limited to ugly scenes in the crowd. The media have also been a target. Reporter Michelle Fields filed assault charges against Trump campaign manager Corey Lewandowski last week and posted pictures of bruises on her arm after she was grabbed at a Trump event. Sopan Deb, a CBS embed with the Trump campaign who has reported abusive comments directed to him at events, was arrested while covering Friday’s protests in Chicago. Last month a Secret Service agent detailed to the Trump campaign choke-slammed a Time Magazine photographer.

Mr. Trump is widely seen as channeling, and benefiting from, the anger of voters across the country. But there is a difference between telling the truth and inciting violence–and his are not garden-variety insults but calls to arms.

Trump surrogates have sought to blame President Barack Obama, the protesters–anyone but the ringleader of this dangerous circus. Some on cable news Friday compared the Chicago protests to the 1968 Democratic convention (as if Hubert H. Humphrey promised to cover the legal bills of his supporters engaged in assault). Trump spokeswoman Katrina Pierson has said that Mr. Trump calls on event attendees to be respectful though also makes some “off the cuff” comments.

Notice that this violence is happening at events for only one candidate. There have been protests at events for Republicans Ted Cruz, John Kasich, and Marco Rubio, as well as Democratic candidates Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders, but these were never marred by violence.

Donald Trump, in events that are often televised, is shouting “Fire!” in crowded theaters. How far will this go? Will someone be fatally beaten or shot? Will a militia of Trump supporters emerge, similar to the Minutemen, and what would that mean? What would happen if the violence consistently escalates?

Most important: How can Donald Trump keep this country safe if his own events are so dangerous?

ALSO IN THINK TANK:

Marco Rubio, John Kasich, and the Republican Establishment’s Last Stand

The Hole in the ‘Obama Doctrine’

On Less Crowded Debate Stage, Donald Trump’s Weaknesses Stand Out

Video: Scenes from the Chicago arena where the Trump rally was postponed Friday, after the announcement was made: