The only people who knew that 13-year-old Michael Kuhn was thinking about suicide were the operators of a website that professes to be neutral on the matter but gives readers detailed instructions on killing themselves.

Although Michael wrote to them with his real name and an easily traceable email address, describing his impulses either to kill others or himself, the operators of the site didn't contact authorities or his family.

His emails to the website cast light on a problem that Internet security and anti-bullying experts say isn’t unusual: When distraught teenagers have thoughts of ending their lives, some turn to the Internet to learn how.

“It’s been going on for many years,” says Parry Aftab, a New York privacy attorney and founder of WiredSafety.org, a group that promotes Internet security. “There’s several cases where children learned to do it through online websites.”

In two emails to the website, Michael indicated he was suicidal.

In the first, he says he is simply curious about death but might as well leave a mess for his parents when he dies. He thanks the website for showing him how to do so.

But when the operators respond, he writes back in more detail, explaining that he is teetering on the verge of a breakdown and fears he might do harm to others.

“I will kill and kill until someone kills me,” he writes, adding that suicide would prevent the violence.

Three months later, on Aug. 25, he reportedly lashed out physically at another boy during an altercation. He then walked home and took his life.

The Topeka Capital-Journal has decided not to publish the name of the website.

Websites like the one Michael accessed aren’t run by professionals trained to help people struggling with thoughts of suicide. And for children and adolescents, some say their existence may pose risks.

Walt Thiessen, clinical director of the Kansas Children’s Service League in Wichita, said suicide can seem like an easy way out for adolescents experiencing difficult times.

“They aren’t able to think about death being forever,” Thiessen said. “At that point in time, they just think, ‘I’m in pain and I need to get rid of this.’ ”

Though the website operators describe the site as neutral, he said the mere act of presenting suicide methods isn’t.

“Not for kids, no,” he said. “You’re giving them information that, if a kid wants to hurt themselves, makes it sound like it’s not that big a deal. It minimizes the seriousness.”

Many states have laws against assisting suicide, but prosecutors would have to determine whether a website’s actions fit the definition or fall under the protections of free speech.

“In Kansas, it requires specifically helping them to do it,” said Todd Hiatt, senior assistant district attorney at the Shawnee County District Attorney’s Office.

Forcing someone also would count, he said.

In their emails to Michael, two operators or volunteers calling themselves “G” and “H” recognize that he seems to be young and living with his parents. They suggest he consider seeking help or talking to a friend or professional.

At the same time, G ends an email with the words, “Best wishes in this life or what follows.”

The website's stated aim is to be “impartial” and help readers “make whatever choice is right” for them. It lists suicide methods and bears suicide-related imagery, but also includes a links page with suicide prevention hotlines, and information about therapy.

Although a disclaimer says visitors must be 18 or older to enter the site, the site offers testimonials from what the operators say are children as young as 14, describing it as helpful. The testimonials say the site has repeatedly convinced people not to kill themselves.

The Pottawatomie County Sheriff’s Office, which investigated Michael’s death, declined this past week to give details of the investigation but said that “all aspects” of the case were explored and the investigation is no longer active.

The website’s operators state on the site that it is based in Great Britain.

Their site is hosted by ICDSoft Hong Kong. Their registrant information is blocked by a service called WhoIs Privacy Protection Service, with contact information in Bellevue, Wash. Website registrants can pay the service to keep their names out of publicly available databases meant to ensure Internet transparency.

As The Capital-Journal prepared to go to press, it received a response from the site.

In an email, H says the site doesn’t encourage people to kill themselves.

“Indeed, we aim to discourage suicide,” H writes.

H writes that there is no evidence that websites like the one in question “have had any significant impact on suicide rates.”

The site is “designed to reach the very desperate, and try to make them think twice before they try and kill themselves. We have strong statistical evidence from a large sample of data that the site achieves this aim.”

“There are a lot of help sites out there,” H writes. “But people feeling suicidal, of which I was once one, do not want to look for help — they want to search for information.”

“I have asked a number of people, and consistently am told that the information on the site would not push someone over the edge,” H writes. “It takes a lot of self harm desire to actually go through with suicide, and that sort of desire would not come from this website.”

“Michael emailed us, we told him to get professional help. He emailed us again, and we told him that a second time,” H writes.

H declined to provide a full name or contact information.

For legal reasons, H said the site can’t encourage minors to visit it, but that based on feedback from readers, teens find the site helpful.

H said the site’s operators hadn’t contacted Michael’s family because the confidentiality of visitors is important and because the site is run by volunteers and draws a high volume of visitors.