Woman with epilepsy separates from husband of 33 years to keep health insurance lost to Obamacare-Medicaid coverage gap

Linda and Larry Drain make too little money to qualify for a subsidy to help cover their insurance premiums

Meanwhile, Tennessee has refused to expand Medicaid for people in their situation as the Affordable Care Act originally intended

Now th e Drains live two miles apart and don't even see each other every day

A Tennessee couple among the 100,000-plus people in the state left uninsured because of a gap left by Obamacare and Medicaid have separated in order to stay covered.

Linda and Larry Drain of Maryville have moved apart because couples whose household makes less than $15,510 don't qualify for Affordable Care Act subsidies and Tennessee, like most Southern states, has refused to expand Medicaid to fill in the gap.

Debilitated by epilepsy and dependent on pricey medications, going uninsured is not an option for Linda. Now staying healthy means not getting to see her husband of 33 years every day.

Sad: Larry Drain, left, and his wife Linda are some of the 100,000-plus Tennesseans who make too little money for Obamacare subsidies but for whom the state refuses to extend Medicaid benefits. To keep her Medicaid, Linda--who requires pricey epilepsy medications--separated from her husband of 33 years



Trouble began for the Drains when 62-year-old Larry decided to retire early last year.

'In September of last year, I made what looking back on it in retrospect was the worst decision I ever made in my entire life,' he told the Tennesseean. 'I decided to take early retirement from Social Security.'



But the fault doesn't lie solely with the Drains. The U.S. Supreme Court struck down the part of the Affordable Care that required states to expand Medicaid for people like them.

And Tennessee, where a Medicaid expansion failed miserably in the 1990s, and Republican Governor Bill Haslam have been unwilling to expand the program in the wake of the court's decision.



Like an estimate one in three people in the South, where nearly 4 million of the uninsured fall into the coverage gap, the Drains evidently didn't understand that Linda's eligibility would change with their drop in income.

Sticky situation: The Affordable Care Act originally required states to expand Medicaid to those who make too little to qualify for subsidies, but like most Southern states, Tennessee refused once that provision of the health care law was struck down by the U.S. Supreme Court

But that's precisely what happened and illness-plagued Linda was threatened with the possibility of losing her Supplemental Security Income and the state Medicaid benefits that go along with it.

'After one or two months of crying and lots of prayers and lots of yelling and screaming, on Dec. 26 — after 33 years of marriage — we separated,' Larry told the Tennesseean.

The couple now live two miles apart, with Linda at her mother's house and Larry at the apartment they once shared, and don't see each other every day.

While Linda has kept her coverage, Larry remains uninsured.



'The irony of it was I was working full time at a hospital with no benefits,' he said. 'When I got the job, what they explained to me was the hospital was losing money hand over fist because of uncompensated care.'

The now-retired social worker now writes a letter to the governor via his blog each day, pleading for a Medicaid expansion.

'In some ways, it is like a virtual sit-in,' he said. 'I couldn't go sit in his office, but in some way I need to say, "I am here. I am going to be here. I'm going to talk about things you don't want talked about."'