Guardians of the Galaxy is on track for a better than anticipated summer movie opening, and a sequel is already confirmed. Now the word is in from Director James Gunn and some of the cast that there could be some sort of team-up with the Avengers down the line.

Speaking with Yahoo! Movies, Gun confirmed that there have been discussions of a potential crossover with the head honchos at Marvel. While the director didn’t name names, one of those would have to be President of Marvel Studios, Kevin Feige, who is also shepherding the overall arch of the Marvel movie universe.

“We talked about all sorts of possibilities [for a crossover] and I kind of know what the basic plan is. It could always change at any minute,” Gunn told Yahoo.

“That could or could not include a couple of Avengers and a couple of Guardians meeting up, or all of the Avengers and all of the Guardians. But, we do inhabit the same universe and they’re pretty big personalities that are likely to, at some point or another, run into each other.”

There are some notable issues with such a project, however. As Chris Pratt (Peter “Star-Lord Quill) notes, taking five main characters and then mixing in another five is fraught with problems trying to balance screen time.

Still, Zoe Saldana (Gamora) and Dave Bautista (Drax) both bring up some fun possibilities for a crossover.

“It was be awesome for the Avengers to seek help… professional help from the Guardians,” Zaldana suggested, “[The Guardians] have all been cybernetically altered, so they’re kind of super-bionic.”

“Drax and Hulk would clash,” Bautista added, “There would probably be some blows thrown.”

It’s clear though that the two teams would not get along if Gunn has his say.

“I do not think the Avengers would get on well with the Guardians,” agrees James Gunn, “The Guardians are like a bunch of jerks, really. The Avengers, for all their problems, they’re all do-gooders. And our guys are not do-gooders.”

A crossover between the Avengers and Guardians of the Galaxy has already occurred often in the recent Marvel NOW! run of comics that started in 2012. Iron Man joined the team with a brand new suit crafted to deal with space and split time between Earth and the Guardians.

The Infinitycomic series also featured a crossover of sorts as the Guardians of the Galaxy assisted the Avengers and other heroes defending the Earth against an invasion by Thanos.

It seems some sort of Guardians/Avengers crossover is in the works for the Marvel movie universe, but maybe not the entire teams. Avengers 3 seems the most likely candidate given that it is supposed to deal with Thanos and the Infinity Gauntlet. Guardians of the Galaxy 2 is a possibility as well, though.

Who do you think will appear in which movie? Let us know in the comments.

[Images via Marvel]