Democrats in Virginia are facing accusations of dirty tricks in the final hours of the very ugly gubernatorial campaign between pro-life Republican gubernatorial candidate Ken Cuccinelli and pro-abortion Democrat Terry McAuliffe.

Scott Lingamfelter, a Republican member of the Virginia House of Delegates, says in a Facebook post that he received a Democratic robocall claiming Cuccinelli supports both Obamacare and abortion. Cuccinelli is a strongly pro-life candidate who led one of the legal battles to try to head off Obamacare in court.

Lingamfelter wrote:

About 25 minutes ago (7:24 PM 3 November) the Democratic Party of Virginia dropped a robo-call (that they said they paid for in the recording) at MY house to try to tell ME that Ken Cuccinelli supports Obamacare and public financing of abortion!!! Virginia, pa-leeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeezzz understand that the party that wants Terry McAuliffe to be your governor will flat lie about anything! If you want proof that they will say ANYTHING to gain power over you and your life, you need go no further than the “robo-lies” they are sending around Virginia this Sunday evening. They are shameless in their tactics. (I guess they are trying to suppress GOP voters.) Folks, move this around. Virginians need to know what lengths the Democratic Party of VA will go to lie their way to victory. Disgusting. Again, we must expose this statewide…let people know about this. They will say anything. It’s all about power to them….

UPDATE: Cuccinelli himself has now commented on the calls, via an email his campaign sent out to supporters:

We have the most energized group of grassroots supporters I’ve ever seen in all of my years in office. Our momentum and excitement is contagious – Terry McAuliffe and the Democrats see that – and they’re nervous. So nervous in fact, that they’ve turned to desperate, outright lies to try to sway my hardworking and dedicated supporters. Early today, I was informed that the Democrats are calling the homes of my Republican supporters and telling them that I support Obamacare! That’s right, Friend. Terry McAuliffe and his Democrat allies are trying to convince voters that I support Obamacare in order to trick them into voting against me! Of course we all know the truth – that I was the first Attorney General in the country to sue the federal government over Obamacare. I’ve been busy fighting back against Obamacare for years, and what has Terry McAuliffe done? He said it didn’t go far enough. Terry even stood by President Obama’s side yesterday and celebrated Obamacare after news broke that the President lied to Americans, and millions lost their health insurance.

The calls may have been going on for awhile, as Virginia resident Shirley Widlacki wrote on twitter in early October that she received a similar robocall with false claims about Cuccinelli.

Desperate empty suit @TerrMcAuliffe doing dirty robo-calls trying to scare conservs that Cuccinelli is really pro-abortion. #vagov #vagop — Shirley Widlacki (@patriotmom61) October 12, 2013



The Free Beacon newspaper reports the Democratic Party of Virginia id not respond to its request for comment.