The world is changing at breakneck speed. Many of the tech jobs of today — from designing equipment for robotic surgery to programming apps for smart phones – were unimaginable to our grandparents’ generation. Similarly, our own children will enter the workforce facing new frontiers we can hardly conceive of today. Will they be ready?

With the passage of the 2012 Colorado READ Act (House Bill 1238), lawmakers are pouring resources and attention into ensuring reading proficiency by third grade. While this focus is laudable, Colorado’s government has yet to invest similar resources for our young learners to receive quality STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) education, and to our peril. If we look at current job and technology trends, Colorado must focus more effective energy and resources into math and science education in elementary school to ensure our children are ready for — and even better — creating and securing the jobs of tomorrow.

Early educational experiences pave the way to students’ confidence and competence as STEM learners. Research shows that nearly 50 percent of students lose interest in science by the third grade. Pouring money into microscopes or spending heavily on smart boards for secondary science and math classrooms is unfortunately too little, too late.

Students’ early attitudes towards math lay the groundwork for their future success, and studies show that learners who do not successfully complete basic Algebra by ninth grade are unlikely to attend college and find well-compensated professional positions later. A strong start in math and science is as critical as basic literacy skills.

To complement STEM offerings at the secondary level, elementary schools must see themselves as the petri dishes for young STEM thinkers. All elementary teachers are, in fact, STEM teachers, and can profoundly influence students’ futures by promoting their sense of themselves as scientists and mathematicians capable of thinking deeply and solving complex, real-world problems.

As STEM-related industries, such as aerospace and energy, grow in importance in Colorado, the need to maintain a highly-skilled workforce intensifies. STEM-related occupations are projected to be among the 50 fastest growing in the state, accelerating what is known as the “Colorado paradox:” the state’s inability to home-grow enough local talent to staff our STEM industries. According to recent TCAP results, Colorado high school proficiency in science and math is 49 and 36 percent, respectively. It’s clear we have some work to do.

Further, recent research on the changing labor market conducted by Burning Glass found that 38 percent of jobs posted in 2013 were in STEM fields, and college graduates with STEM degrees will have access to twice as many positions and earn a 26 percent premium above their non-STEM trained peers.

To ensure equal opportunities for all of our students, our state government, school districts, teachers and parents must collaborate to lay strong foundations for our youngest students in math and science. While policymakers and superintendents can channel resources to fund high-quality programming for elementary level STEM learners, every adult can play a role in influencing students’ perceptions.

There are a few simple STEM lessons we can all teach to help advance Colorado’s students:

• Math equals opportunity. Working hard to understand math pays big dividends in opportunities later in life.

• Science is for everyone. Stereotypes of scientists as nerdy men in lab coats are not aligned with present or future reality. As a curious human being, any child is a natural scientist capable of making discoveries and solving problems.

• Engineering is everywhere. All day, we work with objects and machines that someone designed and developed to meet a human need. Think iPhones, tablets; how cool is that?

Parents and teachers alike can promote children’s readiness for the jobs of the future by talking with them about the math and science in their everyday worlds, expressing interest in and giving importance to the science, technology, engineering and mathematics around them.

By engaging children’s curiosity about STEM subjects and encouraging them to think of themselves as capable mathematicians and scientists, we can take the first step toward ensuring that they see themselves as members of tomorrow’s STEM workforce.

Wendy Ward Hoffer is senior director of education at the Public Education & Business Coalition, a Denver-based nonprofit that works with teachers, schools and districts to cultivate highly effective K-12 educators to elevate student achievement. She can be reached at whoffer@pebc.org.