Water everywhere?

California is entering its fourth year of a record-breaking drought. And yet, pay a visit to California's Central Valley and on that parched land you'll see acre upon acre of crops. Where do you get water in a drought? You take it out of the savings account: groundwater. CBS News "60 Minutes" correspondent Lesley Stahl reports on disturbing new evidence that our planet's groundwater is being pumped out much faster than it can be replenished.

Boarding up

For the 100th consecutive day, activists took to the streets in the St. Louis area. They want a grand jury to indict Ferguson, Missouri police officer Darren Wilson for the August shooting death of unarmed 18-year-old Michael Brown. CBS News correspondent Omar Villafranca reports that a stretch of West Florissant Avenue in Ferguson is just a few blocks from where Michael Brown was killed, and is expected to be a major protest location when the grand jury decision comes out. Almost every business there is boarded up.

Stuck in East Timor

An Oregon woman says a misunderstanding is keeping her in a jail cell, thousands of miles from home. Stacey Addison was visiting East Timor in Southeast Asia, but she got tied up in a drug trafficking case that stems from a cab ride with a stranger. CBS News correspondent John Blackstone spoke with Addison's mother, who has made it her mission to bring her daughter home.

Saudi Arabia prepares

There are hundreds of young Saudi men fighting with ISIS in Iraq and Syria. CBS News correspondent Holly Williams was given rare access by authorities in Saudi Arabia, who wanted to show what they're doing to counter Islamic extremism.

Netanyahu on Iran

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu delivered one of his sternest warnings yet about Iran, when asked by "Face the Nation" moderator Bob Schieffer whether the U.S. should try to work with Iran in the fight against ISIS.

Back to North Korea

When Director of National Intelligence James Clapper traveled to North Korea to help secure the release of two Americans imprisoned there, he didn't know whether his mission would succeed. Clapper told Schieffer this was not the first time he'd flown to the Hermit Kingdom.

Obamacare's future

Although Americans are signing up for health insurance on the Obamacare exchanges for the second year, there is some uncertainty in the law's future, with legal and legislative challenges ahead. Here are five things to know about the law's future in the current political climate.

Provoking the GOP

As President Obama gets closer to taking executive action on immigration reform, Republicans say he is ignoring the American people and provoking the GOP in the process. "My advice to the Democrats at this point and to the president in particular is. 'Take a breath,"' said 2012 GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney in an interview by Schieffer on "Face the Nation." And while GOP leaders say they don't want to shut the government down if the president acts unilaterally on immigration, most are not taking anything off the table.

Schieffer dumbstruck

Schieffer says MIT economist Jonathan Gruber's comments about how the health care law was written and sold to the public are another example of what's wrong with American politics.

Embryo adoption

Stephanie and Ben Hawkins adopted their daughter, Annika, before she even was born, in a process called embryo adoption. Their story sheds light on an unusual alternative that's resulted in hundreds of children being born from embryos left over from other people's in vitro fertilization procedures.

Jersey dinosaurs

It may turn out the only window the world has to animals actually killed in the cataclysm when a meteor struck and killed off 70 percent of life on Earth, wiping out the dinosaurs, and essentially making the modern world as we know it, is in a pit behind a shopping mall in New Jersey. CBS News correspondent Don Dahler reports that while the dig for dinosaur bones may unlock the past, Drexel University professor Ken Lacovara also hopes to unlock the future for science.

Dog's life

Uga, just named by USA Today as the best mascot in college football, was content to pose for pictures with his fans at the University of Georgia, something he does a great deal of on game days. For 58 years, the Seiler family has considered it an honor to share, unpaid, their family pets with the university. Sonny Seiler showed CBS News "Sunday Morning" correspondent Martha Teichner a shrine to the generations of Ugas, although he said, "We don't call it a shrine. Other people do!"

House calls

Call it beauty on demand. Apps are creating salons of the future, right in people's homes. CBS News correspondent Michelle Miller reports on Glamsquad, where customers can bring in stylists who make house calls with a simple swipe on their phones.

Black Phantom

"The Phantom of the Opera" keeps filling Broadway seats after more than a quarter century and over 11,000 performances, but one man is changing the face of the phantom. As Jamie Wax reports, Norm Lewis made history when he took the stage in the title role as an actor of color.

Top News

World

Obama confirms: Peter Kassig murdered by ISIS - parents "heartbroken," but proud

Pope Francis' first visit to U.S. planned for fall

North Korean offical travels to Russia

6.7 Magnitude earthquake rattles New Zealand

Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 debris collected, 4 months later

Politics

State Department email system hacked, shut down

Mitt Romney: Obama "wrong" to say no ground troops in ISIS fight

U.S.

Feds make surprise drug inspection of NFL teams

Bill Cosby appears on stage amid swirl of controversy

Colorado officials to ask for panel to scrutinize pot treats

Missouri woman sentenced for extreme abuse of her childrem

Texas woman sues owner of dog killed by her pit bulls

Texas hunting club may cancel endangered rhino hunt

Latest Brooklyn Bridge climber arrested

Bono needs surgery after Central Park bike accident

Solange Knowles marries video director Alan Ferguson

MoneyWatch

How would the Keystone pipeline affect U.S. gas prices?

Here's the top financial priority for Americans

Don't hire a financial advisor until you do this

Health

Norovirus outbreak sickens Princess Cruises ship passengers

Surgeon being treated fro Ebola in Nebraska critial

Bird flu discovery at Dutch chicken farm raises alarm