WASHINGTON (CNN) — The Republican candidates for president gathered in Des Moines, Iowa, on Thursday for their last debate before the first votes of the 2016 primary season are cast, and CNN’s Reality Check team is spending the night putting their statements and assertions to the test.

The team of reporters, researchers and editors across CNN is selecting key statements and rating them: True; Mostly True; True, but Misleading; False; or It’s Complicated.

Marco Rubio

Reality Check: Rubio on Cruz’s budget votes

Florida Sen. Marco Rubio sought to discredit the national security record of his Republican colleague Sen. Ted Cruz by claiming “the only budget that Ted has voted for is a budget that (Kentucky Sen.) Rand Paul sponsored that brags about cutting defense spending.”

Rubio’s claim harkens back to a 2013 amendment introduced by Paul that would have set defense spending levels at what, on paper, was a lower level than in previous years.

Paul, who has warned against big government and overspending, did tout the measure as a way to shrink the military.

The budget “seeks to reduce the size and scope of the military complex, including its global footprint to one that is more in line with a policy of containment,” he wrote at the time.

But the bill came after mandatory across-the-board cuts, known as “sequestration,” were enacted that slashed defense spending. Taking into account the lower levels under the sequester, Paul’s plan actually increased spending on the military.

Rubio’s claim that the 2013 vote is the only budget Cruz has supported also begs scrutiny. When Rubio made a similar claim in a Fox Business debate, Cruz fired back that he supported one of Rubio’s own budget amendments that increased military spending to $697 billion.

Cruz was right: he voted for the measure in March 2015, though it ultimately failed to garner enough support for passage.

Rubio’s claim that Cruz supported Paul’s budget — which was advertised as reducing the size of the military, but which actually increased defense spending — is true. But his assertion that Cruz hasn’t supported other measures is false, since he supported Rubio’s own bill that increased spending.

Reality Check: Rubio claims he “never” supported cap-and-trade

Asked about environmental policy, Rubio said he has never supported cap-and-trade, a policy designed to drive down pollution by creating a regulated market for carbon emissions.

“If they’re going to impose this on us, we better prepare to protect the state from it,” Rubio said, referring to efforts in Florida to create a cap-and-trade program. “I have never supported cap-and-trade, and I never thought it was a good idea, and I was clear about that at the time.”

His record at the time is clear — but it’s not what he claimed Thursday night at the debate.

In March 2008, Rubio told a local TV station that he believed cap-and-trade was “inevitable” on the federal level, and therefore, Florida should act quickly to become “an early complier” so it can “help influence what that cap-and-trade looks like.”

He went on to propose giving the Florida Department of Environmental Protection a mandate to “design a cap-and-trade, or a carbon tax program, and bring it back to the legislature for ratification.” Months later, Rubio presided over a unanimous vote in the Florida House to do just that, according to the Tampa Bay Times.

So, Rubio’s claim at the debate that he never supported cap-and-trade is false. He might not support the idea now, but he helped pave the way for Florida to create a cap-and-trade system when he was a state lawmaker.

Ted Cruz

Reality Check: Cruz on Obamacare as a job-killer

Blasting Obamacare fell to Texas Sen. Ted Cruz on Thursday night.

“It is the biggest job-killer in this country,” Cruz said. “Millions of Americans have lost their jobs, have been forced into part-time work.”

In fact, Obamacare is not a job-killer, according to the 2015 Kaiser Family Founation/Health Research and Education Trust survey released in September 2015.

The report showed that only 4% of employers with at least 50 employees said they shifted some staffers to part-time hours so they wouldn’t qualify for health care, and another 4% said they were reducing the number of full-time employees they planned to hire because of the cost of health benefits. Kaiser found that 10% of employers reported that they were changing workers from part-time to full-time status to enable them to obtain coverage.

An ADP Research Institute study had similar findings. One reason may be that the economy has been improving. Some companies interviewed by ADP said they may increase their part-timers’ hours to retain talent and reduce training costs.

As to whether employers are cutting jobs because of Obamacare, it’s nearly impossible to determine from Labor Department data since the economy is recovering and adding jobs. The number of people who can only find part-time jobs has declined in recent years, signifying companies are hiring more full-time workers.

Verdict: False.

Reality Check: Cruz on naval power

Claiming that the United States military has been “dramatically downgraded” during the administration of President Barack Obama, Cruz said that when the first Gulf War began in 1991, the United States “had 529 ships. Today, we have 272.”

That figure appears to be correct, according to the Navy’s Naval History and Heritage Command website, which tracks the size of the navy going back to the 19th century.

Under the section “U.S. Navy Active Ship Force Levels,” the site says there were 529 active ships in the Navy as of September 30, 1991. The Gulf War took place in January 1991. For the record, the site claims there were 570 active ships as of September 30, 1990, less than two months after Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait and launched the international crisis that eventually led to the war.

The Navy’s website keeps tabs on the current force structure and says there are currently 273 deployable ships in the U.S. arsenal.

According to the Navy, the Navy decommissioned many older ships after the end of the Cold War in 1991, a decision that led to a smaller overall fleet. Ship levels also were not greatly increased in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks as older surface warships have been replaced at a less than one-to-one ratio.

While the numbers Cruz cited of naval power are correct, the decline of ship power took place over the course of two decades and multiple presidential administrations, and not just the past seven years, as Cruz posited.

Verdict: True, but misleading.

Mike Huckabee

Reality Check: Huckabee on manufacturing jobs

Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee said the nation has lost 5 million manufacturing jobs just since the year 2000.

That’s true. There were 12.3 million manufacturing workers in the U.S. last month, down from 17.3 million at the start of 2000, according to the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Huckabee went on to say he visited Newton, Iowa, where workers lost their jobs in 2007 after Maytag’s washer-dryer facility went out of business. “All those jobs went to Mexico,” he said.

That’s not so true. Maytag, which was headquartered in Newton, was bought by Whirlpool in 2006. Whirlpool shuttered the Maytag factory and shifted production to Whirlpool’s existing factories in Mexico and Ohio, according to a 2007 New York Times story.

Verdict: True on the loss of manufacturing jobs, but false on all of Newton’s Maytag jobs going to Mexico.

Carly Fiorina

Reality Check: Fiorina on Planned Parenthood

“Planned Parenthood engages in partial-birth abortion, in late term abortion,” former Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina said. “They alter those abortion techniques to harvest and sell body parts, they have admitted that they are not going to accept compensation for this anymore.”

Over the summer, a conservative group called the Center for Medical Progress released undercover videos and accused Planned Parenthood of performing partial birth abortions and selling fetal tissue.

Partial birth abortions are illegal, and Planned Parenthood has repeatedly denied that it performs partial birth abortions, or that it has participated in any illegal activity. On Monday, a Texas grand jury investigation into Planned Parenthood cleared the group, instead indicting two members of the Center for Medical Progress who secretly recorded Planned Parenthood members.

Officials in 11 states have cleared Planned Parenthood of wrongdoing, according to the organization. Officials in another eight states declined to even investigate the accusations made by the Center for Medical Progress.

Planned Parenthood has said that money it accepts for fetal tissue is used to cover costs, not to generate profit. In October, the group announced that it would no longer accept any reimbursements for fetal tissue used for research.

Planned Parenthood does not engage in partial birth abortions, and they do not sell tissue for any profit (although they have now said they will not accept any reimbursement whatsoever).

Verdict: False.

Reality Check: Fiorina on the Department of Veterans Affairs

Fiorina said, “The American people got a bill passed through Congress that said we could fire the top 400 senior executives at the V.A. For dereliction of duty, when we know that 307,000 veterans have died waiting for health care and the V.A. Handed out $142 million worth of bonuses for superb performances.”

Let’s unpack her statements:

The bill to which Fiorina is referring, the Veterans Affairs Management Accountability Act of 2014, would give authority to the secretary of the VA to fire about 400 senior executives for poor performance. The bill passed the House in May 2014 but has since been sitting in the Senate.

So Fiorina’s claim that the bill has passed through Congress is false.

The 307,000 number comes from a Veterans Affairs report released last September and it represents the number of pending records that belonged to veterans who had died in previous months. However, that number does not necessarily represent veterans who were actively seeking treatment in VA health care, according to the VA’s inspector general.

Due to problems with the VA database, some of those records include people who died before the VA had even started its health care enrollment system, or people who did not apply for health care benefits specifically. To say definitively that 307,000 people “have died waiting” for health care may be a stretch, so we rate her claim as it’s complicated.

And in November 2015, USA Today reported that the VA had given out $142 million in bonuses to employees in 2014, as incentives or tied to performance reviews. That claim is true.

Rick Santorum

Reality Check: Santorum on Americans without college degrees

Presenting himself as a working class advocate, former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum said the other candidates are ignoring a large swath of the populace. He declared that 74% of Americans don’t have college degrees.

Santorum, who has two postgraduate degrees, mentioned the same stat during the last debate two weeks ago, and our verdict was false.

But let’s check our numbers again. There are 209.3 million Americans aged 25 and older, according to the 2014 Census, and 142.4 million of them have not attained a bachelor’s degree or higher. That’s 68% of Americans, not 74%.

During an appearance on “Face the Nation” in April, Santorum said that he would champion the “70% of Americans who don’t have a college degree.” That was close enough to the Census figure to earn Santorum a true rating from Politifact.

Unfortunately, the Penn State graduate changed his calculation to 74% and has repeated the same incorrect stat at two debates in a row. Perhaps it’s a Pennsylvania hat tip to Groundhog Day or maybe he needs a math refresher. Our verdict was and remains false.