Under the Affordable Care Act, Illinois hospitals have secured $34.9 million in research funding since 2012 to help them find answers to some of the most elusive health care questions.

The latest — and largest — round of funding is expected Tuesday, with more dollars flowing throughout the year..

Through 2019, the new health law, often called Obamacare, calls for billions in funds to bolster research at hospitals and other research facilities. So far $674 million has gone to more than 400 projects across the country. Illinois ranked sixth in funding, behind No. 1 research university behemoth Massachusetts, which received $90.5 million.

About $7 million was awarded to Chicago hospitals participating as one of 11 networks in a nationwide research initiative that aims to transform how medical research is conducted in the U.S.

Research on diseases and other health care issues typically involves an expensive patient recruitment effort. Terry Mazany, principal investigator for the Chicago network, said health information in existing patient records can be harnessed to circumvent that step, while still protecting patient privacy. The patient pool could grow from thousands to millions, too, especially helpful for rare disease research, if hospitals across the country can get on the same page with things like data models, medical coding and extra patient privacy protocols.

The goal is to eventually have one system in place for hospitals to follow.

(Tribune graphics)

"Boiling it down," Mazany said, "the goal is to make better medicine faster and cheaper."

The latest batch of funding will be awarded by the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute, established by the law to facilitate funding. Those awards will be two to three times larger than those that have been given so far, said the institute's executive director, Dr. Joe Selby. Over the next five years, the institute plans to give about $400 million annually.

The Chicago network's initial funding for research ends in August, but it plans to apply for more funds by April.

Participating Chicago institutions include: Loyola University Medical Center, Northwestern Medicine, NorthShore University HealthSystem, University of Chicago Medicine, University of Illinois Hospital & Health Sciences System, Cook County Health & Hospitals System, Alliance of Chicago's Federally Qualified Health Centers, Rush University Medical Center, Jesse Brown VA Medical Center and Edward Hines Jr. VA Hospital.

The Chicago hospitals group plans to focus on health issues such as obesity, anemia, asthma and diabetes, as well as rare diseases such as sickle cell disease.

While the medical research initiative received the largest amount of Obamacare funding in Illinois, 16 other research projects are ongoing in the state.

The projects, chosen by a review panel are selected on their merits and scientific approach. They must address "a significant burden on the U.S. population," Selby said, as well as involve patients and other stakeholders such as payers and clinicians in the research process.

"We put an amazing amount of resources at engaging the patients early on," Selby said. "If you do great research but are asking the wrong question, people won't care. That happens a lot."

Dr. Lee Lindquist from Northwestern University said patient input has been key in directing what questions she's asking from the early stages of her research. Lindquist received about $1.8 million to develop an online tool that will encourage more adult children and their parents to plan ahead for later-life care.

"People are planning their wills, buying their caskets at Costco, but no one's planning for when they become frail and disabled, and they need help," Lindquist said.

She's developed an online tool, with input from seniors, that would encourage older adults to consider how they would prefer to be cared for as they age. The form outlines which facilities the person prefers, what type of care he or she would want and under what circumstances he or she would still want to live at home.

Lindquist hopes that someday the information will be integrated into health systems and be readily available to pull up by physicians and family members alike.

She said the study is still actively seeking seniors to participate in the final stage of the research.

"Doctors are not having the conversation, 'Hey do you want to live in your own home or in an assisted living facility if your memory gets worse?'" Lindquist said. "This gives your family, spouse, loved ones a simple sheet, directions on the care you want to receive."

ehirst@tribpub.com

Twitter @ellenjeanhirst