CLEVELAND — T.J. Ward didn’t hesitate when asked last week which member of the Broncos’ defense would come up with the big play Sunday at Cleveland.

“Put the names in the hat,” the Broncos safety said. “Who knows? Somebody is going to make a play, though. I can guarantee that.”

Shaquil Barrett’s name was called — a few times and in a few ways, courtesy of his teammates who chanted “Shaq Diesel!” and “Sack for a Shaq! Sack for a Shaq!” afterward.

The former practice squad player who started in place of injured DeMarcus Ware (back) in the Broncos’ 26-23 overtime victory over the Browns recorded his third, but perhaps most impressive sack on a second-and-8 in the third quarter. Barrett plowed through the middle of the Browns’ offensive line before spotting quarterback Josh McCown, swiping at the ball and tackling McCowen.

The ball, knocked loose, lay on the ground a few feet from Barrett, who stood and searched for his prize.

“I didn’t know where it was at,” he said. “It felt like it was 30 seconds before I realized where the football was, so I just hurried up and dove on it.”

The game-changing strip-sack and fumble recovery, which led to a 25-yard field goal by Brandon McManus on the Broncos’ ensuing offensive drive, is evocative of Von Miller, the fifth-year veteran who helped Barrett expand his repertoire of moves in the offseason and has been one of Barrett’s ardent supporters.

This was no Miller-taught move.

But it was one the Broncos’ continually stress in practices. In defensive coordinator Wade Phillips’ 3-4, the focus is and always will be to get the ball.

“That strip-sack, we work on that week in and week out in,” Ware said. “Instead of just going for the sack, we try to always go for the ball, and it worked. It was a big play for us.”

Barrett split another sack with defensive end Malik Jackson in overtime to extend his total to 3.5 this season and made nine tackles, the second-most on the team behind Danny Trevathan’s 10.

He confirmed his place on a defense that has made 26 sacks and has carried the team to a 6-0 record before the bye week.

And he reaffirmed a depth that never was questioned, but certainly tested Sunday, when Shane Ray went down with an injury in the second quarter.

Ray, Denver’s first-round draft pick this year, was helped off the field after getting caught in the fray on a tackle in the second quarter. Visibly upset, with a towel over his head, Ray was carted back to the locker room and did not return.

He sprained the medial collateral ligament in his right knee and could miss a few weeks.

“I’m being optimistic,” he said after the game. He was wearing a brace on the knee and walking with the help of crutches. “I’ll be back.”

It could have been worse.

“We’re always concerned when we lose a guy,” Ware said. “But this is a testament to how our guys are prepared. I went down, Shaq comes in and plays well. Shane goes down, Lerentee (McCray) is still in the game. With me coming back soon, we’re not really worried about the depth.”

That depth was on display in the second half against Oakland and again Sunday at Cleveland, when the tough blow of losing Ware was softened by the play of Barrett.

On Sunday, his name was called again.

“He’s been that way all year,” Broncos coach Gary Kubiak said. “I don’t care what his name is or where he’s from, but I know that when it’s down to a play, he makes plays. All I know is every time I looked up, he was making plays. What an opportunity he’s gotten, and what a good job he’s done taking advantage of it.”

Nicki Jhabvala: njhabvala@denverpost.com or @NickiJhabvala