Buy Photo Megan Percy does a little grinning-and-bearing as tattoo artist Justin Howell of Flint, Michigan digs in. May 17, 2014 (Photo: Marty Pearl/Special to The CJ)Buy Photo

When Christy Jamison told her local tattoo artist she wanted "something different" for her sixth tattoo, he advised her to check out this weekend's Louisville Tattoo Arts Convention.

She did just that, scoring a zombie girl on her left shoulder Saturday from an out-of-town artist during the event at the Kentucky International Convention Center, which continues today.

"I'm happy with it," Jamison said of the tattoo. "There's just so many different people and ideas here."

More than 300 tattoo artists from around the country are displaying their talents this weekend at the convention. The event, which is open to the public, also includes belly dancing and sideshow acts, tattoo contests and live entertainment, organizer Troy Timpel said.

This year's tattoo convention is Louisville's third, and Timpel said the city is great for a regional event because of its thriving downtown and "rich tattoo culture."

Timpel said he expects up to 4,000 to attend the event.

Sideshow act "The Enigma," along with other acts, are performing various stunts with power tools, fire and electricity throughout the weekend.

"In the sideshow, you see natural-born wonders," said The Enigma, who is tattooed head to toe in puzzle pieces, has horns implanted in his head and had his eyeballs tattooed black.

TV celebrities James Vaughn from Spike's "Ink Master" and Alli Baker from Oxygen's "Best Ink" are also at the convention inking customers.

Baker said she mostly does appointments at conventions but is open to walk-ins this weekend. She said she thrives at these events because she is able to travel, meet new people and pick up different ideas.

"There's no way you can't learn" while on tour, Baker said.

For first-time convention-goer Christy Strauss, the event was an opportunity to get a bride tattoo on her left wrist to match a groom tattoo her husband has.

"This was the perfect place to get it," she said as an artist stenciled the outline on her arm.

Reporter Patrick T. Sullivan can be reached at (502) 582-4335 or on Twitter @CJ_PSullivan.

If you go

What: Louisville Tattoo Arts Convention

Where: Kentucky International Convention Center

When: Today, 11 a.m.-8 p.m.

Costs: Tickets are $20 per day with children 12 and under free. Tickets can be purchased at the door.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1n987UZ