By Patrick B. McGuigan | Oklahoma Watchdog

OKLAHOMA CITY — Oklahoma Commissioner of Insurance John D. Doak says individual health insurance premium rates in the state will jump dramatically in the coming year because of the Affordable Care Act.

The estimate from the state Department of Insurance is based on filings from insurance firms selling health policies in the Sooner State.

“Our fears have been confirmed,” Doak said. “For some consumers, the cost of health insurance will increase significantly. This is more proof that ObamaCare will hurt Oklahoma families and businesses. I continue to support Attorney General Scott Pruitt’s lawsuit to overturn this overreaching and potentially disastrous federal law.”

Pruitt is a leading national critic of ACA implementation. Under his direction the state has filed a lawsuit challenging many provisions of the law, including the Internal Revenue Service rules punishing “large employers” — including governments — with penalties if exchanges are not created within a state.

Oklahoma is one of 34 states challenging ACA, also known as Obamacare.

While actual rates for individuals will vary depending on factors such as age, location and tobacco use, the projected cost hikes will include both new policies in 2014 and renewal policies, due to ObamaCare.

Doak said the increased rates are driven by several factors, including:

The morbidity factor or market risk of guaranteed-issue entrants with no annual or lifetime limits;

The incorporation of Essential Health Benefits to make plans ACA compliant;

Taxes and fees being passed through the rates to the consumer.

Frank Stone, chief actuary for the state agency, said, “From an actuarial standpoint, this confirms the obvious. Insurers must increase their premiums due to the additional requirements of ObamaCare,” said Frank Stone, the chief actuary for the state agency.

In the small group market, the rate hike will range from 10-25 percent, Stone said.

Doak’s staff pointed out that consumers may not have to pay the full premium because of federal tax credit subsidies. As Doak pointed out, the subsidies create “additional hidden cost to Oklahoma taxpayers.”

Contact Patrick McGuigan, bureau chief for the Watchdog.org network in Oklahoma City, at Patrick@CapitolBeatOK.com