About 35 years ago, Lupe Mancha opened the doors of the first Lupe's Mexican Restaurant inside a strip shopping center on Pine Tree Road.

It was the beginning of something big — the hot sauce, the enchilada dinner special, the relish made of onions, jalapenos and carrots, and the signature yellow sign with the dancing couple in traditional attire.

The family business grew, and at its height included 11 restaurants around East Texas.

This past week, though, it ended, with the closure of the remaining two restaurants in the chain — one in Kilgore and one on Marshall Avenue in Longview.

The Mancha family has tenants lined up who are expected to operate restaurants at both locations that are likely to feature at least some of the traditional Lupe's dishes. They're expected to open within weeks.

"I tell my kids, it's just time," said Jesus Mancha, Lupe Mancha's only son. His father died in 2009. The son has continued to run the family business on behalf of his mother, Flor Estela Mancha, and his remaining four siblings. One of his sisters has died.

"Our business has run its course," he said. "You can't be around forever."

Chance location

Mancha recalled how the company's first location was more a matter of chance than anything. One of his older sisters lived in the area where the first restaurant would open. He laughed, explaining she couldn't make a left turn because traffic was so heavy.

"She took a right and she saw that little shopping center with the building for lease," Mancha said. "We went and saw it that same night."

His father, who had previously worked as a manager for El Chico, had been scheduled to start a new job the next day.

"If my sister had been a good driver, we might not have (started the restaurant)," he said.

Mancha was 14, and he was shy.

"I actually volunteered to wash dishes because I didn't want to work up front," he said, recalling how he worked at the restaurant after school each day.

Later, after he returned from college, he worked for the family business. The Manchas had opened the Marshall Avenue restaurant in 1983. The restaurant in Kilgore followed.

His days hiding in back ended.

"It was a necessity" that he work at the front of the restaurant then, he said.

"We were blessed in Kilgore for many years," Mancha added.

Obamacare, economy

About four years ago, there were seven restaurants remaining in the chain. Then, discussions about Obamacare began, and Mancha, like many small business owners, became concerned about how proposed insurance requirements would affect small businesses.

He began to close restaurants and rent the buildings in an effort to lower the number of employees in the chain to fewer than 100, a trigger number in the Affordable Care Act.

He had closed five restaurants, with just the Lupe's in Kilgore and on Marshall Avenue remaining. The difficult economy drove the final decision to close the final restaurants, he said.

"Kilgore took the brunt of it," he said, explaining that he didn't want to just keep one restaurant open. He had determined it was easier to pick up rent checks than to operate restaurants.

"It's just difficult right now," Mancha said. "I have a lot of respect for anybody who operates a restaurant independently."

The hours are long, he said, adding that he also has a great deal of respect for his parents and "what they did at their age out of necessity." He's thankful the family has the opportunity to rent out the buildings.

"I am going to miss the conversation with the customers," he said.

El Chico tradition

The closures mark the end of an East Texas tradition for many loyal diners.

Longview photographer Tammy Cromer-Campbell said her Great-aunt and -uncle Eva and Phil Hidalgo had managed the El Chico on Marshall Avenue in Longview and later on Estes Parkway. Their son, Philip Hidalgo, managed one in Bossier City. She worked at El Chico as a teenager.

"The food (at Lupe's) resembles El Chico, the Cuellar brothers' food, as much as I remember," she said. "To me, Lupe's kind of carried on the El Chico tradition as much as possible."

It was like a family tradition to her because of the El Chico ties.

"It was so good, very Tex-Mex, but they carried on the tradition of El Chico of how they did the cheese enchilada with the chili con carne, but they stopped doing the onions, which I loved," she said.

She especially like the marinated relish, she said, as well as their tacos.

"I'm saddened," she said, recalling trying to eat dinner at the Marshall Avenue restaurant one night only to be surprised by news that it had closed.

'Just like hometown'

Longview resident Jim Price said he remembers seeing Lupe Mancha first at El Chico. Price worked for 24 years as a custodian at Forest Park Middle School. He would often eat lunch at Lupe's on Marshall Avenue, sometimes picking up lunch for teachers as well.

"The food was always good. The waitresses were always friendly," the Longview native said. "It's just like hometown. It was familiar, something I had been to for a lot of my life."

His favorite dish was the beef enchilada dinner, and he, too, loved the relish.

Still, it had been a while since he had eaten at Lupe's, he said, explaining that there have been so many new restaurants open up in Longview.

The city's growth was a factor Jesus Mancha noted in closing the restaurants. He was born in Longview and remembered how for many years there was nothing past Fourth Street.

"For restaurants, location is a lot. Location, location, location," he said. "Things are just changing. … Nobody has control over what's a great location in 20 or 30 years."

He said the Marshall Avenue building has been rented to Jorge Ponce and Aristeo L. Avila, former employees at Lupe's in Mount Pleasant. When that restaurant closed, they opened their own restaurant and now will open one in Longview. Attempts to reach them for comment were unsuccessful.

The Kilgore restaurant also will be operated by a family with Lupe's ties. Maria Rojas formerly was the kitchen manager there, said her son, Jose Erik Rojas. He said he will now run the restaurant with help from her and his father, Jose Carmen Rojas. It will feature much of the same food with some different dishes.

The restaurant will be called El Huapango Mexican Restaurant, for the town his family is from in Mexico.