Bridging the gap between the U.S. public health system and private healthcare is a key mandate of the Affordable Care Act that has gone largely unrecognized, according to a review article.

The ACA "remains a subject of controversy and political debate, fueled partly by difficulties in the implementation of insurance expansion," wrote Frederic Shaw, MD, JD, of the CDC in Atlanta, and colleagues. "In the midst of these challenges, the law's salutary effects on prevention and public health are steadily taking hold. Few articles so far have described the potential effects of the [ACA] on prevention and public health."

The public and private health sectors have operated with very little interaction for almost a century, the group explained in the Lancet in a series of articles entitled "The health of Americans." The ACA's Prevention and Public Health Fund, or Prevention Fund, aims to change that by calling for alignment, coordination, and integration between the two entities, the authors stated.

Such collaborative care could be a "game-changer that improves the health of the U.S. population," said co-author Andrew Rein, in an accompanying statement.

Better integration may prove to be the most radical change through the Prevention Fund as it will allow public health systems to bill insurers for some services, such as immunization.

"Due to the Affordable Care Act, Medicare is now providing coverage for evidence-based preventive services with no copayments," explained co-author Patrick Conway, MD, of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, in an accompanying statement. "We are testing new payment and service delivery models focused on prevention and population health."

In terms of alignment, the largest proportion of the fund will go toward programs that encourage the systems to focus on the same disease or risk factor. An example is Million Hearts, which is intended to prevent 1 million heart attacks and strokes by 2017.

Coordination between the two systems will mean that private clinical providers will be able to refer patients to community programs, such as "Tips From Former Smokers," the nation's first anti-tobacco campaign.

The ultimate goal is to convert U.S. healthcare from a "sick care system," or one that centers on treatment, into a system that emphasizes prevention, early disease detection, and the promotion of healthy living, according to the authors.

Other ACA programs that will bolster the public-private care connection include community needs assessments by hospitals in order to maintain a nonprofit status, and implementation of the National Prevention Strategy (NPS).

The NPS has four priorities: Healthy and safe community environments, clinical and community preventive services, empowering people, and eliminating health disparities.

The authors are employees of the CDC and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The authors disclosed no relevant relationships with industry.