Let me say this plainly: This president is not failing; he is succeeding! He knows exactly what demographic he should go to; the older generation has not yet figured out this method. He is going to the younger generation where the real battle is being waged, and that is where America must go if we are to win the future.

A recent poll out from the Washington Examiner stated that President Barack Hussein Obama is seen as America’s biggest “failure” among modern presidents.

A failure?

Oh, how little the American people know about the history of tyrants and dictators like Mao Zedong, Adolf Hitler, etc.

The American people look at this president as if he does not know what he and his criminal administration are doing. Friends, he knows exactly what he is attempting to do! Barack Hussein Obama has already stated that he was out to “fundamentally transform the United States of America.” If he is out to destroy what America is, then he is in fact not a failure, but rather a success.

For example: It was not too long ago that I heard many in the older age demographic saying they believed that this president made a huge mistake because he had so many people on government entitlement programs. Little did they realize that this was not a failure on the behalf of this president and his criminal administration, it was a total success.

He needed dependents; therefore, he created dependents. Those dependents were sure to keep him in office, and keep him in office they did. Was this a failure on his behalf, or a success? Who are a good majority of the dependents? I’ll tell you who they are: the up-and-coming generation.

What would you say if I told you that over 700,000 of the up-and-coming generation graduating from public schools in America each year cannot even read there own high school diplomas? This, in fact, is true. They cannot.

Is this a failure or a success on the behalf of those who wish to stupefy the next generation (Hosea 4:6)? Of course … a success!

On Dec. 4, 2013, the Obama administration announced that it would hold a special “youth summit social” for the “people who engage” the White House on social media.

The White House also requested that participants ages 18-35 (in 2008, 68 percent of those who voted for Barack Hussein Obama were in the age demographic of 18-33) are eligible to apply to attend this “White House event,” stated the White House in a blog post. “After you sign up, spread the word! Let your followers know that you applied to attend the #WHYouth social.”

The summit aims to educate young voters on the supposed benefits of enrolling in the Affordable Care Act.

Who else could they win over to their unconstitutional and unlawful “Affordable Care Act” except those who do not know the difference?

I have for the last 19 years spent my life reaching out to our posterity, who are now becoming our present leadership. Either America will take up the mission of reaching out to them, or you can rest assured this administration will. If this happens, American Christians and patriots will wish they had listened. There is still time (Deuteronomy 1:39).

The Church Militant:

Think the Trayvon Martin/Zimmerman case was bad? You should see what MSNBC and Rachel Maddow did to Bradlee Dean. Help in his lawsuit against them. Stand for America and get your free gift.