When the Broncos run

The Broncos shouldn’t rely too much on their running game, based on Sunday’s forecast — it won’t be too cold, and wind doesn’t look to be a huge factor. But if they do, there’s no reason not to have confidence in their running backs, or at least in Knowshon Moreno and rookie Montee Ball. San Diego’s run defense was mediocre all season, which gives the Broncos an added boost. Edge: Broncos

When the Chargers run

They were effective last weekend. The Chargers, who ranked 13th in rushing in the regular season with an average of 122.8 yards per game, ran for 196 yards and two touchdowns at Cincinnati. They averaged 4.9 yards per carry. Had they sustained that mark over the regular season, it would have tied Minnesota for second in the NFL. Still, the Chargers didn’t run to control the clock; the Bengals won the time-of-possession battle. Edge: Chargers

When the Broncos pass

It would be shocking if Sunday’s game isn’t a complete air attack by the Broncos, who will have all four of their prime receiving weapons on the field together for the first time since they were briefly united Dec. 8. (It was only for a half. Wes Welker then suffered a concussion.) San Diego’s pass defense isn’t exactly a force, either, so have at it, Peyton Manning. Edge: Broncos

When the Chargers pass

Philip Rivers’ arm was kept in check in San Diego’s playoff opener in weather conditions only slightly worse than what Denver will present Sunday. The same thing held the last time the Chargers and Broncos met in Denver, when despite winning, Rivers threw for only 166 yards and was sacked twice. The Broncos’ pass defense should be better than it was that night too, with the addition of Champ Bailey in the nickel package. Edge: Broncos

Special teams

Ask Broncos fans, and they’ll say their special-teams unit resembles something of a dumpster fire. It hasn’t been that bad, though, and the Broncos’ unit still ranks among the best in the NFL, though it’s nowhere near as explosive as it was at the beginning of the season. Comparatively, though, San Diego doesn’t have the weapons the Broncos do on special teams, and as much as the city of Denver might have a collective heart attack when he touches the ball, Trindon Holliday still is a threat. Edge: Broncos