Governor Greg Abbott hushed liberal critics who say that the reason Texas is number one in the nation for economic success is because of their energy leadership.

“Businesses succeed in Texas because we've built a framework that allows free enterprise to flourish,” Abbott wrote in an open letter to all Americans Wednesday. “Less government, lower taxes, smarter regulations and right-to-work laws—these are the pro-growth economic policies attracting employers to Texas from states that overtax and over-regulate.”

“While some may dismiss our economic dominance as due only to our energy leadership, we are also among the top states for technology, manufacturing and health-care jobs,” noted Abbott. “Over the past year, Texas added jobs in all 11 major industries.”

Abbott revealed that the unemployment rate in the Lone Star State has been below the United States rate for 100 consecutive months. In April 2015, unemployment remained at “4.2 percent, the lowest since July 2007. In fact, if not for Texas' record job growth, the nation as a whole would have experienced a net job loss since 2007.”

As Texas Attorney General, and now, as governor, Abbott has built a national reputation for aggressive push back against federal over-regulation, “whether it's Obamacare, Dodd-Frank or the EPA.”

“Businesses only expand where the workforce is ready,” the Governor added. “With the third youngest median age in the country, Gallup shows that employees here are among the most engaged in the nation. Attracted by a relatively low cost of living, no state personal income tax and job growth across all wage quartiles, Americans are relocating to Texas more than to any other state.”

Abbot says he will not be complacent as Governor. Some of his major programs and strategies include:

Cutting the burdensome business franchise tax and property taxes by nearly $4 billion. This will release businesses and homeowners to invest more in new jobs, higher wages and stimulating the Texas economy.

Reining in regulatory regimes that create a patchwork of compliance complexities. Texas is investing in infrastructure, adding nearly $4 billion more per year for roads without raising tolls, fees, taxes or debt.

Texas continues to lead the country in exports, and will continue to focus on attracting more foreign direct investments to make Texas a hub for global commerce.

“Because technologies not yet invented will drive continuing innovation, we are committing $450 million to elevate our university research programs and to attract even more nationally recognized researchers and Nobel Laureates to our higher-education institutions.”

“We are making college more affordable and ensuring the path to career and technical training is cleared of obstacles.”

“While already experiencing the second-highest high school graduation rate in the nation and the highest for black and Hispanic students, we are aiming to be the No. 1 education system in America.”

“Freedom is the intangible but very real promise of Texas that encourages businesses to grow in the Lone Star State,” Abbott observed. “It's no surprise Texas is again ranked the best state for business—for the 11th year in a row—according to Chief Executive's survey of the nation's top CEOs.”

Texas leads the nation again with “the most new or expanded corporate facility projects of $1 million or more. Showing the geographic breadth of these job-creating capital investments, Odessa, Houston and Dallas were also named among the top metros for business facilities growth.”

“As a result, half of Forbes' top 10 cities for future job growth are in Texas, including Austin, McAllen, Dallas, Houston and San Antonio,” Abbott said. “By unleashing the power of entrepreneurs and innovators—and securing the freedom to aspire—Texas will long remain the best state for business.”

“When businesses succeed, Texans succeed,” Abbott stated.