.......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... .......... ..........

ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. — The state insurance regulator predicts that preferred provider organization plans that allow patients flexibility to choose providers will eventually disappear in the individual health insurance market across the country.

“They are going to be gone,” Insurance Superintendent John Franchini told members of the Legislative Health and Human Services Committee during a meeting in Albuquerque Thursday.

The only choice for individuals who have to purchase their own health insurance, he predicted, will be health maintenance organization plans, which historically have restricted patients to a defined provider network.

He said PPO plans typically cost insurers about 20 percent more than HMO plans because insurers have less control over the providers patients chose to use.

Franchini’s prediction echoed a comment made by Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico President Kurt Shipley during a meeting this week with the Journal editorial board.

“You’re seeing across the country, a number of places where PPOs are being eliminated, and that to me is a trend that may continue,” Shipley said.

In July, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas announced that it would not offer individual PPO plans in 2016, a decision that affected 367,000 people.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Mexico followed suit last month, announcing that it would not offer any individual plans on the state health exchange in 2016, a decision that will force around 22,000 people who purchased its PPO plans to find other health insurance coverage. It will still offer one basic-level plan for individuals off the exchange.

Shipley said Blue Cross intends to offer plans through the exchange again in 2017, but he’s not sure if any will be PPO plans.

“I think the PPO plan for certain people who have a lot of health care needs is a great plan. It’s just that it costs a lot more and we have to have the rates to be able to offer it to people,” said Shipley, “It’s just hard to know that I’ll be able to get the rates that I need to have.”

The Blue Cross exit from the health exchange came after Franchini rejected a 51 percent rate increase the insurer had said it needed.

Earlier this month, the only other insurer that offered PPO plans to individuals, New Mexico Health Connections, said it was dropping plans to offer those insurance products in 2016. Around 1,900 people have Health Connections PPO plans.

Legislators at the committee meeting were concerned that the lack of PPO options would hurt very ill people who may need to go out of state to get the best care. Franchini pointed out that before the Affordable Care Act, insurers could deny coverage to people who had pre-existing health problems.

Lisa Reid, director of the life and health division in Franchini’s office, who also spoke at the meeting, ventured that in future insurers may have to offer wider provider networks in their HMO plans as a selling point to customers.