1. Pass the Keystone XL pipeline (Credit: AP) On Thursday, Jan. 8, 2015, a Senate committee took up a bill that would approve the long-contested Keystone XL pipeline. Keystone fell just one vote short of passage in the Senate last year. The 1,179-mile, $8 billion project would bring oil from Canada through Montana and South Dakota to Nebraska, where it would connect with existing pipelines that connect to refineries on the Gulf Coast. It is strongly opposed by environmentalists, and the White House has promised that President Barack Obama will veto a Keystone bill. Above, some of about 500 miles worth of coated steel pipe manufactured by Welspun Pipes Inc., originally for the Keystone pipeline, is stored in Little Rock, Ark. in 2012.

2. Repeal the Affordable Care Act (Credit: Getty Images) Yes, we've been here dozens of times before, but now that Republicans control both houses of Congress for the first time in Obama's presidency, they're expected to try again to repeal his signature domestic policy. They are also pushing a bill that would change the Affordable Care Act so that a full-time worker who must be offered health coverage at his or her job is working 40 hours per week, instead of 30. Republicans say the current 30-hour requirement is encouraging businesses to cut workers' hours. But the White House says there's no evidence the health care law has caused a broad shift to part-time work -- and argues the new version would give companies incentives to make such shifts. The White House threatened to veto the legislation on Wednesday, Jan. 7, 2015. Above, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz speaks during the "Exempt America from Obamacare" rally on Capitol Hill on Sept. 10, 2013.

3. Cut the budget (Credit: AP / J. Scott Applewhite) Republicans in Congress want to reduce spending, and those in the House want to balance the budget in 10 years. That's a faster timeline than Kentucky Sen. Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, has committed to. But he did bring up balancing the budget in his first major speech as majority leader this week, as well as perennial issues like reducing the national debt and tackling Medicare and Social Security. For his part, Obama says he hopes for a productive year, while acknowledging that there will be "some pitched political battles." Above, McConnell is seen with Senate Minority Whip John Cornyn of Texas, right, and Sen. John Barrasso (R-Wyoming), left, on Capitol Hill in Washington on Wednesday, Jan. 7, 2015.

ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISE HERE

4. Get legislation passed (Credit: AP / Evan Vucci) Leaders are focused on getting bills to the president's desk while avoiding chaotic standoffs like the 2013 government shutdown. And there are some areas where bipartisan cooperation seems possible, such as tax law changes and trade. "Serious adults are in charge here and we intend to make progress," McConnell says. House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, a Republican from California, says they want to create jobs and run "a more efficient, effective, accountable government." Above, Obama meets with McConnell and Boehner in the Oval Office of the White House in Washington on Sept. 9, 2014.

5. Take on Obama over immigration (Credit: EPA / Jim Bourg) Obama's executive actions on immigration that spared as many as 4 million undocumented immigrants from deportation angered many conservatives late last year. Now, Republicans are planning to tie Department of Homeland Security funding -- which expires in late February -- to legislation that would overturn the president's policy. Cruz has called Obama's moves an "abuse of power" that were unconstitutional. The president, above, announced his executive actions on immigration from the White House in Washington on Nov. 20, 2014.