Trey Owen gets a block from Chris Pilafas and runs for the touchdown during the Cañon City Tigers' football game against the Widefield Gladiators at C.A. Foster Stadium on Friday night. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Colorado Springs — A 49-21 win against the Widefield Gladiators on Friday night wasn't enough to propel the Cañon City Tigers into the Class 4A state playoffs.

"If we would have played that well all the time, then maybe, maybe, maybe," Tigers coach Tom O'Rourke said.

Cañon City finished the season 6-4 and missed the playoffs for the first time in six years when it went 5-5 in 2007. When the wild card points were released on Sunday, the Tigers were in 21st and the top 16 qualified.

Senior Tyler Templeton ran the ball for 205 yards on 16 carries and scored three times — from 39, 25 and 12 yards.

The win prolonged the program's streak of not losing two games in a row in the same season since 2009.

Perfect final play

Senior quarterback Logan Nethercot's final play of his high school football career couldn't have gone any better. Up 49-21 with seconds left on the clock, he rolled out to the right and was hit hard by Desmond Holmes for a sack.

It was the first time Holmes had played this season, and Widefield head coach Brent Cottrell said Holmes is mentally disabled.

"It's great. He's a great kid," Cottrell said. "What Cañon City did was amazing. He's pretty happy, our kids are happy for him. The coach that was here before me did a great job with him, and he's just a great kid to have around."

Even after the teams shook hands, Holmes was still celebrating the sack with his teammates.

Advertisement

"Now that it's happened I don't think I'd want anything else," Nethercot said. "That was a special moment. I wanted to make sure I was the guy who did that because I've always wanted to do something special."

The Tigers' second-teamers had been in the game, including backup quarterback Zach Manchester.

Tigers coach Tom O'Rourke knew nothing of the play until it happened, but he said it speaks to the kind of kids that Cañon City High School has.

Nethercot (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Holmes entered the game with less than a minute on the clock and lined up in the safety position. Visibly thrilled to be in the game, he was giving hard high fives to his teammates. Even though the Tigers took a knee on his first play, an excited Holmes continued with the high fives.

Then an official called him to line up at the cornerback position near the Widefield sideline for the next play. Nethercot rolled out in a light jog and sold the hard hit by lifting his feet off the ground on contact.

The announcer in the press box and the Widefield fans and players let out a loud burst of excitement on the hit. Cottrell said it was the first play of Holmes' high school varsity career.

After the game Nethercot said his lip was bleeding from the play.