Pam Woods is comforted by Bullitt County Kentucky family practitioner Mohana R. Arla as she leaves his office on Oct. 31, 2014. Pam and husband Bernard Woods are battling Bernard's stage three colon cancer and carcinoid cancer of the lungs. (Photo: Alton Strupp, Louisville Courier Journal)

LOUISVILLE — As Kentucky prepares for the second year of Obamacare sign-ups, there's little of the public hoopla that surrounded last year's historic launch in a state widely seen as a national model for its smooth roll out.

But after Tuesday's Republican sweep of Congress, there's new uncertainty about the Affordable Care Act's future — with the state's newly re-elected senator, soon-to-be Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, saying he plans to target elements of the law.

Despite campaign calls to tear out the ACA "root and branch," a repeal is highly unlikely given President Obama's veto power, experts said. But McConnell said he may seek to eliminate both a tax on medical devices and the "individual mandate," which requires most Americans to carry insurance and penalizes them if they don't.

"We'll be addressing (the ACA) in a variety of ways," McConnell said at a post-election news conference in Louisville.

As it stands now, the individual mandate's penalty for not having coverage in 2015 will rise from $95 per adult, or 1% of household income, to $325 per adult or 2% of household income. Next year will also mark the first year that federal taxes will require people to check a box saying that they have insurance or face tax penalties.

Robert Blendon, a Harvard University public health professor who studies ACA politics, said Republican efforts could also include attempts to cut employer penalties for not providing insurance or reducing individual subsidies.

Because many newly elected Republicans took strong stands against the ACA during campaigns, he said, McConnell will be under "a lot of pressure" to find ways to scale it back.

But Dewey Clayton, a University of Louisville political science professor, said so many are benefiting from it, efforts to scale it back too far could be politically costly.

Kentucky Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear agreed. "It will be very, very difficult — not to mention unpopular — for Congress to try to snatch health care away from millions of Americans who finally have it, many for the first time. That includes more than half-a-million Kentuckians," Beshear said.

"Despite the changes in Congress, no action on the ACA can overcome a presidential veto. I expect Congress will try to work with the administration to find areas of the Affordable Care Act that could be altered, but I doubt we will see any major changes that will take away health care policies from Americans who need them," he said.

In the meantime, key changes are coming with the open enrollment beginning Nov. 15, including: a bigger penalty for not having insurance; a shorter enrollment period; new insurers; and likely changes in premiums and subsidies. PwC's Health Research Institute, which collected individual insurance rate filings across the nation, estimates Kentucky's average premium increase on and off the exchange will be 4.6%.

The Congressional Budget Office has projected Americans getting coverage through the ACA could grow to 13 million in 2015, up from 8 million during the ACA's first year. So far, 80,000 people are enrolled in Qualified Health Plans in Kentucky — which along with Medicaid expansion helped reduce Kentucky's uninsured rate from 20% in 2013 to less than 12% so far in 2014, according to the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index.

This year, Kentucky officials are increasing the state's HealthCare.gov call center staff from 125 to 300 to reduce wait times that ran up to three hours last year, and working with twice as many insurance agents, said Carrie Banahan, executive director of the Office of the Kentucky Health Benefit Exchange. They are also launching a mobile app to help consumers shop for plans and a "pop-up" store in Lexington where people can get enrolled.





Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Republicans officially seized the Senate majority for the first time in eight years on Tuesday night. USA TODAY's Susan Page says this shows how frustrated the voters have been with Washington.

But for all the preparations, things this year seem a lot more routine — more like the quiet tide of insurance re-enrollment in workplaces across the state. That's partly because Medicaid enrollees, who made up the majority of Kentucky sign-ups last year, can enroll at any time.

In the run-up to Obamacare's launch last year, insurance agent Marcus Woodward's Ashland, Ky., office was a constant flurry of activity as he fielded questions about coverage and cost before helping a couple hundred Kentuckians sign up for new health plans.

Kentucky's website, kynect, for the most part proved reliable — unlike the glitch-plagued Healthcare.gov. And advocates said the state successfully branded kynect so that it wasn't so tied up in the controversy surrounding Obamacare.

Still, Kentucky's roll out wasn't without problems.

Woodward and other insurance agents said a few clients rejected Obamacare plans on principle and either bought other plans outside the health care exchange or purchased plans on the exchange but refused subsidies even if they qualified.

And some customers with ACA plans wound up with narrow networks of doctors and hospitals or couldn't get needed services covered. Bernard Woods, a lung and colon cancer patient from Louisville, for example, is struggling to get approval for an expensive chemotherapy infusion pump.

"If they don't approve it," his wife Pamela said, "I'm stuck with the bill."

Woodward said people need to shop carefully for insurance during re-enrollment. "I tell people, 'Do your due diligence. … Make sure you have a plan that fits your needs.'"

Ungar and Kenning also report for The (Louisville, Ky.) Courier-Journal.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1qsktZb