SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Talk radio host Rush Limbaugh stated that the controversy over Jeb Bush’s remarks on women’s healthcare is evidence that “you can’t compromise” with the left on Wednesday.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Rush said, “Jeb said absolutely nothing wrong in his original comments, absolutely nothing wrong. But the Drive-Bys cherry-picked his comments, and it didn’t matter that there’s no taking him out of context. They didn’t have to. What he said was not wrong. It made infinite sense. … But the Drive-Bys think that they can use Jeb’s remarks to give Hillary the moral high ground here on women’s health, and women’s rights, and the War on Women, and all of that.”

Rush, then read from Bush’s statement that, “I’m not sure we need half a billion dollars in funding for women’s health programs,” and “If you took dollar for dollar, there are many extraordinarily fine organizations, community health organizations that exist, federally sponsored community health organizations to provide quality care for women on a wide variety of health issues. “But abortion should not be funded by the government, any government in my mind.”

He continued, “Once the Drive-By Media got wind of what was happening on Twitter, they joined the party. And it was time to destroy Jeb, time to destroy Jeb for insensitivity, racism, sexism, bigotry, insensitivity to the plight of women. Even though Jeb said, I don’t know if we need to be spending all this money, and then he went on to praise all of the federal organizations that he just knows are there that are, that are providing just wonderful healthcare for all of these women who are so denied it in this mean-spirited country. Why, you would think that women cannot get healthcare in America, even after Obamacare, even after the Affordable Care Act! But yet here’s Jeb Bush, citing all of the federal programs and praising them, and it wasn’t enough, was it? Here’s crossing the aisle, folks. Here’s trying to compromise. Here’s working with the other side. Here is showing we can govern. Here is showing that we can cooperate. Here is showing that we’re not hate-mongers like some in our conservative media are, and what happened? It all blew up right back in his face, because of one phrase: ‘Although, I’m not sure we need a half a billion dollars for women’s health issues.’ That little aside was blown up on social media as precisely an example of the Republican Party attacking women’s health issues.”

Rush concluded, “He didn’t say anything wrong, and he gets attacked as conducting a War on Women. And then tries to correct it, and that didn’t work. When are these people gonna learn you can’t compromise, you can’t cross the aisle, you can’t extend the flying fickle finger of friendship, or hand of friendship, whatever, you can’t. There is no bipartisanship. There is no cooperation. There is no showing on the other side we can govern. They’re not interested in that. When, if ever, is the establishment on our side going to figure out the reality?”

Follow Ian Hanchett on Twitter @IanHanchett