The New Jersey Supreme Court has ruled that Ethics regulators may pursue a case against two lawyers accused of using a paralegal to friend a litigant for the purpose of accessing nonpublic Facebook information.

The state’s High Court ruled that the ethics office could investigate the grievance even though the secretary of a local district ethics committee refused to docket the matter.

The lawyers, John Robertelli and Gabriel Adamo are accused of using the paralegal to obtain private Facebook information about a plaintiff in a personal injury case who was represented by counsel. The plaintiff was injured after being struck by a police car; Robertelli and Adamo represented the governmental body being sued.

“After the plaintiff changed his privacy setting, the paralegal allegedly obtained access by friending the plaintiff. The paralegal used her real name but did not disclose that she worked for the Rivkin Radler law firm in Hackensack,” ethics officials say. The litigant learned his private Facebook information had been accessed after the lawyers sought to add the paralegal as a trial witness and disclosed Facebook printouts.

The litigant filed a grievance, but the secretary of the local ethics committee refused to docket the complaint because she believed that the allegations, if proven, did not constitute unethical conduct. The Director of the Office of Attorney Ethics still filed a complaint against the lawyers. In their answer, the lawyers stated that they were unfamiliar with the privacy settings on Facebook. The lawyers admitted to asking the paralegal to monitor the Facebook page but denied asking her to friend the litigant. They said they thought the friend request was an automatic process.

This is a novel ethics issue that has not been the subject of any reported case law in the state.

“Consistent with the goals of the disciplinary process, the court rules do not close off further inquiry if a district ethics committee secretary declines to docket an important, novel issue as to which there is little guidance, or mistakenly declines to docket an allegation of egregious, unethical conduct,” the state’s high court said

Michal Stein, the lawyer representing Robertelli and Adamo, said that the opinion highlights a lack of “playbook or precedent for how these attorneys should have dealt with the circumstances they were confronted with in 2008.”

Stein noted that a hearing on the merits of the ethics complaint has not yet been held.

Source: Lawyers accused of using paralegal to friend litigant on Facebook are facing ethics probe

Join the Discussion