Though fairly new to Walker and Catoosa counties, Primary Healthcare Centers have a well-established record of providing affordable and comprehensive health care in northwest Georgia.

PHC has remained dedicated to the notion of improving the health care status of its patients and their communities by making affordable, quality primary health care available to everyone regardless of their ability to pay since its founding in 1978, according to Diana Allen.

“It will be 36 years in August,” she said during an interview at the non-profit’s administrative office in downtown LaFayette. “We serve at least 10 counties in northwest Georgia — about the same as the health department — and also two counties in Alabama as well as Hamilton, Marion and some others in Tennessee.”

In 1980 PHC became federally qualified to receive grants to help offset the cost of providing services to the uninsured and underinsured.

From the very first day of operations, what has made this so unique, has been a willingness to provide services to those with insurance as well as those with little or no insurance. Private pay patients, those without any insurance, are billed on a sliding scale.

“We use a sliding scale based on income as well as taking Medicare, Medicaid and private insurance,” Allen said. “And we are the only federally funded primary health care provider in north Georgia.”

Originally operating from a single office in Trenton, in 2008 a Rossville office opened in space formerly occupied by the Walker County health department.

Walker County sole commissioner Bebe Heiskell made the Rossville space available for a full-service clinic and about a year ago leased a county-owned building at the corner of Villanow and Duke streets available to PHC for use as administrative offices.

Allen said the Trenton and Rossville locations had run out of office space and it had become apparent that the administrative offices not only needed more room but could operate more efficiently if located in one location rather than scattered across several counties.

“We’ve grown clinical services and needed the space for medical only use,” Allen said. “It had reached a point where we knew we had to relocate.”

During the 2013 calendar year at least 10,500 patients made more than 30,000 visits to the various PHC offices. That number should increase as more medical staff are hired and more clinical space opens.

What started in a single small space in Trenton now has a total staff of about 70 who are active in four clinics where there is always a need for more space. That made it more critically important to consolidate administrative and support services into a central location.

Allen said it was fortunate that the timing was right for the county to lease the two-story building to PHC when the county’s drug task force vacated the building a block from the square and from the county courthouse in LaFayette about a year ago.

“It’s been a wonderful partnership,” Allen said. “It is ideal for us because it is a convenient location to service all four sites we now operate.”

Recent additions to the PHC network include opening a clinic inside Tiger Creek Elementary School in Catoosa County in May 2013, and a standalone clinic in Cedartown this past January.

“We serve adults and children,” Allen said of the Tiger Creek clinic. “All Catoosa County students and their family members as well as the school’s staff and teachers can come to the clinic.”

In addition to medical services, a mobile dental clinic will regularly schedule visits to Tiger Creek before the end of this year.

“We’re looking forward to having dental services available to people even if they don’t use our medical,” Allen said. “The question is always ‘how to serve’ — that really is our mission.”

Toward that goal, PHC has joined a coalition that includes churches, social service agencies, United Way and the city of LaFayette to provide medical screenings and education in what is being called the West LaFayette Project.

“It is a monthly outreach program,” Allen said.

It is too early to tell whether the Affordable Care Act will help or hurt PHC, but officials have not seen a significant increase in the number of uninsured coming through the clinic’s doors

“Georgia’s not expanding Medicaid has left PHC with a big case load of the uninsured,” Allen said. “On average, about 50 percent of those we see are uninsured or are provided services that are billed on a sliding scale.”

And like the family doctors of years gone by, PHC staff serve as comprehensive providers. For mental health services, PHC partners with Lookout Mountain Community Services. Its dental clinic provides services as well as referrals. Its trained staff help with medication management and maintenance for long-term conditions such as diabetes and hypertension.

In sum, PHC serves as a one-stop-shop for nearly all basic medical needs.

“There is a strong correlation between physical, mental and dental health,” Allen said. “Some see it as a holistic approach, we call it comprehensive services.”

About Primary Healthcare Centers

Primary Health Care Centers (PHC) is a not-for profit, 501 (c)-3, board-directed, Federally Qualified Healthcare Center (FQHC) founded in 1978. PHC is dedicated to improving the health status of its patients and community by providing accessible, affordable, primary health care, general dentistry, behavioral health services, and health outreach and education to everyone, regardless of ability to pay. PHC has two full-time service locations, Trenton and Rossville, and is the only FQHC in 10 counties in northwest Georgia.

At a glance

What: Primary Healthcare Center, a not-for-profit Federally Qualified Healthcare Center founded in 1978 and dedicated to improving the health of anyone in the community.

Where: Walker County office is located in Rossville, one block west of McFarland Avenue at 1430 Suggs St. Dade County office is at 13570 N. Main Street/U.S. Highway 11 in Trenton. Catoosa County office is at Tiger Creek Elementary School located at 134 Rhea McClanahan Drive in Tunnel Hill. The Polk County office can be found at 118 E. Girard Ave, in Cedartown.

Services: Primary health care, general dentistry and behavioral health services provided regardless of ability to pay.

For more information: Call 706-866-5520 or visit primaryhealthcarecenter.org to obtain information about services available and hours of operation at the various offices.