This story has been updated.

ARLINGTON — A 5-year-old girl was killed and six other people were injured when their speeding car slammed into a telephone pole Saturday morning, Arlington police said.

Valencia Freeman, 25, of Arlington was charged with one count of intoxication manslaughter and three counts of intoxication assault causing serious bodily injury, police said.

Police suspect Freeman was drunk when she lost control of her southbound Mercury Grand Marquis and plowed into the wooden pole in the 5100 block of South Collins Street near Arlington Municipal Airport about 9:30 a.m. The pole snapped in half, and part of it thundered down onto the car.

“Investigators believe that speed and impairment are contributing factors in this crash,” police said in a news release.

The car’s seven occupants — three adults and four children ages 3 to 9 — were taken to hospitals in varying conditions, police said. Some hadn’t been wearing seat belts.

Deunna Fairchild was pronounced dead at 10:53 a.m., the Tarrant County medical examiner said.

One child was taken to Cook Children’s Medical Center in Fort Worth in serious to critical condition, police said, and one adult was taken to John Peter Smith Hospital in Fort Worth with injuries later called non-life-threatening.

The four other victims were treated at Medical Center Arlington, where the adults were found to have non-life-threatening injuries and the children’s conditions weren’t known, police said.

The crash knocked out power to hundreds of customers. The 5100 block of South Collins remained closed for several hours as authorities and Oncor workers figured out what to do with power lines drooping onto the street.

Freeman was in the Arlington city jail late Saturday with bail set at just under $63,000. She was released from jail Sunday, KTVT-TV (Channel 11) reported. In addition to the intoxication manslaughter and assault charges, she faces numerous counts for failure to have a valid driver’s license, car insurance and inspection sticker. She also faces charges for not securing children in the car.

Right after the crash, a woman who works in a nearby building stood with hands clasped in prayer not far from the mangled car. Police eventually escorted her from the scene.

For members of the Arlington police DWI unit, the crash came at a tragically ironic moment. The unit had just finished taking part in a Mothers Against Drunk Driving walk in downtown Fort Worth, where they encouraged people not to drink and drive.

“Our DWI Unit ROCKS!” the unit cheerfully tweeted from the walk just before 8 a.m.

Not two hours later came word of the grisly crash, police spokesman Christopher Cook said.

“They heard the police radio — all the chaotic scenes over the air,” he said.

The DWI officers, including one who had lost her sister in a drunken-driving crash, immediately went to work to help with the investigation, Cook said.

“It’s just surreal for them,” he said. “It’s very tragic.”

For police, the lessons that come from DWI crashes are always the same.

“At the end of the day, people have to make good choices,” Cook said. “Watch your speed. Never, ever get behind the wheel if you’ve had alcohol.”