Topics: Drug Wars, E-Cigarette, Joint, marijuana, Scientific American, Life News

This article was originally published by Scientific American

As if the debate surrounding the risks of increasingly popular e-cigarette and marijuana-vaporizing devices wasn’t hot enough already, the Dutch company E-Njoint, BV, has released what it calls the first electronic joint, igniting new concerns about the safety of e-smoking products.

Whether the new offering, which resembles a classic marijuana cigarette, should rightly be called a joint is debatable, given that it holds not a touch of cannabis. The product, named the E-njoint Disposable, is what the company calls a “100 percent legal electronic joint” that contains “no THC, tobacco or nicotine,” making it “harmless and 100 percent legal.” (Tetrahydrocannabinol is the active compound in marijuana.) The device is battery-powered and vaporizes a liquid comprising vegetable-glycerin and polypropylene-glycol, with added “biological” flavors such as passion fruit and watermelon.

The company has been manufacturing 10,000 of these devices a day and is now preparing to double production because, it says, it has been receiving inquiries from distributors worldwide every three minutes.

The next version of the product, however, may fit the billing as an electronic joint. E-Njoint CEO Menno Contant says that the company is getting ready to launch a device that is both rechargeable and refillable, and can be filled with cannabis or a derivative. “Once the cartridges are empty, users are able to fill these cartridges with a liquid. Those liquids may be standard liquids bought at any store around the world or it could be an extract of a cannabis plant,” he says. “We don’t provide the cannabis extract or anything like that. We just provide the tools.”

The company also plans to release an e-joint that can be used with “dry herbs,” including marijuana, in the near future.

Among those who dispute that the new product is groundbreaking is Pamela Ling, professor and director of the Tobacco Control Policy Fellowship at the University of California, San Francisco’s Center for Tobacco Research and Education. “While this company is the first, to my knowledge, to call its product an ‘electronic joint,’ the idea of using electronic vaporizers for THC or marijuana is not new, and this company is far from the first,” she says. “There are several products in the U.S. that either overtly or euphemistically brand themselves as devices useful for marijuana.”

Mike Van Dyke, chief of the Environmental Epidemiology, Occupational Health and Toxicology Section in the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, agrees and expresses a larger concern. Like other public health experts, Van Dyke says he is anxious about the repercussions of the growing popularity of the vaporizing devices. “You worry about any type of alternative drug delivery method that somehow gets perceived as safe. You worry about people who wouldn’t initially start smoking, starting to do drugs. You worry about this opening up marijuana use to a whole new population,” he says.