WESTBROOK, Maine--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Colonial Life broker customers can now take advantage of benefits administration at no ongoing cost available from Zero PEPMTM, a new solution through benefits administration software firm Common Census. Zero PEPM eliminates the per-employee-per-month cost for benefits administration.

“Our broker customers and their human resource clients are going to love this new opportunity,” said Marianne Adams, Assistant Vice President of Enrollment at Colonial Life, which has worked with Common Census for more than a decade. “Eliminating the per-employee charges will help bring Colonial Life’s products and solutions to more broker customers with more competitive pricing.”

Common Census provides high-quality software for benefits administration plus Affordable Care Act-required exports, file feeds and more. The company has revolutionized benefits administration pricing with Zero PEPM, eliminating license fees or per-employee-per-month charges, which are expensive for both employers and brokers.

“The Common Census Benefits Operating System® is designed for companies like Colonial Life. Their products are easy to use in our system, plus brokers can enroll any product from medical plans to administrative plans,” said Stephanie Whitman, Marketing Manager at Common Census. “The continued carrier adoption of the Zero PEPM pricing model proves that brokers have been waiting for this type of solution.”

To learn more about Zero PEPM with Common Census or to book a free demo contact Jonathan Ide, Sales Account Manager at jonathan.ide@commoncensus.com or +1 800 552 7373.

About Common Census:

Common Census, Inc., based in Westbrook, Maine, develops and markets a Benefits Operating System® to enroll and manage employee benefits coordinated with a Home Office Portal®. The enrollment system seamlessly transitions into an online benefit administration platform providing EDI for payroll, file feeds and data for ACA reporting. Common Census helps insurance brokers and agents obtain and retain clients by providing a branded platform that completely integrates core and worksite insurance products. For more information, please call 800-552-7373 or visit www.commoncensus.com.

About Colonial Life:

Colonial Life & Accident Insurance Company is a market leader in providing financial protection benefits through the workplace, including disability, life, accident, dental, cancer, critical illness and hospital confinement indemnity insurance. The company’s benefit services and education, innovative enrollment technology and personal service support 85,000 businesses and organizations, representing 3.5 million of America’s workers and their families. For more information visit www.coloniallife.com or connect with the company at www.facebook.com/coloniallifebenefits, www.twitter.com/coloniallife and www.linkedin.com/company/colonial-life.