Hillary Clinton leaves a fundraiser at the home of Yale law school professors Judith Resnik and Dennis Curtis in New Haven Friday. Mary O’Leary — New Haven Register

NEW HAVEN >> Hillary Clinton was late for her fundraiser in New Haven, stuck with all those other Connecticut drivers who regularly curse the congestion on Interstate 95 through Fairfield County.

It was her second fundraiser of the day, having first picked up contributions at the Greenwich home of philanthropist Malcolm Weiner and his wife, Carolyn Weiner.

The ask at both the Greenwich event and the one in New Haven at the home of Yale Law School professors Judith Resnik and Dennis Curtis was the same: $2,700 per person.

To be a co-host to the invitation-only event and receive membership in her Hillstarters Program, individual supporters were given the task of raising $27,000, according to the Greenwich Times. Host of these private fundraisers are asked to raise $50,000, which then puts them in the Clinton’s Hillraisers Program.

Advertisement

Clinton is among three Democrats who have announced their intention to run for president in 2016, a campaign that has already attracted nearly a dozen Republicans for their primary fight.

One of those rivals, U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., was in Stamford Thursday night, the honored guest at the GOP’s Prescott Bush Awards Dinner. He picked up some $50,000 at a fundraiser prior to the dinner, according to the Greenwich Times.

U.S. Sen. Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn, U.S. Rep. Jim Himes, D-4, and U.S. Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Conn., were among the estimated 100 people at the Greenwich event, as was former Connecticut Secretary of the State Susan Bysiewicz.

Blumenthal, who attended the Yale Law School at the same time as Clinton and former President Bill Clinton, was at both events.

Bysiewicz, who said she was helping Clinton with grassroots organizing and fundraising, did the same thing. She also brought her 93-year-old aunt, Mary Stewart, a World War II Coast Guard vet. “She was hoping to meet her,” Bysiewicz said.

Many in attendance from New Haven were associated with the Yale Law School, with former Dean Harold Koh acting as one of the organizers.

Koh served as the legal adviser to the State Department during President Barack Obama’s first term, when Hillary Clinton was secretary of the state.

The head count in New Haven was also around 100, according to Charles Pillsbury, a neighbor of the hosts, who attended with his wife, the Rev. Allie Perry.

Connecticut Democratic Party Chairman Nick Balletto showed up on time for the New Haven event in the East Rock neighborhood, where the guests started arriving just before 4:30 p.m. Mayor Toni Harp was also a guest.

“I think her values and the things she stood for over a lifetime and in public life are things that would be good for our country,” Harp said.

Everyone was first checked off on an invitation list and then had to pass through security set up on the front lawn at the home on St. Ronan Street.

The guests mingled inside and on a rear porch as they waited for Clinton, who arrived around 6:15 p.m. by a back entrance, avoiding the small press contingent assembled across the street.

Gov. Dannel P. Malloy and the state party are expected to endorse Clinton for president this weekend in Hartford.

Pillsbury said he feels Clinton “is our best hope.”

He said she spoke about the importance of early childhood education and said the tension between the public schools and the charter schools is a false dichotomy.

The former secretary of the state said the public and charter schools should be working together. She offered the example of schools in Houston, where the successful elements of the charters have been incorporated into the public school system, Pillsbury said.

He said Clinton, who first conducted a listening tour before declaring her candidacy, told the donors that she learned two things on that tour, that she might not have stressed beforehand.

The candidate said families told her how drug addiction was ruining the lives of their children, with heroin the problem in New Hampshire and meth the scourge in Iowa.

The other issue was the lack of mental health practitioners. While there is more coverage under the Affordable Care Act, there are not enough professionals to serve the population, she told them.

Clinton, according to Pillsbury, talked of supporting a constitutional amendment to overturn the Citizens United court ruling. The court found that corporations and unions can pay for political ads made independently of candidate campaigns. That finding and others have opened up a flood of campaign spending, where often the names of donors are hidden.

Rubio on Thursday took a shot at the fundraising efforts of the Clintons, according to press reports.

“I don’t have a family foundation that raised over $2 billion from Wall Street and foreign nations,” Rubio said at the dinner.

On environmental issues, Clinton said in the move away from coal, something will have to be done to replace those jobs now performed by miners.

Pillsbury said the candidate recalled her trip to Indonesia when she was secretary of state and a talk show host had asked how she could work for Obama who had said such harsh things about her in the campaign.

She said she did it because she loved her country. Clinton said she realized that often people’s loyalties are to regions or tribes. The concept of patriotism expressed in the United States was foreign to them, Pillsbury recalled.

After having sat in traffic in Connecticut, Clinton, as she left the St. Ronan Street home, was shouted a question as to whether she would advocate for funds for the state to fix its commuter nightmare.

“Absolutely. I believe in infrastructure,” she said before getting back into the black Explorer with Secret Service agents.