Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton greets supporters during a “get out the caucus” event at Grand View University on Friday in Des Moines. Credit: Getty Images

By of the

Des Moines, Iowa — With three days to go before the nation's presidential nominating process kicks off, Hillary Clinton spent as much time Friday drawing distinctions between herself and fellow Democrat Bernie Sanders as she did criticizing her GOP opponents.

The former secretary of state claimed the mantle of President Barack Obama and portrayed herself as a pragmatist with progressive values, saying she was the Democrat who could get things done.

"I'm not running on just telling you what I think you want to hear," she told supporters at a rally at Grand View University. "I'm running on what I think I can do."

She gave her 30-minute speech as Iowans prepare to caucus on Monday in the first round of voting nationally. Clinton is leading Sanders in Iowa 46.8% to 44.3%, according to a polling average tabulated by RealClearPolitics.com. Former Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley is trailing with 4.3%.

Sanders, the U.S. senator from Vermont, has proved resilient as he has talked about providing tuition-free college and a single-payer health care system.

In contrasting herself with Sanders, Clinton repeatedly praised Obama and the Affordable Care Act, his signature health care law known as Obamacare.

"Before it was called Obamacare, it was called Hillarycare," she said.

She said she was disappointed her health care overhaul failed when she was first lady and was thrilled when Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law.

"We Democrats had been trying to get that done since Harry Truman," she said.

She said she and Sanders both want to establish universal health care, but have different approaches to getting there — and that her way is more attainable.

"I want to build on what we have achieved," she said. "He wants us to start over — with a plan that will be very difficult."

Calling some prescription drug companies "predatory," Clinton said she would end a tax break for drug companies and push to allow Medicare to negotiate with them to lower the government's costs for the health care program for senior citizens. Sanders' plan to create a "Medicare for all" would be almost impossible to get through Congress, she said.

Meanwhile Friday, the Obama administration confirmed for the first time that Clinton's unsecured home server contained closely guarded government secrets, censoring 22 emails with material requiring one of the highest levels of classification.

Some of Clinton's backers like her focus on attainable goals.

"We need to have somebody who can manage the country, and we need to have some pragmatism," said Carole Dickey, a retired teacher from Des Moines who plans to caucus for Clinton.

She said Sanders had integrity and was a nice guy, but questioned the wisdom of some of his ideas.

"You can't do all the things he says he's going to do without increasing taxes for taxpayers," she said.

Megan Weisert, a Drake University student, said she would likely caucus for Clinton or O'Malley, but that Sanders "kind of scares me."

"For the point we're at now, I don't think (his plans) could work," she said. "Maybe in the future."

Alan Wilensky said he attended law school with Clinton and traveled from Minneapolis to Iowa so he could volunteer for her campaign. He said he thought her experience in the U.S. Senate and State Department gave her the ability to lead the country.

"Now with the problems so serious, we do not have the luxury of on-the-job training," said Wilensky, a tax attorney.

Clinton's stop in Des Moines came a day after the Republican candidates debated and real estate mogul Donald Trump held an alternate event because of a dispute with debate sponsor Fox News Channel.

The candidates from both parties will be camped out in Iowa for the coming days. Many of them spent Friday far from central Iowa, with Sanders campaigning in the eastern part of the state and the Republicans scattered across Iowa.

In addition to distinguishing herself from Sanders, Clinton took the opportunity to draw sharp lines between her views and those of Republicans. Her voice a little ragged from campaigning, she championed abortion rights and called for raising the minimum wage and guaranteeing women are paid the same as men for the same work.

The GOP candidates won't accept that climate change is happening, she said.

"They're missing out of a great economic opportunity," she said. "Some country is going to be the clean energy superpower. I think it's either going to be China, Germany or us. I want it to be us."

Clinton dismissed Republican economic policies, saying President George W. Bush had regulators take their eyes off Wall Street. "Boy, did we pay for that," she said.

"Are we going to let them have the White House again?" she asked the crowd. "Are we going to let them wreck our economy again?"

The Associated Press contributed to this report