Jim Toms and his wife, Nancy, took their grandson into their Seagoville home as a foster child after their son died in a car accident.

They had hoped to adopt Jacob and raise him together. But in January, Nancy died of lung cancer.

Still, Toms, 70, decided to push ahead without his wife of 49 years and raise the 4-year-old alone.

“There is nobody else left to take care of him but me, and I’m going to do it,” Toms said. “I’m a little bit old to be a father, but I don’t care.”

Toms made it official Saturday during a National Adoption Day event for more than 60 children at the Henry Wade Juvenile Justice Center in West Dallas. Jacob’s mother had lost custody of him, and Saturday’s event was designed to expedite the adoption process for children like him.

The soon-to-be-families, many of them dressed in their Sunday best, crowded the hallways lined with balloons and photographers and the court rooms filled with teddy bears.

Before he took his turn before a judge Saturday, Toms, a retired Coast Guard veteran, described raising the young boy — who he swears will be an engineer because he takes everything apart — has been rewarding, chaotic and demanding.

“But I wouldn’t give it up for nothing,” he said. The adoption, he added, “is going to be a highlight of my life.”

Dallas Court Appointed Special Advocates, known as CASA, put on the event for the 16th-straight year — just in time for Christmas.

“It’s so uplifting just to sense the generosity and the goodness of the families that are here,” CASA executive director Kathleen LaValle said.

Ashley Rhodes-Courter, a foster child and foster parent who wrote two bestelling books about her experiences, watched the festivities.

And officials with Children’s Medical Center, which provides medical care for many of the foster kids, roamed the halls and beamed with pride. Heidi Roman, a pediatrician, attended for the first time and said the event was both “really exciting” and “really emotional” for her.

The Northwood Woman’s Club offered kids their traditional spread of cookies, popcorn and soda. The women joked they have no problem offering kids sweet treats at 9 a.m. — after all, they don’t have to take them home when they are on a sugar high.

“We’re here to please the kids,” Elizabeth Jenkins said. “This is like a birthday and Christmas. Whatever the kids want. This is their day.”

Zachary Jones Walton, 15, said it was the biggest day of his life. The adoption ends three years in foster care for the South Dallas boy who now lives in Houston with his 70-year-old aunt Ruby Jackson. Now, he can focus on his future, which he believes will either be in the Air Force or as a police officer.

“I just really want to help and protect people,” he said.

Other families had no biological ties to the children.

Diane and Jeff Stanley, who is a pastor, adopted six children Saturday after they had already adopted five more. Stanley said his wife pushed for adoption, and he agreed after he read scripture and “didn’t get God to change his mind.”

Timothy and Kimberly Schafer of Forney adopted four new children. And they dressed themselves and the two boys and two girls in red so their picture at the event could double as their Christmas card photo.

The couple took on the kids, who are all siblings, because Kimberly already had a grown daughter who she had in high school.

Timothy Schafer said he is still getting used to having four kids around the house, but “they just changed everything” for him in a positive way.

State District Judge Jim Jordan told the couple, “I have a feeling it will really take a village” to raise the kids.” They replied they were up to it and have plenty of family help.

Carmen Osowski, 35, of Brownsville couldn’t have any children after she suddenly suffered a stroke while she was in banking 14 years ago in Germany. She and her husband officially adopted sisters Magali, 13, Jazmin, 9, and Briseidy, 6, from Fort Worth on Saturday.

“We’re very blessed,” Osowski said with tears filling her eyes.

Shawn Osowski, her husband, said that the kids made for “an easy gift this year” for his wife’s birthday, which was Friday.

“I tell people we’re inches away from a long marathon,” he said minutes before he walked into the court room. “Now, we’re going to start another whole race here in a few minutes.”

Toms, the single grandfather, said he felt unburdened once he was officially Jacob’s adoptive father.

Toms and Jacob, who grasped his new teddy bear in hand, went down the elevator at the court house and left for a celebratory pizza party, their first as a legal family.

“He’s mine, and we’ve got a whole life to go,” Toms said.

Twitter: @TristanHallman