I thought I would never see a president less competent than Jimmy Carter, but that belief has been shattered.

The scandals of the current administration continue to mount, i.e. Fast and Furious, the IRS targeting of conservatives and the murderous attack in Benghazi. But as bad as these scandals are, there is a much greater threat to our Republic.

The increased danger to our nation has been well articulated by an Obama supporter, Jonathan Turley, who is a Constitutional scholar at George Washington University. According to Turley, our Constitution is at a tipping point due to the abuses of the Obama administration. Testifying before Congress, Turley pointed out that the Obama administration had circumvented on immigration, health care and greenhouse gas emissions.

President Obama did not hide his intentions after his re-election in stating that he had a pen and phone available to unilaterally circumvent Congress. And so he has. He has selectively chosen what immigration laws to enforce or ignore, he has changed his Obamacare legislation over 30 times to suit his whims and the new EPA regulations will strangle our coal industry and raise utility bills in most parts of America.

But it is not just the Constitutional tipping point crisis that is alarming. How about the Russians blatantly invading Ukraine and absorbing Crimea, the disappearing red line in the sands of Syria and now the rapid invasion of Iraq by some of the most evil and blood-thirsty terrorist groups in the world?

We lost over 4,000 brave Americans in freeing Iraq from a brutal dictator, Saddam Hussein, only to see that hard-fought victory rapidly disappear because of the neglect of this administration. Because President Obama couldn’t wait to get out of Iraq and did not negotiate a “status of forces” agreement to keep a stabilizing force of American troops, we are allowing the worst kind of terrorist group to occupy a large portion of the Middle East.

Remember, Iraq had never known what it was to live under a democracy. They needed guidance and our military leadership for stability during the transition from a tyrant to a democracy. Without our presence, the leader of Iraq, Nouri al-Maliki, admittedly a poor leader, may well turn to Iran for protection and leadership.

It is simply mind-boggling that we free Iraq from a dictator and then Iran, whose leadership hates America, is the nation that now volunteers to save Baghdad. Remember that in 2010, Vice President Joe Biden said that Iraq would be one of the administration’s greatest success stories. I don’t believe that will be restated any time soon.

So, our foreign policy is an absolute disaster, our Constitution is being shredded by executive orders and now our southern border has become a massive drop-off location for illegal immigrant children. The parents of these children believe that the Obama administration — via our tax dollars — will take care of them now and in the future. Why not? More dependent voters for Democrats.

But wait, surely our economy and job creation has blossomed under Obama’s economic policies. Sorry to report that the jobless rate today is the worst since the Jimmy Carter days some 36 years ago. Some 37.2 percent of Americans 16 or older that comprise our potential workforce are not working. Youth unemployment is up, especially among black youth, family income is down and many college graduates loaded with student debt cannot find decent jobs to pay their bills or loans.

Food Stamp usage has mushroomed, Obamacare has proven to be a huge disappointment, immigration is in a state of chaos, Iraq is crumbling at an alarming rate, Putin invaded the Ukraine and laughed at our president’s threats and our economic recovery remains the worst since World War II. We have now passed $17 trillion in national debt with no pretense of ever having a balanced budget and our entitlement programs are all headed toward insolvency, but none of these staggering problems seem to slow down the president’s golf game.

To make matters worse, we have two and a half years left of the incompetence of this administration.

My apologies to Jimmy Carter. You’re looking better every day.