­It is a battle over who will manage Susquehanna County in 2016.

On Nov. 3, incumbent commissioners MaryAnn Warren, a Democrat from New Milford, and Alan M. Hall, a Hallstead Republican, will face challenges from newcomers Democrat Chuck Bullock, of Auburn Twp., and Republican Elizabeth “Betsy” Arnold, of Bridgewater Twp.

In mid-October interviews, the incumbents touted the county’s financial health and their reinvestment in capital improvements while managing to cut taxes. Part of the county’s success in this regard is because of natural gas drilling impact fees disbursed under Act 13.

Neither challenger has held public office. Both stressed their valuable life experience — each starting on a Susquehanna County dairy farm — and commitment to the county.

Mr. Bullock was a banker for 28 years, ending his banking career as senior vice president at Grange National Bank in Wyalusing.

“It gives me a lot of fiscal experience,” he said. “And, I had a lot of experience dealing with people.” He also runs the Sanford and Son Antiques shop in Wyalusing but recently quit his job as jury manager for now-retired Judge Kenneth Seamans to run for office.

If elected, Mr. Bullock said he would advocate for seniors, including pushing for an adult day care center and education efforts aimed at making elderly residents and their families aware of existing programs.

His interest stems from his experience caring for his aging mother for 14 years before her death in 1997. Her Parkinson’s disease advanced to the point where he had to feed, bathe and carry her.

Ms. Arnold is proud of her entrepreneurial experience. She is a licensed barber and holds her real estate licenses in Pennsylvania and New York.

“Because I’ve done the real estate, because I’ve done the barbering, a lot of people know me,” she said.

More recently, she worked at a local office of seismic permitting firm Cougar Land Services, which led to jobs as a permit agent, then land agent serving the natural gas industry.

She described herself as a “stickler for customer service” who joined the commissioners’ race after people who knew her professionally suggested she run.

“I’m a caring person,” she said. “That’s why I’m running.”

Mr. Hall was most proud of his work on the county’s pension fund, funded at 43 percent when he took office and now fully funded, he said. He is seeking his second four-year term as commissioner.

During his time, the county was able to use general fund money to pay down its debts, he said. Impact fees cannot be used to pay debt service. The county also accomplished major renovations on the courthouse, overhauling its heating and cooling systems, running fiber optic cables and upgrading computer systems, he said.

“The idea behind this is that once we’re done with all the upgrades, we want to go 20 to 30 years without major renovations or construction,” Mr. Hall said.

Mr. Hall attributed their successes to a “smart use of liquid assets and finances to ensure the safety and longevity of the county.”

Ms. Warren said it was “teamwork” and the ability to put Act 13 money to some expenditures while investing general fund money in the right things.

Both also touted initiatives on suicide prevention and tick-borne diseases, as well as an upcoming $1.3 million affordable housing project in New Milford, following a three-year housing study.

“I’m pretty excited about that,” said Ms. Warren, who is running for her fourth term. “That was a goal of people for years to get seniors out of houses they can’t afford.”

Ms. Warren took credit for making the initial call to Binghamton-based Leatherstocking Gas Co. that brought natural gas service to the county. She expressed excitement about an industrial park study on the Interstate 81 corridor that finished this year, potentially paving the way for manufacturing companies to build on the gas industry.

“Manufacturing is a big deal in Susquehanna County, it’s the background of a lot of people,” she said. “We want to get large employers.”

Major contested Susquehanna County races

REGISTER OF WILLS, RECORDER OF DEEDS AND CLERK OF THE ORPHAN’S COURT

Four-year term, vote for one

Democrat: Tom Charles, Dimock Twp.

Republican: Michelle Estabrook, Great Bend Twp.

COUNTY AUDITOR

Four-year term, vote for not more than two

Democrat: Susan M. Jennings, Brooklyn Twp.

Republicans: George P. Starzec, Montrose; Richard A. Suraci, Clifford Twp.

BLUE RIDGE SCHOOL DISTRICT DIRECTOR, REGION 2B

Four-year term, vote for one

Democrat: Laurie Brown Bonner

Republican: Edward Andrew Arnold

BLUE RIDGE SCHOOL DISTRICT DIRECTOR, REGION 3A

Four-year term, vote for one

Democrat: Michael Detwiler

Republican: Brooke M. Slocum

MONTROSE AREA SCHOOL DISTRICT, REGION 1

Four-year term, vote for not more than two

Democrat: Pamela D. Staats

Republican: Amy Jo Lyden

MONTROSE AREA SCHOOL DISTRICT DIRECTOR, REGION 3

Four-year term, vote for not more than two

Republican: Paul Adams

Democrat: Kathleen P. Mordovancey

Democrat/Republican: Mary Homan

MOUNTAIN VIEW SCHOOL DISTRICT DIRECTOR, REGION 2C

Two-year term, vote for one

Democrat: Casey Webster, Harford Twp.

Republican: Thomas Stoddard, Lenox Twp.

MIDDLETOWN TWP. SUPERVISOR

Six-year term, vote for two

Republicans: Jordan Sobonski, Lloyd Wambold

Democrat: Francis H. Burns, Jr.

ARARAT TWP. SUPERVISOR

Six-year term, vote for one

Democrat: Peter Andrew Seman

Republican: David G. Cottrell

GIBSON TWP. SUPERVISOR

Six-year term, vote for one

Democrat: Thomas Petroski

Republican: Bradley R. Marcho