Read Part One

I spent most of yesterday thinking about death.

Not about my own death, mind you — that would be extremely unpleasant. Few of us want to spend all day thinking about our own inevitable death. Too morbid.

I remember coming home from one of our family’s camping trips — one of the many two-week vacations that traditionally happened in late August — to find out that our beloved family cat, Tiger Baby, had run away. He was being watched by a teenage boy who lived across the street, my parents explained to my sister and me, and the boy had forgotten to feed him. So Tiger Baby had run away.

Thirty years later, I found out during a family conversation that, in fact, Tiger Baby had been run over by a car. But my parents — who normally subscribed to a policy of scrupulous honesty, in all dealing with all people — decided that my sister and I would not be able to deal with the death of our beloved cat. So they lied to us.

Maybe, they simply couldn’t bring themselves to talk about death?

As I grew up, this reluctance played out as a regular pattern, in my family. As a general rule, we didn’t talk about death, and we avoided funerals. There’s some evidence that Americans are particularly reluctant, when compared to the rest of the world, to think or talk about death — except in certain religious situations where the conversation is not so much about “death” but more about an eternal afterlife.

Of course, it’s difficult to ascertain whether Americans, in general, have an unhealthy fear of death — our own death or the death of loved ones — if we also have a cultural taboo against talking about the subject.

I came to a very personal and unscientific conclusion that Americans have a shared phobia, about death itself and about talking about death, after marrying a woman raised in a culturally mixed family: half Filipino and half Alaskan Indian. Clarissa’s attitudes about death… talking openly about it… even, in a sense, celebrating death… were at such odds with the way my own family had treated the topic, that I was forced to form an opinion that white, middle-class America was suffering from a serious psychological and social problem: an inability to face, and discuss, one of the two certainties in everyone’s life. Death.

The other certainty — if we take Ben Franklin’s assessment as accurate — is taxes.

Thus, ColoradoCare, otherwise known as Amendment 69, will be appearing on the November ballot in a fashion that will challenge the two greatest fears of the American psyche. Death and taxes… two certainties in life, of which we are afraid.

We fear, on the one hand, that single-payer healthcare will fail to keep us, each of us personally, alive. I can pretty much guarantee, with 100 percent accuracy, that every Coloradan enrolled in a future ColoradoCare program will in fact die, regardless of how well or how poorly the program is managed. We all die. No matter what. ColroadoCare will not keep us alive, except temporarily. But from what little I have been able to determine about the proposal so far, it will treat each of us equally, regardless of our financial status.

We also have a fear of taxes. We fear the rise of terrible government programs that waste our dollars… or that serve only special interest groups and multi-national corporations… or that basically serve people who are lazy and unwilling to contribute to society.

We also fear government corruption. That’s a healthy fear.

I’ve spent most of the past eleven years writing about local government decisions in this little Colorado mountain town of Pagosa Springs. The decisions on which the Daily Post has focused most of its critical attentions were schemes to extract additional tax revenues for projects that I perceived as unjustified, wasteful, poorly conceived, or smelling of government/corporate corruption. In many cases, our local governments were seeking to bypass the voters and put in place increased taxes and fees to fund projects that the public did not fully support. Some of the proposals that the Daily Post criticized most sharply: the Dry Gulch Reservoir; the Mega-Campus; the Reservoir Hill Amusement Park; the Downtown Recreation Center; the School-based Health Center; the proposed abandonment of the County Courthouse; the 5th Street Bridge proposal. Most of these questionable tax-funded projects appeared, to me, to be attempts to solve problems that didn’t exist.

Like many of our Daily Post readers, I believe our governments have an obligation to serve the people who elect them, and to allow the people to express their opinions about new (and often, expensive) government schemes and projects. Our governments have an obligation to try and solve the numerous problems that private industry cannot solve… problems that actually exist, and that the voters want to see addressed with public funds.

America has a broken healthcare system. We have the technology, we have the delivery system, but something is not working. As a wealthy nation, we have sufficient funds available to provide universal healthcare, as so many other nations have done. Private industry has been unable to overcome its focus on ever-greater profit margins, and place the overall health of the nation above corporate earnings.

A friend wrote to me yesterday, asking if ColoradoCare is just another version of ObamaCare. I don’t believe that’s the case here. For one thing, the option to create this system is not being shoved down our throats by corrupt Washington politicians. Amendment 69 will be placed before the voters next November, and the taxpayers will choose whether they value healthcare as a basic human right… as something all Colorado residents are willing to help fund, out of our own pockets. If we choose that route, we will then be asked to elect the 21-member board to administer the tax increase.

ColoradoCare does not appear fit into the pattern of “government excess.”

Many people in Colorado — including many whom I highly respect — will no doubt vote against ColoradoCare, for various reasons. I cannot yet say how I will vote on the issue; there’s more to learn and discuss before November. You can download the full text of the amendment here.

At the moment, I am thinking about the speech given to the school board by one of our schoolteachers back in December — a portion of which I shared in Part Three. Aaron Wamsley, who teaches second grade at Pagosa Springs Elementary, told the school board that his employee insurance premium had increased — over a four year period — from $478 to $953 per month.

As I calculate the numbers proposed in Amendment 69, Mr. Wamsley’s cost for health insurance would drop to about $100 a month, and the school district would pay another $200. That sounds about right to me, for how much a smart, young family should be paying for healthcare in a modern, wealthy, technologically-advanced nation.

Many hands make for light work. Pooling our healthcare resources together might be the right choice for Colorado.