A newly approved state law that brought Longview's two hospitals onto the same team could mean $15 million or more in Medicaid reimbursements on the roughly $50 million combined uncompensated care they provide.

It's a funding boost that comes at just the right time for Good Shepherd Health Systems.

"There are a lot of things we disagree on, and we compete hard," Good Shepherd Health Systems Executive Vice President Ken Cunningham said of Longview Regional Medical Center. "But, this is one thing I think we both agree on, is the need in this area for additional funding for the uninsured and indigent populations."

Passed May 28 in Austin, Senate Bill 1587 took effect immediately. The measure authorized Gregg County to create an account called a Local Provider Participation Fund, with money provided by the hospitals.

Gregg commissioners created the fund Thursday after a public hearing.

The account funds are sent to the Texas Health and Human Services Commission in Austin, where federal Medicaid funds are added.

Established to help primarily rural hospitals, and hospitals that are not supported by taxing districts, the local legislation also helps hospitals in Cherokee and Bowie counties. Similar bills were filed for six other counties, Cunningham said.

The bills trigger a mechanism by which at least double the money transferred to Austin returns to the county to reimburse the hospitals.

"It's probably going to be somewhere in the $10 million range," Cunningham said, adding that reimbursement is cumulative through 2016 — it's not an annual payment.

It's help at a time the former county hospital can use it.

Good Shepherd Health Systems in recent years has reversed a minor expansion to other sites inside Longview and in other cities that had been taking place. Good Shepherd facilities have closed in Gilmer and Linden as the non-for-profit foundation that operates the Good Shepherd System dealt with a growing gap between spending and revenue.

"The initiatives that we've put in place already are turning our situation around," Cunningham said. "So, we're a much stronger hospital system. This (reimbursement) allows us to be even stronger going forward, for facing challenges that all hospital systems are going to face in the future."

It was an offer neither Longview hospital could refuse.

Jim Kendrick, the outgoing CEO of Longview Regional, said his hospital spends about $10 million annually on uncompensated care.

"Hopefully, we will end up with an additional $5 million," he said. "This was a collaboration between health care organizations for the betterment of the community."

Both hospital leaders praised a coalition of elected officials that was led by Sen. Kevin Eltife of Tyler and Rep. David Simpson of Longview. The two Republican state lawmakers carried identical bills enabling the reimbursement, joined by fellow East Texas GOP Reps. Chris Paddie of Marshall and Travis Clardy of Nacogdoches.

"It was a collaborative effort from both the (Texas) House and Senate," Kendrick said. "That's David (Simpson) and Kevin Eltife."

Cunningham said County Judge Bill Stoudt, county commissioners and the Northeast Texas lawmakers were eager to help once it was clear the two rival hospitals were teaming up.

"That's kind of where we started this discussion," he said. "Once all the hospitals were on board, we talked to Judge Stoudt. He was very supportive, and the county commissioners were very supportive. It was something that was a local effort with everybody on board."