“They’re across the street, those people that come from the other planet,” he says. King attacks DREAMers In an attempted joke, he calls them ‘those people that come from the other planet.’

Rep. Steve King, at the opening of his Iowa Freedom Summit, took another jab at so-called DREAMers, saying they come from a different “planet.”

The Iowa Republican, perhaps the most vocal critic of immigration reform in Congress, made the comment in an ad-libbed remark in his opening address to the gathering of conservatives hailed by some as the beginning of the 2016 Iowa caucus season.

Story Continued Below

“We’re a great people. We have a vitality that’s unequaled on the planet. We come from every possible planet, uh, every possible continent,” King said, to laughter from the crowd. After a brief pause, the congressman referenced the DREAM Action Coalition, an immigration advocacy group protesting the event in Des Moines.

“They’re across the street, those people that come from the other planet,” he said, prompting more laughs and applause from the audience.

The event is featuring speeches from several potential 2016 presidential candidates, including Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum, former Texas Gov. Rick Perry and former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, among others.

Democrats and immigration reform advocates have seized on the summit, accusing Republicans of seeking to “kiss the ring” of an influential Iowa congressman who has become known for his provocative statements against immigration and DREAMers.

On Tuesday, King criticized a DREAMer invited to sit in the first lady’s box at the State of the Union address as “a deportable,” a remark that he defended after facing criticism. The congressman, who has been confronted several times on camera by immigration advocates, has previously said most undocumented immigrations have “calves the size of cantaloupes” from smuggling drugs and compared them to dogs.

Speaking at the beginning of the summit he’s co-hosting with Citizens United, an emotional King offered an impromptu prayer for the next president to “restore the soul of America.” He laid out several challenges to Republicans running for president, including supporting a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution, abolishing the IRS and repealing the Affordable Care Act.

King also predicted that the next president of the United States would be speaking at his summit, an apparent slight to several potential Republican candidates who didn’t appear at the event — among them Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal and 2012 presidential nominee Mitt Romney.