Antonio Smith boasts a remarkable nickname: “Tones-tradamus.”

With tongue in cheek, he fashions himself as a living, breathing, Magic 8 ball. With that in mind Monday, what was so bright about the Broncos’ future that drew the veteran defensive tackle to sign with Denver?

“I am excited. Every piece that you need is on this team, and I know what (coach Gary) Kubiak, (defensive line coach) Bill (Kollar) and (defensive coordinator) Wade (Phillips) can do with a good quarterback and good offense. It will be a dangerous combination,” Smith said. “I believe wholeheartedly we have a chance of making the last dance.”

When the Oakland Raiders released Smith last week, Kollar called him as soon as the news scrolled across the bottom of his TV screen. Problem was Kollar had an old number. The Broncos talked to Smith later that night, accelerating a process that resulted in a one-year, $2-million contract.

Smith, 33, brings experience and durability. He played 791 snaps last season. In Denver, a little less time could lead to more production. Kollar told Smith he views him as a pass-rushing weapon in the nickel package. Given the league’s aerial pyrotechnics, Smith will play a critical role, forcing teams to decide whether they can double team Von Miller or DeMarcus Ware on the outside.

“The best friend of an inside (pass rusher) is ends who can get off the edge and rush up field,” Smith said. “Both outside and inside guys can have excellent seasons helping each other. Kollar told me he watched the film, and he knows I can still get after the quarterback.”

In Smith, the Broncos also added a locker-room rudder. This can’t be ignored in an offseason when leaders Terrance Knighton, Jacob Tamme, Rahim Moore and Mitch Unrein signed elsewhere. Smith will be surrounded by relatively inexperienced players — Sylvester Williams, Derek Wolfe and Marvin Austin — whom the team is counting on heavily to improve.

“Anything they need from me — advice, help. … I’m an open book. … I take pride in teaching the craft,” Smith said. “(After having mentors in Arizona) I always kind of vowed that I would be that kind of guy. I am not going to not educate you because one day you may take my job. I don’t keep secrets.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck