DENVER--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The JRP Group, a national recruitment solutions firm that targets and places elite finance and accounting professionals, today launched its first specialized healthcare division in Denver. The office is led by industry veteran Steve Tutwiler with the goal of tapping into the Front Range region’s high-impact healthcare workforce, one of the largest, fastest growing and most talented in the nation.

“The year 2014 is critical for healthcare payers and providers, and the Denver market is poised for national leadership in the areas of business management, finance and administration,” said Tutwiler. “With our full-services ranging from contract to contingency, we’re a principal-driven firm with the entrepreneurial spirit and small-town values that are the right fit for our region’s growing healthcare infrastructure.”

The Colorado healthcare market is growing exponentially with three major hospital systems, thousands of health and wellness companies, and more than 169,150 healthcare workers. With the Affordable Care Act (ACA) now in effect, it is estimated that 500,000 Coloradans will have insurance that were previously uninsured, creating the need for more healthcare professionals on both the clinical and administrative sides. Another milestone in 2014 affecting all organizations under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) including healthcare systems, hospitals, clinics and insurance companies is the required migration to ICD-10 (International Statistical Classification of Diseases) coding procedures by October 1.

“The JRP Group places high-impact finance professionals who specialize in the ACA and ICD-10 to help healthcare organizations mitigate risk and reduce the instance of compliance penalties,” said Tutwiler, who was recently named vice president of staffing services and will lead the new healthcare division of the JRP Group. Tutwiler previously served as CEO of Sterling Management Resources, and president and CEO of Don Richard Associates, which both specialized in healthcare clients.

About The JRP Group

JRP Group, a leading executive and contract talent recruitment firm, uses proprietary best-practice methodologies to deliver customized staffing solutions for clients in the banking, accounting, finance, tax and healthcare industries. As a member of the MRINetwork, JRP Group has access to staffing resources across the United States and internationally to place high-demand, high-impact candidates for each client’s specific need. JRP Group was founded in 1999 and has offices in Denver, Dillon, Colo. and Green Bay, Wis.