Topics: Atheism, David Brooks, Editor's Picks, Media Criticism, New York Times, Religion, Life News, News

One might deem it almost shameful to publish one’s musings on the New York Times’ opinion page, the same page that continues to print, and quite shamelessly, the unapologetic scribbles of Iraq War cheerleader Thomas Friedman or the earnest yet befuddled lucubrations of useful Islamist idiot Nicholas Kristof. The first of these two columnists will probably never be called to account for the bloodshed and mayhem he has sanctioned in the Middle East. The second, I believe, means well, but by denouncing “Islamophobia” he shows he has accepted as sound a nonsense term that conflates faith and race and equates (well-founded) objections to Islam with prejudice against Muslims as people. And we should never forget that he, like Friedman, supported the Iraq War.

But what to make of Friedman and Kristof’s seemingly milquetoast colleague, David Brooks? No shame attaches to him, though by publishing his pro-faith columns, he validates a stupendously (if surreptitiously) baleful Weltanschauung that should long ago have disappeared from our world. Brooks, in the face of mounting evidence, has striven tirelessly to bequeath credence to the dangerous notion, ever more antiquated and morally untenable, that believing in something asserted without evidence – religion — constitutes a virtue. That valuing faith above reason makes one a better person. That those who have shrugged off – or laughed away – the comically outlandish claims advanced by the Abrahamic creeds about our world and origins as a species are the ones with the explaining to do. Should he not be called to account?

I believe so. Moreover, Brooks’ recent Op-Ed, “Building Better Secularists,” leaves me no choice, or, better said, offers me an opportunity I cannot pass up for commentary. “Building Better Secularists” is nothing less than an anti-religion writer’s dream come true, an essay remarkable for its utter and complete susceptibility to refutation and repudiation. The title hints that Brooks intends to teach us godless folks a thing or two. The result? He succeeds only in beclowning himself by authoring a sanctimoniously gaseous tract that befits not America’s august Paper of Record, but a highbrow version of Watchtower, the Jehovah’s Witnesses’ End-is-Nigh rag once handed out for free by blue-haired little old ladies in tennis shoes in front of speakeasies and liquor shops (and is now available online).

Brooks starts out by noting that those with no religious affiliation now account for a fifth of all Americans and a third of young American adults (a development that, in my view, is to be celebrated). He introduces the sociologist Phil Zuckerman and his “Living the Secular Life,” a book I unfortunately have not read and so cannot comment on, but that apparently promotes the idea that secularism amounts to a “positive moral creed” based on two precepts: first, do no harm, and second, help others. Zuckerman, in Brooks’ telling, would have us believe that “secularists seem like genial, low-key people who have discarded metaphysical prejudices and are now leading peaceful and rewarding lives.” That sounds pretty good. But Brooks therein espies a critical flaw: “secular writers are so eager to make the case for their creed, they are minimizing the struggle required to live by it.”

Neither atheism nor secularism advocates a specific way of life (though I understand Zuckerman does in his book, which is fine by me). Atheism espouses no “creed,” but denotes only the absence of belief in God or gods. Secularism mostly concerns legal prohibitions – Jefferson’s “wall of separation between church and state,” for example, or France’s far more comprehensive 1905 law of laicité — against religious folks intruding (as they have ever been wont to do) their foul fables and superstitious rituals into places where they can do great damage – the courts and schools, for example. One would hope that living free of the tyranny of an imaginary despot in the sky and his money-grubbing minions on earth would allow secularists, as Brooks says, to at least “reason their way to proper conduct,” but there is no guarantee of that.

One thing is certain, though: for the past two millennia, devotees of all the Abrahamic faiths have had more than enough opportunity not only to practice their religions and influence their communities, but to run countries and empires. The results would seem to discredit them: barbarism and murder, civil strife and war, the systematic rape of children, institutionalized obscurantism and misogyny, witch hunts, the cruelest punishments imaginable, the Crusades, the Holy Inquisition, ISIS, Boko Haram, and so on. The point is not than one or another religion is better or more correct, or more guilty or less guilty of producing “bad outcomes” such as the aforementioned, but that all are equally man-made, equally false, equally irrational, and equally capable of being used just as they have been used: as merciless ideologies of control and repression. All this immediately renders null and void the credentials of any journalist who would preach faith-tainted advice about how to live to rationalists.

Brooks proceeds to list the challenges he demands be met if atheists are to prosper. Each of these challenges he presents in contradistinction to its religious equivalent.

Let’s take them one by one.

1. “Religions come equipped with covenantal rituals that bind people together, sacred practices that are beyond individual choice. Secular people have to choose their own communities and come up with their own practices to make them meaningful.”

Since Brooks is Jewish, presumably the circumcision (of baby boys) is the primary “covenantal ritual” he has in mind. Of course there are other rites: acting out cannibalistic fantasies in the Eucharist, eating wafers for flesh and drinking wine for blood; spouting gibberish in tongues; gyrating on the floor; genuflecting toward Mecca, and so on. (One other particularly savage ritual comes to mind, and it is truly “beyond individual choice”: female genital mutilation, usually inflicted on its victims – currently some 125 million women in at least 29 countries — with license from the Islamic canon.) No atheist is obligated to concoct practices similar to the sacraments Brooks considers necessary for “meaning,” or, obviously, to the ghoulish outrages other faith-deranged folk make a habit of casually visiting on their fellows. Disbelief in God obliges me to search for no “community” at all. “Meaning” I can discover on my own, without recourse to fallacious dogmas or conferring with the deluded souls who adhere to them.

2. “Secular individuals have to build their own Sabbaths. Religious people are commanded to drop worldly concerns. Secular people have to create their own set times for when to pull back and reflect on spiritual matters.”

I, a lifelong atheist, need a Sabbath? This is news to me. I associate Sabbaths with the punishment – the death penalty – that Leviticus and Deuteronomy mete out to the violators thereof. Scheduling time to “reflect on spiritual matters” generally poses no problem for anyone who can, let’s say, read a clock. Children usually manage this feat by age 7 or so. If Brooks needs to rely on a magic book’s calendar to help him find time to “pull back,” that’s not my problem.