One of the most contentious parts of bankruptcy is determining the value of the company filing for chapter 11. In fact, the valuation process was a major focus of the American Bankruptcy Institute’s Commission to Study the Reform of Chapter 11, and many of the commission’s proposals were based on the perception that bankruptcy valuations are systematically skewed toward undervaluing debtors. However, a closer look at the data reveals that the proposed changes are based on a somewhat questionable assumption and may therefore need to be reconsidered.

Because all valuation approaches are market-based, valuation levels for chapter 11 reorganization plans confirmed during a particular time period necessarily reflect overall market levels. The commission posits that most chapter 11 plans are confirmed during periods when market valuation levels are low by historical standards, supporting its view that reorganizing debtors are systematically undervalued. Strikingly, 32 years of data measuring the inputs for the two most common valuation methods—discounted cash flows and market multiples—shows that just the opposite is true. Substantially more chapter 11 reorganization plans over that period were confirmed when markets were overvalued rather than undervalued by historical standards.

Valuation Methods

At its most basic level, a company’s valuation is a function of two factors—the future cash flows it is expected to generate and the amount that investors are willing to pay for those cash flows based on their perception of, and appetite for, risk. Because the market’s risk appetite is fluid, it is entirely possible that at different points in time, the value of an asset will fluctuate even if its “intrinsic” future cash flows remain unchanged.

The most common valuation approaches are the discounted cash flow (DCF) and market multiples methods. In a DCF, the company’s expected cash flows are projected forward and discounted back to the present using a risk-adjusted discount rate (the weighted-average cost of capital, or WACC), that reflects—among other things—investors’ current risk appetite.

The market multiples approach employs a more direct route by gauging how much investors should be willing to pay for each dollar of the company’s cash flows by determining how much they are willing to pay for each dollar of similar companies’ cash flows. Multiples valuation has the benefit of capturing the market’s current expectations of cash flow growth and uncertainty, risk appetite and other macro factors such as interest rates.

Discounted Cash Flow Data

Although discount rates are company-specific calculations, they are heavily influenced by overall market-wide conditions. For example, if contemporaneous equity risk premiums are relatively high, discount rates would generally be higher, resulting in relatively lower valuations. The table below summarizes how many chapter 11 reorganization plans were confirmed during times when discount rates were above average (leading to lower valuations) and how many were confirmed when discount rates were below average (leading to higher valuations), calculating the discount rate using market-based inputs and basic assumptions regarding capital structure and risk.

Although this is a very high-level analysis, it shows an interesting and somewhat unexpected result: Between 1982 and 2014, the vast majority of plans were confirmed in years when the overall market discount rates were below average, which suggests that valuations would generally have been at above average levels, holding all else equal.

Market Multiples Data

While discount rate calculations are notoriously subjective, evaluating market multiples produces a more objective indication of general valuation levels. The table below summarizes whether chapter 11 reorganizations occurred during periods of undervaluation or overvaluation relative to historical norms using (1) monthly price-to-earnings and (2) monthly cyclically adjusted price-to-earnings multiples for the companies comprising the S&P 500 Index and (3) quarterly enterprise value-to-Ebitda multiples for the entire market of public companies. The results once again indicate that on balance, more plans were confirmed during periods when market multiples, and hence valuations, were above average.

Therefore, contrary to the assumptions of the ABI Commission, the data strongly suggest that debtors in chapter 11 reorganizations are not systematically undervalued. On the contrary, they often seem to be overvalued. While seemingly counterintuitive, upon reflection the data make perfect intuitive sense. Bankruptcy filings are a lagging indicator, meaning that their number generally peaks towards the end of a recession. Since reorganization valuation is not crystalized until the time a plan is confirmed, the economic trough that may have contributed to the bankruptcy filing is generally all but a faint memory in investors’ minds. Markets and valuations, on the other hand, are forward-looking and reflect investors’ expectations of the foreseeable future. As such, when properly performed, valuations typically capture the debtor’s true enterprise value. Given these findings, perhaps it makes sense for the commission to reconsider its far-reaching valuation proposals.

Konstantin Danilov is associate consultant at the Analysis Group in Boston.