Hill Republicans playing it safe on deficit reduction

For all the bold talk of balancing the budget, Republicans in Congress are playing it safe on how much deficit reduction can be accomplished this year under the expedited reconciliation process afforded to the majority.

The House and Senate Budget Committees won’t roll out their tax and spending plans until next week. But all indications are the savings target for reconciliation won’t come close to the trillions needed to reach balance by 2025.

Story Continued Below

Part of this is practical politics given President Barack Obama’s veto. But in a surprising twist, a lot also has to do with new, lower cost estimates for the law the GOP loves to hate: the Affordable Care Act.

Just this past Monday, the Congressional Budget Office trimmed $209 billion from its prior January estimate for the 10-year cost of subsidies and related spending and revenues for the health exchanges. That’s a 20 percent drop in the space of two months, and those are the same exchange subsidies threatened by a Republican-backed lawsuit before the Supreme Court.

If the justices were to strike down the subsidies this summer, Republicans would be under pressure to come up with some relief for the millions who would find it harder to keep their health coverage.

The filibuster-proof reconciliation process is one legislative tool to employ. The budget resolution is expected to lay the groundwork by instructing relevant committees to come up with savings from other benefit programs. But the reporting date will be late enough so that the impact of the court decision can be addressed.

CBO’s new scores are relevant here in setting the deficit reduction target. Since the exchange subsidies are said to be costing that much less, it means a narrower window for the GOP if the party is to use reconciliation to both respond to the healthcare crisis and achieve budget savings.

Having a lower deficit reduction target makes this more doable. And as a rule, the lower the target, the more room for the Senate Finance and House Ways and Means Committees to add healthcare provisions to the package.

Indeed, in the Senate at least, Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) is telling his members that one big reason to vote for the budget resolution is to give Republicans an outlet for dealing with the aftermath of the court decision.

McConnell couples this with a message to play it safe. As briefings began this week with individual members, it appears a decision has been made to keep Medicare spending in the resolution close to what President Barack Obama has proposed, for example. And while the Senate budget is expected to have a reserve fund for potential defense increases in the future, the current appropriations caps are left intact—without big new cuts in discretionary spending for domestic programs.

The down side of this strategy is that too small a reconciliation package also invites ridicule.

The Senate Budget panel heard testimony Wednesday that it would take $5.5 trillion in deficit reduction to get to balance by 2025. Without big savings from entitlements to fill this gap, the balanced budget plan can seem more bluster than bite.

Right now, that’s a risk many in the GOP seem willing to take. McConnell and Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) are both veterans of the 1990s and the Republican battles then with another Democratic president, Bill Clinton.

Certainly, the GOP paid a political price in 1995 when it sought to enact major savings at the expense of Medicare and other domestic programs—only to run into a veto fight with Clinton and a damaging government shutdown. In fact, all three vetoes of reconciliation bills were in that period of Republican dominance in Congress and the Clinton in the White House.

Reconciliation gets its name from a time long ago when Congress actually passed two budget resolutions each year: one setting goals, the second more binding.

In this context, reconciliation was a tool to “reconcile” the two by making the necessary spending and tax changes needed to meet deficit targets. It gives considerable leeway to the two budget committees to manage a two-step process: first assigning targets to individual authorizing committees and then assembling each committee’s piece into a single package that is subject to limited debate.

In the 1980s and 1990s, it was an effective budget tool used by presidents of both parties. But in the years since, each party has accused the other of abusing the process as a way to advance their agenda –not true deficit reduction.

McConnell bitterly complained that Democrats overstepped by using reconciliation in 2010 to complete healthcare reform. Now he and the Senate GOP are preparing to use it themselves if needed— depending on how the justices rule.

Until the court makes its decision, the full impact of the GOP strategy will not be clear. But it could end up confronting Obama and Democrats with a set of Hobson choices next fall if the ACA subsidy structure is struck down.

For example, right now the Senate is working with a late July date for committees to report back with savings under reconciliation. Medicaid and food stamps for the poor are likely targets even if Medicare is largely spared. The president’s first instinct might be to veto the package, but if the same reconciliation bill offers some relief for those who have lost their health coverage, the White House and Democrats would have to take that into account as well.