Actavis CEO Brenton Saunders, left, and Allergan CEO David Pyott pose for a photo on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. Actavis $66 billion for Allergan is the latest in a string of health care M&A deals that are expected to continue apace. Associated Press/Richard Drew

Actavis PLC’s $66 billion offer for Botox maker Allergan Inc. may be a precursor of things to come.

Of the 190 C-suite executives surveyed in September by Detroit law firm Dykema Gossett PLLC, 25% expect the highest level of merger and acquisition activity in health care, followed by technology, energy and industrial and manufacturing sectors.

But private equity may not be the beneficiary of the expected increase in deal volume. Kathrin Kudner, a member of Dykema’s health care practice group, said activities will likely be driven by strategic mergers and hospital consolidation, an area private equity hasn’t been hot on in recent years.

“A large number of free standing community hospitals are looking at partnerships or acquisitions, given high technology costs, high personnel cost, and decreasing government reimbursement,” she said.

Health care is the most active sector so far this year, driven by multi-billion dollar inversion deals in which pharmaceutical companies seek lower corporate taxes by merging with smaller foreign companies.

Including inversions, there were $341.8 billion worth of health care deals in the U.S. so far this year, according to data provider Dealogic. That total far surpasses $168.2 billion worth of telecommunications transactions and $149.8 billion of technology deals.

The volume of inversion-led activity may be tamer in the year ahead as President Barack Obama’s administration tightens the relevant rules.

But Ms. Kudner said health care deal volume overall will be made up by hospital-related transactions.

“Although M&A in health care is getting more scrutiny by regulators, hospitals are feeling pressured from reduced reimbursement by Medicare and Medicaid and increasing costs to look for other options to combat those pressures,” she said. “There is room for more consolidation in healthcare, it hasn’t peaked yet.”

Jeff Swearingen, a managing director at boutique investment bank Edgemont Capital Partners, said midsized or smaller hospital-based physician services are being consolidated, “so that they can have the capital, scope and scale to withstand potentially challenging times ahead.”

“That’s driving a lot of mergers and acquisitions activities of late, enhanced by the relatively easy access to equity and debt capital,” he said.

Hospitals have much to gain, or lose, under the Affordable Care Act. Hospitals, which have been operating on a fee-for-service model, are expected to shift focus to the quality of care and the efficiency involved in the treatments. Operators are subject to penalties if patients are being readmitted to medical facilities, deeming readmissions as an indication of failure in the initial care.

Ms. Kudner said small hospitals are having particular difficulty in surviving.

“In the late 80s, early 90s, hospitals got a large cushion from donations and investment funds, but small community hospitals don’t have that cushion anymore,” she said.

Uncertainties over reimbursement keep many private equity firms from investing in hospitals, fearing cuts will undermine their investment return.

Private equity firms are active in health related areas where there isn’t a direct reimbursement risk, Ms. Kudner said.

“Companies that are focused on care management, care coordination and companies that help health care providers reduce cost have seen significant investments by private equity, like dental and medical service organizations,” she said.

Still, there are some private equity firms willing to take the risk.

Blue Wolf Capital Partners was named as the stalking horse in the bankruptcy procedure for Florence Hospital at Anthem, a community hospital in Arizona. A court auction will be held Jan. 7.

The firm also announced earlier this month plans to set up a joint venture with the Brooklyn Hospital Center to build and operate a network of urgent care centers outpatient services in the New York City borough of Brooklyn, where access to ambulatory care is limited.

Write to Amy Or at amy.or@wsj.com

[Correction: Dykema Gossett PLLC’s headquarters is in Detroit. An earlier version of this post said the law firm was based in Chicago.]