× Seven of the state’s leading health care systems form partnership called “abouthealth”

APPLETON (WITI) – Seven of the state’s leading health care systems – Aspirus, Aurora Health Care, Bellin Health, Gundersen Health System, ProHealth Care, ThedaCare and UW Health have announced that their recently-formed partnership is named abouthealth™.

The name makes a simple and clear statement about why these organizations have come together – to improve overall population health for the communities they serve while working together to advance clinical quality, efficiency and the customer experience.

“Collaboration is at the root of the abouthealth partnership,” said Greg Devine, CEO. “We’re like-minded health care organizations partnering to make health care more accessible, approachable and easy for consumers at all stages of life.”

All seven organizations are recognized as leaders in delivering high quality, low cost care. The partners, who together cover nearly 90 percent of the state’s population, are leveraging their collective resources and best-in-class practices to improve the lifetime health of people in the communities they serve in Wisconsin and surrounding areas in the Upper Midwest.

“At the end of the day, each of the partners is ‘about health’ for our patients and the communities we serve. We believe that through clinical integration we can do something special in Wisconsin and make abouthealth the model for the future,” Devine said.

The partnering health organizations also unveiled the logo for the abouthealth network. It puts a simple and approachable face on the organization.

abouthealth is a strategic partnership among seven of Wisconsin’s top-performing health care organizations, making high quality, efficient care accessible to approximately 90 percent of Wisconsinites and their neighbors in parts of Illinois, Iowa, Michigan and Minnesota. The partnership members are Aspirus, Aurora Health Care, Bellin Health, Gundersen Health System, ProHealth Care, ThedaCare and UW Health. The members have the same electronic health record platforms, and offer patients access to 47 hospitals and more than 7,000 providers.