NEWPORT NEWS — He served honorably in the Air Force for 23 years as a radar tech. He didn't see combat and wasn't disabled when he retired.

As an enlisted man, Newport News resident Jim Garner qualified for a military pension. He supplemented that income with a civilian job that suited his fix-it talents, and continued working in retirement to support his family.

Half a dozen years after retiring from the Air Force, he was diagnosed with "mild cognitive impairment," a precursor to Alzheimer's, the degenerative brain disease that has no treatment or cure.

He was 48 years old and the father of two young children, daughter Frankie, then 9, and son Bradley, then 6.

How would the family manage without a breadwinner? Who would take care of Jim while his wife, Karen, went to work? What would happen when he could no longer live at home? What community programs could provide the care needed for a progressive chronic disease in someone too young to qualify for federally supported senior programs?

(Jonathon Gruenke/ Daily Press Staff)

Now, more than three years after he had to quit his job, there are still no answers.

Too young, not poor enough

At a few months shy of 50, Jim was even rejected as too young for clinical trials for Alzheimer's.

He is still too young for the federally funded PACE program, the Program of All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly, which provides day care, medical management, and activities for the nursing-home eligible in a community setting.

In July, a bipartisan group of U.S. representatives introduced the PACE Innovation Act of 2015 to allow the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to test new models of care for high-need, high-cost individuals under 55. Jim's case was cited in hearings before a congressional committee. The legislation passed the Senate unanimously, and in late October, the House added its seal of approval. It's the culmination of several years' work to find ways to adapt the model to younger participants. It was sent to the White House on Oct. 26 and is awaiting the president's signature.

Kaitlin McKeown / Daily Press Jim talks with another resident from the secure memory unit during an afternoon at Commonwealth Assisted Living in Hampton in early October. Jim talks with another resident from the secure memory unit during an afternoon at Commonwealth Assisted Living in Hampton in early October. (Kaitlin McKeown / Daily Press)

Meanwhile, Jim, at 53 and progressively unable to care for himself, doesn't qualify for the state's Alzheimer's waiver, cut-off age 55, which might have provided some caretaking relief at home.

He needs help with personal hygiene and dressing and cannot be left alone — he becomes easily agitated and has had one violent incident away from home — but he doesn't qualify medically for skilled nursing care.

"If he needed someone to monitor his diabetes or high blood pressure, it would be different," said Karen.

That means he's not sick enough to qualify for Medicaid; and if he were, the Garners would have to spend down their modest savings to meet the income eligibility. "You have to be worth less than $2,000. Then the government would have to pay for my children's health care and for their lunches," said Karen.

In turning him down for nursing home care in August, a letter from the state's Department of Medical Assistive Services recommended that Jim apply to an assisted-living facility — for which there's no government aid. The annual cost for the most basic assisted living is $55,000, but it's usually closer to $75,000.

In addition to his Air Force pension, Jim qualifies for Social Security disability payments, which he has been receiving for a couple of years. The family uses those funds to live on. "Everything's geared for someone who's retired," said Karen, who gave up a full-time job in December to take care of Jim at home. In January, she took on a part-time consulting job for Home Instead Senior Care, but with Jim's growing care needs and the demands of raising two children, 14 and 11, those hours became hard to carve out.

Meanwhile, she beat the bushes for respite care. For a while she drove from their home in Newport News to Williamsburg two afternoons a week for a respite program subsidized by the United Methodist Church.

Still, she needed more as her husband became increasingly agitated and unhappy around the unpredictable activity of family life. She worried for his safety after he took off through the neighborhood on a couple of occasions. At one point Jim threatened to take his own life.

No help for veterans

Surely his status as a military retiree could provide a solution — and some affordable care — Karen's informal cadre of advisers suggested. A lawyer volunteered his services. Karen called the Veterans Affairs. She was told Jim's disability had to be service-related.

Virginia is home to more than 700,000 veterans and the most common medical condition from recent wars is post traumatic stress disorder, a known contributor to the development of Alzheimer's. From Richmond to Hampton Roads the VA has 40 long-term beds designated for dementia patients. They're all at its Richmond center, which has a waiting list of months.

At the Hampton VA Medical Center there are eight beds in a secure "geriatric special care unit" that is not specifically designated for dementia patients. To qualify for placement there, or in "community alternatives through our contract network of nursing homes and home health services," a patient must qualify for nursing home care, just as for Medicaid, according to spokesman Daniel Henry.

Jim qualifies for neither.

The VA has developed "care sheets" for people who take care of veterans with Alzheimer's, PTSD and traumatic brain injury. Its website says bluntly, "Currently there is no treatment to stop or reverse Alzheimer's disease." It advises that a caretaker's life "may change dramatically as you adjust your already busy schedule to include increasing care needs for the veteran you care for."

It urges caregivers not to feel guilty, says it's normal to feel overwhelmed and offers as salve the VA's Caregiver Support Line, 1-855-260-3274.

Karen made a direct appeal to U.S. Sen. Mark Warner, D-Va.

"Senator Warner knows firsthand the strain that caring for an Alzheimer's patient places on any family. His mother suffered with Alzheimer's for more than a decade, and his father and sister were her primary caregivers during that time.Senator Warner was struck by the Garners' difficult situation, and as Jim's condition worsened, our staff reached out to Karen to see what assistance we might provide to ensure that she is made aware of every available resource," spokeswoman Rachel Cohen wrote in an email.