Buy Photo John Wagner works on a chassis. Adventure RC Raceway celebrates opening day of it's indoor car track, as more than 100 compete on Saturday afternoon. March 22, 2014 (Photo: Michael Dossett/Special to The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Dozens of people packed the warehouse attached to the Adventure RC hobby shop in Jeffersontown on Saturday to christen the recently opened shop's indoor remote-control racing track.

Racers from Indiana, Ohio, Tennessee and Georgia watched closely as their remote-controlled cars zipped by on the 65-foot-wide-by-125-foot-long dirt track. Saturday marked the first set of races on the course.

"It's on par with other tracks in the area," said Jared Kirkwood, a veteran racer from Lexington who travels up to three times a month to places like Cincinnati and Indianapolis to race. "It's flowing and consistent."

Owners Stan Frerking and Chris Katsoulis spawned the idea for the hobby shop and adjacent track at 11008 Decimal Drive in October and began building it this year. The track, which features turns and jumps for both beginners and experts, took 25 dump trucks of dirt and about six weeks to construct. It cost about $35,000.

"A lot of people are interested" in remote-control racing, Katsoulis said. "But they used to have to travel two or three hours away to race."

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share A crowd of 100 hobbyists turns out on Saturday for the grand opening of Adventure RC Raceway’s indoor track for radio-controlled cars. (Michael Dossett, Special to The Courier-Journal) March 22, 2013

Louisville racer Jesse Snellen travels to Ohio and Indianapolis to race on indoor and outdoor tracks, but says having an indoor track within 20 minutes of his home is a luxury. He said the Adventure RC track is bigger than several he's been to and described its quality as comparable to others in the region. "It's one of the upper-end tracks," he said.

Jimmy Vanderharr said he used other tracks around the country as a model when building the Adventure RC track. The course is fraught with jumps and turns and guided by a PVC pipe perimeter. An elevated deck beside the track can hold up to 15 racers as they remotely maneuver their cars.

Vanderharr helped construct the track and said it will be reconfigured every six weeks to implement new obstacles and prevent wear and tear.

Saturday's races had more than 100 entries.

As cars bolted around the course, Brian Dunbar looked on with a smile. It was his first time at a track since retiring from professional racing in 2003. "I've never seen this many people racing in Louisville," he said.

Reporter Patrick T. Sullivan can be reached at (502) 582-4335 or on Twitter by following @CJ_PSullivan.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1m0a8md