PEORIA — Dentists from across the state expect to treat at least 1,000 people a day at a free dental clinic June 20-21 at the Civic Center during Illinois Mission of Mercy’s first visit to Peoria.



“That translates to more than $1 million in free dental work over a two-day period,” said Dr. Timm Schwartz, a Pekin dentist who is co-chairman of the event hosted by the Peoria Dental Society.



Volunteer dentists, dental hygienists and dental assistants will perform basic dental work such as fillings, extractions and limited work on partials.



Doors open at 6 a.m. People will be treated on a first-come, first-served basis. At past Mission of Mercy clinics, people start lining up for care hours in advance, Schwartz said, because of the “tremendous” need.



“That’s the sad part,” he added. “This is a great event but it certainly isn’t the solution.”



Volunteers plan to take state legislators on tours of the activities, said Lee Ann Beane, spokeswoman for the Illinois State Dental Society Foundation, which sponsors the dental missions.



In 2010, the state dental society foundation began sponsoring the missions every two years, in part to highlight the need for accessible dental care. Several hundred Peoria-area residents attended the first dental mission in Bloomington. The 2012 Mission of Mercy was in the Grayslake area.



A lack of affordable, accessible dental care, particularly for adults, ranked as one of the Tri-County Area’s top health issues in a community health needs assessment conducted by the area’s major hospitals in 2013.



People with dental problems often end up in hospital emergency rooms, which can triple the cost of care, according to Schwartz. Left untreated, oral health problems can lead to more severe health issues, including heart disease, strokes, and in rare cases, death.



Illinois lawmakers exacerbated the problem in 2012 when they eliminated Medicaid payments for adult dental care except in emergencies, Schwartz said. Though the benefits were restored in the current state budget, finding affordable dental care still can be difficult.



The Affordable Care Act expanded access to Medicaid for many adults but it did not address one of the key barriers to access in Illinois. Most dentists — including many who volunteer for Mission of Mercy — don’t accept Medicaid patients.



Illinois’ reimbursement rates are so low, dentists can’t afford to accept Medicaid, Schwartz said. “Our goal is to get the state to at least raise it to the break-even point. Then more providers would come on board.”



Meanwhile, Mission of Mercy organizers don’t have a problem finding providers and others willing to donate time and money.



Besides hundreds of dental care professionals, local plumbers and electricians are setting up about 100 dental chairs. Banks and the Peoria Area Convention and Visitors Bureau have given money. The Civic Center reduced its rental price and the Marriott Pere Marquette reduced rates for upwards of 1,000 volunteers, according to Schwartz. Pere Marquette employees also have adopted the event as a community service project.



“Our budget is about $175,000,” Schwartz said, “and everything comes from donations.”

_____

Illinois Mission of Mercy



What: Free dental clinic, sponsored by the Illinois State Dental Society Foundation, hosted by the Peoria Dental Society.



When: June 20-21



Where: Peoria Civic Center



Time: Doors open at 6 a.m., people are treated on a first-come, first-served.



Why: To provide basic dental care, such as fillings, extractions and cleanings, and to spotlight the need for affordable, accessible dental care.



Who’s eligible for treatment: All ages. A parent or guardian must be present for children younger than 18.



Suggestions: Be prepared to spend six to eight hours. Bring a list of current medications and a one-day supply. People with young children should bring baby supplies, such as diapers, food, etc. Also bring something to pass the time, for instance reading materials, knitting or crossword puzzles.



Warning: Care is not guaranteed. People could be turned away if organizers reach the 1,000-a-day limit early. People with serious health problems may not be treated, for example people with a fever or with extremely high blood pressure or blood sugar levels. Patients in severe pain should not wait for the Mission of Mercy to seek care.

_____

Pam Adams can be reached at 686-3245 or padams@pjstar.com. Follow her on Twitter @padamspam.