As an entity that is private but closely aligned with the U.S. government, the system of federal home loan banks in the U.S. has acted much like a silent partner in helping banks help their communities for the past 82 years.

“We’re big fans of the community banks,” said Andy Jetter, 58, president and CEO of Federal Home Loan Bank, or FHLBank, in Topeka. “They’re the lifeblood of their communities. That’s what we tell folks in Washington.”

Having grown up in a banking family in Omaha, Jetter joined the FHLBank in Topeka in 1987 as an attorney and then was promoted to general counsel two years later. In the 1990s, he rose through the management ranks and was chosen as the bank’s leader in 2002, just the fifth president since the Federal Home Loan Bank system was created in 1932 when Chester Sterling was the Topeka location’s first leader.

Topeka is home to one of 12 federal home loan banks that have their own boards of directors. They operate independently of one another but are aligned with the U.S. government and are subject to a high level of regulation.

President Herbert Hoover signed the Federal Home Loan Bank Act in 1932 to try to pull the country out of the Great Depression. The legislation created the home loan bank system that would help thrift institutions provide home loans to the middle class.

“Only the wealthy bought homes (for cash) as commercial banks didn’t make home loans then,” Jetter said. “Thrift institutions were the only significant source of financing for the middle class to buy homes and the Federal Home Loan Banks were created to help the thrift institutions.”

Over the past 82 years, the home loan banks have evolved to provide the same access to funding and capital to banks so they can invest in their communities, providing small business loans and economic development funds as part of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989.

“In today’s economy, retail financial institutions can’t rely solely on consumer deposits to fund their operations,” according to background information provided, “and many turn to FHLBank Topeka for supplemental funding.”

“We are a major, major player in liquidity funding for community banks,” said Julie DeVader, vice president for marketing and communications for FHLBank Topeka. “We are a bank for banks.”

“The Federal Home Loan Bank has always worked behind the scenes,” Jetter added.

Other federal home loan banks are scattered across the country, but Charles Curtis, a Topeka native and Hoover’s vice president, wanted the capital city to have a federal home loan bank that would serve Kansas, Oklahoma, Nebraska and Colorado.

“It was because of Charles,” DeVader said. “He basically said, ‘I want one in my hometown.’ ”

The first location was in the former First National Bank building at 6th and Kansas Avenue, later moving to Town Site Plaza at 6th and Quincy and then to the west side of Topeka in 2002 where it is located on the Security Benefit campus.

In the four-state region, the bank started with just six employees and several million dollars from the U.S. Treasury. It has since grown to 210 employees, $33.3 billion in assets and $1.5 billion in capital. In addition to community banks, the FHLBank serves credit unions, savings institution and insurance companies.

As part of its promotion of homeownership, FHLBank sets aside 10 percent of its annual earnings to provide funding for the Affordable Housing Program, or AHP, targeted at low and low-moderate income individuals, DeVader said. She said the program helps member banks provide funding for projects such as new housing for seniors, rental housing for persons with disabilities, the rehabilitation of vacant, single family homes and commercial property and improvements to public housing.

“It’s a great outreach,” DeVader said. “The stories are incredible.”

With affordable homeownership remaining as its core mission, Jetter said the federal home loan bank system has been able to evolve and be resilient through changes in the banking industry and several downturns in the economy since 1932. He said that is because the FHLBank has been a stable source of funding for community banks through the savings and loan crisis of the 1990s, the housing crisis of the Great Recession and now the ongoing consolidation of community banks in Kansas.

“FHLBank’s capital can adjust to what our customer business needs are,” Jetter said. “We can double in size and continue to be well-capitalized. We can grow and shrink by whatever is going on (in the market).”