Hillary Clinton says President Obama’s ‘don’t do stupid stuff’ foreign policy strategy is bad for the U.S.

According to a recent interview with Jeffrey Goldberg of The Atlantic, Hillary Clinton isn’t buying President Obama’s “don’t do stupid s–t” foreign policy line.

“Great nations need organizing principles,” Clinton told Goldberg when he brought up Obama’s doctrine, “and ‘Don’t do stupid stuff’ is not an organizing principle.”

Such critique of the president coming from Clinton’s mouth is indicative of an effort to distance herself from Obama in advance of her potential run for president in 2016.

Though Clinton weakly defended Obama in the wake of her critique, describing him as “trying to communicate to the American people that he’s not going to do something crazy,” Goldberg admitted in the article that he himself got the sense Clinton was embarking on her “more forceful attempt” to move away from Obama.

Ironically, White House deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes in response to The Atlantic interview said Hillary was “fully on-board” with respect to the “broad thrust” of the administration’s foreign policy strategy.

What’s more, Clinton didn’t stop at insulting Obama’s foreign policy line; the former secretary of State also insisted that the United States should have intervened early in the Syrian war in order to prevent al-Qaeda-inspired groups from gaining control of the rebellion against the Assad regime.

“I know that the failure to help build up a credible fighting force of the people who were the originators of the protests against Assad — there were Islamists, there were secularists, there was everything in the middle — the failure to do that left a big vacuum, which the jihadists have now filled,” alleged Clinton. “They were often armed in an indiscriminate way by other forces and we had no skin in the game that really enabled us to prevent this indiscriminate arming.”

Clinton also exclaimed enthusiastically about the “old-fashioned idea” of America fighting communism and fascism in the quest to promote freedom.

Of course, this isn’t the first time that Hillary Clinton has knocked Obama as of late. During an interview at the Twitter headquarters last month, Hillary claimed that “we have to fix [Obamacare]” even after defending and supporting Obama’s universal health care law throughout its disastrous rollout.