Boulder County official: 'We've dodged the bullet the last couple of years'

A spotter plane and slurry bomber pass over a burning home in the Fourmile Fire on Labor Day 2010. (Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer)

It's been five years now — and so much, but so little, has changed.

Labor Day 2010 will long be remembered in Boulder County as the day the Fourmile Fire exploded in the mountains west of Boulder, burning 6,200 acres and destroying 165 homes plus four other structures.

Miraculously, no one was killed.

Boulder County Fire Manager Jay Stalnacker was the operations chief the first night of the blaze, Sept. 6, 2010, and recalls checking by radio with each subdivision commander on injuries, homes or lives that might have been lost.

"I just remember tallying the homes, 'Division Alpha, 17 homes, Division Bravo, 22 homes,' and so on and so on, and I remember turning to Sheriff (Joe) Pelle and just being devastated," Stalnacker said.

No one fighting the fire slept that night, he said, and when the sun rose the next morning, shrouded crimson in the haze cast by the fire, the new day brought confirmation that no one, firefighter or citizen, had died.

"That was pretty amazing, and pretty motivating, to continue the effort that would be a very, very long road to recovery for the community," Stalnacker said. "That stands out the most."

Since the inferno transformed the foothills landscape and put scores of families on the rough path to rebuilding their lives, Boulder County has issued 86 new single-family home building permits and 53 certificates of occupancy in the burned area.

Advertisement

Those statistics are offered by Garry Sanfacon, now flood recovery manager for Boulder County; he was fire recovery manager until the deluge of September 2013 gave him a new job.

"So, about half the folks (who lost their homes in the fire) are engaged in rebuilding, and a little bit over half of those have successfully completed that rebuilding and moved back in and got an OK from the county," Sanfacon said.

Two homes are burned to the ground while one remains untouched in the Fourmile Fire five years ago. (Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer)

"And, in terms of preparing for the next one, for individual residents, I think there is a heck of a lot more awareness about what individuals can do to fireproof their properties."

Kathleen Moreau and her husband, who own the Red Store in Gold Hill, lost their home on Rim Road in the Fourmile Fire, and slowly have been rebuilding ever since.

"We didn't have insurance, so everything has gone very slowly for us," Moreau said. "We've got a building with a foundation and windows and a door and a roof — and that's as far as we've been able to get. Every year we've been able to do one more step.

"We'd hoped to be in it this winter, but I'm not sure."

The decision to rebuild was an easy one, Moreau said, since she and her husband still had the store to run. But the inferno that cost her, and so many others, so much is one she'll never forget.

"I've been here for more than 40 years," she said. "We've had fires. But we'd never had a fire like that."

'We've changed our approach'

At the request of then-U.S. Sen. Mark Udall, the Rocky Mountain Research Station of the U.S. Forest Service conducted a study of the Fourmile Fire, with a focus on reducing the risk of future catastrophic fires in the wildland-urban interface.

Jim Webster, program coordinator for Wildfire Partners in Boulder County, said key findings out of the USFS study were that county residents have the opportunity to significantly reduce the potential for fire disasters in the wildland-urban interface, that the opportunity to do so requires a change in approach, and that the responsibility for reducing vulnerability to wildfire rests with the homeowner.

And, it concluded, wildfires can't be prevented without homeowners actively creating and maintaining so-called "home ignition zones" with low home ignition potential.

A BMW motorcycle near the Wallstreet area is shown after the Fourmile Fire. (Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer)

Wildfire Partners, a pilot program funded by a wildfire risk reduction grant from the Colorado Department of Natural Resources, Boulder County and numerous other partners, was recently boosted by a $1.125 million grant from the Hazard Mitigation Grant Program of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

"We've changed our approach to put the focus not on fire departments to save everyone's home, but it's the homeowners' responsibility to take action — and not as a one-time thing, but to do it over time," Webster said.

To that end, Wildfire Partners now conducts assessments of the residences of homeowners who choose to enroll in the program, offers consultations on recommended hazard mitigation work to create defensible space and ultimately offers certifications of completion when that work is completed.

Participation in the program can earn homeowners partial reimbursement for the cost of the work they complete and also make it easier to secure insurance on the property. To date, about 700 homes in the county have been enrolled in the program, and 152 had been certified through Thursday, Webster said.

"Anytime we can connect government and community to do something — and there are always boundaries and limitations for both those groups — I think the partnership and the effort should be applauded, and over time it will get dialed in to become more effective," Stalnacker said of Wildfire Partners.

"But the key is we've connected community and government to start that preparedness and mitigation part. And I believe that's a huge part of this equation."

Stalnacker also said, "We are spending millions on ineffective suppression and should refocus some of that funding to preparedness, mitigation and rapid initial attack response efforts."

Wind, high grasses could be potent pair

An equally significant piece of the equation is the environment Boulder County residents have chosen to live in — but the conditions of which, day-to-day and season-to-season, humans can't control.

In 2015, area residents have been lucky; with the average year featuring from eight to 15 fires of five to 30 acres, this year Boulder County has seen none so far — in large part due to the particularly moist spring and early summer.

Tim Mathewson, a fire meteorologist at the Rocky Mountain Area Coordination Center in Lakewood, was hiking one day recently in the foothills near Evergreen. He was concerned about what he saw.

"The grass is impressive," Mathewson said. "I haven't seen this much grass probably in the last decade or 15 years, how tall it is and how continuous it is — which allows fire to carry much quicker than in a typical year."

Mathewson and Stalnacker both emphasized that the "shoulder seasons" of early spring and early fall carry significant fire risk for the Front Range foothills. And, with the prevalence of wild grasses, as tall as an adult's head in spots and drying to an easily combustible state, the area could be positioned for a sudden and damaging end to its fireless streak. All it would take is a stiff wind and human carelessness such as a tossed lit cigarette or overturned outdoor cook stove.

"Fourmile was a wind-driven fire event associated with a cold front," Mathewson said. "And this time of year ... cold fronts start to increase in frequency, so it usually brings some wind, and that's what we saw with the Fourmile. It could have been just a normal windy day in Colorado in September, but we had ignition that day and plenty of dry fuels."

The Fourmile Fire was ultimately traced to an outdoor fire pit on the property of the late George Fairer, a 25-year volunteer for the Fourmile Fire Protection District who insisted that after burning boards in the pit, he had flooded it with water.

An investigation determined, however, that three days after the pit burning, a strong gust of wind reignited the embers and scattered them outside of the pit, which would ultimately spark the fire, resulting in $217 million in insured losses.

Sanfacon admits to having become "more fatalistic" about the area's potential for disaster, having been forced to don the hats of both fire recovery manager and flood recovery manager three years apart.

"It's the reality of living in the Rocky Mountains," he said. "We've dodged the bullet the last couple of years, without hardly any fires."

And when, not if, the bullet finds its target once again?

"We'll move seamlessly into fire and flood recovery," Sanfacon said.

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan