(Photo: DonkeyHotey)BILL BERKOWITZ FOR BUZZFLASH AT TRUTHOUT

The debate over liberal media bias, which has taken center stage during and after recent Republican Party presidential debates, is one of the conservative movement’s most cherished, successful and long-lived memes. The Heritage Foundation, the premier right-wing think tank in the nation, practically grew out of that narrative. In the mid-1970’s, conservatives understood that they needed a new, spunky, uncompromising and ideologically-based organizations that would – unlike the stodgy Hoover Institution and American Enterprise Institute – bypass the mainstream liberal media, and establish a modern-day beachhead for conservative ideas.

When the Heritage Foundation opened its doors in 1973, the Vietnam War was finally winding down, Vice President Agnew had been shown the door and President Richard Nixon would soon follow, victories for civil rights and women’s rights had been won, and the arc of justice seemed to be bending towards greater economic fairness. Belief in a social safety net was still strong, and privatization was not yet the clarion call that it has become. The “culture wars” were still a few years off.

In his 1979 book, A Time for Truth, William Simon, Nixon’s former energy czar and Treasury Secretary, and the then-president of the conservative Olin Foundation, understood that the conservative movement would only grow if it could slap back against the liberal establishment’s belief in "equality" and of being "possessed of delusions of moral grandeur." A year later, the award-winning journalist and investigative reporter Robert Parry reported for consortiumnews.com that Simon published A Time for Action, “which demanded that the ’death grip’ of the Liberal Establishment and its ‘New Despotism’ be broken. Simon saw the news media as part of the enemy camp. He especially targeted journalists who, Simon charged, ‘have been working overtime to deny liberty to others.’"

Simon and other wealthy benefactors were able to mobilize a number of right wing foundations, including the John M. Olin Foundation, the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation, the Koch brothers' foundations, the Smith Richardson Foundation, and the Scaife family foundations, and the transformation of the country’s political landscape was under way.

In his 1986 book, The Rise of the Counter-Establishment, Sidney Blumenthal wrote: "The Bastille to which they [conservative foundations] laid siege was the fortress of liberalism, the hollow doctrine of the old regime. These intellectuals impressed their thoughts on public activity, staffing the new institutes, writing policy papers and newspaper editorials, and serving as political advisors, lending the power of the word to the defense of ideology."

The Heritage Foundation essentially made its bones during the presidential campaign of 1980 when it produced “Mandate for Leadership,” a 3,000-page, 20-volume set of policy recommendations that would be a blueprint for the so-called Reagan Revolution. “Mandate for Change” advocated trickle-down economics, called for massive cutbacks in social programs, and the Star Wars Defense Strategy.

While it would be vastly overstating the case to attribute the gains of the conservative movement and the changing political landscape in the country over the past forty years solely to the Heritage Foundation, the growth of Heritage definitely parallels the growth of the movement.

Heritage Action Embraces Cruz

In its current iteration, with former South Carolina Senator Jim DeMint at the helm, Heritage has become bolder, louder and even more hard line. Heritage Action, the think tank’s 501(c)(4) nonprofit arm, recently produced its first-ever presidential scorecard. According to Politico, the 50-page report, titled “Presidential Platform Review,” “grades the candidates across six categories: growth, opportunity, civil society, limited government, favoritism and national security.”

Although it didn’t directly endorse any candidate, the candidate leading the pack is Texas Senator Ted Cruz. During the GOP’s CNBC debate, Cruz brought the “liberal media is the problem” theme into the spotlight.

While Heritage Action’s report criticizes most of the candidates, Cruz appears to have escaped relatively unscathed, as the report praises Cruz for “willing to pay a political price for taking on government favoritism” as well as his efforts to “eliminate government-imposed barriers to opportunity.”

As The Daily Beast’s Betsy Woodruff recently pointed out, “Over Cruz’s three short years in Washington, he and the Heritage Action team have joined forces on so many issues that some suspect—though always off-the-record—that the group jiggers its scorecard to keep his perfect 100 percent score.

“This isn’t even to mention all the times Cruz and Heritage Action leaders literally stood shoulder-to-shoulder. In the leadup to the 2013 effort to eliminate funding for the Affordable Care Act, Cruz teamed with the group for town halls designed to gin up support for their push. At the group’s Dallas event, he sparred with hecklers and drew adoring praise from the crowd.

Politico pointed out that, “Jeb Bush, for instance, is accused of having ‘kowtowed to the state’s environmental lobby’ in Florida. Chris Christie ‘has shown favoritism toward well-connected real estate developers.’ Rand Paul’s ‘views at times veer outside the conservative mainstream.’ And Donald Trump backs ‘massive tariffs that would damage the American economy.’”

With DeMint at the helm, the Heritage Foundation and its Heritage Action entity “have become increasingly aggressive.” And while they claim that they will not endorse any candidate, Cruz appears to have set their hearts on fire.