St. Croix County Obamacare premiums much higher than elsewhere

The charts compare Affordable Care Act insurance premiums in Wisconsin and Minnesota, and in selected areas of Wisconsin. The numbers are from Citizen Action of Wisconsin, a public policy advocacy group.

A comparison of Affordable Care Act insurance rates released in October shows that St. Croix County has significantly higher premiums than in the neighboring Twin Cities and elsewhere around Wisconsin.

The lowest-cost Bronze, Silver and Gold plans in St. Croix County in 2014 were 175 to 114 percent more expensive than the 2015 premiums for comparable Twin Cities plans.

Meanwhile, the least expensive Silver plan in St. Croix County was 70 percent more expensive than what a Dane County or Fox Valley resident would pay for a roughly equivalent plan.

The study compared the lowest-cost Bronze, Silver and Gold plans in different areas around the state, averaging the premiums for people ages 25, 40 and 60.

In St. Croix County, the average premium for the lowest-cost Silver plan was $532.97 per month. In Dane County and the Fox Valley, the premium for a comparable plan was $313.58 per month.

Citizen Action of Wisconsin, an advocacy group based in Milwaukee, conducted the study. The organization describes itself as “an issue-focused coalition of individuals and organizations committed to achieving social, economic and environmental justice.”

It claims to have 43,000 individual members and 123,000 supporters from all over Wisconsin who are of different political persuasions and walks of life.

The “Tale of Two States” report was issued to draw attention to the dramatic difference in Affordable Care Act premiums in Wisconsin compared to Minnesota.

Minnesota, which has its own Affordable Care Act marketplace, released its 2015 rates on Oct. 1.

“A lot of this keeps coming down to public policy. Minnesota and Wisconsin are really not that different,” Kevin Kane of Citizen Action of Wisconsin said in a call to the Star-Observer.

Kane didn’t have an explanation for St. Croix County’s higher premiums compared to the rest of Wisconsin.

It could have something to do with the fact that only two insurance companies offered coverage in St. Croix County through the federal Affordable Care Act exchange in 2104, Kane said.

He said the reason Minnesota’s rates are so much lower than Wisconsin’s is that our neighboring state set up its own MNsure exchange and “worked very hard to make sure that everyone has access to some form of affordable coverage by using all of the tools in the healthcare law.”

Gov. Scott Walker, on the other hand, “specifically chose not to” do those things, according to Kane.

“Because they created their own marketplace, they have a lot more opportunity to require more accountability from insurance companies,” he said.

The power to review rate increases and determine if they are justified by the underlying medical costs is an example of one the tools Minnesota has used to hold down its premiums, Kane said.

“Wisconsin takes the stance that unless it is more than a 25-percent increase for a given year, we don’t even care,” he said. “It doesn’t have to be that way. It’s just the decision the insurance commissioner (Ted Nickel) made.”

Medicaid issue

Another difference between the two states is that Minnesota accepted the federal money to expand its Medicaid program to allow people making up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level ($23,550 for a family of four) to be eligible.

Wisconsin didn’t accept the federal funds and limited eligibility for Wisconsin’s Medicaid program, called BadgerCare, to people earning 100 percent or less of the poverty level.

In a referendum on the Nov. 4 ballot, 70 percent (22,479) of St. Croix County voters said the governor and legislature should accept the federal money to expand the BadgerCare program. The program expansion was opposed by 30 percent (9,763) of county voters.

In the 19 counties and one city (Kenosha) where the question was on the ballot, 73 percent (747,031) of the voters favored the expansion. It was opposed by 27 percent (276,645) of voters.

“I’m pleased, but puzzled,” Roy Sjoberg, a county board supervisor and co-chair of the St. Croix County Democrats, said of the result.

He noted that Gov. Walker refused the additional federal funds, while his Democratic opponent in the Nov. 4 election, Mary Burke, made BadgerCare expansion one of the themes of her unsuccessful campaign.

“This would be a good opportunity for Gov. Walker and (Rep.) Dean Knudson to pay attention to their constituents and realize that the people want the state to offer better benefits, since we’re paying the taxes anyway,” Sjoberg said.

“That’s the key thing. We’re paying the taxes. Why not receive the benefit of the federal dollars to cover more people?”

Sjoberg said that according to a report he had seen, 87,000 more Wisconsin residents would have health insurance if Gov. Walker and the legislature accepted the Medicaid expansion. He said an additional 800 St. Croix County families would gain health insurance.

“That the advisory referendums passed overwhelmingly in both red and blue areas of the state shows once again that access to health care is not a partisan issue,” Robert Kraig, executive director of Citizen Action of Wisconsin, was quoted as saying in a press release the day after the election.

“This issue is not going away. The BadgerCare referendum results show that the public wants Gov. Walker and the new Legislature to take advantage of the opportunity offered by the healthcare reform law to expand access to affordable health coverage to moderate income families,” Kraig said.

State Rep. Dean Knudson, R-Hudson, and State Sen. Sheila Harsdorf (R-River Falls) didn’t respond to an email request for comments on the BadgerCare vote.

An advisory referendum on increasing the state’s minimum wage to $10.10 an hour that was on the ballot in nine Wisconsin counties and five cities also was approved by a wide margin.

A total of 615,232 voters (67 percent) supported the increase and 301,361 (33 percent) were opposed it.