Colorado Springs Rep. Doug Lamborn - Photo by Julia Moss, The Gazette

A government shutdown could furlough thousands of Pikes Peak region defense workers for the second time in three years unless Congress signs off on a temporary budget pact before Thursday.

The federal fiscal year ends Wednesday, and agencies including the Defense Department will run out of money without a deal. The Senate has passed a temporary budget measure, called a continuing resolution, that would cover expenses through Dec. 11, but House brinkmanship continued Tuesday.

"There's some political games going on," said Rep. Doug Lamborn, R-Colorado Springs.

The possibility of a shutdown drove Rep. Mike Coffman, R-Aurora, to introduce a bill Tuesday that would shield military paychecks from budget battles.

"Our soldiers, airmen, sailors and Marines cannot go on furlough, so it is inexcusable for them to go without pay in the event of a government shutdown," Coffman said in a statement.

Troops stay on the job during a shutdown, but see their pay delayed until a budget passes. Coffman's measure, which has garnered support from other Colorado lawmakers, would keep military paychecks coming, even if the rest of the government shutters.

Federal civilian workers, except for small numbers deemed "essential" like federal police and firefighters, could be sent home without pay. The Pentagon warned workers last week that they could be furloughed if a budget is not passed.

Lamborn said House Republicans will avert a shutdown by passing a temporary budget measure sometime Wednesday because the forces that led to a two-week shutdown in 2013 are no longer in place.

"Things feel totally different this time around," he said. "No one is looking for a shutdown."

In 2013, federal spending was caught between a Republican House and a Democratic Senate. The GOP demanded a budget that eliminated money for the Affordable Care Act and the Senate refused, leading to the impasse.

Now, the House and Senate are in Republican hands, but the chambers have quarreled over funding for Planned Parenthood and other issues, putting the government on the brink of closure.

The House and Senate remain at loggerheads over the National Defense Authorization Act despite weeks of work by a conference committee. Lamborn, who is on the panel that's working out differences between the chambers on the bill, said 857 differences have been brokered

The shutdown in 2013 left about 6,000 of Defense Department civilian workers at the five bases in the Pikes Peak region off the job for a week. While they were later paid for the furlough time, the missed paychecks send a shiver through the local economy, where about half of salaries come from defense spending.

The shutdown also closed federal offices for the Veterans Administration and National Parks and shut down much of the Forest Service. Piecemeal spending bills restored Defense money after a week and reinstated veterans programs and other services before a budget accord was reached.

-

Contact Tom Roeder: 636-0240

Twitter: @xroederx