Concussions can have lingering effects on the brain

Any bump, blow or jolt to the head or a hit to the body that causes your head and brain to move rapidly back and forth can cause a concussion. Dr. Nathan Swartz of the Northern Colorado Rehabilitation Hospital says anyone who suffers a blow to the head should look for symptoms of brain injury and get prompt treatment if they see signs of it. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Our brains are amazing organs. They store a vast amount of information, direct numerous bodily functions and serve as a control center for our entire body. When the brain is injured, it can have powerful ramifications.

Dr. Nathan Swartz serves as the associate director of Northern Colorado Rehabilitation Hospital. He is a physical medicine/rehabilitation physician or physiatrist, who daily treats individuals who have suffered from concussions, as well as more severe traumatic brain injuries (TBI). Swartz feels strongly about educating others surrounding the dangers of concussions.

"Concussions usually aren't life threatening, so many may dismiss the seriousness of them," Swartz says. "I've even heard health-care professionals refer to concussions as 'mild' brain injuries. But all brain injuries are serious."

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) notes that, "A concussion is a type of brain injury or TBI caused by a bump, blow or jolt to the head or a hit to the body that causes your head and brain to move rapidly back and forth.

"This sudden movement can literally cause the brain to bounce around or twist in the skull, stretching and damaging the brain cells creating chemical changes in the brain. What you might not know is that these chemical changes make the brain more sensitive to any increased stress or injury until it fully recovers."

The CDC estimates that approximately 1.3 million people suffer from concussions every year.

Advertisement

Recent media reports have drawn attention to the issue of concussion in sports, but it's not just professional athletes who are affected. Anyone can suffer a concussion. "It's a mix of falls, sporting accidents and vehicle accidents," says Swartz, when asked about the causes.

One challenge that surrounds concussions is that some symptoms may occur immediately, while others may not be evident for days or months after the injury. "With long-term effects, a person may look fine, but may act and feel differently without realizing that this is a result of the concussion," notes Swartz.

Dr. Nathan Swartz, who treats people for concussions and traumatic brain injuries at Northern Colorado Rehabilitation Hospital, says anyone who gets a blow to the head should watch for symptoms such as headaches, blurry vision or difficulty in thinking, and get immediate medical care for serious symptoms. (Jeannie Lancaster / Special to the Reporter-Herald)

What to Look For

• Difficulty in thinking clearly, concentrating or remembering things

• Feeling "slowed down," tired, having no energy.

• Blurry vision

• Headaches

• Nausea or vomiting (soon after injury)

• Dizziness and balance problems

• Light sensitivity

• Irritability, sadness, nervousness or in general, more emotional than usual

• Change in sleeping habits

More severe symptoms can occur that require immediate emergency medical attention including headaches that worsen and don't go away; weakness, numbness or decreased coordination; repeated vomiting and nausea; and slurred speech. If an individual loses consciousness or has severe drowsiness seek immediate medical care. Other serious symptoms can include one pupil of the eye being larger than the other; convulsions/seizures and the inability to recognize people or places.

While Swartz realizes individuals can't remove all the risks of concussions, he encourages them to see a physician if they suspect that they or their child might have had a concussion. Neurologists, physiatrists and some general medical physicians can assist a person in diagnosing, treating and developing a plan for an individual's safe return to activity. Having a plan is essential.

Second Impact Syndrome

"One of the biggest concerns we have as physicians is when a person places himself at risk for another brain injury, before he's recovered from the first injury," Swartz says. "They're at high risk for second impact syndrome, and the result can be devastating. People can die from it, because of swelling of the brain. It can also cause devastating neurological injury."

He counsels individuals, "When in doubt — sit it out."

A young woman, Tracy, who is the focus of a CDC YouTube video on concussions, shares, "I didn't know it could get this bad. All athletes have a strong will, and you think you have to 'suck it up.'"

Tracy suspected she had experienced a concussion, but returned to play later in the week. Her injuries resulted in her being absent from the remaining games and suffering from severe side effects for several months. "If you think you have a concussion," she says, "don't hide it. Report it. It's better to miss one game, rather than the whole season."

"Understanding what a concussion is, what you should do if it is present and prevention of second impact syndrome are very important," says Swartz.

"We see so many patients. As far as recovery, the goal is to return them back to their daily activities, school, work and athletic events. By controlling their symptoms with therapies such as physical and occupational therapy and speech therapy, if necessary, along with pharmacological care, they can return. Most individuals can have a full recovery."