Next year, millions of working-poor Americans will become eligible for Medicaid coverage for the first time, giving them much better access to medical treatment and financially bolstering strained health-care delivery systems in their states.

But not in Georgia.

Thanks to a decision by Gov. Nathan Deal, some 650,000 Georgians will be barred from receiving Medicaid coverage available to their counterparts in other states. That decision also means that hospital closures in some already grossly underserved areas of Georgia are almost guaranteed, because those facilities won't have the money to keep providing care for free. Once those facilities close, reopening them will be very difficult, and any ability to attract economic growth to those areas will vanish. We're basically writing them off as a permanent loss.

A study released last week by the Kaiser Family Foundation helps to explain who in Georgia will be affected by the decision not to expand Medicaid coverage.

First, it's important to understand how tight the eligibility limits for Medicaid are at the moment. In Georgia, a three-person household raising at least one child is eligible for Medicaid as long as their annual income is less than $7,589. That's a very low ceiling, to say the least. And under current law, individuals who aren't raising children can't be covered by Medicaid at all, regardless of income.

Under ObamaCare, and in states that accept it, the eligibility limit for a three-person household raising at least one child rises to roughly $27,000. To put that in context, it's about what a person would earn working a full-time job, 52 weeks a year, for $13 an hour. Sad to say, but that's economic reality for hundreds of thousands of our fellow Georgians.

For an individual, the eligibility ceiling for Medicaid would be $16,484. That's roughly what you earn if you work a full-time job of 40 hours a week at $8 an hour. (Illegal immigrants and legal immigrants who have been here less than five years will remain ineligible regardless of income.)

In other words, those affected by Deal's decision are often people who are working jobs that don't offer health insurance, and at pay scales that make it impossible to afford such coverage on their own. Unfortunately, that describes a substantial number of the jobs available in our state's economy. Medicaid expansion is the only mechanism by which health insurance becomes feasible to such people, many of whom live in rural and smal-town Georgia.

Now those areas are about to take a double hit. Until now, the federal government has spent roughly $17 billion a year to subsidize medical facilities that provide a disproportionate amount of care to the indigent. However, those subsidies will disappear under ObamaCare. When the law was written, the subsidies were no longer considered necessary because they would be more than offset by additional Medicaid funding. The law did not anticipate that the Supreme Court would allow states to block that expansion, and that Deal and others would take that option.

The impact is going to be substantial. In the case of Atlanta's Grady Memorial Hospital, that subsidy represents a potential loss of $45 million a year, which would force cutbacks in the services it provides. In poorer regions of the state, the loss of that subsidy will force outright closure.

Again, none of this needs to be happening. The leaders of this state have made a political decision, not a financial decision, to deny Medicaid coverage to hundreds of thousands of their own constituents as a means of making an ideological point. It is petty, it is cruel, and it will cost jobs, revenue, economic development and most importantly human lives.