BEAUFORT — The newly consolidated Carteret County Human Services Department has a new director and those using services already know him.

Former Department of Social Services Director David Atkinson accepted the newly created position Aug. 11 and will now oversee both DSS and the County Health Department.

“Well, I’m just thrilled,” he said in a phone interview last week following congratulations from county commissioners.

Mr. Atkinson remains at the helm of county services after a 6-1 vote by commissioners in March to combine the departments, seeking to “simplify processes” and better serve citizens, Commissioner Elaine Crittenton said at the time. Chairman Jonathan Robinson cast the opposing vote to the motion.

Mr. Atkinson was appointed interim head in the subsequent months, with Paula Stanley serving as interim public health director.

After more than seven years as DSS director, Mr. Atkinson said he wasn’t ready to relinquish the reins to another and competed against 68 other applicants to secure the position.

“We’ve worked really hard and accomplished some phenomenal goals,” he told the News-Times. “I wasn’t ready to turn that over to someone else just yet.”

Successes include increasing demands on child protective services, growing numbers of children in foster care, eligibility changes following the Affordable Care Act and navigating the office through implementation of NCFAST.

The database, North Carolina Families Accessing Services through Technology, launched broken and buggy last year, impeding the ability of caseworkers to process and review benefits applications and delaying food assistance to thousands of families statewide following system-crippling problems.

Carteret was a pilot county in launching both the food services and Medicaid components of NCFAST, and while improving, Mr. Atkinson said the system continues to experience glitches.

County health and DSS will remain at their separate locations in Morehead City and Beaufort despite the combined management, but Mr. Atkinson said he looks forward to some cross provision of services in the coming months. While DSS is on Craven Street, the health center is on Bridges Street Extension in Morehead City.

“Consolidating offers some opportunities we’ll take advantage of,” he said. “(DSS) will outsource some eligibility workers for foodstamps and Medicaid over to the health department.”

Those caseworkers will allow accessibility “across the river,” and should be operating out of the health department in the next two to three months.

Mr. Atkinson said he has a few tricks up his sleeve for making the consolidation smooth, despite commissioners stating they would not look to build a facility for the large department in the near future.

“I’m not hesitant. I’ve worked intimately with the senior management (at the health department) for years and I couldn’t be happier with the staff I’ve got,” he said.

With consolidation, Mr. Atkinson will oversee nearly 180 county employees.

A graduate of Furman University, Mr. Atkinson holds a Master of Divinity from Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary as well as a master’s in social work from Eastern Carolina University.

With the step to Human Services Director, Mr. Atkinson will see a salary and benefits jump to $115,000 a year.

DSS will come under the direct supervision of current Deputy Director Clint Lewis, while Ms. Stanley will continue serving as interim public health director. Their salaries will not be affected by the appointment, said Assistant County Manager and Human Resources Director Chris Turner.

Mr. Atkinson said the new position will allow him more time to devote to the consolidation and remove him somewhat from the day to day of social services.

“I’m looking to working very closely to make sure services are as seamless as they can be,” he said. “We’ll identify low-hanging fruit and make sure services are efficient and accessible.”

Contact Jackie Starkey at 726-7081, ext. 232; email jackie@thenewstimes.com; or follow on Twitter @jackieccnt.