When President Obama addresses the nation tonight about the growing menace of Islamic State militants, he'll be cutting into a key moment in primetime broadcasts—good news for news divisions, less so for entertainment.

In April, the President’s staff wanted to make a primetime address to discuss the Affordable Care Act, but they were rebuffed by network executives, who told them they would rather run their regularly scheduled programming. The President ended up speaking during the day, when breaking into regular programming did not have such a significant hit.

Back in 2009, network executives estimated to Adweek that three primetime news conferences cost them around $30 million in ad revenue.

At 9 p.m. on the East Coast, CBS, ABC, Fox and NBC will all be breaking into their regular programming to run the speech.

NBC will be breaking into a live edition of “America’s Got Talent,” and will have Brian Williams anchoring. ABC will be breaking into a rerun of "Modern Family.” George Stephanopoulos will anchor. The Fox broadcast network will cut into the two-hour season premiere of “Hell’s Kitchen” for the address, with Shepard Smith anchoring. CBS will be breaking into a special about “Thursday Night Football” called “Under the Lights,” which will preview the upcoming season. Bob Schieffer will anchor on CBS, with Scott Pelley contributing from Iraq.

The primetime presence is very significant, as every time the President makes a primetime address, it can cost them millions of dollars. Presidential speeches are commercial-free, and take up space that would otherwise be filled with entertainment programming and ads.

For tonight’s address, NBC is effectively making the biggest commitment, effectively delaying “America’s Got Talent” on the east coast. It isn’t clear whether NBC will proceed with the show as usual, breaking in when the President is done, or whether it will wait until the address is over. Fox is in a similar boat with “Hell’s Kitchen,” but because it is taped, viewers can catch up on whatever they miss later on. CBS’ N.F.L. special is effectively filler, but it is still football-related, and would likely deliver strong numbers for the network. The special will be simulcast on NFL Network, so viewers that really want to see it still can. ABC, which has only reruns slated in that hour, will not be losing too much.

The cable news channels will, as you would expect, cover the address from all angles. Fox News has Bret Baier and Megyn Kelly anchoring, with live shows before and after. CNN has Anderson Cooper and Wolf Blitzer anchoring. MSNBC, CNBC, Fox Business, Al Jazeera America et al will also be covering the speech live. Bloomberg will have John Heilemann and Mark Halperin anchoring, in advance of their new show's launch.

The President last delivered a primetime address in August, speaking for eight brief minutes starting at 9:30 p.m. about helping Iraqis surrounded by the Islamic group ISIS.

It isn’t clear how long tonight’s address will last, but it will certainly boost cable news, and cost the broadcast networks.