Opinion Obamacare Is Good Enough for Government Work

The phrase “good enough for government work” used to be a boast. Then it became an insult. With Obamacare, it is an ethic.

On Cyber Monday, the federal government was the only entity on the planet touting a commercial website with the promise that it would work most of the time, provided people visiting during peak hours were willing to take a number and come back later.

Story Continued Below

Although HealthCare.gov was still plagued by what used to be known as “glitches,” it was working better. In fact, it appears to be well on the way to being fixed—except for the part where people pay for and actually get insurance. That is called the “backend,” or the payment system without which any other business would go bust. To be charitable, it is still a work in progress.

The line in the administration’s progress report about the technical team working “with private sector velocity and effectiveness” said it all. No one would ever brag about working “with public sector velocity and effectiveness.” Certainly not anyone who works in the private sector.

Yet it is the government that is vastly increasing its reach via Obamacare. Explaining away the troubles of his signature initiative, President Barack Obama pledged on Tuesday, “We’re going to keep on working to fix whatever problems come up in any startup, any launch of a project this big that has an impact on one-sixth of our economy.”

Startups don’t ordinarily affect one-sixth of the economy. Usually, no one hears about them unless they prove successes, and by then they are reliably functional. The president is surely correct that any vast experiment affecting one-sixth of the economy will inevitably have pitfalls—which is why it is foolhardy to undertake one.

Obama is confident his law will work because, as he repeatedly says, “ The product is good.” The leader of the free world is now a glorified insurance salesman. At times he sounds like a poor man’s Billy Mays—you may be eligible, he enthused on Tuesday, for tax credits “that can save you hundreds of dollars in premium costs every month.” He said everything but “Order Now!”

Rich Lowry is editor of National Review.