Plenty of publicity, but key call never came

Amos, at left, one of three dogs sickened by poisoned meatballs plays with his dog friend Crowie in the Gunbarrel park where the poisoning happened April 14. ( Paul Aiken / Daily Camera )

In April, Gunbarrel's peaceful Buckingham Park neighborhood was rocked by the news that an anonymous attacker had poisoned several local dogs, by leaving d-Con-laced meatballs in a grassy area just off of North 75th Street.

No pups died in the outbreak, but dog owners and allies alike teamed up to raise thousands in reward money, hoping someone would come forward with information leading to an arrest.

They never did catch the dropper of those laced meatballs.

On Friday, the Friends of Buckingham Park neighborhood association announced it would repurpose the roughly $4,000 collected earlier this year for a reward, and instead donate it to charity.

"While the heinous act was terrible, the groundswell of support from the community was tremendous," read a joint release from three different dogowners. "With each passing day, the likelihood of catching the culprit diminishes, and so the decision has been made to donate the cash."

The pot will be split among the Humane Society of Boulder Valley, the Longmont Humane Society and the Wounded Warriors Project, which, among other things, pairs veterans with dogs.

"We reached the decision after speaking to animal control a couple times, and to the Boulder County Sheriff's Office," said Sunny Monaco, whose chocolate Labrador retriever, Gybz, was an early meatball victim. "It was clear that there are no leads, and that it's sort of a dead issue."

The Colorado Bureau of Investigation had been involved, too, but received inconclusive results in testing for the presence of human DNA on the meatballs.

"So, we thought it was time to let it go and move on," Monaco said. "And, hopefully, this will never happen again."

In addition to the $4,000 raised in cash, the Buckingham dog advocates also had another $4,500 in money pledged. Since no one was ever caught or prosecuted in the crime, that batch of funding was never collected.

Monaco was blown away by the generosity of donors.

"Word really spread," she said. "Friends of friends of friends. We had donations coming from upstate New York, New Jersey, Florida, California, and then from all over Colorado."

The Buckingham efforts are independent of a separate poison meatball rash in Longmont, which was reported roughly six weeks after the Gunbarrel incident.

No dogs were harmed there, but Longmont police did look into reports of three meatballs, bearing a striking physical resemblance to those found in Gunbarrel, left in a dog owner's Collyer Street front yard.

"We never identified anybody, and we tried DNA testing, too," Longmont Cmdr. Jeff Satur said Friday. "We have no suspects, either. There was quite a bit of publicity around it, but we didn't get any calls."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness