CONCORD >> The annual Garnet Valley Post Prom Showcase will be Monday, March 16 at the high school, 552 Smithbridge Road, Glen Mills.

Doors open at 5:45 p.m., and the show is at 7. Cost is $10, $8 for senior citizens. The theme is “When the Clock Strikes Twelve,” referencing when the fun begins the night of the post prom. The performances include choreography by Lisa Sherer, a special performance by the dance team from Stage Lights Dance Studio of Newark, Del., other music and entertainment, and modeling of the latest prom dresses, tuxedos and hair styles by senior girls and boys. Vendors will include services for formal wear, salons, jewelry, make-up, catering and more. There are raffle prizes, and admission includes three raffle tickets.

For vendor reservations or advertising in the program book, call Nora Reiss at 717-439-2826. To purchase showcase tickets in advance, email Debbie Kent at kent3852@comcast.net

Field hockey clinics at Neumann

Advertisement

ASTON >> Neumann University field hockey coach Sarah Kurpel will hold Saturday clinics during the next three weeks.

The field hockey clinics run 10 a.m.-1 p.m. Saturday. These are all-ages events (usually first-12th grade) aimed to refine skills in small groups.

Early sign ups are encouraged, but walk-ups are welcome with appropriate forms. For more information, visits http://www.nufieldhockeycamps.com/

Book signing set

MARPLE >> Author Mike Harris will present signed copies of his book, “Brandywine: A Military History of the Battle that Lost Philadelphia but Saved America, September 11, 1777,” 7:30 p.m. Tuesday, Feb. 24 at the 1696 Thomas Massey House, Lawrence and Spring House roads.

The largest battle of the American Revolution, one that encompassed more troops over more land than any combat fought on American soil until the Civil War, was one of the most important military events of the war. Harris’ book is the first full-length study of this pivotal engagement in many years.

For information, visit www.thomasmasseyhouse.org

Obamacare enrollment in Chester

CHESTER >> The city is holding Obamacare Enrollment “Sign up Chester” days through Sunday at various locations.

Low cost or no-cost health insurance is available for everyone, and you cannon be turned down for pre-existing health conditions.

There is no cost for enrollment assistance or enrollment into a plan. Here is a partial listing of approved “Sign up Chester” locations:

Fare & Square Grocery, U.S. Tax Pros, Cambridge Restaurant, Rasheedah Beauty Salon,

Crozer-Keystone Health System, Boys & Girls Club, People’s Choice Barbershop, Westside Check Cashing (fliers only), Mt. Pleasant Baptist Church, Chester House of Restoration, Shiloh Baptist Church, Juice Place, 405 Avenue of the States, Chester City Computer Lab, Chester Branch of the NAACP. Additional locations will be added. You can also enroll at www.signupchester.com

If you want your business, organization or church to be included, email al@ihubinsurance.net or al@signupchester.com, or call 855-276-2557.