Ted Rozumalski's photos of Lee Harvey Oswald are on view in the Month of Photography exhibit at The Dairy Center for the Arts through April 10. ( Theodore "Ted" Rozumalski / Courtesy photo )

If you go What: Month of Photography exhibits: • "Legacy: The Photojournalism of Theodore 'Ted' Rozumalski" • "Graceful Appearance: Passion Perception and Expression," with works by Michael Wood and Julie DuBose • "Still Life: Three Interpretations," with works by Stephen Althouse, Keith Brenner and Quoleena Sbrocca When: Through April 10 Where: The Dairy Center for the Arts, 2590 Walnut St., Boulder Tickets: Free, but donations accepted Info: 303-440-7826 or thedairy.org

Lectures • Still Life is Still Alive with Keith Brenner, 6:30-8 p.m. Tuesday, March 10 • Contemplative Photography with Michael Wood and Julie DuBose, 6:30-8 p.m. March 24 • The Art of Photojournalism with Kevin Moloney and Robert Rozumalski, 6:30-8 p.m. April 1

The photojournalist conveys an image, an artist creates one, but a photojournalist can convey creatively.

A new exhibition at The Dairy Center for the Arts features work by such a photographer, Theodore "Ted" Rozumalski, White House photographer for the Houston Chronicle during the Kennedy and Johnson presidencies. His images are stories shaped like paintings. Some document momentous moments at head-of-state heights of history yet do as well to please the eye as to edify.

That's why Rozumalski's photos also appeared in major national publications, such as National Geographic, Newsweek and Time, and that's why they entertain as art objects on a gallery wall.

The exhibition is one of three the Dairy organized as part of its Month of Photography, which runs through April 10. Also on view are "Graceful Appearance: Passion Perception and Expression," with works by Michael Wood and Julie DuBose, and"Still Life: Three Interpretations," with works by Stephen Althouse, Keith Brenner and Quoleena Sbrocca.

"Apple in Foam" is among the work of Michael Wood that's on display at The Dairy Center through April 10. (Michael Wood / Courtesy photo)

Michael Wood frames ordinary sights from life in revelatory ways; Julie DuBose's eye looks for the mystical in the mundane. They are the two founders of Miksang Contemplative Photography in Boulder. Miksang is Tibetan for "good eye," and the artists say they use the camera to express their visual perceptions "exactly" as they experience them. They say people who practice miksang "see the world in a pure way, without overlays of meaning and value, pleasure, dislike, or disinterest." This simply sounds as if they try to be good observers and keep an open mind, which is what all artists do. Visitors will miss nothing if they skip the artist statements and go straight to the art.

Denver photographer Quoleena Sbrocca's still lifes from Pine Ridge, S.D., are part of the Month of Photography exhibit. (Quoleena Sbrocca / Courtesy photo)

Stephen Althouse, Keith Brenner and Quoleena Sbrocca explore the still-life form in "Graceful Appearance." Sbrocca mixes a found-object approach into the form. Her series of gritty photos come from a trip to Pine Ridge, S.D., site of an Indian reservation. She called the photo-making expedition "very sad," and her images are fraught with poverty and mourning.

Robert Rozumalski, Ted's son, is a Boulder resident, and the prints displayed in The Dairy's "Legacy" exhibition were made by Robert Rozumalski from his father's negatives, he said. Ted Rozumalski, who died in 1991, covered Johnson especially when the president was in Texas, and, when Johnson was vice president, Rozumalski was in the motorcade when President John F. Kennedy was assassinated. The exhibit includes a triptych of shots by Rozumalski of Lee Harvey Oswald in custody.

Though the exhibition includes photos of important people, Rozumalski seemed to be at his best in the company of regular folk. One image in the gallery was shot during a Negro League baseball game. An impoverished spectator is wearing only one shoe and the field is in poor shape, but Rozumalski captured a hitter triumphantly in full swing. The image brings to bear the sort of rich narrative and thoughtful composition a painter might take weeks to sketch out and plan.

"I certainly believe many of his photographs transcend photojournalism to fine art," Robert Rozumalski said.

Quentin Young: 303-684-5319, quentin@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/QYoungTC