In face of climate change, work to focus on low-income neighborhoods

Shelly Miller

Many scientists and policy experts have for some time been asserting that the debate over whether our climate is changing has long been settled, and that the focus now needs to be on adapting to its reality in an effective and responsible fashion.

In that spirit, a team of faculty members and students at the University of Colorado has secured a $1 million grant from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to study the impacts of climate change, including increased wildfires, on indoor air quality and health in low-income Denver-area neighborhoods.

The principal investigator on the three-year project is professor Shelly Miller, who teaches mechanical engineering in CU's environmental engineering program, and is also affiliated with the CU-Denver School of Public Health.

"I think it's a highly competitive area, and it really says a lot about the project we put together," Miller said, crediting her collaborators from CU-Denver and on the Boulder campus. "We've put together such a great team. It's very prestigious to have this award."

Miller's team plans to evaluate the effects of weatherization programs, including changes in respiratory health that could be linked to indoor air pollution created by wildfires. Studies have shown that as temperatures in Colorado and the West increase due to human-made, heat-trapping greenhouse gases being released into the atmosphere, and as drought continues in many areas, wildfires will also be more numerous.

Advertisement

Researchers will use sensors in targeted homes to measure particulate matter, including levels of carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide and formaldehyde, compounds that are released through chemical reactions created by wildfires and that can pose a significant threat to human health.

Miller plans to measure the "tightness" of metro-area homes that have been retrofitted to cut down on energy consumption by limiting the exchange of outside air. Well-sealed or "tight" homes may help keep out pollutants tied to wildfires, but they require adequate ventilation systems to ensure such pollutants do not accumulate indoors, according to Miller.

Energy-efficient weatherization "hasn't been looked at from a rigorous scientific point of view, and so that's what we plan to do," Miller said. "We're going to need to weatherize so many more buildings and homes, and so how can we do it more efficiently and effectively?"

Miller's group has reached out to the Colorado Energy Office and local nonprofit organizations in order to identify homes for the study.

"They have talked to us, but I can tell you that we do not have a data agreement with them," said Karen Phelan, deputy director of the Colorado Energy Office. "Unfortunately, with the timing and when they came to us with the request, we have other priorities for our weatherization assistance program."

Miller said, "We'd still like to work out how to best recruit homes" for the study. "We also are looking at working with some other nonprofit organizations in this state, and perhaps with some of the weatherization companies" and contractors to secure study participants.

CU is one of nine recipients to receive the indoor air research grants from the EPA, which total about $7 million.

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan