North Brunswick's Kevin Bovino appears on Tuesday's "Wheel of Fortune" episode.

North Brunswick's Kevin Bovino appears on the longrunning game show "Wheel of Fortune" at 7:30 p.m. Tuesday on ABC. (Photo: ~Courtesy of "Wheel of Fortune") Story Highlights Kevin Bovino has been a fan of "Wheel of Fortune" his entire life.

He taped an episode of the game show in August.

Bovino's episode airs at 7:30 p.m. Tuesday on ABC.

He advises other potential contestants to "do their research" before auditioning.

NORTH BRUNSWICK — While he cannot say if the proverbial "Wheel of Fortune" shone on him directly, the fact that Kevin Bovino made it to the "Big Spin" is enough for this huge game show fan. His episode on "Wheel of Fortune" airs 7:30 p.m. Tuesday, Dec. 29, on ABC.

Bovino has loved "Wheel" — as the show is known by its fanbase — his entire life.

"I have watched 'Wheel' since I was a little kid," said the 47-year-old township resident. "Way back in the day, before Vanna White and Pat Sajak were on. Chuck Wollery was the host. And you didn't win money back then. You won these really ugly furniture '70s pieces and things like that."

And even though the prizes were not up to par in the beginning, being a contestant on the game show became his childhood dream that continued to flourish into adulthood. A few years ago, Bovino took the plunge and sent in an application and video to the show's website.

"They are very specific about what you have to do in the video," he said. "I think that is part of the process because they want to see how good you are at following directions."

Granted an invitation three years ago, he headed to Brooklyn for his audition. In a sense, he missed his turn.

"I went to the audition and got lost," he said. "I never made it. I ended up in Long Island. I was so disappointed."

Have you been on Wheel of Fortune? Tell us about your experiences.

But, Bovino turned tragedy into triumph. As they say, if at first you don't succeed — spin, spin again. So he did.

"Lo and behold, I get another invitation telling me they were having auditions in Manhattan" this past May, he said. "This time I made it."

The aborted audition may have worked in Bovino's favor. The second time around, he did extensive research on contestant blogs online.

"These are people who have gone through the process," he said. "I wanted to see what it was like and what they are looking for. I went really prepared."

After several rounds of yelling letters, solving puzzles, a written test, playing the game and mock interviews for three hours, Bovino found himself one of three left standing out of 75 who auditioned. Not knowing if this meant he was a finalist, Bovino and the other two were tested again.

"I went up and played with severe high energy," he said. "I was jumping up and down. I was calling out letters. And I solved a puzzle. I was high-fiving the other people. And then they said 'Thank you' and "If you are accepted, you will get a letter in the mail in about two weeks.'"

"Two weeks and a day" later, Bovino got his letter. It said the show would be in touch. A month and a half later, an email arrived with a date requesting him to be in the Sony Studios in Culver City, California in August — less than two weeks away.

With his flight and hotel booked in record time, Bovino continued his course of study. The years of faithfully watching "Wheel" was an excellent tutorial, but Bovino continued practice games on the iPad "Wheel of Fortune" app, strategy sessions and honing his knowledge, including lessons in letter patterning and vowels-consonant placement.

While "K" (for Kevin) is his favorite letter, Bovino's "go to" letter — for strategic purposes — is "T." He also suggests that potential "Wheel" players be adept at multi-tasking and "do their research."

"Be extremely energetic, call intelligent letters and buy lots of vowels," he said. "My mind was overflowing with stuff by the time I stepped on the set."

The morning of the show, Bovino was picked up at his hotel, "fully dressed and ready to go with an extra change of clothing."

"We got to the studio about 7:30 and from then on in, it was a whirlwind." he said. "I was there almost 11 hours. There were six shows taped that day. I was show No. 6."

North Brunswick's Kevin Bovino appears on the longrunning game show "Wheel of Fortune" at 7:30 p.m. Tuesday on ABC. (Photo: ~Courtesy of "Wheel of Fortune")

According to Bovino, all of the shows for each "Wheel of Fortune" season are filmed in a 34-day period, filmed six at a time. After a lesson in "Wheel" rules, legal notes and a tour of the studio, Bovino filmed a promo for his episode.

"Then we did makeup, lunch and rehearsal," he said. "You go up and spin the wheel to get a feel for it. They show you the used letter board, where you should be looking and where your mark is. Before each show, they also do a warm-up to make sure you are hyped up and will yell the letters. I had to sit through all five tapings until they got to the sixth one. When it was finally my time, I was already sitting with my two other contestants — two really nice ladies from Long Island and Texas. I remember Pflugerville, Texas. I could not forget that. I really liked them. They warm us up and you are standing there and all of a sudden it starts and Pat Sajak is there!"

Like in his audition, where he wanted to stand out from the other "married with kids" contestants by stressing his "happily single, father of two rescue cats" life, Bovino made an effort to also jazz up his introduction at the taping by stressing his favorite scenic attraction — "The Great Indoors."

"I say why be normal. I'm not," said Bovino, who when he is not spinning is a graphics designer for the Home News Tribune.

Bovino said the experience of playing the game for a 22-minute taping "goes very, very fast."

"It's surreal," he said. "They take breaks where they will put commercials. Things are changed on the wheel and makeup comes up and powders you to death. They give you water, make sure you are okay and give you a pep talk. The funny thing was, I wasn't nervous. I was excited nervous, but not performance nervous. It was like a dream."

Not allowed to reveal how he made out on the show, Bovino is happy with his performance and the fact that he "lived his dream." Though only in Los Angeles for three days, when not on set, he was able to check out Beverly Hills, drive down to the beach and "people watch."

Bovino came away with a new appreciation of the show and its celebrities hosts, both of whom have been with the show for more than 30 years. The game show is in its 40th season, having premiered in 1975.

"Pat is very funny, just as sarcastic in person as he is on the show," he said. "And Vanna is as sweet as pie. And the set is small. It's different in person. But, they have Wheel down to a science — all those people involved with it. They have been doing it for so long."

"It was a once-in-a-lifetime experience," he added.

For more information about "Wheel of Fortune," go to www.wheeloffortune.com, @WheelofFortune on Twitter and #WheelofFortune on Instagram.

Staff Writer Cheryl Makin: 732-565-7256; cmakin@mycentraljersey.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1YKT2dU