Six Reno-area hospitals are among 20 Nevada hospitals that will lose some federal funding this year because too many of their elderly Medicare patients were readmitted within 30 days of being discharged. Northern Nevada Medical Center was among those penalized. (Photo: RGJ File)

Six Reno-area hospitals are among 20 Nevada hospitals that will lose some federal funding this year because too many of their elderly Medicare patients were readmitted within 30 days of being discharged.

This is the third year for the penalty program, which was created as part of the Affordable Care Act with the intent of spurring hospitals to pay more attention to what happens to patients after they leave. That's leading some hospitals around the country to create more active plans for patients once they leave the hospital, such as requiring a follow up with a medical professional.

Meanwhile, hospitals can financially benefit from patients returning for more care. Roughly 2 million patients return a year, costing Medicare about $26 billion. Of that total, officials estimate $17 billion goes for readmissions that could have been avoided.

To help curb that practice, Medicare is fining a record number of hospitals this year — 2,610 — by withholding a percentage of their reimbursements for treating Medicare patients.

Renown Regional Medical Center. (Photo: RGJ file)

Some Nevada hospital officials say the program has been successful in prompting them to become more aggressive in following up with patients who have been discharged to make sure they are taking their medications and seeing their doctors.

But they caution that the readmission rate is just one measure of a hospital's performance and that Nevada hospitals face greater challenges than those in other states in trying to lower readmission rates.

Bill Welch, president of the Nevada Hospital Association, said one of those challenges came when the state was hit harder than others by the recession.

"This population doesn't have the financial resources (for)... making sure that they get their medications, making sure they have the transportation to get to their doctor's offices," Welch said.

Banner Churchill Community Hospital in Fallon. (Photo: Anne McMillin Goodale)

Doctor shortage hurts Nevada hospitals

Other factors working against hospitals in the Silver State include the low rankings of Nevadans on measures of health and a shortage of doctors.

"We have a sicker population in general than most other parts of the nation, which means when that population is sick, they have more complications," Welch said.

Centennial Hills Hospital Medical Center in Las Vegas received the maximum 3 percent penalty that could be levied this year.

Northern Nevada Medical Center in Sparks received the most severe penalty among Reno-area hospitals, losing 2.11 percent of its Medicare reimbursement, followed by the Sierra Surgery Hospital in Carson City at 1.7 percent and Banner Churchill Community Hospital in Fallon at 1.05 percent.

In Reno, Renown Regional Medical Center received a 0.27 percent penalty, while the Renown South Meadows Medical Center was penalized 0.12 percent, followed by Saint Mary's Regional Medical Center at 0.05 percent.

In a written statement, Northern Nevada Medical Center said "readmission rates are not reflective of the quality of care at a particular hospital and are often times the result of factors outside the control of the hospital including patient population and demographic dynamics.

"Notwithstanding, Northern Nevada Medical Center continues to make significant investments in new health care delivery models to address patient needs throughout the continuum of care," the statement said.

Centennial Hills Hospitals issued a statement that said the hospital checks risk factors for readmission and provides bedside delivery of prescription medications. The hospital also makes phone calls to a patient two to three days after they're discharged.

"Patient care can be very complex, especially with patients who are older, have chronic conditions, and may not have support services at home to help them," the hospital said in a statement. "We're committed to expanding our role in the community by providing a continuum of care to our patients."

The statewide average hospital penalty for Nevada of 0.76 percent was the 9th highest of any state and well above the 0.29 percent average penalty for the state last year.

What hospitals are doing about it

In written comments, officials at Carson Tahoe Health — which includes Sierra Surgery Hospital and Carson Tahoe Regional Medical Center in Carson City, which received no penalty this year — cited some of the same factors over which the facilities have no control. And they said that Sierra's overall readmission rate is no worse than the national average.

Steps the company is taking to reduce readmissions include the hiring at Carson Tahoe Regional Medical Center of a care coordinator to assist in the hospital discharge process and make sure patients understand what they need to do when they get home.

More than 1,400 hospitals are exempted from the penalty program, including some cancer facilities and critical access hospitals.

Renown Health officials said in a written statement that they have had a readmission prevention task force in place for many years.

"The task force includes representatives from acute care and transitional care, as well as disease-specific programs such as heart failure and diabetes," according to the statement.

Other initiatives at Renown include nurse navigators and an outpatient heart failure program.

Hoyt Skabelund, CEO of Banner Churchill Community Hospital, said the hospital will lose about $50,000 because of readmissions but will end up with a net bonus of $40,000 from Medicare because of its success in other areas.

Exactly how much a particular hospital will lose this year is not known because it depends on how much it bills Medicare. Nationwide, Medicare estimates the fines will total about $428 million.

"We are very proud and very pleased with our overall results," Skabelund said

The hospital, he said, was able to pinpoint patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease as the cause for its readmission penalty.

He said heavy smoking by people in the area, the wide use of wood stoves and the lack of any pulmonologist all are factors the hospital can't control that contribute to the problem.

Skabelund said the hospital has become more aggressive in following up with patients after they are discharged to make sure they have filled their prescriptions and are visiting their primary care doctor.

"We want the patient to be healthy. We are a not-for-profit. We have no incentive to simply make money," Skabelund said.

"We review every readmission... to determine: Is there anything we could have anticipated and influenced that we didn't?" he said.

Bills to adjust the way the penalties are calculated to take into account the characteristics of the patient population were introduced in the House and Senate last year but did not go anywhere.

Contact Bill Theobald at wtheobal@gannett.com or follow on Twitter @BillTheobald

Penalties in Northern Nevada

Six hospitals in the region lost a percentage of their Medicare reimbursements because of their patient readmission rate. The maximum penalty is 3 percent. The penalties are:

Northern Nevada Medical Center, Sparks: 2.11 percent

Sierra Surgery Hospital, Carson City: 1.7 percent

Banner Churchill Community Hospital, Fallon: 1.05 percent

Renown Regional Medical Center, Reno: 0.27 percent

Renown South Meadows Medical Center, Reno: 0.12 percent

Saint Mary's Regional Medical Center, Reno: 0.05 percent

Source: Medicare, USA Today research

Read or Share this story: http://on.rgj.com/1E7nV2Q