A sign advertises the price of gas to drivers on Interstate 80 in Omaha. (Photo: Nati Harnik, AP)

As Americans gather for Thanksgiving, there's plenty to worry about, from Islamic State terrorists to a warming planet to big stores that can't keep your credit card numbers safe from Russian hackers.

But for just one day, forget all that, and focus instead on some of the positive trends that too often get overlooked. Here are 10:

1) Safety in the skies. Air travelers may have been gritting their teeth in East Coast airports as a winter storm snarled holiday traffic, but they could take some comfort from the fact that the U.S. airline system is on a remarkable safety streak. The last fatal U.S. passenger airline crash was almost six years ago, in February 2009; the one before that was in August 2006. Not to jinx this, but flying is safer. The industry has learned from its tragic mistakes.

2) Gas prices. The millions who travel by road are benefiting from the lowest Thanksgiving holiday gasoline prices since 2009, a product of decreased demand (more efficient vehicles, a still-shaky global economy) and big increases in domestic oil production.

3) Jobs.The 5.8% unemployment rate is not great, but it's the lowest since July 2008, when the financial crisis was starting to wreck the economy. The closely watched decline of first-time unemployment claims signals fewer layoffs and firings and even better job news ahead. And a tighter job market is a crucial precursor to rising wages.

4) Health.Millions more people have health insurance than did this time last year, thanks to the gradual phase-in of the Affordable Care Act. Even those who loathe Obamacare like some of its parts, such as no lifetime limits on health insurance in case of major illness and being able to keep offspring on the family policy until age 26.

5) Longer lives. Life expectancy for Americans is up to a record 78.8 years, according to the latest Centers for Disease Control and Prevention statistics, which are current to 2012. Women (81.2 years) still live longer than men (76.4 years).

6) Fewer stolen cars. Motor vehicle theft is way down since automakers introduced key code technology in the 1990s. The technology matches the key to the ignition, and without the proper code, the car won't start. Theft peaked in 1991 at 1.6 million vehicles a year and fell below 700,000 in 2013, according to the FBI.

7) Teen pregnancy down. There were 26.6 births for every 1,000 females ages 15-19 in 2013, another modern record low in a long and fairly steady decline since the rate peaked in the 1950s. The U.S. rate is still higher than other developed countries such as Canada and the United Kingdom, though. Researchers say there could be many reasons for the drop, but wider use of birth control is a key factor.

8) High school graduation up. The high school graduation rate hit a record of 80% in 2012 (the latest figures available), according to Education Secretary Arne Duncan. Girls (84%) did better than boys (77%).

9) Ebola coming under control? Just last month, 43% of Americans feared that they or a member of their immediate family would catch Ebola, and 65% were worried that the U.S. would suffer an Ebola epidemic, according to a Washington Post-ABC News poll. For now, at least, those fears seem wildly overblown. Of the several cases of Ebola in the U.S., most contracted in West Africa, just two people have died, and there appear to be no current active cases here. Meanwhile, in the three nations with the worst outbreaks, disease rates have risen in Sierra Leone but fallen in Guinea and Liberia.

10) Friends, family and ... more football. Thanksgiving is traditionally a day for getting together with family and friends, which for many of us is perhaps the single most important thing to be thankful for. If not, many of us will also be thankful for the fact that three NFL games will be on TV this year, providing escape valves from lunchtime until almost midnight.

USA TODAY's editorial opinions are decided by its Editorial Board, separate from the news staff. Most editorials are coupled with an opposing view — a unique USA TODAY feature.





Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1xIfypZ