Ghana based Gambian actress and model, Princess Shyngle, has revealed in a new interview some things that will interest you! Princess Shyngle,who has been nominated at this year’s City People Entertainment Awards 2015 as Most Promising Actress of the year, made the statement in an interview with Gh Links when she was asked if she would act nude for one million dollars.

“In response, she said: HELL YEAH I will but…

The 24 year old actress has featured in several television programs and movies including , ‘5 Brides’ , ‘Jack and Jill’ , ‘Family Album’, Why Should I Get Married’, and many others.

Interview:

Hi Princess how are you today and how is 2015 treating you? I must say 2015 has been a great year so far and I thank God for that, this year alone I was made a cover girl for the June edition of HOUSE OF MALIK MAGAZINE, I was also featured exclusively for the 1st time on 24hours newspaper, and graphic showbiz newspaper. I got signed to one of the biggest talent agencies in Africa (UPFRONT AND PERSONAL) they have worked with artists like wizkid, Tiwa Savage, Don jazzy, Ini edo so it was a big deal for me, I was named the most curvy celebrity in Africa by Richlifestyle.com, and I also recently got nominated as the most promising actress 2015 for The City People Awards, so 2015 has been an amazing year for me so far.

In your own opinion, who is a successful woman? A successful woman is a happy woman with a piece of mind, good health and has a family (husband and kids) that love and care about her.

Who is Princess Shyngle off screen? : Well I am a fitness freak off screen, always concerned about my diet and what I put into my body, I am a fun person love to hang out and chill, I am a loving person, I love being in love and in a relationship, I love shopping and travelling, I love writing and getting creative, I am also obsessed with the internet always researching, I guess that’s me off screen.

Tell us something that people don’t know about you? Well honestly I have a very bad temper and can be very blunt sometimes but over all I am a sweetheart.

Can you tell us about your journey to fame? Well my journey to fame all started when I represented my country in a reality show (THE NEXT MOVIE STAR AFRICA) and emerged the 2nd runner up in the whole of Africa, that’s pretty much where it all started for me.

What is your dream man like? : I honestly can’t define my dream man (LOL) but I know the day I set my eyes on him I’ll just know it’s him.

Can you act nude for One million dollars? HELL YEAH I will ( hahahahahahaa) as long as I won’t be butt naked and won’t be doing anything sex related, I honestly won’t mind at all, I love my body and anyone who knows me knows I am not ashame to flaunt it.

Can you talk about your rumored romantic relationship with D.Black? (HAHAHAHAH) D.Black and I are just friends nothing more.

What’s your view on sex before marriage? I honestly don’t have any problem with sex before marriage, not saying it’s right because my religion does not accept it because it’s immoral, but I still have no problem with anyone that chooses to do it, at the end of the day we are all sinners and there is no perfect human being.

Any advice to upcoming stars who look up to you as a role model. Well before I advice all those that look up to me as their role model I would love them to know that I started this journey at the age of 19 when I represented my country in the 2010 NEXT MOVIE STAR AFRICA and emerged as the 2nd runner up, I later left my country, my family, my friends and moved to Ghana at the age of 22, I knew no one here, had no friends, no family it was very hard for me but I had to do it because I wanted to pursue my career in acting, and after all the hard work, lonely and sad nights my dreams are becoming true. So my advice is don’t ever think you are too young to follow your dreams, follow your heart do the right thing and God will see you through.

Source: Gh Links