Getty Images One of Obama’s signature moments — signing the Affordable Care Act.

In his gun-safety event Tuesday, I was struck by something President Obama said. “I’m not on the ballot again,” he uttered. “I’m not looking to score some points.”

This is nonsense, of course. All presidents want to run up the score, particularly in their final year when days are few and the sense of urgency great. Jan. 20, 2017, is just around the corner, and Obama intends to keep plugging away on his legacy until the very end.

There’s big stuff, of course: he and Ben Bernanke staved off another Great Depression. Like it or not, he got his way on some of his biggest goals: Obamacare, a nuclear deal with Iran, a global climate pact. It’s all one big outrage to Republicans, but, because they’ve spent as much time fighting with each other as they have with him, he’s been able to keep scoring touchdowns.

But perhaps the biggest thing of all, something that few “Obama legacy” stories have mentioned thus far is this: he has appointed two Supreme Court Justices, Sonia Sotomayor, and Elena Kagan. Putting these judicial allies—who reflect his cultural and legal philosophy—on the high court means that Obama’s influence will be felt for years, perhaps decades, to come. Sotomayor, a Hispanic, has been a justice since 2009, but is still just 61. Kagan, who joined in 2010, is 55. In Supreme Court terms they are spring chickens: Four justices are 77 or older and the median age is 67.

The business implications of this cannot be overstated. In the last year alone, the court has ruled on cases with wide-ranging impacts on companies and investors: same-sex marriage, health care subsidies (an Obamacare win), what power the Environmental Protection Agency has over industry (too much, the court ruled), employment discrimination and pregnancy discrimination, among others. Decisions in all but one of these cases (the EPA case) pleased the White House, and in all of them, the votes of Sotomayor and Kagan helped win the day.

Obama would love to put at least one more justice on the court. He would leave office a year from now knowing that a full-third of it was his doing. There’s nothing that would please him—or infuriate Republicans—more. But what would really be the icing on the cake for Obama: ending the court’s ideological divide by replacing one of Ronald Reagan’s two remaining appointees: Anthony Kennedy, 79, the court’s current swing vote, and the hardcore conservative Antonin Scalia, who turns 80 in March. But neither has plans to retire anytime soon. At best, Obama could maintain the current split by replacing one of the two lefties: 82-year-old Ruth Bader Ginsburg, or 77-year-old Stephen Breyer. But both of them intend to stay put as well. It’s probably a moot point anyway: Republican control of the Senate in this extreme hyper partisanship era means that any Obama appointee would never see the light of day.

What happens if Clinton wins? She might in four years and almost certainly in eight, have the chance to replace both Kennedy and Scalia. Issues dear to liberals—abortion rights, gun rights, affirmative action, immigration and the environment—would likely move their way. But given likely Republican control of the Senate, at least between 2017-19, she’d have trouble getting anyone through.

And if a Republican wins the White House? The chance to replace one of the aging liberals like Ginsburg would almost certainly occur—plus the opportunity to replace elderly conservatives like Scalia with younger clones who’ll hang around for decades. The issues mentioned above—would almost certainly tilt to the right.

Meantime, this question: What if a court vacancy opens up, leaving a four-to-four ideological split—but that gridlock between the White House and Senate is so severe that no nominee is approved? It could happen if, say, Hillary Clinton wins the presidency, and Republicans retain control of the Senate—as they’re expected to. Even if a Republican wins the presidency it could happen, because the 60-vote filibuster remains the threshold for Supreme Court nominations, and Democrats would take full advantage.

This could benefit liberals. Why? Because, as legal scholar Linda Hirshman notes in the Washington Post, “an eight-member court would often divide 4 to 4, affirming the decisions of the predominantly liberal lower courts.” She notes that most circuit courts — the step below the high court — are controlled by liberal judges, lifetime appointees who hold sway even over states that vote Republican in presidential elections.

It’s all kind of messy, but for business and economic matters that may bubble up to the Supreme Court in 2017 or beyond, here’s the bottom line: if, say, Ted Cruz or Donald Trump wins the White House and nominates a right-wing justice, Senate Democrats, who are in the minority, would filibuster it to death. If Clinton wins, Senate Republicans, who would be in the majority, would also block any liberal nominee. But, as Hirshman notes, “Liberal dominance of the lower courts, however, might make the GOP disinclined to hold out indefinitely.” In other words, advantage Hillary.

More from MarketWatch