Blanche Adams, third from the left, gives a line dancing lesson Friday, June 5, at the Chilson Senior Center. The senior center offers classes, clubs, activities and games for seniors. ( Shelley Widhalm / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Classes, day trips, billiards tables and a library get seniors out of the house and active at the Chilson Senior Center.

The Food Bank for Larimer County, Meals on Wheels and Loveland's Community Kitchen make sure seniors — and their other clients — get a free meal if they need to stretch their limited incomes.

And Catholic Charities Adult & Senior Services helps those seniors remain independent in their homes.

Several Larimer County nonprofits include in their menu of offerings services specific to seniors, who may be facing health issues or needing financial assistance or help in some other way. Last month was Older Americans Month, a nationally proclaimed month to acknowledge the contributions of older Americans.

"Many organizations are taking a look at providing services for older Americans," said Amy Pezzani, executive director of the Food Bank for Larimer County, adding that as more and more Baby Boomers retire, "We know we're going to be serving more seniors."

Food Bank for Larimer County

The Food Bank for Larimer County operates two food share facilities in Loveland and Fort Collins to provide food to low-income residents in a grocery store setting with shelves, bins and coolers of food, donated or purchased at low cost from farms, grocery chains and other outlets. Eleven percent of the 13,000 clients who visit the two facilities each month are seniors.

Advertisement

The food bank serves 600 seniors a month through the Commodities Supplemental Food Program, a federal program that provides food, mainly dry goods, to seniors ages 60 and older.

And through a partnership with Catholic Charities Larimer County, the food bank delivers boxes of food to homebound seniors, mostly in Silver Leaf, operated by the Loveland Housing Authority, and low-income housing in Fort Collins.

Of the food bank's 29,000 clients a year, 3,200 are seniors.

"In the last couple of years, baby boomers are retiring in really large numbers," Pezzani said. "We're seeing more seniors seeking assistance. We're looking at the programs we could provide for seniors facing hunger and evaluating possible new programs starting at the beginning of next year."

Meals on Wheels, Loveland's Community Kitchen

Ninety-five percent of the clients of Meals on Wheels of Loveland & Berthoud are seniors. Meals on Wheels delivers hot lunches Monday to Friday to seniors ages 60 and older and to residents with physical and mental disabilities who are unable to shop and cook for themselves.

"We try to keep them independent and in their homes by providing the services we provide," said Kimberly Spencer, director of resource development for Meals on Wheels.

Meals on Wheels served 541 people last year and is projecting that number will increase to 560 this year as Baby Boomers move into the over-60 age group, Spencer said.

The meals are cooked on site and delivered on 27 different routes each day. The volunteers — there are 100 — drop off the meals and conduct a wellness check with the clients.

"For a lot of our clients, this might be their only interaction," Spencer said. "That social interaction is really important. A lot of them do live at home by themselves."

Each month, Loveland's Community Kitchen provides 900 meals to the senior population, and according to a client survey from 2014, 28 percent of the clients who come in for a free breakfast or lunch are 60 and older.

Many of the senior clients are on a fixed income and are unable to supply a nutritious meal, but at the kitchen, the lunches give them a third of what they need for a day's nutritious needs, said Sandra Wright, executive director of the kitchen.

"This becomes a social place for them," Wright said. "They come here not only to get nutritious food, but to meet their friends."

House of Neighborly Service, Catholic Charities

At the House of Neighborly Service, located in the new HNS Life Center of multiple nonprofits in one building, seniors make up 20 percent of the nonprofit's clientele. In 2014, the nonprofit served 955 seniors.

"Our services help them stretch their fixed incomes," said Glorie Magrum, executive director of the House of Neighborly Service.

The nonprofit offers clients who qualify based on income food baskets, clothing, prescription and utility assistance, and emergency shelter. For seniors who are homebound, the House of Neighborly Service has food baskets delivered to their homes through a partnership with Meals on Wheels — currently, 40 to 50 seniors use the service.

"Very often, seniors are very proud, and it's hard for them to ask for help," Magrum said. "They're very frugal. They seek services when it's absolutely necessary."

Catholic Charities Adult & Senior Services, which has an office in the HNS Life Center, helps seniors remain independent by working one-on-one with caseworkers, who help them secure benefits, coordinate home health care and budget and maintain housing, while serving as their recreation, support and social advocates. The case management services are for low-income seniors 60 and above and seniors with disabilities or disabling health conditions 55 and above to help them retain their independent living status.

Each year, Catholic Charities serves 400 seniors in Larimer County and a total client population of 2,500 residents.

Some seniors "get so frustrated with the red tape securing services, they don't have the stamina or willpower to get through the red tape," said Guy Mendt, regional director of Catholic Charities Larimer County, adding that part of Catholic Charities' mission is to prevent homelessness. "When we can keep anyone, seniors included, from falling into homelessness, it's a win both for the individuals, obviously, and for the community."

Chilson Senior Center

The Chilson Senior Center provides a social outlet for seniors 62 and older, although younger people are welcome to attend with their older family members and friends.

Each month, 700 seniors participate in the senior center's programs and activities, and attendance has grown over the last five years, said Gina DeBell, recreation coordinator at the Chilson Senior Center.

"It's a resource for them to be able to participate in activities and stay active. It also helps with loneliness," DeBell said.

The senior center organizes exercise programs; classes in things like arts, crafts and health; clubs, such as for singing, playing cards and discussing books; day trips to places such as the mountains, theaters and restaurants; and activities that include dances and movies.

Four days a week, the senior center serves lunch, asking for a donation of $2.50. There also is a library and games tables, including billiard tables.

"We're just a big family down here," DeBell said. "People enjoy visiting. They come to have a cup of coffee. It's a nice place to gather and feel like a part of the community."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm