MESA, Ariz. — The expression on Jon Gray’s face and the tenor of his tired voice — see above — told the story of his difficult day.

The Rockies’ top prospect took the mound against the Cubs Saturday afternoon, knowing there was a lot at stake — perhaps even a chance to cement a spot in the starting rotation with a crisp, impressive outing. Instead, Gray struggled though just two-thirds of an inning, giving up seven runs (six earned) on four hits and a walk. The killer blow was a three-run homer by opposing pitcher Jake Arrieta.

The Rockies slogged through their worst performance of the spring, getting roasted 18-4 and giving up 21 hits to the Cubs.

“I would rather have a bad game the first outing, but it can’t always be that way,” Gray said. “This was unfortunate, but it’s all about how you respond. I’ve responded well in the past, and I think I will be able to again.”

It didn’t help Gray’s cause that second baseman Charlie Culberson and catcher Michael McKenry both committed errors, or that Gray misplayed two bunts in front of the mound that allowed two Chicago runs to score.

“I was just going too fast,” he said of the bobbled bunts. “I didn’t tell myself I had time. I didn’t do what I practice. I panicked, went way too fast for myself and bobbled the ball. I’ve got to settle it down out there. That can’t happen.”

Manager Walt Weiss is looking for poised performances from his starters and Gray’s meltdown on Saturday didn’t help his cause to make the rotation.

Still, Weiss downplayed Gray’s bad outing.

“We made it tough on him, and I think he made it tough on himself with a couple of bunts back to him,” Weiss said. “We didn’t play well behind him. We looked up and he was 40 pitches in, and you don’t want that in the first inning. So we got him out of there.”

What did Weiss say to Gray after such a bad performance?

“He’s come a long way and he’s had a great spring,” Weiss said. “Again, it was a really strange inning. Unfortunately, he couldn’t go past one inning. But it’s one of many, many he’s going to throw.”

Hits

The positive moments were few and far between. Former closer Rafael Betancourt, trying to make the roster at age 39, threw a scoreless inning, though he allowed two hits.

Utility player Matt McBride, who’s had a good spring but who’s unlikely to make the 25-man roster, hit a two-run homer, his second of the spring.

Misses

Left fielder Corey Dickerson departed the game after the second inning with a tight lower back. He said his back and hamstrings tightened up while he was standing in the the outfield during the first two long innings. Dickerson was scheduled to travel to Mexico Sunday to play in the Rockies’ split-squad game against Arizona, but the condition of his back might keep him out of Sunday’s game.

Minor-league pitcher Nelson Gonzalez, called on to relieve Gray, got rocked for three runs on five hits in his one inning of work.

Right-handed reliever Scott Oberg, a darkhorse candidate to make the bullpen, did not help is cause. He gave up two runs on three hits in two-thirds of an inning.

Lefty reliever Rex Brothers continues to run hot and cold. His spring ERA stands a 9.45 after he gave up a run on two hits in his inning of work. He uncorked a wild pitch to allow the run to score. “He’s been good, with a lot of positive signs from Rex this spring,” Weiss said. “The last couple of times it’s gotten away from his a little bit. I think the key for him is just not grinding so much when it starts to get away; just relax and reel it in a little bit. He’s such a competitive guy that sometimes he grinds himself into the dirt. He has to relax out there.”

Up Next

The Rockies play two games Sunday as they begin their final week of Cactus League play. One squad travels to Hermosillo, Mexico to face the Diamondbacks in a 2:10 p.m. (MDT) game. Right-hander Christian Bergman is scheduled to start that game. Arizona starts right-hander Aaron Blair.

The Rockies also play the Diamondbacks at Salt River Fields in a 2:10 p.m. game (MDT). Right-hander Jordan Lyles gets the start opposite Rubby De La Rosa. The game will be televised on Root Sports.