Buy Photo Benjamin Ullem, a Drake University Law School graduate, returned in July for a two-year stint as dean. (Photo: Andrea Melendez/The Register)Buy Photo

Drake University Law School is a family affair for Benjamin Ullem, a longtime Des Moines attorney who returned in July to lead the school for a two-year stint as dean.

His father earned his undergraduate and law degrees at Drake. Then, Ullem, now 70, graduated from Drake in 1966 with a liberal arts degree before going on to law school himself. His daughter got her law degree from Drake in 1997.

It's those deep ties to Drake, combined with business savvy, that make Ullem the right fit to lead the school at an uneasy time for law schools across the country, said former Iowa State Bar Association president Guy Cook, also a Drake law alumnus.

"Dean Ullem, he's true-blue Drake," he said. "He's been a longtime supporter of the school. ... He's sort of a bridge-builder, someone who works well with others to sort of deal with these challenges that law schools across the country have."

Job No. 1 in 2015: working to reverse a six-year decline in applications. But 2015 also will be a year of celebration: The start of the fall semester will mark the law school's 150th year.

During his tenure as dean, Ullem hopes to help sustain and grow the law school by focusing on efforts to attract students, while also building on the school's long tradition of supporting clinical and real-world experiences for its students.

"We think completing 150 years is a good stepping stone to looking forward to the next 150, and we truly are doing that," he said.

Ullem, a Des Moines native, spent 44 years at the Whitfield and Eddy law firm, guiding businesses through mergers and contract negotiations. In 2008, he stepped in to serve as the law school's interim dean for one year before going back to the firm.

Ullem chose to leave private practice for academia again in July to serve his alma mater after the former dean, Allan Vestal, stepped down. The move is a testament to Ullem's genuine passion for the legal profession and its next generation of practitioners, said current Iowa bar association president Joe Feller.

"I admire him for taking on the job as the dean of the law school, because these are not easy times for deans of law schools, and Ben came from a very successful private practice career," Feller said.

The more than four decades Ullem has spent working with business owners and leaders have shaped his philosophy toward education.

"You learn a lot from actually doing, and you know the skill sets that are necessary to be successful," he said. "I think that certainly gives me a slightly different perspective."

The law school has long prided itself on the opportunities it offers students to get real-world experience. Students have the chance to participate in six different legal clinics run by the school in areas from criminal defense to children's rights and elder law.

Currently, Ullem is exploring ways to bulk up the law school's curriculum with more offerings focused on health care law, a growing area of need in the wake of the Affordable Care Act. He's working with Drake's college of business and public administration to explore establishing a health insurance law center.

Ullem believes this type of responsive, forward-thinking initiative will make the law school attractive to more students.

Ullem takes the helm at Drake at a time when the number of applications to accredited law schools nationwide has dropped from a 10-year high of 602,300 for the 2010 academic year to 352,400 for 2014 — a 41.4 percent decrease, according to data collected by the nonprofit Law School Admission Council.

At Drake, applications hit a recent peak at 1,206 in 2009. But numbers then tumbled, hitting a low this year of 496 applications, a 59 percent decrease, according to data the school reports annually to the American Bar Association.

The size of first-year classes at the law school has also dropped, from 166 students in 2010 to 110 at the beginning of the fall semester this school year. To turn the tide, Ullem has championed efforts by professors and faculty to visit undergraduate classrooms to make presentations on the law school or even to teach mock law classes.

Common thought is that would-be attorneys are shying away from law school due to concerns about student debt loads and disappointing post-graduation job opportunities. But Ullem remains optimistic about the future of the legal profession and shares that message with prospective students and with Drake alumni across the country.

Drake must amplify its message that a degree from the law school offers good value for the money, Ullem said. The law school has established so called "3 and 3" partnerships with Drake's undergraduate programs, Simpson College and Iowa State University that allow students to get both an undergraduate degree and a law degree in six years, shaving a year from the usual process. Partnerships with other schools are on the way, Ullem said.

Students also need to understand the "big picture" of a law degree, Ullem said. The law school's graduates have gone on to do everything from lead nonprofits to manage and direct significant construction projects.

"My own practical experience is that I had a wonderful career in the law practice, and it was very rewarding," he said. "I also tell them they're not going to make huge amounts of money, but they get an opportunity to help people. I tell them they can use their legal degree in an infinite variety of ways."

Buy Photo Benjamin Ullem (Photo: Andrea Melendez/The Register)

Benjamin Ullem

AGE: 70

LIVES: Des Moines

EDUCATION: Bachelor's degree in liberal arts, Drake University, 1966; law degree, Drake University Law School

CAREER: Drake University law school dean since July 2014, interim dean 2008 - 2009, attorney at Whitfield & Eddy since 1975.

FAMILY: Three adult children

15 PEOPLE TO WATCH IN 2015

These are central Iowans in business, arts, nonprofits, civic activism and nonelected government positions who are expected to make a difference in their fields of endeavor in 2015. Readers were invited to submit nominations. Selections were made by Des Moines Register editors and reporters. Look for profiles daily through Sunday.

Earlier profiles: At DesMoinesRegister.com/PeopletoWatch, read profiles of Greg Edwards, president and CEO of the Greater Des Moines Convention & Visitors Bureau; Gilbert Vicario, senior curator at the Des Moines Art Center; Des Moines Police Officer Kelly Drane; developer Richard Hurd; Marvin DeJear Jr., director of the Evelyn K. Davis Center for Working Families; Jennie Smith, owner of Butcher Crick Farms and a sales manager at Kemin Industries; Stephanie Jenks, one of the world's top young triathletes; Nate Noble, a pediatrician who specializes in treating children with developmental disorders; Harrison Inefuku, digital repository coordinator at Iowa State University; Jeff Kaufmann, chairman of the Republican Party of Iowa; Blake Rupe, founder of Re-App; and Scott Sanders, Des Moines city manager.

Coming Saturday: Kenia Calderon, a Drake University student who helps other young immigrants pursue higher education.

Year in review: Look back at 2014 at DesMoinesRegister.com/YearInReview.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1zDVzcJ