The Watershed Addiction Treatment Programs Our purpose is to provide the best level of care to each patient, and to maintain our vision to create the best addiction treatment and rehabilitation program possible.

The Watershed, a leading drug and alcohol treatment center, headquartered in South Florida, officially opened its doors on January 15th to a premier 28-bed facility in Clear Lake serving the Southeast Texas community.

The Watershed Addiction Treatment Programs provide an extensive continuum of care, which ranges from detoxification to intensive inpatient rehab, to outpatient programs and halfway houses, and sober living apartments. Since its inception in 1998, The Watershed has led the way for treatment through its caring and trusted staff of professionals who are committed to their passion and vision for helping the sick and suffering alcoholic and addict find recovery.

Drug and alcohol addiction is still a prevalent national public health threat. Every year in Texas, only about 63,000 of the nearly 910,000 substance abuse sufferers receive necessary treatment. The number of people on a typical wait list on any given day totals to 977 adults and 43 youths. “These statistics show an urgent need and confirms that it is our duty to help,” said Chris Crosby, President and CEO of The Watershed. “Our purpose is to provide the best level of care to each patient, and to maintain our vision to create the best addiction treatment and rehabilitation program possible, in a way that is affordable to the greatest number of people.”

The Affordable Care Act (ACA) is now in effect and includes substance use disorders as one of the 10 elements of essential health benefits. In addition, the ACA has extended health care to young Americans through age 26, a group which greatly benefits from addiction treatment services. “The new provisions mean more people will have access to care, which has always been a hurdle. Hopefully, this will help us to help as many people as possible get the appropriate addiction treatment they so desperately need,” said Crosby.

About The Watershed

The Watershed is a leading drug and alcohol treatment facility based in South Florida. Established in 1998, The Watershed is a full service addiction center offering a continuum of care, ranging from medical detoxification, inpatient rehab, outpatient programs, and sober living communities. The Watershed has earned its accreditation by the Joint Commission and has received the Gold Seal of Approval. For more information about The Watershed Texas, please visit http://www.thewatershedtexas.com.