Photo

A flock of Republican presidential contenders appeared on the morning news shows on Sunday and showed the party’s varied response to the Supreme Court’s rulings on gay marriage.

Mike Huckabee, the former Arkansas governor and pastor who counts evangelical Christians among his strongest supporters, has said the high court’s affirmation of gay marriage is an affront to religious voters.

In an appearance on ABC’s “This Week,” Mr. Huckabee said that if he were president, he would not “consider” the court’s ruling on same-sex marriage until “the Congress provides enabling legislation and the people’s representatives vote and it gets to my desk.”

Additionally, he said, people of faith might decide to become conscientious objectors rather than follow the court’s decision. He did not elaborate on what form such objections might take.

“I don’t think a lot of pastors and Christian schools are going to have a choice. They either are going to follow God, their conscience and what they truly believe is what the scripture teaches them, or they will follow civil law,” he said.

“They will go the path of Dr. Martin Luther King, who in his brilliant essay, the letters from a Birmingham jail, reminded us, based on what St. Augustine said, that an unjust law is no law at all,” Mr. Huckabee said. “And I do think that we’re going to see a lot of pastors who will have to make this tough decision.”

The ruling has further galvanized many in the party to keep up the fight, as Gov. Bobby Jindal of Louisiana has taken a stand similar to Mr. Huckabee’s and Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin has reiterated calls for a Constitutional amendment to let the states decide the issue for themselves.

But, some Republicans see the court’s decision as a “wiping of the slate,” as The New York Times reported on Sunday, and other contenders appearing on the news shows reflected this thinking.

On CBS’s Face the Nation, Gov. John R. Kasich of Ohio said that while Republicans should not just accept the court’s decision validating a key provision of the Affordable Care Act, a ruling President Obama said meant that the law was “here to stay,” the party should “move on” from the marriage issue.

“Look, I believe in traditional marriage,” he said, “but the Supreme Court has ruled, and it’s the law of the land, and we’ll abide by it. And I think everybody needs to take a deep breath to see how this evolves.”

He added: ” I think there’s so many other things now that we have to focus on.”

And Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, who added his voice to those calling for the removal of the Confederate flag from the state capitol in the wake of the mass shooting in Charleston, told Chuck Todd on NBC’s Meet the Press, that a marriage amendment would not have enough support in the Congress to pass.

And while “What I want to do is protect the religious liberties of those who believe that opposing same sex marriage as part of their faith,” a push for an amendment would hinder Republicans in the presidential election.

“You can put it in the platform, but it will, in my view, hurt us in 2016, because it’s a process that’s not going to bear fruit,” he said.