A month before the Obamacare exchange debuts for its third year, it's unclear which hospitals Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Illinois will include in its broadest plan on the online marketplace.

This is crunch time for brokers who help people choose health insurance plans. Some are concerned that the area's largest academic medical centers will not be included, such as Northwestern Memorial Hospital and University of Chicago Medicine.

“It is a huge issue for a select group of people,” said David Strumm, executive vice president of Strumm Insurance. “People purposely choose the larger network because they need access to the doctors.”

Barbara Otto, CEO of Chicago-based nonprofit Health & Disability Advocates, who works closely with brokers, said that with the Nov. 1 open enrollment date approaching, brokers are running out of time to learn what their clients' options are or to be able to direct them with clarity.

Blue Cross, the state's dominant insurer, announced last month that its broadest plan, the Blue PPO, will no longer be sold to individuals and families who buy plans on and off the exchange. The broad plan had a network that included every hospital in Illinois, more than 200 facilities.

Those covered by the plan will automatically be enrolled in the Blue Choice Preferred PPO, a plan that now only has 78 hospitals, though there are plans to expand it in 2016 to include a little more than half of the hospitals statewide.

The Blue Choice Preferred plan currently does not include Streeterville-based Northwestern, Hyde Park-based U of C Medicine, Rush University Medical Center on the Near West Side, Evanston-based NorthShore University HealthSystem or Downers Grove-based Advocate Health Care. These hospitals are among the biggest in the Chicago area. Advocate is the largest hospital network in the state.

Blue Cross has not announced which hospitals will be included in the expanded plan. Blue Cross spokesman Michael Deering said the list of hospitals will be available on the insurer's website beginning Oct. 10, during what it calls its window-shopping period.

'VERY CONCERNED'

A spokesman from Rush said Blue Cross has not invited them to be added to the Blue Choice Preferred network. A spokeswoman from NorthShore would say only that the situation would be monitored. A U of C Medicine spokeswoman said no changes have been made.

Frank Vance, owner of Edgebrook-based EganVance Insurance Agency, said about two dozen people have contacted him in the past five days worried about the coverage changes.

“People are very concerned about it,” he said. “We need to know all of the information first before we can advise or help educate our clients.”

Often, enrollees with pre-existing conditions or those who are at risk will buy the broader plans to ensure their network includes doctors and hospitals they already go to. This change in coverage could cause those enrollees to either switch doctors or find a new plan.

Two of every five Blue Cross customers in Illinois are covered by the broad Blue PPO plan that will no longer be available. Customers automatically switched to the narrower plan can change their health plan during enrollment. Those who get coverage through their employers will not be affected.

This change will cause ripple effects in the market, Otto said.

“Once the 800-pound gorilla makes some changes, what are the other plans doing and what are they going to do?” she said. “This shifts the chairs on the deck a little bit and may give some of the other plans an opportunity to take some of that market share.”