LOS ANGELES, July 21, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- With the days long and the air warm, summer is the best time of year to head to the beach in your most flattering swimwear. That's why many people in Southern California will be heading to OuRX Pharmacy, Inc. for aesthetic treatments like skin bleaching cream and BLT numbing cream for laser hair removal. OuRX Pharmacy, Inc. even provides preservative free eye drops that will keep your eyes from feeling irritated after a swim. The experts at the Santa Monica pharmacy have been prescribing and dispensing medications for more than 20 years. In the summer months, they're the ideal team to help beachgoers prepare for their summer beach season.

For women and an increasing number of men, laser hair removal is an effective way for beachgoers to get rid of unwanted hair before displaying their fit summer bodies – without the pain that comes from waxing. However, laser hair removal can lead to challenging issues like skin irritation, including redness and swelling. In rare cases, it has even lead to blistering, scarring and other unwanted changes to skin texture. Fortunately for the appearance conscious, numbing creams at OuRX Pharmacy, Inc. protect the skin from a variety of conditions, allowing individuals to look their best at the beach without worrying about painful irritation or embarrassing blemishes.

Numbing cream can be utilized either before or after a laser hair removal. Once you rub the numbing cream into your skin – you'll notice the positive effects almost immediately; as your skin numbs, you'll feel more relaxed and comfortable than you have in a long time. Though using BLT cream for laser hair removal is common in the summer time, that's far from the only use for this popular topical anesthetic. The cream can also be effective for alleviating discomfort after tattooing, body piercing, laser tattoo removal, and also minor surgery.

Even more important for some than BLT numbing cream is the skin bleaching cream at OuRX Pharmacy, Inc. These work by treating skin problems like age spots, acne scars, or discoloration caused by hormones. One of the most impressive options at the pharmacy is hydroquinone, an FDA-regulated product that is sold over the counter with up to 2% concentration, or with a dermatologist's prescription for up to 10% hydroquinone.

As impressive as they are, the numbing and bleaching creams are only a few of many health and wellness options found at OuRX Pharmacy, Inc. In fact, patients visit OuRX Pharmacy, Inc. for assistance with a variety of medical concerns, including:

Urology/Erectile Dysfunction

Opthalmics

Weight Loss

Hormone Replacement Therapy

Pain Management

Dermatology

Vitamins and Homeopathics

To experience the benefits of numbing cream and various other pharmaceuticals found at OuRX Pharmacy, call 310-421-8736 or visit www.globalcompoundingrx.com today. The pharmacy accepts most insurance and pharmacists are prepared to answers any questions relating to the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) as it relates to prescription medication. Their staff also ships globally, so no matter where you're located, you can embrace holistic health with OuRX Pharmacy, Inc.

PR Submitted by www.Cyberset.com

SOURCE OuRX Pharmacy, Inc.