Jean Yang, the executive director of the Massachusetts Health Connector, testified before a congressional committee on Thursday that the state is benefiting from the Affordable Care Act, despite the problems with its website.

“We have not allowed website problems to prevent us from meeting the ultimate goal of the ACA: getting people covered so they can enjoy health and economic security,” Yang said, according to her prepared testimony.

Yang was one of several officials from different states who testified at a hearing of two subcommittees of the U.S. House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, focused on problems with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act in the states.

Yang said the website problems, which have prevented people from using the online Health Insurance Exchange to sign up for insurance “are mainly due to failures of our system integrator,” referring to technology vendor CGI. The state has since cut ties with CGI.

Independent reports have found problems with both CGI and with the state's project management.

Yang stressed the workarounds the state has used to get people enrolled in insurance coverage, even though most of that coverage is only temporary. Yang also talked about the large gains in insurance under the reforms put in place by Republican Gov. Mitt Romney in 2006, which was the model for Democratic President Barack Obama's national health care overhaul.

“We support the Affordable Care Act because it embodies the principles of our Massachusetts reforms: shared responsibility for expanding coverage; a balance between private and public solutions; and the fundamental belief that health is a public good,” Yang said.

Republicans in Massachusetts used the occasion to criticize the state’s handling of the health connecter website problems.

“I continue to worry about the new federal health law's disastrous effect here,” said Republican gubernatorial candidate Charlie Baker in a statement. “What members of Congress likely didn't hear today is that thousands of families are still in the dark, unsure of whether they have access to a doctor or about the rising costs surely to hit job creators.”



The Boston Globe reported that the committee members spent most of the hearing questioning a representative of Maryland's health insurance website.

Read Jean Yang’s full Congressional testimony below.

Congressional testimony of Jean Yang