I knew beyond a doubt that Colorado was already feeling the effects of climate change when the state I chose to raise my twins in — where they could appreciate its natural beauty — was faced with horrific natural disasters. It wasn’t just the multiple, devastating wildfires of recent years, but also the floods of 2014 that devastated parts of Boulder, Larimer, and Weld counties.

For me, those incidents provided a real wake-up call. And, after talking to hundreds of Coloradans this summer, I know I’m not alone.

Climate change is the biggest challenge of our generation, and it is knocking at our front door. We can no longer afford to be held hostage by politicians who deny scientific facts.

The debate is settled: Climate change is real, and it is already having a devastating impact in our state. And for every year we fail to act, the destructive wildfires, floods and drought that threaten our communities and economy grow more severe.

In 2012 and 2013, wildfires caused nearly $1 billion in damages in Colorado. Last year we suffered $2 billion in property losses from flooding — much of it uninsured. Costs like these will skyrocket if we do not take action, and demand that our elected officials do the same.

That’s why this election year, I’m working with Coloradans across our state to hold our elected leaders responsible and support candidates who will fight for our future.

The good news is that we’re already on the right track: Colorado is among the nation’s leading states in renewable energy.

Through a groundbreaking ballot measure, Colorado voters came together to approve a state renewable energy portfolio standard that works for our economy and our environment. Colorado has more than doubled renewable energy generation since 2008, and together, the wind and solar industries support up to 7,600 jobs right here at home.

But Congressman Cory Gardner stands in the way of our clean energy progress, and his extreme views are placing Colorado health, safety and prosperity at risk. Gardner is in the pocket of Big Oil special interests — he even voted against a bill to promote renewable energy that would have created 23,000 new jobs in Colorado.

Renewable energy pioneers in Colorado are building a clean energy frontier — and we need a leader like Sen. Mark Udall if we want them to go the distance. Sen. Udall understands that climate change is a severe and urgent threat we must address now. He’s has been a champion of clean, renewable energy sources like wind and solar, which create thousands of jobs for hardworking Coloradans. Rep. Gardner, on the other hand, disagrees with NASA and the U.S. military on the science of climate change, and even voted to prevent the Pentagon from considering climate change in its national security planning.

We can’t afford leaders whose reckless views and extreme policies place our kids’ future at risk.

That’s why my team of organizers, volunteers and climate action supporters are on campuses and knocking on doors throughout Colorado, talking to voters and mobilizing them to turn out at the polls for Sen. Udall on Nov. 4. We have opened up three offices in Colorado thus far, in Boulder, Denver and Basalt. We plan to be on the ground in Durango within the next 10 days.

Using a combination of field organizers and volunteers, we will knock on hundreds of thousands of doors on behalf of Sen. Udall in his race against science-denier Congressman Gardner. Voters in Colorado, especially young voters, care about the ways that climate change is impacting Colorado’s environment. We are confident that voters will connect with our message.

The climate is changing, and so should our politics. Let’s put climate on the ballot this November to work toward building the clean energy future Coloradans deserve.

Georgie Aguirre-Sacasa is the Colorado state director for NextGen Climate, a national organization dedicated to bringing climate change to the forefront of American politics.