When "August: Osage County" received two Academy Award nominations last week, the movie shot in Osage County and Bartlesville was only the latest film with Oklahoma connections to receive recognition during awards season.

Multiple native Oklahomans have competed for and won Oscars of their own, and more movies filmed in or set in Oklahoma have made their mark with the Academy.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

These are some of the most well-known Oklahoman Academy Award connections, with more to come in the future, including the Oscar ceremony on March 2: Native Oklahomans Alfre Woodard and Brad Pitt appear in best-picture nominee "12 Years a Slave," and Tulsan K.K. Barrett is nominated for best production design for "Her."

The last movie filmed in Oklahoma to win best picture

When Charlie and Raymond (Tom Cruise and Dustin Hoffman) take their cross-states road trip, Oklahoma plays a featured role with scenes shot in Guthrie, El Reno, Hinton and Oklahoma City. "Rain Man" would win four 1988 Oscars, including best picture and best actor (Hoffman).

The last movie filmed in Oklahoma to receive Oscar nominations

"Twister" tore up parts of Waurika, Wakita, Ponca City, Guthrie, Pauls Valley, Norman and Maysville as the production chose many state locations for filming. The No. 2 box-office hit of 1996 ($241.7 million) received nominations for best sound and visual effects.

The last Tulsan nominated for an Oscar for acting

Alfre Woodard has won a remarkable four Emmy Awards, but she's been nominated for an Academy Award only once: best supporting actress in "Cross Creek," a 1983 Southern drama. She lost to Linda Hunt for "The Year of Living Dangerously."

The only Tulsan to win an acting Oscar

Jennifer Jones (born Phylis Lee Isley in Tulsa in 1919) was a five-time Oscar nominee, winning as best actress for the 1943 film "The Song of Bernadette."

The last Tulsan to win an Oscar

Blake Edwards, the director behind the "Pink Panther" movie series, as well as "10" and "Victor Victoria," won an honorary Oscar for his career in 2004. Edwards was born in Tulsa in 1922.

The last Oklahoman to win an acting Oscar

Ben Johnson, the real-life cowboy born in rural Osage County who went on to make Westerns with John Ford, John Wayne and Sam Peckinpah, took home the 1971 Oscar as best supporting actor for his role as "Sam the Lion" in "The Last Picture Show."

The only Oklahoman to appear in six best-picture nominees in the past eight years

It's been quite a run for Brad Pitt, born in Shawnee in 1963, to have appeared in "Babel" (2006), "The Curious Case of Benjamin Button" (2008), "Inglourious Basterds" (2009), "The Tree of Life" (2011), "Moneyball" (2011) and "12 Years a Slave" (2013).

The only Oklahoman to produce and direct a best-picture winner

Duncan native Ron Howard was one of America's most popular actors ("The Andy Griffith Show," "Happy Days") before he started making his own movies, including the 2001 Oscar-winning best picture "A Beautiful Mind."

The most famous Oklahoman portrayed in a best-picture nominee

The music-filled biopic "Bound for Glory," nominated in 1976, told the story of the early life of Woody Guthrie, starring David Carradine as the Okemah-born folk singer.