Natasha Trethewey, who served as U.S. Poet Laureate from 2012 to '14, has written much of her poetry about the history of the South and its legacy. In her research for poems, she made a study of monuments and noted that if you were a visitor to the region's memorials, you might come to the conclusion that the South had won the Civil War.

She noted during a keynote address I attended a few years ago that many of the monuments begin with the words "After the Indians left..."

As if the tribes just decided one day to move elsewhere.

This got me to pondering Boulder's monuments and what they say about our city.

We've got bears, wolves, buffalo and an elk.

Two sculptures are dedicated to the memory of Chief Niwot. Neither tells the full story of his demise. Among the missing facts is that some of the founders of Boulder were willing participants in the Sand Creek Massacre of 1864 in which the 700-man Colorado Territory militia destroyed Cheyenne and Arapaho villages and killed and mutilated many native Americans, including Niwot.

Art Deco reliefs grace the façade of the Boulder County Courthouse, commemorating mining and agriculture, in keeping with major influences on our early history.

Like many other towns in the country, we have monuments commemorating veterans of wars such as the Civil War monument in the County Courthouse square. A Vietnam Veterans memorial was placed south of the municipal building in 1992.

Several monuments can be viewed on the Boulder Creek Path. A memorial bench, just east of the 17th Street bridge, honors the work of Frederick Law Olmsted Jr., who came to Boulder to offer advice on planning and produced "The Improvement of Boulder, Colorado" in 1910.

Dedicated in 1990 by the Boulder County AIDS Project, the AIDS Memorial Garden is on Boulder Creek just south of Arapahoe.

A memorial to the Gilbert White, "father of floodplain management," on the Boulder Creek Path proved its relevance in 2013.

I'm fond of a memorial that pays homage to the coal miners of the Northern field in Erie. Located in the Old Town part of Erie, the sculpture recognizes the hard work of men in the mines and the dangers inherent in that occupation. The names of those who died while working or in labor violence are etched below the statue of a coal miner.

Should I choose a Boulder individual who deserves a monument, I would pick Penfield Tate II. Boulder's only African-American mayor, Tate proved to be ahead of his time as an ally to the LGBT-rights movement. He proposed an addition to the Human Rights Ordinance in 1973 to protect homosexuals from discrimination. As a reward for his humanity, he faced a bitter recall election, which he barely escaped, and later lost his bid for re-election.

In Birmingham, Ala., several monuments have been installed that reflect on the shameful Civil Rights violence in their town. Kelly Ingram Park has a statue of the infamous Associated Press photo of a police officer with a German shepherd attacking a black teenager. A new sculpture of the four girls killed in the 16th Street Baptist Church bombing of 1963 was unveiled a couple of years ago.

An engraved stone entrance to the park states "Place of Reflection and Reconciliation," a somber message needed more than ever.

Perhaps Boulder needs such a site of conscience.

I've read about efforts underway to create a monument to cycling, given its popularity in town. Another group has proposed statues of the Nobel Laureates of Boulder.

Do our monuments reflect what we value about our city's history? If not, which monuments or memorials should be added? Should we celebrate our greatness, reflect on tragedies, or both?

With the cultural plan still in draft form and a new pool of money for public art coming from the 2014 Ballot Measure 2A, now is a good time to think a moment about the monuments you believe our city should display.

Carol Taylor and Silvia Pettem write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com, Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net or write to the Daily Camera, 5450 Western Ave., Boulder 80301.