The mission of the NCNW is to lead, develop and advocate for women of African descent as they support their families and communities.

Barbara Gaba of Union County College is to receive the Educational Excellence Award from National Council of Negro Women, Elizabeth chapter. (Photo: Photo courtesy of Union County College) Story Highlights Barbara Gaba of Union County College to receive educational excellence award from National Council of Negro Women (NCNW).

Gaba serves as the provost of Union County College's Elizabeth campus.

National Council of Negro Women will be celebrating 80 years of enriching and fulfilling the lives of African-American women and their families.

The organization was established in 1935 by Mary McLeod Bethune, distinguished educator and life rights leader.

Barbara Gaba, provost of Union County College's Elizabeth campus and associate vice president for academic affairs for the College, has been chosen by the National Council of Negro Women Inc., Greater Elizabeth Area Section, to be a recipient of the Prestige Recognition Award, "NCNW Educational Excellence Award."

Gaba, who holds a doctorate, will receive this award at the 10th Annual Harambee Breakfast and Awards Ceremony being conducted at 9 a.m. March 14 at the Renaissance Airport Hotel, 100 Spring St., in Elizabeth.

Gaba is one of five individuals who will be awarded for their commitment to community service. Also being honored for their leadership and service are: Berthenia Harmon Carolina, who will receive the Dr. Mary McLeod Bethune Award; Detective Jeanine Simone Taylor who will receive the Community Service Award; Brianna M. Armstead will who receive the Dorothy I Height Youth Leadership Award; and Eartha Mitchem will receive the NCNW, Greater Elizabeth Area Section Award. Mistress of ceremony is Honorable Patricia Perkins-Auguste.

The breakfast is open to the public. Ticket donation is $45.

The keynote speaker at the ceremony will be the Honorable Alexis Herman, the first African-American United States Secretary of Labor who served in President Bill Clinton's administration. As secretary, she focused on a prepared workforce, a secure workforce, and quality workplaces Currently, Herman serves as chair and chief executive officer of New Ventures.As well, the National Council of Negro Women will be celebrating 80 years of enriching and fulfilling the lives of African American women and their families. The organization was established in 1935 by Mary McLeod Bethune, distinguished educator and life-rights leader.

The GEAS of the NCNW is now in its tenth year and is one of the newest of more than 240 sections in the National Organization founded by Dr. Mary McLeod Bethune in 1935. The group's mission is to lead, develop and advocate for women of African descent as they support their families and communities, addressing local needs while impacting communities nationwide. The section meets at 7 p.m. the second Tuesday of each month. New members are always welcome. For information or to become a member, contact Erica Blount, president, NCNW GEAS at 908-884-0832 or Joann Blount at 908-884-0241.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1AmYaYi