She is starring as Lois Lane's sister Lucy in Supergirl.

And Jenna Dewan-Tatum was looking rather superb herself as she enjoyed a fun day out with her daughter at a farmer's market in Los Angeles on Sunday.

The dynamic duo looked like they were having a great time as they sauntered around the bustling bazaar, with the popular actress even happy to wave at excited fans as she strolled past.

Making waves: Jolly Jenna Dewan-Tatum was happy to wave at fans at a farmer's market in LA on Sunday

The saucy former dancer showed off her svelte physique in black top and jeans, while she also chose to wear flat shoes for her produce sourcing mission.

But the 34-year-old's was her trendy fedora hat and Sunday Somewhere oversized sunglasses combo that really raised her ensemble above the average.

Her two-year-old daughter, who is the spitting image of her father Channing Tatum, looked as cute as a button in black trousers and a Care Bear top.

The pair were spending even more quality time together after a fun-filled Thanksgiving with her family.

Hi-de-hi: She looked like she was having a great time with her daughter on her day off

Hatagirl: She lifted her ensemble above the run of the mill by wearing a fancy fedora

What a carry on: She was happy to hold the toddler as the wandered around the bustling bazaar

Jenna honoured the occasion with a particularly special throwback photo from her archives, which she shared on Instagram.

She posed alongside her three younger brothers and dad Darryll in the ten-year-old photo which she juxtaposed with a modern-day re-enactment.

The actress captioned the image: 'Happy thanksgiving everyone!!!!!! We spent the day with my dad and little brothers:) 10 years ago and now.'

Jenna is currently appearing in Supergirl as recurring character Lucy Lane, the former girlfriend of Mehcad Brooks' Jimmy Olsen, though he toe-curlingly insists on being called James in the liberal new adaptation.

Trolley dolly: Her daughter looked as cute as a button as she went on a thrill ride around the market

You look super girl: No doubt the superheroine was telling Lucy Lane how much she likes a woman in uniform

What Daily Planet are you on? Jenna's character is a former flame of Mehcad Brooks' Jimmy Olsen, who toe-curlingly insists on being called James on the show