Colorado authorities have moved Homaidan al-Turki , the Saudi man convicted of sexually assaulting his housekeeper for years, from a state prison to a federal lockup for security reasons, his attorney said Friday.

But his lawyer, Henry Solano, said he was unaware of any threats made against his client. In fact, prison records obtained by The Denver Post show al-Turki’s only complaints in years behind bars concerned prison staff, not fellow inmates.

Al-Turki has been investigated in connection with the March murder of Colorado prisons chief Tom Clements, particularly whether al-Turki had any ties to a white supremacist prison gang that investigators believe may have ordered the hit. Since then, al-Turki has been moved several times from general population to protective segregation.

Al-Turki has denied having any involvement with Clements’ killing.

Al-Turki had been held at the Limon Correctional Facility until 3:30 a.m. Friday, when Colorado correctional officials moved him to a federal prison in Englewood, Solano said.

“We don’t know where he will be transferred,” Solano said.

Solano said when he met with al-Turki on Thursday, his client had no indication about any threats against him. Al-Turki’s attorneys received a call from a case worker at Federal Correctional Institution Englewood Friday morning indicating he had been transferred to a federal prison.

“The decision was made very quickly,” Solano said. “He was only allowed to take his legal papers and his Koran with him.”

DOC spokeswoman Alison Morgan confirmed that al-Turki was moved to a federal prison for safety reasons under the interstate prison compact but called the move “routine.”

“We make these decisions based on the business needs of the department and the safe operations of our institutions,” Morgan said.

Solano said he would be concerned if al-Turki, who is scheduled for a hearing this month, was moved far away because it might restrict his ability to meet with his client.

Solano said authorities have indicated al-Turki remains a part of the investigation into the killing of Clements, who was shot to death on the doorstep of his Monument home on March 19. He said in court proceedings the state has denied records requests by al-Turki on the basis that the investigation in the Clements’ case continues.

One week before he was killed, Clements denied a request by al-Turki to be transferred to Saudi Arabia to serve the remainder of his prison sentence.

Evan Ebel, a member of the white supremacist gang the 211 Crew, allegedly shot Clements. Authorities have investigated whether there are ties — financial or otherwise — between al-Turki and the gang. Ebel died in a shootout with Texas authorities March 21.

Prosecutors have said al-Turki kept his Indonesian housekeeper a virtual slave and sexually assaulted her over four years. Al-Turki, a well-known member of Denver’s Muslim community, has maintained his innocence and claimed the charges were a result of anti-Muslim sentiment following the 9/11 attacks.

He was convicted in state court in 2006 of unlawful sexual contact by use of force, theft and extortion—all felonies—as well as misdemeanor counts of false imprisonment and conspiracy to commit false imprisonment. He was sentenced to 28 years to life in prison, which was reduced to eight years to life in 2011 on a legal technicality.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, kmitchell@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kmitchelldp