MONTGOMERY, Alabama --- Sen. Hank Sanders of Selma said the seven people arrested at the State Capitol last night were taking a moral stand for Medicaid expansion because they believe lives are at stake.

Sanders' wife, Faya Rose Toure, and six others were arrested when they refused to leave the State Capitol after it closed at 5 p.m.

They were protesting Gov. Robert Bentley's decision not to allow expansion of Medicaid in Alabama.

Sanders, Toure and others with a group known as the Save OurSelves Movement for Justice & Democracy held marches for seven straight days at the State Capitol to advocate for a variety of causes, including voting rights, women's rights, immigrant rights and others.

They called the marches Jericho marches because of the Biblical story in the book of Joshua, when the Israelites followed God's instructions and marched around the city of Jericho for seven straight days, including seven times on the seventh day, to bring the city's walls down.

Sanders said at the end of Thursday's demonstration, 10 of the 40 or so marchers decided to enter the Capitol and stay for 24 hours as a special protest for Medicaid expansion.

"When law enforcement asked them to leave, three left but seven remained," Sanders said.

"They said, 'This house does not belong to the politicians, it was the people's house,' so they had a right to stay in there," said Sanders, who was there but not among the group that went in the Capitol.

"I think the seven people that stayed in there were prepared to be arrested," Sanders said. "They felt like that just because of politics hundreds of thousands of folks can't get medical insurance and hundreds of folks die each year. It's a moral issue."

For more than a year, Bentley has staunchly opposed expanding Medicaid, which is a state option under the Affordable Care Act.

"The governor's position on Medicaid expansion has been crystal clear--it isn't fiscally responsible to expand Medicaid. His focus is trying to make the current system more efficient and effective," Bentley spokeswoman Jennifer Ardis said in an email.

Those arrested Thursday were charged with second degree criminal trespassing, according to state police. Sanders said they bonded out of the Montgomery County jail at about 1 a.m. Friday.

Sanders said they are scheduled to appear in Montgomery County District Court on Sept. 15.