Officials will close on a new storage facility this week to help make room in museum, allow those interested to study work in more detail at new location

City of Loveland officials authorized the purchase of the building pictured above, located at 710 Southwest 14th Street, as a storage facility for the Loveland Museum/Gallery. Closing is planned for this week. ( Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Loveland Museum/Gallery staff members are excited about upcoming programs and changes in the new year, including a new storage facility that officials will close on this week.

Exhibits

The next big show coming up at the Loveland Museum/Gallery on Jan. 30 is called "Momentum," by five artists who have been involved in Loveland for a long time, according to Maureen Corey, curator of art. The artists are Jane DeDecker, Rosetta, Kathleen Caricof, Kirsten Kokkin and Glenna Goodacre. "It's about women who drive the art in Loveland," she said.

Corey added that these five women are a big part of Loveland's art history and helped make Loveland an art center.

Julia Campos, then 11, left, and Chloe Tippmann, then 11, try their hands at pen and ink plus colored pencil on mylar during the Techniques Showcase on March 7, 2015 at the Loveland Museum/Gallery. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald file photo)

"All of these women have international reputations, important commissions they've produced and continue to produce," Corey said.

Programs along with this exhibit will include demonstrations for schoolchildren where organizers are inviting schools to hear from artists in the exhibit, said Jenni Dobson, curator of education.

Corey is also excited about an exhibit by Salvador Dali that will open at the end of August 2016 with illustrations from a private collector that Dali painted for a cookbook called, "Les Diners de Gala."

"He did these surreal illustrations for this. They're kind of funny and kind of sensual because it's food," Corey said. "It will be fun to have Dali in the museum again."

Advertisement

And the Governor's Art Show is on its 25th annual event this year, Corey said. The exhibit will take place April 24-May 29, with an opening night gala on April 23.

"We'll be in all three of our gallery spaces. Usually, they are in two," Corey said.

She said Pam Osborn, director of the event, is planning a lot of downtown activities such as plein aire painting events and artist demos. Go to governorsartshow.org for more about the show.

Loveland-based sculptor Ted Schaal, middle, talks about his contemporary abstract art with Pat Saunders-White, right, and Jack Frost during the Governor's Art Show Opening Gala on May 30, 2015 at the Loveland Museum/Gallery. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald file photo)

Corey and Dobson are also looking forward to a blockbuster exhibit in September but don't have details yet since the event details have not yet been finalized.

"It will have some big names and include a lot of history," Corey said.

Programs

The museum is also hosting the site for another pre-college studio art collaboration with Front Range College. Front Range has an anonymous donor that helps with outreach through various community programs.

Artist Jennie Kiessling, featured artist at Artworks Loveland in December, coordinates the program and hires artists in Loveland to meet with high school students and give them access to various experiences like studio work, tours of Artworks and Front Range.

"It has been great," Dobson said. "These are month-long programs, four Saturdays per month, but (students) can continue on and meet with different artists."

Students can sign up at the museum website, lovelandmuseumgallery.org.

Dobson said the museum is bringing back History Days the second week of May for second graders. The event will include morning activities at the Rialto Theater Center and Loveland Museum, and afternoons at Lone Tree School.

"We had 19 of 20 elementary schools in Loveland come," Dobson said.

The program was paid for by the Thompson Education Foundation for curriculum-based field trips so that there was no cost to the schools themselves.

Museum Storage

The Loveland City Council approved in November a contract to purchase a 16,000 square-foot property for $2.1 million at 710 Southwest 14th Street, on 14th Street between Taft Avenue and U.S. 287. The facility will house the 35,000 pieces of history that the museum doesn't have room to display.

"(The items) are now stuffed into the museum and into the back of Mister Neat's (now Al's Formal Wear)," Cultural Services Director Susan Ison said. "But there's no space to maneuver. It also doesn't have the environmental control we need."

After the closing in early January, museum staff will start boxing up artifacts and moving them over. The actual move might not take place until February or March. The pieces are occasionally used to switch out exhibits at the museum and are also used for research.

In the new space, Loveland residents — by appointment — will have more room to maneuver and study the pieces in research.

"Preserving things in perpetuity is one of our primary missions," Ison said.

Most of the pieces are items that have been donated to the museum such as photographs, clothing, agricultural instruments and sewing machines.

"Sewing machines are a popular thing to give to museums," she said.

City staff members from the Facilities Department sought a building that had the possibility of environmental control, ground floor access, loading docks, high ceilings and security.

Art in Public Places

The Visual Arts Commission and Art in Public Places program are working on several art pieces in Loveland in the new year, according to Ison. The VAC asked for artists to submit proposals for the Wilson Avenue bridge, the Taft Avenue bridge and a mural at the formerly-named Fire Administration Building (FAB), soon to house a development center.

The city requires that a piece of art is commissioned at newly constructed city buildings as part of the "1 percent for the arts program," which stipulates 1 percent of construction costs of public buildings must be set aside for the arts.

Artists are presenting proposals to the VAC for the FAB building and Wilson Avenue bridge project in January. The Taft Avenue project will come later in 2016.

"We had 80 applicants for the FAB," Ison said. "We ended up with three finalists."

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com.

[Editor's Note: This story has been changed to reflect that City Council approved the museum storage facility in November.]