Teleperformance is preparing to hire 300 agents for its call center operation in Abilene, Texas, as the global outsourcing giant presses ahead to garner a larger chunk of contracts emanating from the Obama administration’s healthcare law.

The Paris, France-based firm, whose annual revenue exceeds US$3 billion, says the agents to be hired will support “the nation’s largest health insurance companies.” It is encouraging military members, veterans and military spouses to apply to fill the new vacancies.

“These positions will be assisting members with the insurance needs for the upcoming year and answering questions through inbound calls at the Abilene center,” the BPO provider stated in a press release.

“ObamaCare,” as it has been dubbed, has led health insurers and government agencies to recruit more call center representatives, because they have to answer questions from millions of American residents signing up through health care exchanges.

Company officials state that wages will range from US$9 to US$12 per hour depending on experience. Upon recruitment, the employees will undergo training, said the company, adding that it is also looking for supervisors and managers.

The outsourcer already employs nearly 400 customer service and technical support professionals at its Abilene facility. Elsewhere in Texas, the company has more than 2,000 full time employees.

Sign up for our Nearshore Americas newsletter:



“We are very excited to be launching these new programs and bringing these career opportunities to the great city of Abilene,” said Todd Hatch, executive vice president of operations.

Teleperformance, recently reached a deal to purchase Aegis’ outsourcing operations in the United States, the Philippines and Costa Rica for US$610 million.

The BPO firm, which started out with three call centers in 1998, now operates more than 26 sites in the United States. In total it employs over 149,000 people at 230 centers across 62 countries. It’s biggest Latin American operations are in Mexico, where it operates 17 contact centers with over 18,000 employees.