Critics have decried Burger King’s plan to combine with Tim Hortons and relocate its headquarters to Canada from the U.S.as an unpatriotic tax dodge.

But last year, Liberty Global, one of Colorado’s largest public companies, made a similar maneuver following its $23 billion acquisition of Virgin Media, a deal twice as large as the one being derided.

Burger King now faces boycott calls in the U.S., but the Liberty Global move didn’t generate anywhere near the same controversy.

That might be because 90 percent of the cable company’s revenues last year came from Europe and the remainder from Latin America, leaving domestic consumers with nothing to boycott.

Liberty Global’s move did catch the attention of the Internal Revenue Service, which changed the tax code in April to shut down a structure the company used to make the transaction mostly tax-free for its U.S. investors, a group led by John Malone.

Tax inversions occur when U.S. corporations acquire foreign companies and then re-incorporate abroad to save money on taxes, sometimes without shifting any operations or headquarters staff.

Liberty Global traded in its Inc. for a PLC last year, but the executive team and the operational headquarters remain near Centennial Airport — even if the London office gets top billing.

Defenders of inversion argue it results from the 35 percent corporate tax rate in the U.S., among the highest in the developed world, and a policy of taxing revenues regardless of where they are made.

“The United States, with its tax code, has made itself increasingly uncompetitive as we vie for companies to locate and to expand operations here,” said Michael Faulkender, an associate professor of finance at the University of Maryland.

But James Henry, a senior fellow at the Columbia University Center for Sustainable International Investment, counters that countries around the globe are engaged in a race to the bottom on corporate tax rates, including a few in Africa that have gone to zero.

“These companies do business in the U.S. They benefit from the airports, hospitals, police, fire, education. The rest of us pay for the military,” he said of tax inverters.

Burger King, based in Miami, denies that a desire to save on corporate taxes is driving the relocation, noting its effective tax rate is only slightly higher than what Tim Hortons pays in Canada.

Rather, it argues that Canadian customers, who would account for the bulk of revenues in a combined company, would remain more loyal if the company flew the Canadian flag.

That doesn’t sit well with some Whopper lovers who pledge allegiance to the stars and stripes. Calls for a Burger King boycott are making the rounds on social media, with Sen. Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, joining in the fray.

Bloomberg reports Congress may take up the matter of tax inversions next year, given the growing number of U.S. brands that have or plan to incorporate abroad.

Aldo Svaldi: 303-954-1410, asvaldi@denverpost.com or twitter.com/aldosvaldi