hr chrishurstnutcracker 121415 p08 Chris Hurst looks for the perfect place to hang Alison Parker's point ballet shoes on a clock set piece on Sunday before his final performance in "The Nutcracker." The clock appears in the first scene, during which Hurst and his dance partner, Mitzi Keeley, will admire it.

hr chrishurstnutcracker 121415 p01 Chris Hurst and Mitzi Keeley enter the stage in the role of a couple for the opening act of "The Nutcracker" by Southwest Virginia Ballet at Berglund Performing Arts Theatre on Saturday night. Hurst performed in honor of his late girlfriend, Alison Parker, a WDBJ (Channel 7) reporter who was killed during a live broadcast in August. Parker intended to perform in the ballet with Hurst.

Chris Hurst shares a hug with Pedro Szalay After hanging Alison Parker's pointe ballet shoes on a set piece for "The Nutcracker" and wiping away some tears, Chris Hurst shares a hug with Pedro Szalay, artistic director of Southwest Virginia Ballet. The set piece, a clock, appears in the first scene, during which Hurst and his dance partner, Mitzi Keeley, admire it.

Chris Hurst and Mitzi Keeley Chris Hurst and Mitzi Keeley enter the stage in the role of a couple for the opening act of "The Nutcracker" by Southwest Virginia Ballet at Berglund Performing Arts Theatre on Saturday night. Hurst preformed in honor of his late girlfriend, Alison Parker, a WDBJ (Channel 7) reporter who was killed during a live broadcast in August. Parker intended to perform in the ballet with Hurst.

Alison Parker's pointe ballet shoes Alison Parker's pointe ballet shoes hang on a clock set piece that sits on display in the first scene of "The Nutcracker" on Sunday. Chris Hurst and Pedro Szalay, artistic director of Southwest Virginia Ballet, hung them there to honor Parker, who was supposed to perform in the ballet.

Chris Hurst prepares with fellow "Nutcracker" performers Chris Hurst prepares with fellow "Nutcracker" performers at the Berglund Performing Arts Theatre on Saturday night. Hurst preformed in honor of his late girlfriend, Alison Parker, a WDBJ (Channel 7) reporter who was killed during a live broadcast in August.

Chris Hurst has his makeup done by Karen Kalbfleisch Chris Hurst has his makeup done by Karen Kalbfleisch, executive director of Southwest Virginia Ballet, before performing in "The Nutcracker" at Berglund Performing Arts Theatre on Saturday night. Hurst said Parker would have gotten a chuckle out of his makeup.

Chris Hurst Chris Hurst buttons his costume in a changing room after having his hair and makeup done before performing in "The Nutcracker" at Berglund Performing Arts Theatre on Saturday night. Hurst preformed in honor of his late girlfriend, Alison Parker, who he said would have gotten a chuckle out of his makeup.