OU Medical's Children's Hospital held its first "Winter Wonderland Prom" for its young patients.

The prom also had appearances from pageant queens, OU baseball and football players and both OSU and OU cheerleaders, and the Barons mascot danced with the kids Saturday night.

The dance floor was packed Saturday night as children and their families got all dressed up for a one-of-a-kind prom.

It's a special night for dozens of children battling life-threatening illnesses. The OU Medical's Children's Hospital held its first "Winter Wonderland Prom" for its young patients.

The dance floor was packed Saturday night as children and their families got all dressed up for a one-of-a-kind prom.

Preparing for a night to remember, picking out the perfect dress and being pampered by professionals, these girls at OU Children's Hospital got dolled up from head to toe.

"I'm just afraid of tripping and falling, but I can walk in heels pretty good," Makenzie Patrick.

Patrick, 9, has suffered 16 broken bones because of a bone disease she was born with. She joined dozens of other kids, battling life-threatening illnesses for prom night in their honor.

"I think it's really nice of them...that they get people with all these diseases to come and just have fun," Patrick said,

Patients turned into party animals, celebrating a night some thought would never come.

"A lot of my kids come three days a week, and sit in a chair for three hours to get dialysis. So it's a way to get out of your chairs and meet the people who are in the same unit as you and come and hang out," said child life specialist, Ashley Claber.

Tori Brown, 15, is all smiles, even after being diagnosed with leukemia four months ago.

"I like to people watch," said Brown.

All eyes were on Tori's best friend, who shaved off her hair to show support.

"Don't lose faith. You get to have fun, and just dance and meet all these new people," Brown said.

The prom also had appearances from pageant queens, OU baseball and football players and both OSU and OU cheerleaders, and the Barons mascot danced with the kids Saturday night.