U.S. Rep. Mark Amodei, R-Carson City, is photographed in his Washington office on July 29, 2014. (Photo: Jocelyn M. Augustino for USA TODAY )

Most members of Congress keep awards and honorary certificates in their Capitol Hill offices. Rep. Mark Amodei has preserved his favorite piece of hate mail.

It’s a printout of an email from an angry constituent who didn’t like one of Amodei’s bills. The subject line reads: “Are you insane?” and the message concludes with the sentiment, “Your job is over, cupcake!”

“My sensitive staff glued a candy heart with the word ‘cupcake’ on it and gave it to me to cherish for eternity,” Amodei said, chuckling after showing it to a couple of visitors from Nevada. “We need to learn to laugh at ourselves a little more here in Washington.”

In a city consumed by bitter partisan politics, the Carson City Republican’s self-deprecating humor has won him friends among lawmakers of both parties and helped the former state assemblyman and senator pass nearly a dozen bills during his first full term in Congress.

Democrats who serve with the 56-year-old congressman said they find the wise-cracking conservative lawyer to be a refreshing change from the hostile tea party-style Republicans who have swept into office in recent years. Even Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., has called Amodei “hilarious” and fun to be around.

“He’s likeable, he’s easy to work with, and he doesn’t take himself too seriously,” said Rep. Jim Moran, a liberal Democrat from northern Virginia who serves on the House Appropriations Committee with Amodei. “But he takes his job seriously.”

Amodei has won House approval of five of the 18 bills he introduced in this session of Congress. The House is expected to pass six more of his bills — a package of Northern Nevada lands legislation — in September.

“That’s excellent for somebody so early in their career, especially when you consider the fact that Congress has gotten so little done overall,” said Eric Herzik, chairman of the political science department at the University of Nevada, Reno.

Amodei has been in office nearly three years. He won a special election in September 2011 to replace Sen. Dean Heller, R-Nev., who held the House seat before being appointed to replace former Sen. John Ensign, R-Nev. Ensign resigned amid a sex scandal. Amodei was re-elected to the House in 2012.

One of the major reasons that Amodei has been successful is that his legislation tends to be bipartisan and aimed at solving local problems, Herzik said.

Case in point, Herzik said, is the Yerington bill, which would transfer more than 10,000 acres of public lands to the city of Yerington to develop a copper mine in exchange for making 48,000 acres of the Wovoka forest into a national wilderness area.

Amodei championed the bill in the last Congress, when Yerington was part of his district. In this Congress, Yerington became part of the district represented by Democratic Rep. Steven Horsford.

Together, Amodei and Horsford worked to push the bill through the House Natural Resources Committee, where is was approved at the end of July. Amodei convinced the Republican majority to create more federal wilderness area while Horsford convinced environmentally conscious Democrats to support the mine.

Rep. John Garamendi, D-Calif., who has served on the Natural Resources Committee with Amodei and worked with him on Lake Tahoe restoration and wildfire prevention, said Amodei is unique among the newer Republican members because he knows how to negotiate and compromise with Democrats.

Amodei said he learned those skills serving in the Nevada State Assembly from 1996-1998 and the Nevada State Senate from 1998-2010. He was president pro tempore of the state Senate from 2003-2008.

“It definitely makes a difference that Congressman Amodei served in the state legislature,” Garamendi said. “He knows the legislative process. With many of the newer conservative members, it’s ‘my way or get out.’ He’s not like that.”

Despite Amodei’s collegial style, the congressman should not be mistaken for a moderate, Democratic Party officials said.

“Congressman Mark Amodei has been a lockstep vote for the most reviled Congress in modern history — whether it’s shutting down the government, ending the Medicare guarantee or giving tax breaks for the wealthy at the expense of the middle class —Mark Amodei has proven time and again that he is part of the problem, and out of touch with Northern Nevada values,” said Tyrone Gayle, a spokesman for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.

Among Nevada members of the U.S. House, Amodei voted with his party the most often, earning him a 2013 party unity score of 96 percent from the non-partisan CQ Weekly magazine. Reps. Dina Titus, a Democrat, and Joe Heck, a Republican, both had party unity scores of 93 percent. Horsford earned a party unity score of 92 percent.

Just before Congress adjourned for its August legislative recess, Amodei joined fellow House Republicans in voting to sue Democratic President Barack Obama for delaying a provision in the Affordable Care Act that requires employers to provide medical insurance to their workers.

Republicans see the delay as an example of Obama overstepping his executive authority. Democrats say the vote was a political stunt by Republicans in an election year.

“Instead of focusing on issues that the American people are urging us to act on, House Republicans decided to sacrifice precious taxpayer resources on a partisan stunt that does nothing to help working families,” Horsford said.

However, that same week, Amodei defied his GOP leaders as one of only 11 Republicans to oppose a bill to end an Obama administration program that stops the deportation of some undocumented immigrants. The legislation passed but has no chance of advancing in the Democratic controlled Senate.

The Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program allows young immigrants brought to the U.S. as children to gain legal status if they are in school, have graduated from U.S. high schools or served honorably in the U.S. military, and have lived in the country at least five consecutive years since June 2007.

Amodei’s spokesman, Brian Baluta, said the congressman thought the Republican bill would create more confusion about U.S. immigration policy — confusion that Amodei believes would end if the House would pass an immigration reform bill.

The congressman said the failure of Congress to pass immigration reform is his biggest frustration. He has said he would support a bill to offer a way for undocumented immigrants in the United States to earn citizenship. House leaders say they will not take up immigration legislation this year.

“We need to vote on something,” Amodei said. “How the hell do you defend nothing?”

Amodei will likely have a chance to make that point again in the new Congress that convenes in January.

The congressman is expected to win re-election easily in November. The non-partisan Cook Political Report lists Amodei’s seat in Nevada’s 2nd Congressional District as “solid Republican.” The non-partisan Rothenberg Political Report lists the seat as “safe Republican.”

Amodei will face Democratic challenger Kristen Spees — an attorney from Incline Village — and Independent American Party candidate Janine Hansen in the Nov. 4 election.

In the meantime, Amodei said he will spend the few remaining legislative weeks of this year focusing on trying to get his Nevada-centric bills passed.

In addition to the Nevada lands package, Amodei is pushing for a House vote on the Nevada Native Nations Lands Act, which transfers federal land to a half dozen Indian tribes in the state to use for economic development, housing and cultural preservation.

The bill, already approved by the Natural Resources Committee, also includes a provision to sell about 275 acres of federal land to Elko County to create a motocross, bicycle, off-roading or stock car racing area.

Amodei also is hoping the Senate will pass two spending bills already approved by the House that include his provisions to bar discrimination against casino cities such as Reno by federal agencies planning government meetings and conferences.

The congressman used his spot on the House Appropriations Committee, which he was appointed to in December, to insert the measure into the spending bills after the legislation stalled in another committee. If the Senate fails to pass the spending bills, Amodei said he will push for the anti-discrimination provision to be included in whatever compromise spending deal is worked out at the end of the year.

A 2010 scandal involving employees of the General Services Administration led to a federal blacklisting of casino cities and resorts. GSA employees attending a conference near Las Vegas spent more than $800,000 on activities that included hiring a mind reader and a clown. The lavish spending was done in the midst of the recession.

“We’ve tried to take a hands-on approach to solving problems,” Amodei said. “I want to get things done. I don’t care much for the political quarterbacking that goes on here. I can talk about issues all day without ever needing to talk about Republicans or Democrats.”

Rep. James Renacci, R-Ohio, lives in a Capitol Hill apartment next to Amodei’s and said other lawmakers could learn something from watching the Nevadan work a room full of politicians.

“When he walks across the House floor, it doesn’t matter whether it’s a Democrat or a Republican, he is joking around with them and saying hi to them,” Renacci said. “Everybody knows him and sees him as someone they can work with.”

Amodei said he’s trying to avoid getting sucked into the partisan Washington drama that’s broadcast back home to Nevada every day from the cable news networks.

“People need to calm down around here and talk to each other,” he said. “Everything doesn’t have to be a Fox News alert.”

Contact Erin Kelly at ekelly@gannett.com

Rep. Mark E. Amodei, R-Carson City

Current office: U.S. representative, 2nd Congressional District of Nevada

Elected: First elected in a Sept. 2011 special election to fill vacant seat, re-elected in Nov. 2012

Party: Republican

Born: Carson City, Nev. on June 12, 1958

Age: 56

Education: BA from the University of Nevada, Reno in 1980; law degree from the University of the Pacific, McGeorge School of Law in Sacramento, Calif., in 1983.

Work experience: Attorney in private practice (currently sole practitioner, has worked in law firms in the past); president of the Nevada Mining Association from 2007-2008; attorney for the U.S. Army Judge Advocate General (JAG) Corps from 1983-1987.

Elected offices held: Nevada State Assembly, 1996-1998; Nevada State Senate, 1998-2010; President Pro Tempore, Nevada State Senate, 2003-2008; U.S. representative, Sept. 2011-present

Congressional committees: Appointed to the House Appropriations Committee in December; before that, served on the Judiciary Committee, Natural Resources Committee and Veterans’ Affairs Committee

Marital status: Divorced, two grown daughters

Current residence: Carson City, Nev.

Source: Office of Rep. Mark Amodei

Key votes by Rep. Mark Amodei in the 113th Congress

Voted yes to reauthorize the Violence Against Women Act for five more years. Passed the House by a vote of 286-138 on Feb. 28, 2013.

Voted yes to repeal the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare. Passed 229-195 on May 16, 2013.

Voted yes to prohibit the National Security Agency from the bulk collection of Americans’ phone records for domestic surveillance purposes under the Patriot Act anti-terrorism law. Failed 205-217 on July 24, 2013.

Voted no to requiring mining companies to include the cost of mine cleanup in their financial insurance before they can obtain a federal mining permit. Failed 191-235 on Sept. 18, 2013.

Voted yes to bar the Defense Department from using its funds to report on the impacts of climate change. Passed 231-192 on May 22, 2014.

Voted yes to prohibit states from penalizing a bank for providing financial services to legal marijuana businesses. Passed 231-192 on July 16, 2014.

Voted yes to ban the District of Columbia from using federal funds to enforce the city’s gun control laws. Passed 241-181 on July 16, 2014.

Voted yes to authorize House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, to sue President Barack Obama for delaying the implementation of parts of the Affordable Care Act. Passed 225-201 on July 30, 2014.

Voted yes to pass a $17 billion veterans health care reform bill that adds more doctors and nurses to the VA system and allows veterans to seek care from private doctors if VA clinics cannot treat them in a timely manner. Passed 420-5 on July 30, 2014.

Voted yes to provide nearly $11 billion to the federal Highway Trust Fund to keep it going through the end of May. Passed 272-150 on July 31, 2014.

Voted no on ending an Obama administration program that protects some young undocumented immigrants from being deported if they were brought to the U.S. as children and have lived here since June 2007and are in school, have graduated, or served honorably in the U.S. military. Passed 216-192 on Aug. 1, 2014.

Voted yes on a $694 million emergency spending bill aimed at reducing the flow of Central American children across the Southwest border. It included $35 million to pay for National Guard troops at the Texas-Mexico border and would make it easier to send Central American children back to their home countries quickly. Passed 223-189 on Aug. 1, 2014.

Sources: Project Vote Smart; U.S. House website

Read or Share this story: http://on.rgj.com/VbQ3AS