An officer moves in the direction of Columbia Centre on Saturday night. (Source: Anabell Martin)

The Columbia Police Department continues to follow leads after Saturday night's possible gang-related shooting between two men inside the Columbiana Centre shopping mall.

So far, no arrests have been made.

Instead, police are focusing on surveillance video and witnesses in an effort to identify the men who caused quite a scare for hundreds of shoppers and store employees.

RELATED: See photos from the scene of the shooting.

A massive amount of law enforcement officers and first responders converged on the mall just after 7 p.m. Saturday after shots were reported inside the complex.

Shots were initially reported outside Dillard's and T-Mobile as the first officers arrived at the scene.

Those shots, according to Columbia Police Chief Skip Holbrook, were byproducts of a fist fight in front of Kay Jewelers. Holbrook said both men were fighting when a third male jumped in. At some point, two of the men pulled out guns and shot in the air.

Holbrook described those men as being black males 20-25 years old, both standing around 5' 10" and weighing 150 pounds. One of the shooters was wearing an acid wash shirt and pants. The other shooter was wearing a dark hoodie. Both had black handguns.

The people involved in the fight quickly ran away after the shots were fired, Holbrook said.

A video posted by Anabell Martin (@aos_author) on Feb 20, 2016 at 4:20pm PST

"We don't have any reports it was a running gun battle," Holbrook said. "We have a very good witness that was standing nearby when it occurred."

The third man did not fire a gun and is not considered a suspect.

There have been no reports of anybody being injured as a result of the shooting or the chaos that ensued, the chief said. There was an accident on Interstate 26, but it was not connected with the mall incident.

Holbrook also said area hospitals have not received anybody with injuries related to the shooting or rush to escape the building.

Chief Holbrook said officers have completed all tactical operations inside the mall and have also cleared all Harbison corridor businesses.

Officers found some businesses inside Columbiana Centre to be locked. Holbrook said officers will work with mall and store management to go through those spaces.

Traffic was restricted in the general area of the mall for several hours. The I-26 exit at Harbison Boulevard was also closed for some time.

Investigators hope to find images of those involved and share them with the public. "Anything of value will be shared with the media," Holbrook said.

They also ask that anyone with video or pictures of the fight or shots fired call authorities as soon as possible.

As for the mall, it will re-open on Sunday at noon.

If you know anything about this incident or the people that may have fired the shots, you are urged to contact Crimestoppers in any of the following ways: Call 1-888-CRIME SC (888-274-6372), Text TIPSC plus your tip info to CRIMES (274637), visit www.midlandscrimestoppers.com and email a tip. Your identity will be kept anonymous, and if your tip leads to an arrest, you could be eligible for a cash reward of up to $1,000.

Copyright 2016 WIS. All rights reserved.