You might want to clear your schedule for a couple of evenings this week. It appears that Denver’s Dazzle Jazz club has plans for your ears.

Drummer Rudy Royston, who grew up in the Denver area but has been seeking his fortune in New York recently, will celebrate his homecoming with two nights at the venue, Sept. 11-12. His new CD, “303” (on trumpeter Dave Douglas’ Greenleaf label) should stand as one of the boldest debut efforts of the year. Royston’s compositions are as filled with life as his animated drumming style, and his current working group shines with talent, including saxophonist Jon Irabagon. Fans of creative music know Irabagon’s work from his own group, the assertive and intelligent Mostly Other People Do The Killing.

As fine as the “303” release sounds, the live performances of the music should add depth as Royston and his crew have a chance to stretch out. The drummer has played Dazzle on many occasions, but these shows will be his first time as a critically acclaimed bandleader.

Then on Sept. 13-14, longtime Colorado guitarist and educator Dale Bruning will pay tribute to one of his friends, the late jazz giant Jim Hall. Bruning’s gentle spirit and accomplished technique would be reason enough to attend, but he’s invited his most famous student to join him onstage for both nights.

Tireless guitarist Bill Frisell has accepted Bruning’s invitation, and it’s a joy to see and hear the two perform together. Trumpeter Ron Miles and a handful of Denver’s best will fill out the bill, and these shows will likely sell out. Find out more at dazzlejazz.com.

More dates: The Byron Shaw Projext appears at Denver’s fabled El Chapultepec Sept. 12-13; saxophonist Kim Waters plays the Soiled Dove Underground on Sept. 12; the annual Summit Jazz takes place Sept. 26-28 at the Radisson/Red Lion Southeast in Aurora. Performers include clarinetist Allan Vache, singer-bassist Nicki Parrott and the Jim Cullum Jazz Band. Get tickets and information through summitjazz.org

Bret Saunders can be heard from 6 to 11 a.m. weekday mornings at KBCO 97.3 FM and KBCO.com. Contact bretsaunders@kbco.com.