Harlem's renaissance is impossible to miss. Starbucks and Banana Republic line 125th Street. Whole Foods is coming. Marcus Samuelsson's Red Rooster restaurant draws gourmands from everywhere, and busloads of tourists come to hear gospel choirs in the churches. But one important uptown institution has missed the revival: Carver Federal Savings, the nation's largest African-American-founded bank and the bedrock of the neighborhood's business scene for 67 years.

Like other black banks, Carver was hit especially hard by the financial crisis, which disproportionately hurt its African-American customers. It weathered the storm thanks to extraordinary intervention by the federal government and a group of big Wall Street institutions. Now it is crawling out of its bunker, and new Chief Executive Michael Pugh has a simple message to the community: Come back.

"I invite you to check us out if you haven't done so for a while," he told members of the Greater Harlem Chamber of Commerce last week.

Whether there is a place for Carver, the last black bank in New York, is a question facing black banks nationwide. Since 1987, three-quarters of the nation's 91 African-American banks have disappeared. The most recent casualty came last month, when regulators closed Atlanta's Capitol City Bank & Trust after years of losses. In January, Chicago's Highland Community Bank met the same fate.

The collapse of so many African-American banks has alarmed black leaders, including those inside the Obama administration, who are only now taking measures to save the 24 that remain in the United States. Most of the banks are small and struggle to make money, but their defenders argue they must be preserved because they remain career launching pads for minority and women bankers, in addition to having long histories of providing credit to consumers and entrepreneurs who couldn't get it anywhere else.

Though Harlem's renaissance has expanded the presence of Chase, Citibank, Wells Fargo and Bank of America, black banks say that minorities need dedicated institutions to serve their financial needs because the era of discrimination is far from over. They point to the fact that regulators and the U.S. Justice Department found that minority borrowers were pushed into more costly subprime loans or charged higher fees than comparable white borrowers during the housing bubble, and that once-conservative black banks were pressured by federal regulators to get into risky loan-making.

"Absolutely these banks are still relevant, and it's important for black businesses to find ways to work with them," said Keith Clinkscales, CEO of Revolt Media, a cable network owned by Sean "Diddy" Combs.

Mr. Clinkscales added that his company is in talks with Carver to open an account. "I'm busy, you're busy, but we have to do it," he said.

Former city comptroller and mayoral candidate Bill Thompson said he closed his Carver account "long ago," though his 90-year-old father still has one. Mr. Thompson now banks with Chase but still is fond of the place he used to go.

"When I need cash and am in the neighborhood, I go to the Carver branch on 117th Street and use the ATM," he said.

Last ones standing

The 24 African-American banks in the U.S., ranked by asset size

Bank Location Asset size (in millions) Year founded Carver Federal Savings New York $640 1948 OneUnited Bank Boston $614 1982 Liberty Bank & Trust New Orleans $579 1972 Seaway Bank & Trust Chicago $420 1965 Citizens Trust Bank Atlanta $395 1921 Industrial Bank Washington, D.C. $368 1934 Broadway Federal Bank Los Angeles $350 1947 Mechanics & Farmers Bank Durham, N.C. $298 1908 City National Bank of New Jersey Newark $265 1973 Harbor Bank of Maryland Baltimore $235 1982 First Independence Bank Detroit $216 1970 Tri-State Bank of Memphis Memphis, Tenn. $125 1946 Illinois-Service Federal Savings Chicago $115 1934 United Bank of Philadelphia Philadelphia $109 1992 Citizens Savings Bank & Trust Nashville, Tenn. $108 1904 Unity National Bank of Houston Houston $76 1985 North Milwaukee State Bank Milwaukee $75 1971 Commonwealth National Bank Mobile, Ala. $59 1976 South Carolina Community Bank Columbia, S.C. $59 1999 First Tuskegee Bank Tuskegee, Ala. $52 1991 Carver State Bank Savannah, Ga. $42 1927 Alamerica Bank Birmingham, Ala. $41 2000 First State Bank Danville, Va. $39 1919 Columbia Savings & Loan Milwaukee $24 1924

Source: FDIC

Given the wealth of choices now available, it isn't clear how many people will take up Mr. Pugh's invitation to take another look at the community bank that stuck with Harlem throughout the hard times.

"All of us want Carver to prosper, and all of us know its history of serving the community when no one else would," said Greater Harlem chamber President Lloyd Williams. "But if they're going to survive, they're going to have to earn it."

Founded in 1948, Carver was one of the few places where African-Americans and other minorities could get the mortgages or business loans denied them by the midtown banks. That started to change in 1977 with the Community Reinvestment Act, which required banks to serve low-income communities. Given the chance to put their money in institutions that offered more branches and services, many black depositors began to leave.

Still, Carver and its founders remained community fixtures. The Rev. M. Moran Weston of St. Philip's Episcopal Church served on the board until 1997. Richard Greene joined the bank in 1960, served as president for 26 years starting in 1969, and didn't step down from the board until 1997. The bank's slow-and-steady mindset enabled Carver to expand from Harlem into neighborhoods in Queens and Brooklyn.

Its chief competitor, Freedom National Bank, which was co-founded by baseball legend Jackie Robinson and headquartered a few blocks away from Carver on 125th Street, failed in 1990. Carver was so conservative that it introduced ATMs only in 1989, long after most banks.

Even today, Carver remains a place that teaches financial education to people with too little to invest to be of interest to asset-management firms on Wall Street. It's also a place where people without accounts can inexpensively cash checks, pay bills or send money.

"The services and education they offer are tremendously well thought out," said Margaret Anadu, a managing director at Goldman Sachs' urban investment group, which owns shares in Carver. "Big banks would do well to follow what they do."

But its conservative approach became a problem with federal regulators. In a 2001 report, they observed that the bank's "overall volume of lending ... was low" and rated Carver's efforts to serve its communities merely "satisfactory." That amounted to a warning from above that the bank wasn't fulfilling its mission of serving people ignored by other banks, so Carver officials responded by making a lot more loans.

In particular, they wrote a lot of loans to finance construction of affordable housing. Construction loans are much riskier than mortgages because there's no rental income to support them, yet they came to account for more than a fifth of the bank's loan portfolio last decade.

In 2004, regulators raised the bank's community-service rating to "outstanding." Carver officials said they believed the government would provide enough subsidies and support to prevent the loans from defaulting in hard times.

The wrong bet

That proved to be a grave miscalculation when housing collapsed and the financial crisis exploded. Carver lost more than $60 million between 2011 and 2012—a terribly large sum considering that the bank had generated only about $20 million in net earnings since going public in 1994.

Carver's losses reflected how badly the customers of black banks were hurt by the financial crisis. A Federal Reserve study last year showed average income in nonwhite or Hispanic families fell by 11% between 2010 and 2013, compared with an 8% increase among white households.

The decline was one minority families could ill afford, considering median net worth among them was only one-seventh as much as white households, according to the Fed. The banks that specialized in doing business with these families or their landlords got hit hard. At one point, Carver had $120 million worth of seriously delinquent real estate loans on its books and only $23 million set aside in reserves.

In 2011, regulators demanded that Carver raise cash fast and purge its books of troubled loans or the bank would be seized. CEO Debbie Wright, a former city housing official, managed to prevent disaster. But the price of salvation was steep.

The federal government agreed to rescue the bank, and Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Prudential Financial, Citigroup and others injected $55 million in cash. But existing Carver shareholders, many of them Harlem residents who for decades had turned to the bank for mortgages or savings accounts, were left with just a 2% stake. The nation's largest African-American-run bank was no longer African-American-owned.

"I understand the optics," Ms. Wright said at the time. "But there was no alternative. The ... capital we needed wasn't available locally."

Plenty of other African-American banks around the country faced similar predicaments. About 25 of them have failed or were sold during the past decade because they couldn't raise new capital like Carver could.

Indeed, many African-American banks remain so wounded that they need government support, said Michael Grant, president of a trade group for the institutions called the National Bankers Association. He's going to ask the Justice Department to allocate the banks a portion of the billions being collected from large institutions to settle charges over misdeeds last decade. Subprime loans written by big banks caused minority households great financial stress, and, as Mr. Grant put it, "the black banks got stuck with the bill."

After getting its lifeline from Wall Street and the feds, Carver spent the next few years tending to its wounds. Its loan portfolio shrank nearly in half, and its deposit base contracted by a quarter as customers took their money elsewhere. Management says some of the deposit decline stemmed from shooing away other banks and credit unions that parked excess cash to take advantage of Carver's high yields.

In January, Ms. Wright handed the reins to Mr. Pugh, 43, who had been Carver's president and chief operating officer. He joined the bank in 2012 after serving as Capital One's market president for the Washington, D.C., area. "Michael has the experience and commitment to lead and help Carver reach new heights," Ms. Wright said.

To reinvigorate the bank, Mr. Pugh is asking the churches and nonprofits that have been customers for years to help connect it with creditworthy customers. He's sponsoring neighborhood events like Summer Sizzles on Lenox, which highlights the avenue's restaurants. And the bankers he's brought in to drum up small-business loans are showing results. Carver recently made a $1.3 million loan to Gotham Greens, a Brooklyn-based producer of pesticide-free vegetables.

"That's an example of us doing business with people and in places where we weren't before," said Mr. Pugh, a Detroit native who worked as a teller while attending Eastern Michigan University.

To continue the bank's tradition of looking farther afield for borrowers than other banks, he plans to soon offer business loans of $10,000 or less. "If a person who's running a kiosk on 125th Street came looking for a loan, another bank might offer him a credit card—or nothing," he said. "We're going to provide something better."

A growing loan portfolio

Shareholders believe Mr. Pugh is moving in the right direction. Credit-related losses have stabilized, and the loan portfolio is growing again. The bank has turned in three profitable quarters in a row, though earnings were a scant $491,000 over the nine-month stretch ended Dec. 31.

"They've overcome a lot of structural challenges, and we're encouraged," said Ommeed Sathe, a Prudential vice president. Goldman's Ms. Anadu described her firm's investment in Carver as "one of our most important and impactful."

But Carver's small size, with only $640 million in assets and 10 branches, means the building boom transforming the Harlem skyline is passing it by. It wasn't involved when bigger banks provided tens of millions in loans to finance construction of a 28-story condominium tower called Fifth on the Park, for instance. The dollars were simply too much for a bank that doesn't want to bet big on construction anymore.

The bank also has a way to go in turning the entrepreneurs who are remaking Harlem into customers. For instance, restaurateur Mr. Samuelsson isn't a client, though Carver officials say his manager is. Mr. Pugh said he recently had a "good discussion" with Mr. Samuelsson, who wouldn't comment.

Still, unlike some of the remaining African-American banks, Carver's future looks encouraging. The lifeline from the city's biggest banks affords Mr. Pugh time to rebuild the institution, one loan at a time, and capture its share of Harlem's renaissance. And it helps that the Obama administration is interested in its well-being. During a recent meeting at Carver's headquarters attended by representatives from several New York banks as well as city and state agencies, Maria Contreras-Sweet, the head of the U.S. Small Business Administration, praised Carver for its long history of going the extra mile to help launch careers and companies that might not have otherwise existed.

"We need more like you," she said of Carver. "Thank you for being here. I know it hasn't been easy."

"No argument there," Mr. Pugh replied.

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments