Letters to the editor (Photo: Times graphic)

Many of you hopefully saw the Sunday Times report “Caregivers: Tough job, little pay.” As referenced, last year the Legislature passed significant reforms for our nursing homes that included much-needed compensation increases for caregivers. Those reforms and increases wouldn’t have happened without the strong support of Rep. Jim Knoblach.

This year, the Best Life Alliance, a coalition of people and providers, is asking the Legislature to provide similar compensation increases for caregivers in the remaining programs that serve older adults and Minnesotans with disabilities in home and community-based services. These caregivers did not receive increases in 2015.

Knoblach understands the need and has voiced support. For that we are grateful. But we know new spending this year is limited to mostly emergencies. We also know the most recent budget forecast showed that $900 million is available for critical spending and some likely tax relief.

Here’s what’s at stake: A 5 percent rate increase for services that support 108,000 older adults and people with disabilities is desperately needed to address a workforce crisis overwhelming these services. The bill would increase the wages for 99,000 caregivers who make an average of $11.97 for complicated and professional work. Most caregivers have second or third jobs to support their families — so they can support our loved ones.

The crisis can be summarized with an alarming statistic: There are more than 8,700 unfilled caregiver and related job openings across the state — vacancies that threaten the quality of care and life for our most vulnerable citizens.

The bill would provide these dedicated caregivers with an average 5 percent compensation increase. The Legislature must act now. We applaud Knoblach’s support of older adults and people with disabilities. In the remaining weeks of the session, we hope Knoblach will make this rate increase for a priority in his Ways and Means Committee and the House.

Steve Howard has been the executive director of WACOSA since July 2008. David Lyons has worked with REM Minnesota for 12 years, with 10 years in St. Cloud as an area director.

Read or Share this story: http://www.sctimes.com/story/opinion/2016/04/23/care-providers-deserve-states-help/83431616/