With a minute to spare, Vacaville Community Services Commissioner Alex Henthorn swept into the Solano County Registrar of Voters office Friday afternoon and filed papers to face off against Assemblyman Jim Frazier in the June primary.

Henthorn was tapped last week by the California Republican Party to declare his candidacy.

Saying he was honored and a bit overwhelmed, the 28-year-old nonetheless accepted the challenge and looks forward to campaigning and, if elected, serving a broader base of California.

"I will speak out for this district and for the state of California even if I'm the only voice, because I will do what is right for California's economy, the future of our freedom and liberty, and for making the state a better place for our future generations," he said.

Henthorn is a Vacaville native who entered the political arena fresh out of high school. Bit by the bug to help shape not only his future but those who would come after him, he snagged a spot on the Community Services Commission, where he has served for nearly 10 years.

As a communications major at the University of California, Sacramento, he was active with the Sac State College Republicans. He has helped with numerous campaigns and, in a few weeks, will attend his third state Republican Convention.

The impetus to run, he said, has a lot to do with the state of California in recent years.

"I think we're still facing a lot of problems with California when we're talking about economic factors, water factors and dealing with the future," he said. "Too much regulation is hurting our businesses in California, which is causing them to leave or go out of business."

Covered California is also a big issue, he said, alleging the group is not following the tenets of the Affordable Care Act. As an example, he cited not allowing the recent two-year extension, which he said may harm small businesses, as well as individuals.

Henthorn said his experience as a commissioner and his communications studies, which he completed in December, qualify him as a viable candidate for the Assembly.

"I believe that what I've learned from those two experiences have allowed me to truly listen and represent the citizens of this district," he said.

Henthorn ran unsuccessfully for Vacaville City Council in 2010.

Follow Staff Writer Kimberly K. Fu at Twitter.com/ReporterKimFu.