Who wrote that no man is an island? English poet John Donne was wrong some 400 years ago. The president is seeking refuge and peace on Martha’s Vineyard off Cape Cod in Massachusetts. Long ago, the English sea captain who discovered and charted the graceful curving island named it for his daughter Martha. Ever since, its blue sky and water aura is calming and clear, kind to men with daughters. Barack Obama needs to heal from the cuts of Washington warfare.

Actually, Obama is an island within an island now. He likes his own company. And he’s got briefing papers to read about the Islamic State. He’s also thinking, my kingdom for the Kurds?

And he remembers 2013 ruefully. His spell of bad luck started out when he couldn’t get his picks, Susan Rice for secretary of state and Lawrence Summers to head the Federal Reserve.

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

For a president in troubled waters, the Vineyard is the place to be splendidly alone amid pristine scenery. The town names sound charming and English: Oak Bluffs, Chilmark, West Tisbury, Vineyard Haven. But this summer is dark, so Obama may skip scoops of Mad Martha’s ice cream and hanging with the summer “folks.”

The latest crisis in Iraq has become a tipping point for evaluating the whole Obama record. It’s become a terrible task to reflect on Iraq’s war stitches coming apart – again. New York Times writer Peter Baker referred to the nation as the “graveyard” of American ambition. When they start talking like that, in an Olympian voice, head for the hills. Is Iraq becoming Vietnam revisited, a war that will go down as lost?

That’s why Obama will take a pass on the beautiful people. When President Bill Clinton came to Martha’s Vineyard with Hillary for several summers, they showed up at every party, dancing with their fellow boomers late into the night. Yes, the Clintons and their island friends took their fun very seriously.

While taking a break from his bleak presidency, Obama is also wondering why he didn’t quit while he was ahead in 2012. Everything he will be remembered for, such as lifting the ban on gays in the military and Obamacare, happened in his first term.

[GALLERY: Cartoons on Hillary Clinton]

So far, the second term is full of goose eggs. Little has been accomplished. Despite the efforts of Harry Reid, the Senate Democratic Leader, to keep the inmates from running the asylum, the House Republicans are in charge. They are turning the Capitol hard to the right, with Texas Republican Sen. Ted Cruz serving tea in his office parties. Not moving immigration forward was the latest major failure. Gun control was the first to fall short. There were many more skirmishes, like the House Republicans shutting down the government for days on end.

Losing the Senate, if it happens this fall, would effectively end Obama’s presidency early. Personally, I admire his dignity and restraint. I accept that he's more introverted than most in his line of work. Sometimes I think we the people don’t really deserve him, given the disrespect Republican leaders in the House (and a handful in the Senate) have shown him. Obama is too classy to fire back. But the astonishing level of incivility from Congress will be one story of his presidency.

For now, let's hope Martha's island spirit is a refreshing tonic. It would be great to see Obama look like a winner again.