Advertisement - story continues below

The South Florida Sun Sentinel newspaper has itself made news by refusing to endorse any of the four remaining Republicans for Tuesday’s Florida presidential primary.

It’s the first time in its history the paper has refused to give a presidential endorsement. The reason given by the paper is “the kind of person who should be running is not in the race.”

The editorial board dismisses Donald Trump as the choice for angry voters but notes he has been on both sides of major issues and is “too bendable” on core values.

Advertisement – story continues below

They see Marco Rubio as the one most likely to unite Republicans and win, but also as someone lacking in experience and work ethic. Oddly, they also assert his conservative views are “those of yesteryear.”

As for Ted Cruz, they bash him for his lack of compromise and see him as someone who might defer to the Bible when making decisions. “Cruz scares us,” they say. Why, he’d be willing to — horrors! — risk a government shutdown to kill Obamacare. He also promises to replace the IRS with a tiny office in the Treasury Department that will process tax returns submitted on postcards.

By the way, both of those sound like pretty good ideas to me. I still wish we could institute the Fair Tax and get rid of the IRS entirely. But then, I don’t suppose the Sun Sentinel would have endorsed me, either.

Advertisement – story continues below

John Kasich they like well enough, but they say he lacks “presence” and can’t win with the Republican base, so they dismiss even him.

OK, so no Republican merits an endorsement from the Sun Sentinel in 2016. Let’s look on the Democratic side, where a socialist is running against a confirmed liar facing possible criminal indictments.

After trashing the Republicans and failing to endorse anyone, surely they wouldn’t find a Democrat worthy of their stamp of approval.

Wrong. They’ve endorsed Hillary Clinton.

Advertisement – story continues below

Oh, yes, they allow that she’s “too secretive, almost paranoid.” They touch on her controversies and the investigations within the State Department and the Department of Justice, and they mention her failure to release the content of her Wall Street speeches.

But it seems they’re willing to forgive her disingenuous nature and Nixonian paranoia and her dangerous flouting of the law regarding classified material. She’s “flawed, but qualified,” “steady and experienced.” “She won’t need training wheels.”

That’s for sure. She’s more than ready to get into office and play by her own rules. But then, this same paper also endorsed Obama in 2008, despite him having no executive experience whatsoever, questionable associates, failed far-left views from yesteryear, half as much time in the Senate as Rubio, and a virtually non-existent legislative record.

The Sun Sentinel has implied what we already know — when it comes to Democrats, the standards are much, much lower.

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.