via Wikipedia

At a time when Rick Scott's cronies are raising gazillions of dollars for attack ads and other reelection goodies, Charlie Crist is out there defending Obamacare. Ballsy!

At a campaign rally in Hillsborough County over the weekend, Crist went all-in in his support for Obamacare, telling the crowd that it's a "good plan." This echoed his sentiments when he met with reporters in West Palm Beach on Friday, saying essentially the same thing.

And if you think his hugging the president is going to send the GOPers into a tizzy, wait till they get a load of this one!

See also: Republican Party of Florida Releases First Charlie Crist Attack Ad

Crist regaled the crowd with pleasant buzzwords and super supporty sayings, as he asked the crowd of Democrats to hang in there with the president.

"The president's is going through a tough time right now. Everybody's on his back about a website," Crist told a crowd of about 90 people gathered for a fundraiser at the Palma Ceia home of Hillsborough County Clerk of the Circuit Court Pat Frank. "Well whatever," he said. "Stuff happens. But he's got a good plan. And now's the time you need to show him what a friend you are. It's easy to be with him when he's rolling along, but when it's tough the tough get going."

Of course, the Republican Party has been all over Obamacare stumbling out of the gates, attacking the government's glitchy website and going after Obama for not keeping his promise that people could keep the insurance plans they were already on.

The Republican Party of Florida jumped into the fray last week, with Chairman Lenny Curry flinging a salvo at Crist and his love of the Obamacare, saying, "Last week, Charlie Crist made it clear that he would double down on raising taxes and double down on supporting Obamacare. So it's no surprise he also told Floridians that he has no concerns about Obamacare's tax increases that will hurt job creators and middle-class families. We can't afford Obamacare, and Floridians can't afford Charlie Crist."

Add this to the attack ads we're going to have shoved in our faces about Crist's flip-flopping ways, and right now, things aren't looking too hot for Charlie.

Then there's the fact that Sen. Bill Nelson might jump into the whole HEY I WANNA RUN FOR GOVERNOR TOO! thing, saying that he might consider going up against Scott if Crist runs into some trouble.

And, there's also the latest Quinnipiac University poll that shows Scott cutting into his lead.

But Crist dismissed this, saying that "polls go up, they go down," and citing the millions being spent on attacking him in recent weeks.

Charlie Crist knows it's a long haul. He also knows his political aspirations have always been tied to Obama (ever since he embraced him, that is). So he's staying the course.

Charlie Crist ain't care.

Send your story tips to the author, Chris Joseph. Follow Chris Joseph on Twitter

Follow @NewTimesBroward