Sen. Mike Lee (R-Utah) (Rick Bowmer/Associated Press)

At the Heritage Foundation today, Sens. Mike Lee (R-Utah) and Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) defended their tax plan, which has drawn both praise and criticism on the right. In lowering individual rates (to 15 percent and 35 percent), eliminating all but the mortgage and charitable deductions and including a $2,500 per child tax credit, they promise to lower taxes for nine out of 10 taxpayers. On the corporate side (including pass-through corporations), they take the rate down to 25 percent and the rate on dividends and capital gains to zero. In addition, they go to a territorial system like what other countries have and include immediate expensing of capital investments. They describe it as pro-growth and pro-family.

A separate Heritage study found, “For married filers earning between $150,000 and $405,100 ($75,000 and $405,100 for single filers), the Lee–Rubio plan would increase their marginal tax rates compared with current law because they are in a tax bracket with tax rates below 35 percent.” By contrast, “for taxpayers earning between approximately $75,000 and $150,000 ($37,000 and $75,000 for singles), Lee–Rubio is a marginal rate cut. Combined with the enormous CTC [child tax credit], many taxpayers in this range would pay substantially lower taxes.”

Liberals have problems with the zero rate on dividends and capital gains, rejecting the standard conservative argument that this constitutes double taxation. (Recall Warren Buffet and his secretary.) As a political matter, I don’t think a zero rate is sustainable, but if the plan as a whole is equal to or more progressive than the current code, a reduction in dividends and capital gains is certainly possible.

I want to focus, however, on the criticism from the business wing of the GOP that objects to the family tax credit. It is a “subsidy,” critics say, that distorts the tax code. Unfortunately, the defense Lee and Rubio have come up with is not strong. They argue this just corrects an “imbalance” in the code because parents, who produce future taxpayers and entitlement funders, don’t have that contribution recognized. They deem that a “distortion” of the tax code — saying their taxes and the cost of raising kids are double taxing parents — that their plan corrects.

Sorry, but the explanation is bunk, although I approve of the provision. One’s personal expenditures, whether for children or anything else, are not a tax. The money you spend at the grocery store or on an Apple watch is your expenditure, not the government’s tax, even though your money goes to support the store’s employees and promotes economic activity. So, let’s be honest: It is a subsidy. I’d argue it is defensible on that basis for several reasons.

First, with the enormous corporate tax reform and inclusion of pass-throughs, this is already a super pro-growth plan. The business and investment community has little to complain about. Second, other subsidies, if you will, including charitable and home mortgage deductions, are preserved because we find charity and home ownership to be productive, just as the plan allows complete expensing for businesses because we want capital investment activity. The justification for the enhanced child tax credit is that the tax code does not merely have to be geared toward economic growth. Yes, we want to get government out of the business of picking winners and losers, but we have other issues in the country (the middle-class tax squeeze, insufficient population growth, etc.) and this is a justifiable way to address these. As for the claim that this is just pandering to middle-class families, my response is simple: It’s about time. The party as a political matter and the country from a social standpoint need to make it a little easier for middle-class families to get by. So sue them for caring about their voters.

Questions with the plan remain, to be certain. First, the senators acknowledge that it is going to be revenue negative. If Rubio and others want to also increase defense spending, I’d want to see one heck of an entitlement reform plan to prevent a gusher of red ink. Keeping the percentage of GDP in its historic range is a necessity, I suspect, to fund the things voters do want government to do. Second, Rubio and other conservative reformers have also expressed interest in expanding the earned-income tax credit for lower-income families, so that’s an additional wrinkle, I would think, in their flatter, simpler tax code. In addition, many conservative reformers want to use tax credits in lieu of Obamacare for health-care purposes. Is that to be added in as well, and if so, where does the revenue come from?

However, the plan is an impressive example of balanced, sober reform. Intended to start the discussion, it has succeeded in that aim and, if ever introduced and seriously considered, would undergo refinements, no doubt. But mostly what I am impressed with is the very thing Lee and Rubio choose to evade with their defense of the child tax credit. I look upon this as a grown-up trade-off, a balancing of priorities and a rejection of the notion that the tax code should have only one purpose. I’d much prefer if Lee and Rubio would just come out and say that. Their child tax credit is not a bug or correction of a distortion; it’s a subsidy and a feature of reform conservatism.