Sometime last week, one of the largest and most controversial dark money groups adopted a new name.

Two documents suggest the timing of the Center to Protect Patient Rights’ metamorphosis into something called American Encore. In a letter to Congress dated Feb. 25, 60 conservative organizations — including CPPR — voiced support for the Stop Targeting of Political Beliefs by the IRS Act of 2014, which would block the IRS for one year from implementing new rules to define and limit political activity by “social welfare” nonprofits. The letter lashed out at the “draconian” guidelines proposed by the IRS last November, which were open for public comment until Feb. 27.

The bill passed the House last week and now heads to the Senate, where it is expected to die.

The letter echoed concerns voiced by organizations across the political spectrum that the proposed rules are overbroad and burdensome. However, unlike other organizations opposing the possible changes, many of the groups on the letter were renowned for pushing the limits of permissible political activity by 501(c)(4)s, which do not have to disclose their donors to the public.

Nearly a third of the 60 groups made political expenditures that they reported to the Federal Election Commission in 2012. Together, they spent more than $66 million — one-fourth of all 501(c)(4) “social welfare” group spending reported that cycle. That’s nearly double the $34 million spent by all liberal (c)(4)s combined. Even with union spending added, the total only rises to $58 million.

Of course, that’s looking only at FEC-reported spending. Americans for Prosperity , another group that signed the letter, has opted to spend more than $30 million so far running issue ads like this against endangered Senate Democrats in several states; they don’t have to be reported unless they run very close to an election. AFP, in fact, has spent about as much as all the reported spending by super PACs, PACs, 527s and 501(c) nonprofits combined so far in 2014.

CPPR hasn’t reported any political spending, ever — but it has played a key role in financing the politicking of other groups. The organization, first discovered by OpenSecrets Blog in 2012 , has acted as an ATM for politically active nonprofits on the right, all in the name of social welfare.

With only a post office box in Phoenix as an address, CPPR has been the linchpin in one of the most complex networks of dark money in the country , unparalleled on the left or, for that matter, anywhere else on the right. Between 2009 and 2012, it funneled more than $182 million in grants to other organizations, with $167 million of that going to nonprofits that reported political spending on the federal level. Most of that money came to CPPR from other nonprofits like TC4 Trust , another 501(c)(4), and Freedom Partners , a 501(c)(6) trade association, which also doesn’t have to makes its donors public.

Initially, the group attracted attention because it had seemingly boundless revenues, but no employees, volunteers, office space or significant operations aside from making grants. Then, in 2012, California’s campaign finance agency found that CPPR had engaged in “ campaign money laundering ” with its involvement in channeling $15 million through several nonprofits and into the bank accounts of two California PACs working on ballot initiatives. The findings, and the attention they drew, apparently strained relations between the group’s president, Phoenix-based political consultant Sean Noble, and its backers, Charles and David Koch, who had helped to corral donors over the years.

Noble’s troubles mounted in late 2013 when CPPR filed its 2012 paperwork with the IRS ; it showed that Noble was sending tens of millions of the group’s dollars to firms he controlled. Last month, ProPublica reported that Noble had begun to live lavishly , and divorce records suggested that a great deal of the group’s money was making its way into Noble’s bank account, in possible violation of the private benefit rules that govern 501(c)(4) groups. Still in business

Despite the recent rocky patch, though, signs of a renewal for CPPR came two days after the 60 conservative groups submitted their letter to Congress, when three of the signatories filed a 59-page comment with the IRS opposing the agency’s proposed rules for 501(c)(4) groups: the Center for Individual Freedom, American Commitment, and a third group called American Encore, which, the comment notes, was “ formerly known as the Center to Protect Patient Rights .”

“American Encore,” according to the comment , “advocates for limited government and free enterprise and is committed to protecting individual liberty, including the rights of patients to choose and use their desired medical care providers. It goes on, “American Encore has primarily advanced its policy interests by investing in and conducting research, as well as providing financial support to other organizations in support of shared policy interests.”

The group’s investment in public policy research, though, has heretofore been invisible. Last year, the group was paying consultants, including Noble’s firms, to conduct opposition research and develop ads.

That was only a fraction of the group’s spending, though. American Encore/CPPR gave out more than $112 million in grants to politically active nonprofits that reported more than $127 million in political spending in the 2012 elections. Recipients of American Encore/CPPR funds spent more to influence the 2012 elections than all liberal nonprofits, including unions, have spent starting with the Citizens United decision in 2010 and going to the end of February 2014.

Another of the three groups listed on the IRS comment, American Commitment, was founded by Noble in 2012. It has received the bulk of its funding over two years from American Encore/CPPR and, later, that group’s top funder, Freedom Partners.

In its comment to the IRS, American Commitment is described as an organization that “engages in critical public policy debates over the size and instrusiveness of government through direct advocacy, strategic policy analysis, and grassroots mobilization.” Yet, American Commitment spent 96 percent of its funds in 2012 on “ media production and polling ,” using the same firms it listed in its political spending reports filed with the FEC.

During the summer of 2012, American Commitment ran a number of ads that did not have to be reported to the FEC. In one ad criticizing Sen. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), the group claimed that the Affordable Care Act “imposes the largest tax increase in history on the middle class.” That garnered a “ pants-on-fire ” rating from Politifact, which checked four of the ads. The best the group rated on the truth meter was “mostly false.”

Factcheck.org gave an ad by American Commitment against Sen. Sherrod Brown (D-Ohio) a berth among its “Worst Political Ads of 2012.”

The fact that organizations like American Commitment, a group that describes itself as engaging in “critical policy debates” and conveying “ timely, effective public policy research ,” are running misleading ads slamming politicians predominantly or entirely of one party in tight races highlights the complexity of the task the IRS is facing in its rulemaking.

Citizens United. It has spent almost exactly the sum of those grants on ads critical of Democrats in federal races. In 2010, CIF told the IRS it spent more than $2 million on politics, none of which was reported to the FEC. The third group on the IRS comment, the Center for Individual Freedom , has received two large cash infusions from Crossroads GPS — the large (c)(4) formed by GOP strategist Karl Rove — since. It has spent almost exactly the sum of those grants on ads critical of Democrats in federal races. In 2010, CIF told the IRS it spent more than $2 million on politics, none of which was reported to the FEC.

Like American Encore/CPPR and American Commitment, CIF doesn’t appear to have much grassroots support, having received more than two-thirds of its revenues in 2012 from Crossroads GPS and one other unknown organization

However, CIF does engage in major litigation related to its mission. For example, it was CIF, along with the Hispanic Leadership Fund, that appealed the Van Hollen v. FEC decision in 2012. The case dealt directly with disclosure of donors to nonprofits that engage in certain kinds of reportable political activities. CIF ultimately won and the issue was sent back to the FEC for a possible rulemaking.

Not Going Anywhere

The emergence of American Encore from the scandal and turmoil of CPPR last year indicates some role for the organization in the current election cycle, whether Noble has patched up relations with his benefactors or is going it alone.

NAACP v. Alabama case in which the Supreme Court said a 501(c) organization — in that instance, one facing the very real threat of physical harm — could not be compelled to reveal the names of its financial supporters. But Noble and his allies signal no intent to change their ways when it comes to revealing the identities of their donors. The IRS comment speaks forcefully about the importance of free speech, but just half of one paragraph mentions donor disclosure, concluding that such a requirement “would raise additional First Amendment issues.” It cites in part the 1958case in which the Supreme Court said a 501(c) organization — in that instance, one facing the very real threat of physical harm — could not be compelled to reveal the names of its financial supporters.

Unmentioned are the majority’s words in the Supreme Court’s 8-1 Citizens United decision that “prompt disclosure” would allow citizens to “see whether elected officials are ‘in the pocket’ of so-called moneyed interests.”

So far in this election cycle, groups that don’t disclose their donors have already spent 300 percent more than they had at the same point in 2012, which was a record-setting — and presidential — election year. And there’s evidence that liberal groups — outspent more than 7-to-1 in 2012 — won’t be left behind: They’ve already spent nearly seven times more than they had by now two years ago.