'I paid for a ticket and still got a £110 fine': Why you should fight a parking ticket and four steps to winning

A group of MPs is demanding drivers get five minutes’ grace after their parking time expires to stop councils using them as ‘cash cows’.



The all-party Transport Committee – chaired by Labour MP Louise Ellman – is also urging councils to publish how much each makes from parking penalties from next year.



Together, councils rake in more than £30 million monthly from parking attendants slapping 890,000 tickets a month on to our windscreens, according to insurer LV=.



Vindicated: Carrie Haines overturned a £110 fine after a friend took photos proving the warden had made a mistake

Yet despite the vast majority of us paying up without arguing, about half of those that take the parking ticket to appeal win their case.



Many attendants feel they can act with impunity as only 1 per cent of motorists bother to appeal to the parking adjudicator – the final arbitrator. It has emboldened them to be overzealous – with tricks adopted to rake in cash including waiting by cars for parking tickets to expire and ignoring parking bay signs.



Also many councils have introduced Sunday patrols, which this year has resulted in a 13 per cent rise in tickets issued on that day.



Retired photo editor Carrie Haines, 66, of Hampton Wick, South-West London, got a £110 fine from Richmond council despite having paid £2.50 for a pay-and-display parking ticket when visiting a hair salon.

Carrie says: ‘There was a pay-and-display machine right in front of where I had parked but the space could also be used for residents with a permit. The attendant ignored the machine and wrongly decided the bay was just for residents.



‘I was left confused and angry about the ticket and I didn’t know what to do. Fortunately a friend stepped in and made sure we had photographic evidence to get the fine overturned.’



Carrie had the penalty quashed within a fortnight, though the mealy-mouthed council offered no apology or explanation.



Don't get mad – take these four steps to win an appeal KEEP CALM: Arguing your case in a polite and reasonable manner is most likely to get results.

Include photos backed up with specific details – such as misleading and unclear road signs and ticket discrepancies with incorrect or missing information, for example, a wrong registration number.

Make your initial appeal with copies of the evidence and be sure to present facts within 14 days. This will also increase your chances of paying only half-price for the full penalty if you lose. Appeal directly to the council or private firm. GATHER FACTS: A big reason for being issued a parking fine is failure to display a permit or pay-and-display ticket clearly. Make sure it is not upside down and hasn’t fallen off the dashboard.

When appealing it is up to the council to prove it was the driver’s fault that a parking ticket was not visible.

Penalties handed out where there are no clear warnings of restrictions is an area where motorists often win – the onus is on the council to make sure they are clearly marked. SHOW GOOD REASON: There is also a strong case for throwing out a penalty if a vehicle was parked briefly on a yellow line for a good reason – such as to help an elderly passenger into their home. Others include vehicle breakdowns, broken parking meters and legally loading or unloading a vehicle. DON’T SURRENDER: For a council-issued Penalty Charge Notice go to the Traffic Penalty Tribunal if you are still not satisfied with its answer. In London it is the Parking and Traffic Appeals Service while in Scotland it is the Scottish Parking Appeals Service. You have 28 days to lodge appeals.

Most penalty fees can be halved if the driver pays up within 14 days. This panics many motorists into paying straight away. But the council may agree to freeze the fine if you make an appeal, so don’t be afraid to ask if it will do this.



To appeal, you first need to write direct to the council within 14 days, explaining clearly why you believe the penalty is invalid.



If the council does not budge and still wants your money it must then issue a formal letter – known as a Notice to Owner – and you are given a further 14 days to explain clearly why you should not pay. If you lose at this stage you will probably not be able to pay the half-price amount.



However, you do not need to give up if the council continues to chase you for money. This is because the matter can be escalated to an independent adjudicator.



Zealous: Wardens now work Sundays

Along with its final rejection letter, the council should send you an Appeal Notice form to be returned to the Traffic Penalty Tribunal within 28 days. If your appeal fails at this final stage you will have to pay the full sum.



Barrie Segal, who runs campaign website AppealNow, says there are lots of ways you can beat a fine – but you must be prepared to fight.



He says: ‘It seems wrong that traffic wardens are always looking for new ways to hand out parking tickets – including going out on a Sunday. But rather than just feeling aggrieved you should fight back.



‘Be prepared to go all the way. If you provide a well-reasoned and polite argument with full facts, you have a good chance of success.’



The appeals process for tickets issued by a council – officially called Penalty Charge Notices – should be clearly marked on the ticket.



But, you can also get hit with a ticket for parking on private land. These penalties are not handled by councils or covered by their rules.



Private parking firms issue Parking Charge Notices as opposed to public Penalty Charge Notices. If your car is slapped with one of these, you can take your case to the independent Parking on Private Land Appeals scheme if the issuer is signed up to the British Parking Association, as the NCP is.



It may be worth standing your ground with private firms that are not members of the British Parking Association, as they rarely have the nerve to take drivers to the County Court, despite their tough rhetoric.



Since last year, clamping on private land is no longer allowed except at train stations, airports and ports.