Miley Cyrus twerked her way to the top this year, unseating Kim Kardashian as the most searched person on Yahoo in 2013, the Web giant revealed Wednesday.

"Your top searches included high-profile trials, Obamacare, and the twerk seen round the world," Yahoo Senior Editor and Year in Review Project Lead Vera H-C Chan wrote in a blog post. "You and millions of others searched the most for none other than Miley Cyrus, who came into our lives like a wrecking ball, dethroning Kim Kardashian, who was at the top of list in 2012."

The reality star and mother of North West wasn't far behind, ranking No. 2 on Yahoo's list of the top searches of the year, followed by Sports Illustrated bombshell Kate Upton. Celebrities Selena Gomez, Amanda Bynes, and Justin Bieber also made the top 10, along with the popular building-block game Minecraft, Apple's iPhone 5, and convicted murderer Jodi Arias.

Top Yahoo Searches of 2013:

1. miley cyrus

2. kim kardashian

3. kate upton

4. minecraft

5. selena gomez

6. obamacare (affordable care act)

7. amanda bynes

8. jodi arias

9. iphone 5

10. justin Bieber

Besides the top searches, Yahoo also ranked the top "obsessions" of the year, or terms that shot up the search charts quickest.

"Your top obsession is America's favorite bearded duck-calling family show, Duck Dynasty," Chan wrote. "Breaking Bad found the recipe to get to the top and came in as the number two obsession." Users were also keen to find out about The Walking Dead, Fifty Shades of Grey casting information, and the new $100 bill.

When it came to news, the top-searched stories included domestic and international affairs. At the top of the list was the Jodi Arias trial followed by Obamacare, the Boston marathon bombing, the birth of the royal baby, and the George Zimmerman trial.

Yahoo also for the first time ranked the most viral blogs on Tumblr of the year. The hilarious and cute Reasons My Son Is Crying topped the list, followed by This Charming Charlie, Hot-Dog Legs, Things Fitting Perfectly Into Other Things, and The Worst Room.

For more, check out Yahoo's 2013 Year in Review site, as well as the top searches from Bing and Ask.com.