Kathy Mitchell and Marcy Sugar

Dear Annie: How do you cope with a friendship where the person stays connected just enough to continually remind you of how unimportant you are?

I have a friend with whom I was once quite close. We exercised and ran errands together, and when she was seriously ill, I spent countless hours visiting, reading to her and just being there. I donated to her charities, sang in her choir, and we always had fun together.

But after I was diagnosed with the same illness (now recovered), she visited me only twice and now seems too busy to get together. That would be bad enough. But the real problem is that she texts me often to say how much she misses me or to ask for a favor, but apparently never wants to see me. It's a sad reminder of how little she is willing to do to maintain the friendship.

We live in a small town and I can't cut her off without repercussions. Is my only option to simply live with the disappointment? — Friend in Need

Dear Friend: You have another option: Talk to her about it. Not everyone is good about friendship maintenance. Some people become so busy that they neglect people who are otherwise important to them, and don't recognize that this behavior is hurtful. For them, texting becomes a convenient substitute for face-to-face interactions that require scheduling and organization.

You won't know whether this is the case unless you ask your friend directly. We hope she will be completely honest about the reasons for her dismissive attitude. At the very least, you will be able to determine how much she cares by how sincerely apologetic she is and whether she does anything to remedy the situation. After all, what do you have to lose?

Advertisement

Dear Annie: My granddaughter just hosted a birthday party for her year-old baby with 100 people in attendance. The child was lavished with beautiful, expensive gifts. When I asked my granddaughter if she had written thank-you notes for the lovely presents, she informed me that "this isn't done for birthdays" and the subject was closed.

I am livid over this pompous act of entitlement by my usually kind and thoughtful grandchild. But this is a pattern I have seen with lots of children who were never taught how to express gratitude well, and this lack of training is passing to the next generation.

I have come up with a solution that I can live with. I am having "Thank You" notes printed with my grandchildren's names, adding Forever stamps and handing them out at Christmas. — R.J.

Dear R.J.: We hope this works for you, but we aren't optimistic. Nonetheless, your granddaughter isn't entirely wrong. Birthday gifts that are opened in front of the givers with appropriate verbal thanks offered at the time do not require a written thank-you note afterward, although that is always a nice touch and makes a good impression. What we find tacky is the lavish birthday party for a year-old baby that includes 100 guests.

Annie's Mailbox is written by Kathy Mitchell and Marcy Sugar, longtime editors of the Ann Landers column. Please email your questions to anniesmailbox@comcast.net, or write to: Annie's Mailbox, c/o Creators Syndicate, 737 3rd Street, Hermosa Beach, CA 90254.