Health insurers are selling more than 100,000 plans at a county level through the Affordable Care Act’s marketplaces, at radically different prices and varied designs. The carriers range from established local Blue Cross plans and national for-profit behemoths to upstarts like local hospital systems and the new consumer-oriented co-ops that were created under the federal law.

Many people will see their premiums increase significantly for 2015 if they haven’t yet taken the advice of my colleague, Margot Sanger-Katz, to shop around. But a new analysis from the McKinsey Center for U.S. Health System Reform suggests insurers had some luck in holding down prices if they offered plans that limited a consumer’s choice of doctors and hospitals.

Plans featuring health maintenance organizations or restricted networks of providers typically had the lowest year-over-year premium increases, according to McKinsey, which sifted through information on the 223,000 plans offered in the marketplaces at the county level over the last two years. Plans featuring an H.M.O. had a median increase of only 2 percent. The more widely known P.P.O., or preferred provider organization, plans, which typically allow people to go outside their plan’s network if they are willing to pay a greater share of the cost, had a median increase of 9 percent.

The same contrast was found in comparing the median price increases for plans designed around a narrowed network, in which people are limited to a smaller group of hospitals or are asked to pay more when they go to an expensive facility. While plans featuring broad networks had a median increase of 8 percent, narrowed network plans increased just 4 percent.

Some Kinds of Insurance Are Pricier Than Others Average premium increases in the Affordable Care Act marketplaces were modest. But if you look at the plans by type, products that gave customers a wider choice of doctors and hospitals tended to have much higher increases than those that were more limiting. Average Premium Increase, between 2014 and 2015 Product Type Hospital Network H.M.O. P.P.O. +2% +9% Narrow network Broad network +4% +8% Average Premium Increase, between 2014 and 2015 Product Type Hospital Network H.M.O. P.P.O. +2% +9% Narrow network Broad network +4% +8%

Plans that limit a patient’s choice of where to go to seek care are not without controversy, of course. H.M.O.s experienced a backlash in the early 1990s after employers embraced them as a solution to rising health care costs, and patients and doctors complained about strategies they said were aimed at keeping patients from getting the care they needed.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But H.M.O.s are clearly making a comeback, at least in the marketplaces. McKinsey found that almost half of the lowest-priced midlevel silver plans in 2015 featured H.M.O.s, up from about a third the year before, and insurers seem to be betting that people may now be willing to join a more restrictive plan if the price is right. Employers still tend to favor plans that allow their workers more flexibility.

Narrow networks, which operate under a similar principle, have also generated a fair amount of bad press. Some people have had trouble figuring out which providers are actually in their network before they sign up, and critics say patients may not always have access to specialists or hospitals that excel in certain kinds of care.

The McKinsey analysis also highlighted another feature of the least expensive plans: More than half of the insurers who were found to offer the lowest premiums in 2015 entered the individual market just within the last year or two. Both co-ops and insurers that had traditionally specialized in Medicaid coverage frequently offered the least expensive midlevel silver plans in their market.

But what is also clear from the McKinsey report is that the insurers, established or not, have not yet figured out what they should be charging and what consumers want to buy. Consumers had their choice of 27 percent more offerings this year, with the bulk of these new products being provided by established carriers. And the wide variation in prices, a hallmark of the first year of the marketplaces, has persisted. Within a given category of plans (bronze, silver, gold platinum), about half of consumers will see plans that vary from the cheapest to the most expensive by more than 50 percent.