Strains of Kaboom and Blue Mystic! Nothern Lights Natural Rx

The two strains (the latter of which is pictured here) are among those most popular at Northern Lights Natural Rx, says co-owner Eva Woolhiser. But when it comes to edibles, she said customers will go for "anything."

The Ominously-Named 'Death Star' Strain! Dank Colorado

Owner Justin Jones of Dank Colorado: "Our Death Star [strain] has been really popular."

And Blue Daddy and Mr. Pink Too! Sean Barbas

"Our in house strains like Blue Daddy and Mr. Pink (pictured here) have been really popular,” Mile High Medical Cannabis store manager Sean Barbas said. "It’s been nuts”

'Euphoric' Cannabis Concentrate!

At The Health Center, owner Tiffany Goldman said a product called Shatter was the top choice among recreational customers before it sold out. Officially known as a cannabis concentrate, it's a form of hash and "according to most people it's more euphoric.

Blue Kudu Chocolate! Bluekudu.com

The edible has been especially popular at Kine Mine, but customers shouldn't get in over their heads. "We’ve been warning people about the potency," CEO and founder Theran Snyder said.

Pop Rocks Candy Bars! Incredibles

"Edibles have been flying off the shelves," Denver Kush owner Darin Smith said. "We’ve found particular success with the Incredibles Fireworks bar. It’s got chocolate mixed with pop rocks and the packaging is just great."

Weed Flowers! Tim Cullen

“Cannabis flowers have been flying out the door," Evergreen Apothecary co-owner Tim Cullen said. "People have been waiting two hours for just two minutes in the store and couldn’t be happier for it.”

Weed Sodas! AP

THC-infused sodas are displayed for sale in a cooler at The Clinic, a Denver-based marijuana dispensary with several outlets.

Something Called a TKO Bar, Whatever That Is! Hank Borunda

"The TKO bar is most popular amongst patients," The Greener Side Owner Hank Borunda wrote in an email to HuffPost.

Here's What A Weed Menu Looks LIke! AP

A recreational marijuana menu and price list sits on a counter at 3D Cannabis Center.

And Some Normal Bagged Weed! Seth McConnell/The Denver Post via Getty Images)

Packages of marijuana labeled for recreational use are spread out on a counter at Northern Lights Cannabis Co in Edgewater, Colorado on January 1, 2014.

And Of Course, Just Plain, Old Weed Cigarettes! AP

Different strains of marijuana are displayed for sale at The Clinic in Denver.