GOODYEAR, Ariz. — Frick and Frack, the two crackerjack pitching prospects the Rockies let loose here Sunday, chirped at each other for a week before they finally faced players in another uniform color.

Jeff Hoffman and Kyle Freeland, drafted back-to-back in 2014, can’t get rid of each other. The Rockies needed to trade Troy Tulowitzki to Toronto to snag Hoffman. And Freeland, the former standout at Denver’s Thomas Jefferson High School, was waiting. Their lockers sit in the same corner of the Colorado clubhouse.

They’re nipping at each other’s spikes trying to earn a shot to leave camp with the major-league team.

“We feed off each other. That’s a good thing we have,” Freeland said. “We compete in everything — golf, baseball, you name it.”

Rockies Mailbag: Pose a question for Patrick Saunders

Hoffman and Freeland made their big league-level debuts Sunday, pitching two innings apiece in a Cactus League road game against Cincinnati. They both impressed, with two hits allowed between them and five strikeouts.

And they’re still arguing about it.

“It’s back and forth, telling each other who throws harder, seeing who will give up the most bombs,” said Hoffman, a 24-year-old right-hander selected ninth overall in 2014.

Hoffman struck out the first two batters he faced. He threw a full-count curveball to Jake Cave to punch him out looking in the third, then got Ivan De Jesus Jr. to ground out weakly to second base. Hoffman’s fastball averaged around 97.

Freeland, picked No. 8 in 2014, allowed a home run, to Cave, but he struck out one more than Hoffman did, using a controlled fastball at 93-95 mph, with a slider as well.

“He’s got me with velo, but I have him with location,” said Freeland, 23, a left-hander.

Hoffman came back: “I’ll take it. I’ll take the harder velocity every day.”

And on and on they went.

The Rockies are aiming for Hoffman and Freeland to tag-team their progress through Triple-A Albuquerque this season.

Hoffman last season moved swiftly through Single-A and up a level, with a 3.22 ERA over seven games with Double-A New Britain, after he was traded to Colorado.

Freeland pitched seven games at High-A Modesto last season after surgery to remove bone chips and scar tissue from his elbow. But he made up for lost time in the Arizona Fall League, pitching well enough for an invitation to spring camp.

They’re both pitching in the country club environment of the big leagues for the first time. And their schedules are synched, from bullpens to Cactus League games.

“We’ve been talking about it since our last live BP,” Hoffman said. “It felt like forever to get back to the mound. We were real excited to be out there, especially on the same day.”

Hoffman’s curveball was his most impressive pitch, which stayed sneaky through two innings. Freeland filled up the zone with fastball placement and a well-timed changeup.

“Especially at this level, it was great to get that competition going,” Freeland said.

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or @nickgroke