As the hours ticked down until Thursday's deadline for Congress to raise the "debt ceiling" and prevent the first default in US history, crisis talks appeared to have found fresh momentum in the Senate.

After a weekend of political stalemate, Harry Reid, the Democrat leader, and Mitch McConnell, his Republican counterpart, stood side-by-side on the Senate floor to say there were hopeful a deal was close.

"I'm very optimistic we will reach an agreement that's reasonable in nature this week," said Mr Reid.

"I share his optimism that we're going to get a result that will be acceptable to both sides," added Mr McConnell.

Late on Monday night, the two leaders returned again to the Senate floor saying there had been "tremendous progress" but they were not yet at a final agreement.

The White House called off a planned meeting with both parties "to allow leaders in the Senate time to continue making important progress towards a solution".

Markets remained calm and hopeful of a deal despite President Barack Obama cautioning that there was still "a good chance" of a US default if Republicans continued to hold out.

“I think there has been some progress in the Senate," Mr Obama said shortly before the Senate leaders' announcement.

"I think House Republicans continue to think that somehow they can extract concessions by keeping the government shutdown, or by threatening default, and my hope is that a spirit of cooperation will move us forward over the next few hours."

Mr Reid's offer would reportedly lift the debt ceiling, the legal limit the US can borrow, until February and fund the US government for another three months.

Democrats were also said to be open to rolling back a small part of Mr Obama's signature health care law, giving Republicans a face-saving concession that could be presented as a victory to their conservative base.

Although having previously said Obamacare was off the table in budget negotiations, Democrats were reportedly prepared to allow small adjustments to the way that income is verified for those seeking subsidies.

It remained unclear what Democrats would demand in return but it is likely to centre around higher than expected levels of government spending.

Although Mr Reid and Mr McConnell have quarrelled bitterly during the course of the shutdown crisis, both men are veteran senators with a history of deal-making.

"We probably have another 48 hours of rancour and ugliness but these guys have 60 years of congressional experience between them and should hopefully be able to get something done," said Jim Kessler, vice president of the Third Way think tank.

Joe Manchin, a conservative Democrat at the centre of senate talks, said the signs were "very encouraging".

"Everyone's just hopeful that things work out the way they should. The most promising thing is we're moving in the right direction," he said.

Bob Corker, a Republican senator, said "there's a deal to be had here" but it was "a shame" that his party's focus in recent weeks had been put on Obamacare instead of cutting government spending.

However, even if the two parties' Senate leadership is able to finalise a deal it would still face significant hurdles. Complex Senate procedures mean it could take days for a bill to be put to a vote and a single dissenting senator could further slow progress.

Ted Cruz, the conservative Texas senator who last month delivered a 21-hour speech against Obamacare, could try to derail a compromise if he felt it fell short of Republican demands.

If a bill cleared the Senate it would then go to the Republican-controlled House of Representatives, where John Boehner, the Speaker of the House would face a choice to either alienate the right-wing of his party by bringing forward the compromise or else demand further concessions and risk being blamed for the default.

The legislative timetable raises the possibility that even with an agreement a final law may not be passed by Thursday, leaving it unclear exactly what would happen when the US Treasury reached its borrowing limit.

"We've never actually tested it, we don't know what happens and we don't want ever want to find out," said Jason Furman, chairman of the White House's Council of Economic Advisers.

The Treasury would begin prioritising which payments it would make and which would it delay. It is likely to ensure that US bond holders, including the Chinese government, receive payment but welfare benefits for pensioners, veterans and the very poor would be delayed.

If a deal was not reached then within weeks the remaining funds would dry out and key agencies like the FBI and Federal Aviation Authority could be closed.