Teens have decided that the social media site, Facebook, is just not cool any more. The news comes from a report by iStrategyLabs, released on Wednesday. Even President Obama knows that the site is no longer the go-to place for everyone.

iStrategyLabs reports a 25 percent drop in people using the networking site since the last study in 2011. Three million of that drop was teenagers, who have decided to use other social networking websites and messaging apps to communicate. However, there has been a considerable increase in the number of people over 55 using the site with 80.4 percent more using it in 2013 than in 2011.

During a conversation about getting more young people signed up for medical cover since the Affordable Care Act, President Obama noted that “they” no longer use Facebook. While the “they” could mean everybody, the main part of the conversation was focused on those between the ages of 18 and 34, leading to the speculation that “they” meant the people within that age group. TechCrunch believes that “they” meant teenagers and those in their 20s who originally made social media popular.

While the iStrategyLabs report indicates the drop, the report has been under fire by some people. The results are taken from looking into Facebook Advertising, where campaigns are pitched to advertisers by the website. These figures are not the official statistics. The data is also mostly one-sided as it looks at those using the social networking site, not the number of people actually leaving. However, the Chief Financial Officer did admit in 2013 that those between 13 and 19 are losing interest, indicating that teens have decided Facebook is not cool.

When some anonymous teenagers were asked about their reasons for not enjoying the website, there were mixed responses. One 14-year-old explained that it was the implications through likes and comments, compared to the things that people would say in real life. A 15-year-old girl complained that there was too much drama, while a 19-year-old female explained it was because her mom was on the site but not on sites like Instagram and Twitter. Some teens expressed concerns that their parents knew everything they were doing and friends would overshare.

One of the only services to provide data about the spiral was Onavo, but that was bought by the social media giant recently. Since then, only App Annie could offer data that could look into the competition between the social media channels. When TechCrunch looked into this data, it noted that Facebook sat in the 50s on the iTunes Store in the US, but Snapchat was above in the teens and sometimes in single digits for downloads.

The rankings changed in August when there was some type of change in algorithm in the store. However, Snapchat continued to remain above Facebook and its photo and video side, Instagram.

According to a study by Piper Jaffray, more teens are now on Instagram and have declared that is more important in their lives. The good news for Facebook is that it owns that site now. However, for now teens have decided Facebook is not cool.

By Alexandria Ingham

Sources:

TechCrunch

Huffington Post

Daily Mail

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr