Picture this. You’re feeling crummy, so you call your family doctor for a checkup.

The next day, he shows up at your house and asks to see your kitchen pantry, fridge and freezer. You’re astonished. He eyes your stash of cola and Oreos, smiles warmly, and wanders over to your pots and pans (assuming you have some.) “Do you own a grill pan?” the good doctor asks.

“What about a food processor?”

“How many meals do you cook at home every week?”

What? Welcome to the world of culinary medicine, a delicious new movement in health care that recognizes and celebrates the importance of real food — especially cooking it at home — when it comes to quickly, substantially, improving your health.

Dr. Rani Polak is a teacher of culinary medicine, a physician-chef at the Institute of Lifestyle Medicine at Harvard Medical School.

He knows that people who cook at home tend to be healthier. They consume more fruits and veggies, eat healthier fats and have easier portion control. As a result, they are less overweight, with better digestion and stronger hearts. But people aren’t cooking nearly as much as they used to. (Let’s hear it for bringing back home economics.) “There’s been a 42 percent increase in eating away from home in the last 40 years,” reports Polak, who has devoted his practice to getting people cooking again, including doctors themselves, who spend most of medical school eating from vending machines.

Here’s the bitter truth: Most doctors in the U.S. know next-to-nothing about nutrition. It’s still not part of the training in about 75 percent of medical schools. This is in spite of a recent JAMA article acknowledging that a poor diet is the No. 1 risk factor for disease and death in the U.S.This is a disconnect the size of Rhode Island.

And it’s one reason why culinary medicine started percolating back in 2008, when chef-physician John La Puma published his book called “ChefMD’s Big Book of Culinary Medicine.”

It’s still a great resource and guide to building a “culinary medicine chest” with 50 foods that help prevent and control a variety of health issues, from Arthritis to Zits.

Currently, there are about 30 institutions around the country teaching Culinary Medicine, including Polak’s. I recently sat in on one of his classes, and here are a few highlights:

Any kind of cooking is better than none. “It almost doesn’t matter what people cook at home,” Polak reports. The important thing is that you cook. Any style of cooking is better for your health than no cooking.

Expect obstacles. Finding the time to cook is a common problem people wrestle with. Get over it. If you’re being true to yourself about improving your health, then you’ll make the time. Cook multiple meals at one session and store them in the freezer. Lentils freeze well. So do chickpeas and rice. Once you have a taste of success preparing simple, tasty meals, your confidence will sizzle.

Implement your plan. “Buy a grill pan and use it,” Polak advises. Add a little olive oil, and it’s perfect for stovetop grilling vegetables (like eggplant or asparagus that don’t need to cook through), chicken breasts, fish fillets, thin sliced beef.

Food over supplements. Polak talks to clients about eating fish, not omega-3. He’d rather you get fiber from vegetables, not fiber pills.

If culinary medicine spreads, more patients will come home from their doctor’s office with prescriptions for spinach-feta frittatas, and America’s health care crisis will fizzle faster than a deep-fried corn dog.

Marilynn Preston is a fitness expert, personal trainer and speaker on healthy lifestyle issues. She has a website, marilynnpreston.com, and welcomes reader questions, which can be sent to MyEnergyExpress@aol.com