PITTSBURGH, Jan. 20, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- EBenefits® Solutions -- a powerful online solution that streamlines benefits enrollment and administration -- is introducing ACA Employer Decision Tools designed to help employers manage their businesses while staying current and in compliance with the Affordable Care Act.

EBenefits Solutions is offering two integrated ACA Employer Decision Tools -- the ACA Navigator and the ACA Compliance Module.

"The ACA presents a unique and unprecedented set of challenges to employers," said Kismet Toksu, President of EBenefits Solutions, which provides state-of-the-art solutions that address and solve specific human resources needs for clients throughout the United States. "Left unattended, these challenges can disrupt a company's business operations."

Many companies lack the time and resources to be current with the changing regulations of health reform. Moreover, many companies lack the internal technology necessary to carry out the recordkeeping, enrollment, and reporting requirements that are legally necessary to be compliant with the law. These tools enable companies to successfully manage the administrative requirements of the ACA, including eligibility tracking, notifications to employees, enrollment, standardizing of reports, and monitoring the latest changes to the ACA.

The ACA Navigator guides employers through each aspect of the employer coverage mandate of the ACA. The ACA Compliance Module provides eligibility tracking for all employees, sends monthly notifications to employees and human resources staff, and monitors the latest changes to the ACA to ensure companies have the information to stay in compliance.

"EBenefits Solutions offers a robust set of integrated solutions to help companies comply with many aspects of the ACA," said Toksu. "Our processes save time, and eliminate what could be costly mistakes. That way companies can focus on what they want to think about --- staying competitive and growing their businesses."

For more information, call 1-866-353-0984 or email info@ebenefits.com.

About EBenefits Solutions

EBenefits Solutions was founded in 2005 following the success of the program in supporting the benefits administration needs of its parent company, UPMC, the premier integrated health care delivery system in western Pennsylvania. Today, the EBenefits platform supports the benefits administration needs of more than 50 organizations, more than 200,000 employees, and more than 500,000 lives nationwide.

SOURCE EBenefits Solutions