The controversial superintendent of the Los Angeles Unified School District is out.

Now what?

Dr. John Deasy’s departure is hardly a shock considering the powerful enemies he collected in his turbulent 3 1⁄2 year reign as head of the nation’s second-largest school district. Deasy didn’t just step on toes, he stomped on them.

And some of those toes needed a good stomping starting with the UTLA, United Teachers Los Angeles, the union that represents the district’s 26,000 K-12 instructors, the single biggest obstacle to reform in a district desperate for reform.

We’ll get to Deasy’s many failures in a second, but first his triumphs.

Under John Deasy graduation rates are up, and up significantly.

Dropout rates have plunged. Standardized test scores are up as well as English language proficiency.

Deasy had the guts to take on the institutional stasis at LAUSD that accepted failure and mediocrity as long as the checks cleared. He fired incompetent teachers. He pushed hard for a teacher evaluation system open to the public and he touched the third rail of public education, teacher tenure. John Deasy actively campaigned (and lost) for LAUSD school board members who would support his program of reforms. Is it any surprise the long knives came out?

John Deasy not only got in people’s faces, he seemed to relish doing so. That was a big mistake. Maybe in New York or Philadelphia you can stab people in the front, but in Los Angeles we still prefer the phony civility of kiss, kiss, “let’s do lunch” followed by a quiet, fatal knife in the back.

Deasy finally met his match in a school board empowered by union money and a new UTLA boss, Alex Caputo-Pearl whose raison d’etre was Deasy’s head on a platter.

The simple truth is a lot of folks just don’t like John Deasy and, frankly, he’s an easy guy not to like.

Even Deasy’s supporters acknowledge he can be prickly, humorless, stubborn and thin-skinned. To be superintendent of LAUSD, you need rhino-like hide.

It’s more than ironic that the man whose signature initiative, the distribution of 600,000-plus iPads and laptop computers to every student in the LAUSD system should ultimately be taken down by a computer glitch.

The much-ballyhooed MiSiS program (My Integrated Student Information System) rivals the HealthCare.gov rollout for Obamacare for IT “hall of shame” honors. Thousands of Jefferson High School students are still wandering around campus without scheduled classes resulting in a blistering condemnation from Judge George Hernandez who said, “There is no evidence of any organized effort to help those students.”

Advertisement

And then there is the iPad issue itself.

The seeds of the iPad debacle were planted in Sacramento when the state Legislature decided to mandate all standardized tests in California be available only in digital format. This places low-income kids at a huge disadvantage. If you’ve never used a computer or tablet, the SATs aren’t the time to learn.

Of course, everyone knows how to use a pencil, but there’s no money to be made from the pencil lobby. Enter Apple and Pearson.

Deasy spearheaded the push to spend a billion dollars of construction bond money to purchase 600,000-plus iPads with special “educational” software created by Pearson. Despite objections from nearly every quarter, Deasy bulldozed this through, playing the social justice and civil rights card and brushing off questions about his connections to Apple and his former top assistant’s past employment with a division of software developer, Pearson.

Add to this the in-classroom breakfast program disaster, the national scandal of Miramonte Elementary School and multiple other sexual abuse allegations and the normal broken bones and hurt feelings that come with trying to administer a system with 655,494 students speaking 93 different languages spread across 1,124 schools with a $6.78 billion budget and every conceivable social vice and virtue walking through the door.

So the LAUSD is done with Deasy and now we go back to the past with Ramon C. Cortines, his third bite at the apple.

Former UTLA President A.J. Duffy described Cortines as “the only one in the city with the ability and background to take up the post where everyone will support him.”

If that’s true, it’s a sad commentary on Los Angeles. The fate of our schools rests in the hands of 82-year-old Ramon Cortines?

Doug McIntyre’s column appears Sunday and Wednesday. He can be reached at: Doug@KABC.com.