A Texas gun shop known for its controversial signs has managed to raise eyebrows once again by criticizing President Barack Obama and bringing up the gruesome issue of beheadings to do it.

Outside of the Katy, Texas-based Tactical Firearms, the company currently has a sign asking, “Does one of Obama’s family members have to be beheaded for ‘change’ to happen?”

The sign, of course, is up in the midst of American grieving and anger over the beheadings of two American journalists at the hands of Islamic State extremists. Over the weekend, the group also claimed to execute a British aid worker.

Despite the controversial nature of the sign, the company’s CEO, Jeremy Alcede, defended the content as well as the general decision to put it up.

“I look and see what’s going on throughout the week, realize what’s an issue, what needs to be fixed, and if I think it’s important then that’s what I’ll voice my opinion,” Alcede said to Houston-based KHOU.

Alcede also claimed the sign could be used by parents as an educational tool.

“You should show them [children] the news and say, ‘This is reality, kids. Beheadings happen, but they shouldn’t.’”

This is not the first time that Tactical Firearms has made waves in the community – and around the country – for its contentious signs. In the past, its posted statements such as, “Guns are cheap compared to Obamacare and have better coverage,” as well as “Perry gets indicted and Obama does not. I call bull**** and demand impeachment.”

The company has even targeted Congressman, like Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.).

“Harry Reid said our border is secure. Did they legalize crack in Washington,” a past sign read.

As far as the most recent statement is concerned, Marco Romero of Katy told KHOU the sign was in “pretty poor taste,” although she defended the company’s right to express its views.

On Facebook, meanwhile, commenters were far more supportive.

“You’re speaking what many, many, many are thinking. Thank you!” wrote a Facebook user named Zo Zo.

“Love ur signs and keep up the good work waking up America,” added Jessica Adkins.