Executive Briefing | by Brandon W. Danz, MHA, MPA | January 12, 2016

Over the last couple of weeks, I examined the emerging superutilizer market and the process used to properly target a superutilizer population (see How To Define A Superutilizer Population and Are Superutilizers Your New Market?). Once your population is identified, it is time for the crucial step of designing the consumer care management process.

What does care management look like for superutilizers? In many ways, it resembles elements of the Medicaid health home program – fine-tuned to the needs of an even more specific target population. The core elements of a superutilizer care management program include:

Comprehensive care management – Improving outcomes for superutilizers requires an interdisciplinary, team-based approach to care. The central hub of a superutilizer program is the care management team – and its members must meet the all-encompassing health and human service needs of your target population.

Care coordination and health promotion – A care management program taking on superutilizer populations must be capable of reducing fragmentation by managing all of their health care and human service needs – not just part of it. This requires providers to look outside the footprint of your current scope of health care services. This also includes referrals to community and social support services as needed.

Improved communication and coordination of health information technology to link services – Your care management team must meet regularly to review cases and assure efficient care coordination. Increased communication should be supplemented with coordinated data throughout the team. This requires care managers to be both project managers and data scientists and assure that all moving parts are working together. Breaking down barriers and fragmentation is a top priority for care management to be effective (see Tackling The Superutilizer Challenge With Technology).

Individual and family support – Health promotion requires an investment in consumer education and coaching. In many instances, high utilization among this population is due to the presence of psychosocial problems that limit the individual’s ability to perform routine, daily tasks. Non-adherence to pharmaceutical regimens is also common. Consumer and family education and coaching must be emphasized as a means to reduce avoidable utilization. Calling a consumer once daily to remind them to take their medications costs significantly less than the emergency room (ER) visit that would result from forgetting.

Face-to-face care management – Care management of superutilizers cannot be done solely over the phone. Many superutilizers have health care conditions and human service needs that are too complex to manage from a distance. Transportation challenges are also common, making it difficult to maintain appointments. For these reasons, home visits should be part of your care arsenal. Depending on the risk rating of each individual, varying degrees of aggressive care management interventions will need to be assigned to them.

Specially-trained care managers and small caseloads – Care management for this population is a time-intensive responsibility and should be met with small caseloads. Caseload sizes depend on the intensity of the care management intervention. As a rule of thumb, a sicker or more rural population will require smaller caseloads – in the range of 35 to 70 per nurse. Where the population is less ill, more geographically condensed, and where care management is predominantly telephonic versus face-to-face, caseloads can approach 70 to 100 per nurse. More intense care management will necessitate smaller caseloads – but is essential to identifying the correlating health and human service problems present and properly addressing those problems.

What does this mean operationally? In terms of staffing, most superutilizer care management teams are interdisciplinary and led by a nurse. These nurses are specially trained in caring for consumers with complex needs and have the skill set to manage the care team. Typically, other team members include:

A social worker who can address consumers’ health and human service care gaps, coordinate services, and connect the consumer with state and local programs. These can include employment training, housing assistance, various educational programs, and other services aimed at improving the individual’s wellbeing.

A physician who can make clinical decisions regarding care for the consumer’s chronic conditions and health problems.

A behavioral health worker or psychologist who can meet the consumer’s mental and behavioral health needs.

Other specialty care practitioners as necessary, depending on the population.

What does the work of this team look like in practice? In order to keep costs low, most of the work will be shouldered by the nurse and a social worker. These members of the team will focus on two strategies – promoting consumer engagement and utilizing home visits to understand the consumer’s needs. The nurse and social worker will keep the other members of the care team informed about the consumer, and the entire team will work together to develop objective, measurable goals for the consumer’s health improvement. Keep in mind that this care management can vary significantly based on the setting and the target population.

For more information on care management of complex cases, see Making It Through The Care Coordination Maze. And for more, attend the OPEN MINDS Performance Management Institute on February 11 in Clearwater, Florida, where I will join Don Fowls, M.D., President, Don Fowls & Associates for the session, Moving To Value-Based Purchasing In An Era Of Integration & Managing High Cost Members.