Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Manny Pacquiao will each defend their various titles in big-money fights within the next three months. But the biggest money fight of them all may be a real possibility.

Mayweather’s next bout is a rematch from May against scrapper Marcos Maidana, on Sept. 13 in Las Vegas. Pacquiao’s Nov. 22 bout in Macau is against Brooklyn’s Chris Algieri, who’s coming off an upset win over Ruslan Provodnikov.

But if Maidana and Algieri were fighting each other, would it command big bucks on pay-per-view?

The one fight that remains atop nearly every fight fan’s wishlist — Mayweather vs. Pacquiao — also remains the biggest possible payday available in boxing.

And Mayweather-Pacquiao is closer to happening now than it has in years, Top Rank promoter Bob Arum told The Denver Post on Thursday.

“There’s one guy who everybody would agree is a megafight (for Pacquiao). And his initials are F.M.,” Arum said.

Why initials?

Pacquiao earlier Thursday joked that the number of Mayweather questions he fields has led him to be “the one we don’t mention.”

Some boxing fans have soured to the unending talk of a Mayweather vs. Pacquiao bout, now several years in the unmaking. But even if it was better fight three years ago, when the boxers were in their primes, the bout is still not past it’s sell-by date. The long-standing grudge and drama between them alone would make a watchable fight.

Arum promotes Pacquiao with an agreement to air fights through HBO. Mayweather is his own promoter and is working with Oscar De La Hoya’s Golden Boy Promotions. His fights air on Showtime. So the rivalry between Mayweather and Pacquiao extends to both their promoters and the networks who air them.

But that cold war may be thawing.

“I’m hopeful in the near term that that fight can be made — way more than before,” Arum said. “Because it appears to me that both networks, Showtime and HBO. both want to do the fight. They want the fight to happen. So that attitude will permeate both fighters.”

Arum’s hopefulness should come with caution among fight fans. He’s currently promoting a fight between Pacquiao and Algieri and any related Mayweather chatter can only help raise awareness of everybody involved.

But Arum was disappointed in the 750,000 pay-per-view buys for Pacquiao’s last fight, against Tim Bradley. And Mayweather’s first fight against Maidana came in at fewer than 1 million pay-per-view buys.

So if Pacquiao-Algieri struggles at the box office and Mayweather-Maidana stays low, they could be more eager for a guaranteed big-money fight in 2015.

“I’m more optimistic now than I have been in years for that fight to happen,” Arum said. “As far as Pacquiao is concerend, we’re 100 percent in.”

But would HBO and Showtime actually be keen on working together? Arum pointed to the Mike Tyson vs. Lennox Lewis fight in 2002 — when HBO and Showtime agreed to collaborate — as an example of how Mayweather-Pacquiao might come together.

“When Mike Tyson fought Lennox Lewis, Tyson was under contract with Showtime and Lewis was with HBO. And they worked it out. They can can use the same model this time. That was a good road map on how to do it. And I know that on behalf of both networks, they could be interested.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke