NATIONAL HARBOR, Maryland – Dr. Gina Loudon was having nightmares. She dreamed she was in a gulag across from one of her five children. The child would always ask her, “Mama, what were you doing when our country fell to tyranny?”

Those nightmares began after Loudon met Kitty Werthmann, a woman who lived through the Holocaust. She told Loudon many of the things President Obama was doing looked exactly like things she saw happen in her native Austria after Hitler annexed the country.

“Every moment, every step, every interview, every book I’ve written, everything I’ve done from the day I met Kitty Werthmann has been so that I can answer that question should it ever arise 20 years from now,” Loudon told a CPAC audience during her Saturday afternoon speech in the main ballroom.

Loudon, who is the host of “American Trends with Dr. Gina” and a WND columnist, told everyone in the crowd they should be prepared to answer that question too. She said she doesn’t believe Americans will be sitting in gulags 20 years from now, but she insisted conservatives must keep that vision alive to remind themselves what they are fighting for.

Hillary for prosecution, not president! Join the sizzling campaign to put Mrs. Clinton where she really belongs

Despite the talk of her nightmares, Loudon sounded a mostly upbeat tone during her 10-minute speech. She told the crowd she “absolutely” believes conservatives will be able to unite by the end of this election cycle, despite the rift that has fractured their movement.

She pointed out conservatives did not want Bob Dole as their presidential nominee in 1996, but they joined with other Republicans and supported him when the general election came around. Conservatives also united around John McCain, Mitt Romney and both George Bushes.

“We always came together even when it wasn’t our nominee, even when we had fought hard for our conservative candidate,” she said. “We came back together because that’s who we are, because we know what we’re fighting for.”

Loudon, who coauthored the book “What Women Really Want,” rejected the idea certain conservatives have divorced from the larger movement.

“This is not a divorce among conservatives,” she proclaimed. “This is our divorce from the establishment who put us in this position, and this is our divorce from the media elite who think they can control our minds.”

Story continues below

Related column:

God has coffee with Donald Trump, by Matt Barber

Related stories:

Carson officially drops out at CPAC

Carson officially drops out at CPAC

Cruz plays to fans in CPAC audience

Kasich channels Mister Rogers, Barney

Donald Trump bails on speech at CPAC

Gohmert reveals real border guards

Talk-radio star attacks Trump – without mentioning his name

‘Da Coach’ Mike Ditka gives Trump love, blasts Hillary

Lindsey Graham: Brokered convention not ‘fair’ to Trump

George Clooney slams Trump as ‘xenophobic fascist’

Trump ‘changing’ and ‘softening’ on visas

Romney says no to presidency but quizzed on Trump

Loudon asked the audience to close their eyes while she read through a long list of things Obama has done, from pushing through Obamacare to telling business owners, ‘You didn’t build that” to golfing after ISIS beheaded journalist James Foley.

“Open your eyes,” she commanded. “Realize what we’re fighting together.”

But despite what she termed the “tyranny” of Obama’s eight years, Loudon asserted conservatives are actually winning today.

“Did you ever dream we would emerge from these eight years and their tyranny to be winning so much that somebody who was elected as a Tea Party candidate could then be labeled an establishment candidate?” she asked, seemingly referring to Marco Rubio. “Have we not made some accomplishments here?

“Did you ever dream that the tables would turn so much … that the number-one issue our candidates were fighting [against] is illegal immigration? It’s like we’re drunk on our own punch and we don’t understand that we’re winning. We have to understand it.”

Looking at the CPAC ballroom full of conservative activists, Loudon proclaimed that no matter who the GOP nominee is, conservatives will win the country back.