Was our governor a pioneer in the ‘rise of anti-establishment’ candidates – and what is he up to next?

HIALEAH, FL - MARCH 09: Florida Governor Rick Scott attends a road expansion event at the Casa Maiz restaurant as he fields questions from reporters about climate change on March 9, 2015 in Hialeah, Florida. Recent reports indicate that the Florida governor allegedly issued orders for certain state agencies to not to use the term "climate change" or "global warming" in any official communications, emails, or reports. (Photo by Joe Raedle/Getty Images) (Photo: Getty Images)

Florida has never had a leader like Richard Lynn Scott.

You’d have to go back exactly a century, to Sidney Catts in 1916, to find a governor who came to Tallahassee with no prior experience in government or politics. But where Catts, the Prohibition Party nominee, had been cheated out of the Democratic nomination before he criss-crossed the state in a battered Ford, Scott darted about Florida in his personal jet forcing himself on the Republican Party of Florida.

A half-century ago, Claude Kirk became the first Republican governor since Reconstruction with no prior public office. But he had headed Democrats for Nixon in 1960 and was the unsuccessful GOP nominee for the U.S. Senate in 1964. And Jeb Bush had only the most fleeting government experience – a couple years as secretary of the old Commerce Department – before running for governor.

But politics is the Bush family business and he was born into it.

Scott’s business is business, and he shrewdly assessed the political market in the anti-incumbency Tea Party fervor of 2010. He narrowly beat then-Attorney General Bill McCollum, then edged Chief Financial Officer Alex Sink in the general election – financing his rise with about $70 million of his own fortune.

Five years later, re-elected by another slim margin, Scott remains an enigma as he heads into the 2016 legislative session. His program remains unchanged – jobs, jobs and more jobs – with about $1 billion in tax cuts and some $250 million in financial incentives for attracting new business to Florida.

“A lot of his success has been in keeping his focus on the economic climate of Florida,” said Susan MacManus, a nationally known political science professor at the University of South Florida.

It’s a sort of trickle-down economics that trickles up just enough popular support to keep the Republican-controlled Legislature sufficiently supportive of Scott. Business organizations would back any conservative Republican, but MacManus said Scott’s sunny optimism about job creation goes down well with the average Floridian – who may not love him, but hopes his plans will work.

“Tax cuts and business incentives are the economic messages he continues to talk about, and that resonates with the business community,” she said. “The people who are not doing as well as they think they should, economically, will take hope from that.”

Repeating his basic campaign speech at quarterly Republican Party conferences, Scott used to joke about what a friendly reception he received, compared to his largely ignored visits in 2010, when the party establishment was flocking around McCollum. In office, he has had uneven relations with the party – which rejected his choice of former Chairman Leslie Dougher in favor of state Rep. Blaise Ingoglia, the current state GOP chairman.

Where other governors have surrounded themselves with top legislative leaders for budget matters, Scott announced his first budget at one Tea Party rally in 2010 and signed it – with line-item vetoes – at another such gathering. Last summer, he enraged Republican lawmakers with a record $461 million in budget vetoes, including some big-ticket items sought by Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, and other top legislative leaders.

Scott’s disdain for politics and government as usual was amply illustrated by the departure of Lt. Gov. Jennifer Carroll, who was implicated in an investigation of “Internet Café” gambling, but never accused of any wrongdoing. He left the office vacant for a year.

Similarly, Scott badly bungled the ouster of Florida Department of Law Enforcement Commissioner Gerald Bailey in late 2014, initially claiming the highly respected chief wanted to retire – which came as news to Bailey. Scott also said the three Cabinet officers concurred in his decision – which came as news to them.

Finally, Scott conceded the matter “could have been handled better,” the closest he has come to admitting a mistake in office.

Scott sometimes tells audiences of his poor roots – how he started school in public housing, how his trucker father got laid off just before Christmas some years, how he started a small doughnut business when he got out of the Navy. He and his wife of 43 years, Ann Scott, saved and invested over the years and Scott cofounded Columbia/HCA Hospitals.

The international hospital chain paid $1.8 billion in federal fraud penalties, but Scott was not criminally charged in the case. He left the company with a vast fortune and continued investing in health care businesses – as well as a “Conservatives for Patients’ Rights” campaign against Obamacare in the early days of the Obama administration.

That led Scott into politics, starting at the very pinnacle of state government. The unknown Naples business executive picked just the right time for it.

Unknown former House speaker Marco Rubio was inching upward in a tortoise-and-hare Republican race against Gov. Charlie Crist in the U.S. Senate campaign – winning straw ballots at county GOP conclaves while the well-financed Crist counted on the party establishment – and Scott hired some of the best available political consultants to do the same in overtaking McCollum.

Atlanta-based consultant David Johnson, head of Strategic Vision LLC, said 2010 “saw a change within the Republican Party. Anti-establishment Republicans captured the GOP nominations for various offices” in several states. In addition to Rubio, outsiders such as Sens. Ted Cruz in Texas and Rand Paul in Kentucky were elected that year – and are trying to out-outsider Donald Trump for the presidential nomination now.

“He represents where the Republican Party is going, with the rise of anti-establishment candidates,” Johnson said of Scott. “Before it is all over, he could be the party’s most successful anti-establishment candidate ever.”

Although he was upside-down in polls through most of his first term – rated the nation’s least-popular, most-vulnerable governor at one point – Scott defeated Crist, now a Democrat, for a second term. He can’t run for a third, but Scott’s “Let’s Get to Work” campaign committee has collected about $4 million in 2015 – more than any other candidate’s political fund – and he is widely expected to use it in a bid for the U.S. Senate in 2018.

Sen. Bill Nelson, the last Democrat remaining in statewide office in Florida, will be ending his third term in Washington that year. Nelson will be 76 – middle age by congressional standards – and probably far more formidable than any Democrat Scott has faced before.

Florida State University public-administration professor Lance deHaven-Smith, said Scott could be a strong candidate for the Senate in 2018.

"He's kind of shaken the bad image that he had, initially, when he first started," he said. "He's doing a good job now and there hasn't been much controversy or corruption in his administration -- at least, not since he fired the FDLE commissioner."

Bill Cotterell has covered Florida’s Capitol for 45 years. His Capital Curmudgeon column appears in the Tallahassee Democrat twice weekly on Thursdays and Sundays. Email him at bcotterell@tallahassee.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1Rfxy9M