Medicare Trustees: Funds 'Sufficient' Through 2030

The slowing growth of healthcare costs has extended Medicare's projected lifespan 13 years beyond projections made in 2009, the last report issued before the passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

The Medicare Hospital Insurance Trust Fund will have "sufficient funds to cover its obligations until 2030," the Medicare Board of Trustees said Wednesday in its annual financial review of the $613 billion program.

This year's projections are much the same as in last year's report, when trustees extended the solvency of the program another 13 years beyond projections in 2009, the last report issued before the passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

The report showed that Medicare covered 53.8 million people in 2014. Total Medicare expenditures were $613 billion, and income was $599 billion. The average benefit per enrollee was $12,432, about 2% higher than last year. Medicare outlays in 2014 were slightly lower for Part A and Part D, and higher for Part B than previously estimated.

The trustees said the projected portion of benefits that can be financed with dedicated money is 86% in 2030, falls to 79% in 2039, and then gradually increases to 84% in 2089. The 75-year actuarial deficit in the hospital Insurance Trust Fund is projected at 0.68% of taxable payroll, down from 0.87% projected in last year's report. The trustees credited the improved outlook to a change in methodology that shows a lower estimate for long-range healthcare cost growth.

Obama administration officials wasted no time crediting the Affordable Care Act with extending the life of Medicare and slowing cost growth.

"Once again, these reports demonstrate how the Affordable Care Act has bolstered Medicare and shored up the program's finances," Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew said in remarks accompanying the report.



Cori Uccello

"When the President signed healthcare reform into law, the Trustees projected that it would extend the life of the Medicare Trust Fund by 12 years, from 2017 to 2029. Since then, the Affordable Care Act has helped reduce the rate of healthcare price increases to their lowest rate in 50 years. As a result, the trustees have over the past several years revised down their projections of Medicare costs, and the projected life of the Medicare Trust Fund now extends to 2030, even further than estimated when the Affordable Care Act was signed."

Per-enrollee Medicare spending growth has averaged 1.3% over the past five years. Over the next decade per-enrollee Medicare spending growth, projected at 4.2%, is expected to be lower than the growth in overall health expenditures, which is projected at 5.1%.

Future Needs

Cori Uccello, Senior Health Fellow at the American Academy of Actuaries, says this year's report "continues what in the last few years has been somewhat of an improvement, especially in the long term."