Jeb Bush speaks to journalists at the e-Estonia Showroom during his visit in Tallinn, Estonia. | AP Photo 2016 Jeb Bush confident as he wraps up European tour

TALLINN, Estonia — As he embarks on his journey back across the Atlantic aboard donor Woody Johnson’s private jet, Jeb Bush will be flying into the typically strong headwinds — but, after a gaffe-free, five-day jaunt across three European countries, he feels as if he’s got the wind at his back.

“I’ve learned a lot, met a lot of really interesting people,” Bush said after an hour-long presentation about the nation’s strong culture of innovation technology Saturday morning at the e-Estonia showroom. “From my perspective, it’s been a spectacular trip, and I love Estonia.”

Story Continued Below

Bush, who will officially launch his presidential campaign in Miami Monday after six months of robust fundraising in the guise of a private citizen simply exploring his political options, showed no signs of fatigue after the week of travel.

He listened avidly and asked several questions during the presentations about Estonia’s unique use of technology in government and across many spheres of private life; people here interact with teachers, access their healthcare records, transfer money, vote and pay taxes quickly — all online.

“All of these things are an example of moonshot kind of thinking, going way beyond where you are,” Bush told reporters afterward. “That’s what I’ve learned from these trips and that’s what I think the United States needs a lot more of.”

Bush made sure to contrast the Estonian story with the seemingly dysfunctional government in Washington.

“They transformed their country,” Bush said. “In anticipation of technological changes that are now commonplace, they embraced using information technology the right way.

“We have a static government on top of our dynamism that’s choking us off,” Bush continued, pointing out the technological struggles of the federal health insurance marketplace created under President Obama’s Affordable Care Act. “I mean, $800 million to build a website that didn’t work?”

Estonia was tacked on to this trip that also included stops in Germany and Poland to highlight the Bush tour’s central theme: the need for a more engaged U.S. and NATO to contain Russia and its president, Vladimir Putin, just across the border.

Bush was briefed on cyber security at an undisclosed NATO-contracted cyber defense site on Friday before he dined with Estonian President Toomas Ilves.

When asked Saturday morning about how many additional American or NATO troops he might be willing to permanently station here, Bush said he would rely on military advice to decide that while advocating additional troops generally as part of an overall strategy of “deterrence.”

“The notion that somehow by showing support, of having troops here, is somehow a provocation when it’s for defensive purposes has to be rejected out of hand,” Bush said. “I think the best way to make sure countries like Estonia are safe is to send a clear signal that we have their back, we’re engaged as a leader over the long haul.

“That’s the right strategy; the particulars of troop levels, I think that’s a little premature.”