SAN FRANCISCO — Rafael Betancourt threw his head back and glanced a “Why?” look at the sky. He stumbled backward off the mound like a poker player just beat him with a gut-shot straight draw.

Against the Giants, next to Willie McCovey’s Cove, your luck can swing that quick.

Betancourt, a 40-year-old veteran member of the Rockies’ bullpen, faced 25-year-old catcher Andrew Susac for the first time Saturday. In a 1-1 count, Betancourt threw him a fastball.

And Susac lined it inches inside the third-base line for a game-deciding, three-run double to left field in the bottom of the seventh inning to lift the Giants to a 7-5 victory over the Rockies in front of 41,476 at AT&T Park.

“The ball came in a little bit and when he hit it, I thought he couldn’t keep it fair, that’s why I went, like, ‘God?’ ” Betancourt said.

The Giants (41-35) finally got past the Rockies on their home field, winning for the first time in five games this season in San Francisco. Colorado (33-41) snapped a mini-streak, losing just a second game in the past seven.

“I missed my spot there. But keeping it fair, good for him,” Betancourt said. “He put a good swing on the ball. And that was it.”

The Rockies unraveled in the seventh. Starter Chris Rusin, who survived the sixth by forcing an inning-ending double play of Casey McGehee, came back for more. He walked Angel Pagan to lead off and forced a groundout to get the lead runner.

Betancourt came on and gave up a double to Matt Duffy. The Rockies intentionally walked Buster Posey to load the bases.

But Susac burned them with the double, scoring Joe Panik, Duffy and Posey to give the Giants a two-run lead.

The Rockies had twice jumped to leads. Nolan Arenado doubled and Troy Tulowitzki and Wilin Rosario singled for three RBIs and a 3-0 lead in the first.

The Giants stayed alive in the third when the Rockies kicked away three unearned runs. Rosario, shading toward second, misplayed a Panik groundball to help load the bases. Then a potential inning-ending double play grounder to Tulowitzki was bobbled too, and Colorado got only the force at second. That allowed Yusmeiro Petit to score.

Posey then tied it with a two-run double that hit off a fan’s hand in left-center that nearly went over the wall.

“We gave them a couple extra outs that inning,” manager Walt Weiss said.

In the fourth, the Rockies broke a 3-3 tie on an RBI groundball single through the right side from Rusin and a sacrifice fly from Charlie Blackmon.

Duffy answered with a solo homer in the fifth that cut the Rockies lead to 5-4.

Rusin threw into the seventh on 98 pitches. He left after 6 ⅓ innings with 10 hits, two earned runs (five total), four strikeouts and one walk.

“He certainly gave us a shot to win that game,” Weiss said.

The Rockies knocked Giants starter Tim Lincecum out of the game, literally, in the second inning after LeMahieu hit a line drive comebacker off Tim Lincecum’s pitching arm.

The Giants starter left immediately, but considering how Colorado was hitting him — three runs on four hits in 1 ⅔ innings, that may have hurt Colorado’s chances. Four Giants relievers combined to allow two runs on four hits over the final 7 ⅓ innings.

The Rockies let slip an early chance to win another series in San Francisco. They return to the bay Sunday afternoon to face Madison Bumgarner in a rubber match.

“I’m not worried about tomorrow,” Weiss said. “They got a big hit. We battled.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke