Thanks to the National Defense Authorization Act of 2015, breast-feeding moms using Tricare will get access to the same resources as those parents whose health insurance is mandated by the Affordable Care Act.

The Defense Health Agency and the Tricare Health Plan are actively developing a plan to allow Tricare to cover these important breast-feeding supplies and services for new mothers, said Kevin Dwyer, Defense Health Agency spokesman.

“We expect to complete the new policy within the next few months,” he said.

Some key aspects of this effort include determining what type or types of breast pumps are covered, how they are provided by Tricare authorized providers, and how providers are paid for these supplies and services,” Dwyer said.

Currently, Tricare may cover electric hospital-grade breast pumps for premature infants who meet certain criteria. The breast pump may be covered for use in the hospital, and in certain cases, if the physician proves medical necessity, for home use,” he said. At this time TRICARE doesn’t cover electric hospital-grade breast pumps for convenience, basic electric breast pumps, or manual breast pumps.

“Until this new policy is complete, Tricare beneficiaries should save their receipts for breast pumps, and breast-feeding supplies and services,” he said. “Coverage for these services and supplies will be retroactive to Dec. 19, 2014, the date the 2015 NDAA became law, as long as they were purchased from a Tricare authorized provider.”

Also available in the meantime, are a variety of free breast-feeding support opportunities through Carl R. Darnall Army Medical Center.

Prenatal breast feeding classes are offered to expecting mothers free of charge, said Tara Haberl, nurse educator and board certified lactation consultant at Darnall. The hospital and New Parent Support programs also offer a support group that focuses more on postpartum.

“Breast-feeding is kind of a lost art,” Haberl said. “Most people didn’t grow up seeing women breast-feeding. In a support group setting, we’re able to form that network prior to their baby being born and after so they know what they’re going through is normal.”

When it comes to trouble-shooting while feeding a new baby, Haberl said that network of support can really make a difference.

The classes teach moms the tools for success, said Capt. Erica Franklin-Wilkerson, officer in charge of Darnall’s Women’s Health Clinic.

“Classes ... teach on how to breast-feed and to get their mind ready for the breast-feeding,” she said. This also includes how to pick up on breast-feeding cues and how to hold babies.

Moms are given information on these resources during doctor appointments. After they give birth, moms are given even more resources that include in-home follow up.

“If they want to succeed at breast-feeding, Fort Hood is the place to be,” Haberl said.

Tricare will notify beneficiaries once the new policy has been approved, Dwyer said.