WASHINGTON — Roughly 48 million Americans remain without health insurance, a tally that could drop dramatically in coming months. So, for foes of the Affordable Care Act, time is running out.

Programs such as Social Security, Medicare, food stamps and welfare have a way of becoming entrenched and politically untouchable. And Republicans know it, adding urgency to their efforts to kill the landmark health care law, which offers subsidies for millions to help pay for insurance.

“It’s easier to kill a vampire than a bad government program,” said Rep. Pete Olson, R-Sugar Land, invoking a bit of conservative folk wisdom from Phil Gramm, the former Texas senator. “Once this thing gets up and running, it’ll be tough to kill, just like all government programs are. That’s why there’s some sense of urgency.”

Republicans who dug in hardest ahead of the government shutdown, demanding that Congress defund Obamacare, warned over and over that once the law takes hold, there may be no turning back.

“The Obama administration knows that in modern times, no major entitlement program that’s been implemented has ever been unwound,” Sen. Ted Cruz told Texas reporters in late July. “Their objective, I believe, is to get as many Americans as possible addicted to the subsidies, addicted to the sugar, in order to entrench Obamacare as a permanent feature of our economy.”

At Families USA, a left-leaning group that supports the law, executive director Ron Pollack said Wednesday that he agrees with critics who expect political momentum and public opinion to make it exceedingly hard to overturn.

“If they had confidence it was going to fail, why put much effort into stopping it? This is really going to help people,” Pollack said. “That’s why they have reached a fevered pitch at this moment.”

Oct. 1 was a key milestone, as uninsured Americans began signing up — albeit with many glitches — through online marketplaces. Their coverage will take effect Jan. 1.

“They recognize that it’s a point of no return,” Pollack said, “and as people get the benefits and get the protections, they’re going to value this very highly, and they will be very mad at any politician who takes this lifeblood away from them.”

About a third of the population has a pre-existing medical condition. For someone with a history of asthma or diabetes or cancer, the law protects them from being denied coverage, charged more, or getting kicked off insurance.

Millions of Americans will enjoy subsidized premiums; benefits taper out but even a family of four earning up to $94,200 would get help.

Then there’s the Medicaid expansion. Texas along with about half of all states refuses to participate; Gov. Rick Perry says the state budget can’t handle it. Elsewhere, this element of the law will cut dramatically the number of poor Americans without health coverage.

Budget showdown

With the government’s nonessential functions shut down and the nation’s credit line due to run out on Oct. 17, the budget showdown has merged with a fight over the debt ceiling. Conservatives are trying to keep the focus on the health care law.

“The only acceptable way out of this is some sort of deal that funds the federal government without funding Obamacare,” Michael Needham, chief executive of Heritage Action for America, told reporters Wednesday. The tea party group worked with Cruz to generate demand for a defunding showdown.

He doubts Obamacare will be popular, because it’s too costly and “fundamentally unfair.” But “giving out billions of dollars in subsidies is going to be a difficult thing to roll back,” and the Oct. 1 opening of enrollment “created some urgency. … Clearly, it’s easier to take on an entitlement program before it takes root.”

Texas Sen. John Cornyn, the deputy GOP leader in the Senate, shunned the tactic of linking Obamacare and the budget. But he agrees with the impetus.

“I am very concerned that the longer it goes on, the harder it will be to dismantle,” he said. “On the other hand, I have to say that the president and his administration are doing a lousy job of rolling this out, and there’s a very good chance that a lot of this will sort of collapse under its own weight.”

Law confusion

Confusion about the law has prevailed.

The latest Kaiser Health Tracking Poll, conducted in late September, found that half of the public — and two-thirds of people without health insurance — don’t know how the law will affect them and their families.

That means most of the people with the most to gain aren’t aware that Medicaid will expand in many states, or that subsidies will help lower-income people pay for insurance. Advocates are betting that as the law comes into focus, and more people leave the ranks of the uninsured, approval will rise.

“Yes, when it’s implemented there is a concern among people on our side of the aisle that there will be a lot of benefits that people will like,” said Sen. John Thune, R-S.D., a member of the GOP leadership. But co-pays and premiums will rise for some people, and overall costs will be harmful to the economy, he argued.

“I don’t think this is a slam dunk even when it’s implemented,” he said.

Opponents have long invoked the language of addiction to describe the evils of Obamacare.

Late last month, Rep. Michele Bachmann, R-Minn., a top tea party leader, told the conservative site World Net Daily that “President Obama can’t wait to get Americans addicted to the crack cocaine of dependency on more government health care.”

Cruz has used less inflammatory language.

Either way, Pollack called it offensive, a “trivialization of something that is a life and death matter for so many people. … To say that when you’re getting help that this is like sugar or crack demonstrates such a total lack of understanding of people’s realities when they can’t afford insurance.”

Follow Todd J. Gillman on

Twitter at @toddgillman.