A coup d’état is the sudden deposition of a government, usually by a small group of the existing state establishment to depose the extant government and replace it with another body, and when a coup neither fails completely nor succeeds, a civil war is the likely consequence. Because a coup d’état is supposed to be a sudden event, it is unlikely that a seditious group would announce, or hold a rally, publicizing their intention to overthrow America’s legally elected government, but this is the 21st Century and an African American man has been twice elected by the people to serve as President. A little under two months ago, an anti-government Islamophobe and Christian announced in an op/ed his intent to marshal a million like-minded rebels to march on Washington D.C. to demand the President’s removal, and subsequently proclaimed a date a week before Thanksgiving to demand the surrender of President Obama to face charges set out by a citizens’ grand jury.

On Monday, the same un-American, Larry Klayman, released a new declaration of independence and announced that on November 19th he and fellow Islamophobes, extremist Christian leaders, and right-wing gun fanatics will converge on the White House and depose the Obama Administration, members of Congress, and the Supreme Court. According to Klayman, President Obama is a “despot, socialist, ultra-leftist “Muslim” who, with his Democratic minions, passed a destructive piece of legislation” (Affordable Care Act) that Klayman claims is unconstitutional. Within the new declaration of independence is a laundry list of imagined slights that claims after “warning him and his administration of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us, we must acquiesce in the necessity, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, Enemies in War, in Peace Friends.” Klayman’s group clearly holds the United States government and Barack Obama as “Enemies in War.”

The November 19th rally calling for the overthrow of President Obama and the government is being co-sponsored by groups such as Accuracy In Media, GrassTopsUSA, Gun Owners of America, Pacific Justice Institute, and several teabagger groups. Klayman claims Representative Trent Franks (R-Ariz) will speak at the coup d’état rally, but a spokesperson from Franks’ office says the congressman will not attend. Franks is likely wise enough to avoid being seen with the other speakers slated to join Klayman who say they are “disgusted by Obama’s criminality, his Muslim, socialist, anti-Semitic, anti-Christian, anti-white, pro-illegal immigrant, pro-radical gay and lesbian agenda to demand the President leave town and resign from office if he does not want to face prison time.” Klayman said if the seditionists’ “list of grievances is not considered by the ruling establishment it will result in their demise” and strongly suggested there may be a violent revolution if the November 19 rally fails to reach its stated goal; overthrow of the United States government.

Klayman’s threat of a violent revolution if the President, congressional leaders, and the Supreme Court do not meet their list of demands and be “abolished from all allegiance to the current government’s regime, including political connection between them and the current government, is to be totally dissolved” is treason. Calling on, and inciting, millions of other Americans to join in the overthrow of the United States government is sedition, particularly under the threat of violent force, but it is glaringly obvious Klayman’s group eschews U.S. law and the U.S. Constitution.

Reading through the list of grievances against the President and the government exposes Klayman and company’s motivation is rank Islamophobia, hatred of minorities, and a desire to dissolve the Union into a collection of independent nation states. In fact, in the “new declaration of independence” there are repeated references to “tyranny” against “the patient sufferance of the States” that leaves them with no choice but, according to their duty, “to throw off and alter the former system of government.” In its place the rebels demand that the country be made up of “free and independent States” and if their demands are not met, “it is only a matter of time before the people and the military rise up to remove the shackles that have been placed on them by the government.”

Klayman is a seditious traitor and he joined Ted Cruz and Sarah Palin during a Washington rally to protest the government shutdown where he repeated his demand that President Obama “get up, put the Quran down, get up off his knees and come up with his hands up.” Klayman’s group also joins Ted Cruz in demanding that “the Internal Revenue Service be abolished entirely,” as well as obliterating the Affordable Care Act. The group also demands that on November 19, the day they designated as “new independence day,” that President Obama “submit himself to examination and appear in front of a citizens’ grand jury to answer questions under oath regarding his illegal, treasonous and impeachable actions during his presidency, as well as provide a physical, original copy of his birth certificate and submit himself to the scrutiny of qualified forensic experts.”

On November 19, Klayman hopes millions will join him and demand the President and key leaders of both Parties and the courts surrender and leave the government. According to Klayman, if nonviolence fails to achieve their goals then “surely another recourse will break out” and after three straight years of threats of armed rebellion against the government, their threats cannot be taken lightly. The U.S. Constitution’s 1st Amendment certainly guarantees Klayman and his un-American cabal the right of free speech, but even the Supreme Court put limitations on speech regarding sedition and imminent danger that certainly includes incitement to overthrow the United States government under threat of violent rebellion.

According to 18 USC § 2382 – Misprision of treason, “Whoever, owing allegiance to the United States and having knowledge of the commission of any treason against them, conceals and does not, as soon as may be, disclose and make known the same to the President or to some judge of the United States, or to the governor or to some judge or justice of a particular State, is guilty of misprision of treason and shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than seven years, or both.” Therefore, any American with knowledge of Klayman and company’s intent to commit treason and overthrow the legal government of the United States has a duty to report the November 19th coup d’état rally; if not to avoid imprisonment, but to put a stop to these persistent call-to-arms to overthrow the legally elected government. Maybe then the ascendance of right-wing Christian extremists will come to a halt because it is just a matter of time before these well-armed un-American maniacs will succeed in starting what they yearn for America; a violent rebellion to overthrow this country’s government.