ORG XMIT: ILSP201 Corn crops are harvested Tuesday, Aug. 30, 2011 near Farmingdale, Ill. The National Agricultural Statistics Service reports 1 percent of the Illinois corn crop has been harvested, while soybeans are nearing maturity. (AP Photo/Seth Perlman) (Photo: Seth Perlman AP)

The 2014 Farm Bill heralded a new era in federal farm subsidies. Farmers would no longer receive direct payments from the federal government. Instead, crop insurance programs took over the role of providing a safety net for America’s farmers. Crop insurance companies would receive subsidy checks and checks from farmers, too, but that was beside the point.

The Farm Bill promised to strengthen crop insurance, provide more risk management tools for farmers, make crop insurance more affordable for beginning farmers, and expand the safety net beyond a handful of row crop commodities. Ultimately, we were told, the Farm Bill’s enhanced crop insurance offerings would provide a stronger safety net for farmers with greater program integrity to ensure that tax dollars are used more efficiently.

That brave new world dawned when President Barack Obama signed the Farm Bill into law on Feb. 7, 2014 — but not really. The nation’s largest and wealthiest farms still use the largesse of unlimited crop insurance subsidies to drive up land costs and drive their smaller neighbors out of farming.

The Federal Crop Insurance Program is incredibly complicated, involving both the government and private insurers. Essentially it is a system that gives crop farmers every incentive to purchase “revenue protection” insurance. That is the most expensive option available because it protects against revenue losses no matter how they come about. If a farmer’s crop is huge and prices plummet, lowering profits, the policy pays off. If crop prices remain high but a farm’s yields are low, bringing down profits, the policy pays off.

Revenue protection insurance isn't merely crop insurance — it is income insurance, and the government subsidy for the premiums is so high that farmers simply can't turn it down. In 2012, more than 85 percent of eligible crop acres in the U.S. were covered by federally subsidized crop insurance, and more than 90 percent of those acres were covered by revenue protection. Taxpayers pay, on average, 62 percent of premiums for that insurance. Farmers pay the remainder.

Make no mistake, Americans love the idea of the iconic American farmer, and no one wants to return to a time when an ill-timed hail storm could lead to a sheriff’s sale, with neighbors bidding on their unfortunate friend’s combine and tractors.

What Congress and the U.S. Department of Agriculture have succeeded in creating, however, is a completely different animal — a complex insurance system and related set of subsidies that carry a hefty price tag for taxpayers. And that cost has risen sharply in recent years. According to a 2012 Congressional Research Service report, crop insurance costs have gone from $3.9 billion in 2007 to over $14 billion in 2012.

Perhaps more disconcerting, unlimited crop insurance premiums mean the sky’s the limit when it comes to farming the crop insurance program. If we had the desire and means to farm all of Iowa, the federal government would pay 60 percent of our crop insurance premiums. That’s on every single acre, every year, no matter how many bushels of corn and soybeans we grew and regardless of the price we received for those crops.

An extreme example? Yes. But the bin-buster benefits for America’s largest mega-farms in the crop insurance subsidy program are all too real. In 2011, 26 crop insurance policyholders across the nation each received more than $1 million in federal premium subsidies. A Government Accountability Office study in 2012 pointed to one farm that insured crops in eight counties and received nearly $1.3 million in premium subsidies.

Sadly, that study also found that only 2.5 percent of producers nationwide would have been affected by a $50,000 limit on crop insurance premium subsidies in 2011. America’s largest and wealthiest farms have reaped the benefits of the farm subsidy shell game Congress foisted on the American people in the 2014 Farm Bill.

The time has come to reform the federal crop insurance system and end the subsidy shell game. The time has come to cap premium subsidies and restructure the program to work for small, mid-sized and beginning farmers.

Reform would also create room for real investments in family farmers, farm and ranch land conservation, and other rural priorities — investments that could be the foundation for creating a rural future with thriving family farms and ranches and vibrant small town mainstreets, a future that truly reflects American values.

Traci Bruckner and John Crabtree work for the Center for Rural Affairs in Lyons, Neb. Contact: cfra.org

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1UWhdVJ