When will the improving American economy translate into higher approval ratings for President Obama?

It will take time. But if recent trends continue, Mr. Obama’s political standing is likely to strengthen.

The economy is turning upward. Job growth is increasing, as The Upshot’s Neil Irwin has noted, and wage and income growth – which have been largely nonexistent for years – are likely to pick up. The latest estimate shows G.D.P. grew at a rate of 5 percent in the third quarter, the fastest rate since 2003.

The political currents are seemingly running in the opposite direction from the economy, however. Mr. Obama’s approval ratings are currently mired in the low 40s – mirroring the ratings for his handling of the economy – and his party was soundly defeated in November’s midterm elections.

Some Democrats have blamed Mr. Obama for not taking enough credit for the state of the economy. But as The New York Times correspondent Jackie Calmes reported recently, the party remains divided over how it should handle the issue, with some officials fearing a backlash if the president or his allies celebrate an economy that is still leaving millions of Americans behind.

Photo

The lesson of history is that Mr. Obama will get credit if growth continues, but we should not be surprised if public opinion lags objective measures of the economy. The political scientists Peter Enns and Gregory McAvoy write, for instance: “For the most part, public opinion does not react instantaneously to changes in economic information. It takes time for economic news to make its way from government reports into news reports so that ordinary citizens can absorb and respond to this information.”

We can see this process of the public starting to notice improvements in the economy in recent survey data. A recent Pew Research Center poll shows increases in the number of Americans hearing “mostly good” news about the job situation, gas prices and the national economy over all. Likewise, the preliminary Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan estimate of consumer sentiment for December is the highest since January 2007.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

If the economy continues to improve, these changes will eventually be reflected in Mr. Obama’s approval ratings. An interesting point of comparison is Bill Clinton in early 1996. Mr. Clinton was still striking the same awkward balance as Mr. Obama, taking credit for recent growth while noting “there is another side to America’s economy: About half our people still haven’t gotten a raise in terms of real purchasing power of their incomes in 10 or 15 years.” It wasn’t clear to political observers as late as April 1996 how much credit Mr. Clinton would get from the public on the economy, given the insecurity that many voters still felt. But Mr. Clinton was eventually successful in attributing the strong economic recovery to his policies, which pushed his approval ratings to nearly 60 percent and helped him to easily defeat Bob Dole.

It is unlikely that Mr. Obama will receive as much credit as Mr. Clinton, of course. He faces two major obstacles. First, the strength of the economy under President Clinton eventually became difficult to deny, producing roughly parallel increases in economic approval across party lines. Mr. Obama seems unlikely to match the high levels of growth seen during the late 1990s, which substantially exceed the current economic forecasting consensus. He may struggle to change Americans’ minds if the economy is not growing at such a rapid clip.

The other thing working against Mr. Obama is the widespread divergence in his approval ratings between Democrats and Republicans, which in 2012 exceeded the record set during the George W. Bush administration. Independents and members of the opposition party tend to be more sensitive to economic news than members of the president’s party, but it remains to be seen how many Republicans will warm to Mr. Obama as the economy improves.

Still, while Mr. Obama’s recent executive actions on immigration and Cuba have received greater attention from the chattering class, recent economic developments could be more consequential for his presidency and the 2016 election.