Need to manage health, not health care:

Posted September 23, 2015

John Bardis brings 30 years of experience in health care to table John Bardis retired this year as chairman, president and chief executive officer of Alpharetta-based MedAssets Inc., the company he founded in 1999. That company – publicly traded since 2007 – provides products and services for 4,400 hospitals (that is four out of five hospitals in the country) and 122,000 non-acute care health centers across the United States. The company specializes in cost and clinical resource management as well as purchasing and revenue cycle management. MedAssets also provides change management consulting and data-driven analytic software. The company’s goal is to continually improve the operational and financial bottom line. The company is able to provide consulting insights based on data-driven insights. Thus, MedAssets challenges its clients to improve the quality and effectiveness of the health care they provide based on hard numbers and solutions the company can provide. After spending more than 30 years in the health care industry and attaining many senior management positions, Bardis has acquired not only the expertise but the relationships that are key to any business. He has been named by Modern Healthcare as one of the 100 Most Influential Leaders in Healthcare for the last four years (2011, 2012, 2013, 2014). Bardis was the 1995 Inc. Magazine Entrepreneur of the Year and was Ernst & Young’s Entrepreneur of the Southeast in 2012.

John Bardis is a maverick in the health care industry. Recently retired as president, chief executive officer and now chairman emeritus of MedAssets (see box), he sounds a loud and clear call for supporting the Affordable Care Act.

A 30-year veteran of managing health care costs, Bardis says it is not only important to the health of everyone, but if we don’t get a grip on the true cause of skyrocketing health care costs, an economic crisis of epic proportions is unavoidable.

So why is Bardis so sure he is right?

“Well, what is clear and irrefutable is there are 40 million uninsured Americans, many of whom have no chance of ever being able to afford health insurance, and that number is growing for the same reasons,” Bardis said.

Those reasons are founded in how the government originally began paying for health care with Medicare in the 1960s with a cost-plus system of payments, he said.

But in the mid-80s, there was a cost split. The government capped the rising costs in Medicare of what are called diagnostic related groups (DRGs) and linked any rising costs to a cost-of-living figure. But DRGs in the private sector had no such cap,

“So private sector costs continued to rise, until companies could no longer absorb those costs and passed them on to employees,” he said. “Now premium costs are so high, individuals have been driven out of the insurance market altogether.”

The situation has become so bad, those who don’t have insurance cannot afford premiums on their own, and people with pre-existing conditions are in an even worse situation. Not only were their premiums much higher, but often insurance could not be procured at any price.

Today, health costs are growing at a much faster rate than wage growth or even economic growth.

“It was only a question of time before the affordability of health care versus wage and wealth growth would segment out the poor and the middle class. And that is exactly what has happened to us,” he said.

The Affordable Care Act is an attempt to rectify that, but Bardis says the law is “by no means perfect,” nor was the way the law was legislated.

The disparity in costs are so great now between what wage earners can pay and what care costs, many of that 40 million uninsured do not seek care until they are at such a point of deterioration that they must walk into an emergency room.

“There couldn’t be a more expensive place to get your primary care than the ER,” Bardis said.

The reality is the country needed an answer to the insurance issue. An estimated 15 million people are covered today who were not before the law.

Conservatives say the number of newly insured is nowhere near 15 million, but closer to 5 million. Bardis says no matter the number – and he says it is nearer the upper range – the next step is clear.

“We have to manage health, not health care,” he said. “We’re in a much better place if we have an educated consumer in a transparent market.”

In a market today of high deductibles, the economic forces should reward the person who chooses health care at the most reasonable cost. But Bardis says the consumer is snookered because there is an “opaqueness” on the cost side.

Costs can be hidden in so many ways consumers can’t make an informed comparison decision.

Meanwhile, the onset of the presidential campaign has brought more cloudiness to the issue. Conservatives agree health care needs fixing, but say first Obamacare must go.

“That is unproductive, and there is nobody who believes that is going to happen. But it is a tear-down political strategy – just tear down the other guy,” Bardis said.

Rather, the conversation should be about what adjustments can be made to make the act better. States that rejected the Affordable Care Act have only hurt themselves, Bardis said. Those states have left more uninsured on the outside.

“So I am waiting for someone to come up with a better idea,” he said.

Bardis says he is a fiscal conservative, but 40 million uninsured is a looming social problem that cannot be ignored.

MedAssets manages $400 billion in claims for U.S. hospitals, so this is a problem Bardis has wrestled with for the last 16 years.

“We have a pretty good bird’s eye view of how payments and costs don’t coordinate with one another,” he said.

Medicaid and Medicare today have 67 million on the rolls. That number will grow to 85 million by the 2020s.

Part of this is the product of the good health care that Americans receive today. Life expectancy has gone up every year for 100 years except 1919 and its worldwide flu epidemic. That is an actuarial nightmare as more people are living longer.

When Bardis compares the economic growth of about 1.2 percent to 1.5 percent and health care costs cruising at 5 percent a year, the economic train wreck is only a question of when.

“We can’t get a handle on costs. And we can’t survive with wage and earnings growth at under 2 percent and health care growing at 5 percent. That’s nearly a 500 percent disparity,” he said.

The great challenge is to bring health costs into line with economic growth. America is 4.1 percent of the world population and represents 40 percent of health care dollars.

The world GDP is $77 trillion, and the United States accounts for $18 trillion of that, or 22 percent. But America spends 40 percent of the health care GDP.

“That tells you we’re spending more than we should,” Bardis said. “We have 4 percent of the population consuming 40 percent of the global health care GDP.”

Another disconnect in the economic balance is the United States has the largest pharmaceutical expenditure in the world, yet Americans also pay the highest price for drugs. In almost any other market, the largest buyer should be getting a discount.

“These numbers tell me we can do better,” Bardis said. “And we have the resources to do it. We have the best medical infrastructure in the world. But by any measure, you have to conclude that America’s costs for health care are too high.

“Costs will be the rule of thumb going forward,” he said. “You can’t have health care costs growing at five times that of the economy. That’s why costs have to be addressed.”