CLEARWATER – A Seminole man is accused of defrauding several retail stores, including Wal-Mart, by producing his own Universal Product Codes, or bar codes, and receipts, according to court documents.

Luis Antonio Schomaker, 39, was arrested Thursday on a charge of scheming to defraud, the same day Pinellas County sheriff's investigators searched a Palm Harbor residence where they say Schomaker was manufacturing the bogus paperwork.

Bail was set at $10,000, but Schomaker can't be freed from the Pinellas County Jail until he shows that the $1,000 bond required for his release is not coming from illicit gains.

Sheriff's detectives executed a search warrant at 2631 Country Grove Blvd. and confiscated 90 items, including receipt rolls, sheets of bar codes, computer equipment and manuals, a half-dozen firearms, and Visa debit and gift cards, the court documents show.

Also seized were receipts ostensibly from retail outlets such as Barney's Motorcycle and Marine, Foot Locker and Wal-Mart, the documents show.

An informant told investigators about the scheme and how it worked, according to an affidavit accompanying the request to search the Palm Harbor house.

The informant went to that house and met Schomaker in the garage to get bogus bar codes, bogus receipts, a list of merchandise and cash to buy the items, the affidavit says.

The informant then would go to a Wal-Mart, find the pre-selected items, place the fraudulent bar codes over the real ones, and purchase the items at significantly lower prices than the actual ones, the affidavit says.

The informant then went to a different Wal-Mart and, using receipts Schomaker had made to show the original higher prices, returned the merchandise for a refund, the affidavit says. The informant would meet Schomaker to give him the refunded cash, the affidavit says.

The informant told investigators Schomaker was the source of bogus receipts and bar codes for six other people, the document says.

Detective George D. Moffett arranged for the informant to have a recorded telephone conversation with Schomaker, during which they discussed future meetings and the scheme, the affidavit says. The informant met Schomaker on two occasions, and was wearing a recording device, the document says.

At the first meeting, Schomaker discussed making the fraudulent bar codes that he would give to the informant at a second meeting, the affidavit says.

At that meeting, which was not at the Palm Harbor house, he gave the informant three fraudulent Wal-Mart receipts and 14 fraudulent bar codes, all designed to defraud the retail giant, the affidavit says. On the back of the fraudulent bar codes, Schomaker jotted down the merchandise to which the bar codes were to be attached, the document says.

Schomaker used an application on his cell phone to scan the bar code to make sure it would scan properly at Wal-Mart, reflecting the bogus lower price, the affidavit says. Some did not scan properly, and Schomaker told the informant to meet him at the house, where he would print new bar codes, the affidavit says.

A Wal-Mart investigator confirmed that the receipts and bar codes sheriff's investigators collected are fraudulent, the affidavit says.

sthompson@tampatrib.com. (727) 215-6504.