Leslie Ladd is state director of March of Dimes. (Photo: Submitted)

Each year, more than 6 million children and 370,000 pregnant women, including more than 106,000 children in our state, are covered through the Children’s Health Insurance Program, also known as CHIP. Created in 1997 and renewed as part of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), CHIP is a vital piece of the nation’s health insurance coverage puzzle.

But while the CHIP law was renewed in 2010 to last through 2019, CHIP funding was only extended through September 2015. As a result, CHIP supporters like the March of Dimes are now working to persuade Congress to fund this important program at least through 2019.

Our state CHIP program, CoverKids, was created to provide a source of affordable, quality coverage for working American families who earn too much to qualify for Medicaid. In Tennessee, children ages 1 to 5 are only eligible for Medicaid if their families earn less than 147 percent of the federal poverty level, or about $29,000 for a family of three. CHIP helps give more families access to coverage by extending availability to a higher income level, 255 percent of poverty level here in Tennessee. CHIP also allows states to cover some children and pregnant women who may not be eligible for Medicaid.

Some people might wonder why we need CHIP at all anymore, given that the ACA sought to extend access to coverage to everyone. The answer is that since CHIP was a proven, popular, well-established program operating in every state, Congress decided to maintain and build around it rather than dismantle it. As a result, CHIP is an integral part of the national insurance framework constructed by the ACA.

So why didn’t Congress just extend funding through 2019 when it renewed the law? Not surprisingly, the answer has to do with money. Extending funding was then calculated to cost billions of dollars per year, which would have required Congress to find corresponding cuts. It was easier not to extend the funding and to postpone those tough decisions.

Happily, though, CHIP might just end up benefiting from that procrastination. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) recently released some informal estimates indicating that extending CHIP might cost nothing beyond the already budgeted funds over the next few years. If certain improvements are made to the program, it could cost up to $5 billion over five years. The main reason for this comparatively modest cost is that the CBO assumes that children and pregnant women not covered by CHIP would end up either in Medicaid or receiving tax credits to purchase coverage through the Marketplaces — both of which are projected to cost more than covering them directly through CHIP.

Advocates like the March of Dimes are working energetically to urge Congress to extend CHIP funding. Now’s the time to take advantage of circumstances and extend CHIP at least until 2019 — for the sake of the millions of children and pregnant women served by this important program.

Cheryl Major, RNC-NIC, BSN, is volunteer advocacy chairwoman for March of Dimes. Leslie Ladd is state director of March of Dimes.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1CXpTGO