Cleveland Clinic CEO Toby Cosgrove could be nominated to take over the deeply troubled Department of Veteran Affairs, according to The Wall Street Journal.

Citing “three people familiar with the matter,” the newspaper reports that the White House has approached Dr. Cosgrove about taking the job, and two of them said he’s “seriously considering” pursuing the job. One Journal source said Cosgrove is the main person under consideration, but the decision is not final.

Cosgrove, a decorated Vietnam veteran, was a surgeon in the U.S. Air Force and served in Da Nang as chief of the U.S. Air Force Casualty Staging Flight. He was awarded the Bronze Star and the Republic of Vietnam Commendation Medal, according to his official Clinic biography.

A Clinic spokeswoman, Eileen Shiel, on Tuesday evening, June 3, would not confirm if Cosgrove has been approached about the VA job.

Cosgrove, 73, has been at the Clinic since 1975 and has been CEO since 2004. He has helped it become one of the world’s leading academic medical centers and has emerged as a leading voice on national health care policy matters.

The VA has been rocked by revelations about long wait times for care at its facilities, and by other concerns about its quality of care. Secretary Eric Shinseki resigned last week, and the job would require someone of significant stature to restore confidence in the VA.

The VA is a massive agency with facilities all over the country. Cosgrove has led a significant physical expansion of the Clinic, not only in Cleveland, but in Florida and Abu Dhabi, where it is building an outpost. Cosgrove also has been a strong voice on wellness initiatives and other issues aimed at holding down health care costs.

The Journal noted that President Barack Obama visited the Clinic in 2009, when Democrats were crafting the Affordable Care Act, “and cited it as a model for how the country could move to a higher-quality, lower-cost health system.”

The paper also said that in Washington, Cosgrove “is not a stranger. He has spoken before the Senate, and he attended the White House Correspondents Dinner this spring.”

Related Links