MARICOPA INTEGRATED HEALTH SYSTEMS, HIRING 114<br /><br />For more information, go to: http://www.mihs.org/ <br /><br /> Dr. Sunitha Bandlamuri examines patient Guy Colombo, 55, of Mesa, at a the Mesa Family Health Center, part of the Maricopa Integrated Health System facility. (Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

Most Maricopa County residents might not think about the county's public hospital system or even know it exists, but their lives could some day depend on it.

The Maricopa Integrated Health System is a safety net for the county's poor and underserved residents. It primarily caters to those who have nowhere else to go. But it operates a burn center that treats some of the most desperate patients from across the Southwest. Its hospital is a Level 1 trauma center and a teaching institution for medical students and other health-care professionals.

Maricopa County residents pay for these facilities through their secondary property taxes. The special health-care district also receives federal and state funds.

Next month, county taxpayers will be asked in Proposition 480 to approve $935 million in bonds that would be spent to expand and renovate the aging system and increase capacity to serve the county's mentally ill. The total cost of the bonds, including interest over 30 years, is tabbed at $1.6 billion.

Early voting began Thursday.

The average homeowner would pay $13.74 more a year per $100,000 of a home's assessed valuation to finance the bonds, according to MIHS.

Prop. 480 is stirring debate over the role of a public hospital system in a health-care landscape undergoing significant change. Arizona's Medicaid expansion and implementation of President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act are key signs of that change.

The primary question is not whether a public hospital system should exist in the Valley, but whether changes proposed in Prop. 480 are appropriate for Arizona's health-care future.

Campaigns for and against Prop. 480, the second countywide ballot measure since 2004, are heating up. The proposal has wide support but draws opposition from certain interest groups and has split the Arizona hospital community.

Proponents argue the changes would modernize MIHS to better meet the evolving needs of patients. Opponents question why taxpayers should fork over more money, especially since more Arizonans will be covered through the state's Medicaid expansion.

Prop. 480 reflects MIHS executives' long-standing desire to upgrade facilities and modernize the system. A possible bond has been discussed since the district was created.

Maricopa Medical Center, the county's hospital, already was an aging building when voters decided to create the hospital district a decade ago. The building, which broke ground in the late 1960s, has had leaks, asbestos in the walls, and emergency room corridors so small and crowded that intake patients, jail-inmate patients and violent psychiatric patients all waited in the same area.

MIHS has spent $46.7 million on renovation and maintenance in the past five years.

The largest proposed project in Prop. 480 is to replace the complex that houses the hospital, the Arizona Burn Center and the Level 1 trauma center. It is on the MIHS campus at 24th and Roosevelt streets.

MIHS will die a slow death without the bond approval, proponents say. They have said the same thing for 11 years. But opponents call the claim an exaggeration — especially since the system has held its own during the past decade.

Every major city has a publicly-funded hospital, usually operated through the county, city, a hospital district or a city-county partnership. And almost every major public hospital at some point has asked voters to invest their taxes in renovations to their aging facilities.

Voters in Dallas County, Texas, for example, in 2008 authorized a $747 million bond to rebuild the crowded and aging Parkland Memorial Hospital, famous for treating President John F. Kennedy after he was shot. The Parkland Health and Hospital System is structured much like MIHS: Level 1 trauma center, a renowned burn center, community-based clinics, a teaching hospital, and a safety-net hospital providing uncompensated care for indigent patients.

"Parkland, being a county hospital and indigent-care hospital supported by taxpayer dollars — the reality is, you may end up being there. There's a connection there," said Alan Walne, a former longtime Dallas city councilman involved in the bond campaign. "The citizens of Dallas County believe in the mission of the hospital and they absolutely understood the need to replace the building."

Will Maricopa County voters feel the same way?

Proposed changes

"No more chest pains for you?" Dr. Sunitha Bandlamuri asked on a recent morning as she examined Guy Colombo, 50, her patient of more than 10 years.

"We've got to work on that belly," she told him, and he bashfully laughed.

"Yeah, I need to cut down on my starch," said Colombo, who is covered through the state's Medicaid plan. He chose this clinic because he lives nearby, and has built a relationship with Bandlamuri.

It was a routine checkup at the Mesa Family Health Center, one of MIHS' 11 community-based family health centers, which are one-stop shops for patients' everyday needs. The family health centers provide a range of services, including adult and pediatric ambulatory care, primary care, OB-GYN exams, dental care and pharmacy services.

Prop. 480 proposes to spend $138 million to upgrade, replace and add outpatient clinics like the family health centers throughout areas of the Valley with the most underserved and uninsured patients.

The measure also proposes to allot $226 million for behavioral health facilities, including a new behavioral health hospital that would increase the number of beds available for seriously mentally ill patients.

An additional $571 million would be spent on inpatient facilities, mainly replacing the Maricopa Medical Center, Arizona Burn Center and the Level 1 trauma center.

Prop. 480 would allow MIHS to transition into a network of community-based clinics that provide primary, preventive, specialty and outpatient care — a decentralized model that safety-net systems nationwide are adopting. With new technology for telemedicine and electronic medical records, the role of a large, centralized hospital system is changing.

The goal is to have fewer patients use the emergency room to receive primary care, which is much more expensive than actually going to a primary-care clinic. Instead, the system would take advantage of the new federal focus on increasing the number of community health centers in areas of high health-care need. As a result, the new Maricopa Medical Center would have fewer inpatient beds.

"It no longer needs to have all those beds because a lot of the time that used to be spent in beds in the rehabilitation, recovery period is now happening at home," said Tony Rodgers, former director of the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, the state's Medicaid agency. "Most hospitals are downsizing. It's really hard to downsize when you are built for wards."

Over the past decade, the district has worked to rebrand itself as a nationally recognized hospital system and shed its image as the "county hospital," like some well-intended but unstable and behind-the-times cousin of county government.

Maricopa County voters created the district in 2003 with 60 percent approval, spinning it off as an independent taxing entity. At the time, it was bleeding money from the county general fund. The district is governed by five publicly-elected directors.

When the county no longer was legally mandated to be a safety-net system providing indigent health care, the Board of Supervisors mulled closing the county hospital, said Supervisor Andy Kunasek, the only remaining supervisor among those who decided to take the matter to the voters in 2003.

"I can speak for the mindset of everybody that was there at the time on the board as we looked at it. Everybody recognized it as such an important institution in the Valley, in the whole state — really, the whole Southwest," Kunasek said.

"The board thought collectively that it would be best to try and tell the whole story to the voters and let the voters decide," he said.

The debate

The Yes on 480 campaign has raised money aggressively, and launched a publicity blitz via news outlets, social media, billboards and bumper stickers. The campaign reported raising nearly $975,000 as of late September, which was considered a feat among political observers.

That figure is more than double the amount raised in a comparable time for the last countywide ballot measure in 2004, a $951 million community college bond approved by voters. The majority of Prop. 480 donors are physicians, nurses and other staff from District Medical Group, the not-for-profit physician group at MIHS.

A wide range of prominent community leaders, medical professionals, and state and local government officials support the bond. They say the measure would improve health-care services, attract more medical professionals and provide firefighters, first responders and police with quality facilities and equipment.

"Prop. 480 should be approved because it fills a gap in the health-care delivery system in this community, and it's been filling that gap for over 100 years," said Dr. Leonard Kirschner, former AHCCCS director. "Maricopa County is an important part of our system and it will remain for the future, and it needs to be updated."

The Vote No on Prop. 480 campaign was launched by the Arizona Tax Research Association, a research and advocacy group, and its president, Kevin McCarthy.

Other groups opposing the measure include the Goldwater Institute, Americans for Prosperity Arizona, NAIOP of Arizona, Small Business Alliance, Gilbert Chamber of Commerce, AZ Public Integrity Alliance, and the Arizona Free Enterprise Club, a non-profit that has sparked debate over the influence of "dark money" through record spending in Arizona elections.

The opposition campaign, formed only days before the most recent reporting deadline, has not filed a campaign-finance statement.

Opponents say Prop. 480 comes at a bad time, as taxpayers emerge from the economic downturn and the health-care landscape is being reshaped. Taxpayers are paying for Medicaid expansion. They already pay secondary property taxes for MIHS, and will now be asked to pay even more, McCarthy said.

Opponents also say the tax dollars will be used to compete against private hospitals — an argument proponents vehemently contest, saying MIHS comprises only 5 percent of the patient market in the Valley, and that the system serves a population that is not economically attractive for private and non-profit hospitals.

That MIHS has only 5 percent of patients shows other hospitals are absorbing indigent health care, McCarthy said. The opposition campaign wants other options explored — including privatization of some MIHS services or public-private partnerships — before taxpayers commit to the bond measure.

"If the decision is made by voters to deny the bonds, the current operation stays there. The burn unit isn't going anywhere. Their role in health care isn't going anywhere in the near future," McCarthy said. "But I think what's most important is the dialogue in the future should include taxpayers and private providers that feel like MIHS is competing in this space, trying to improve their market share."

Proposed projects, costs

$571 million

Acute-care facilities, including replacing the Maricopa Medical Center, its Level 1 trauma center and the Arizona Burn Center. All are on the MIHS campus at 24th and Roosevelt streets.

$226 million

Behavioral health facilities, including a new behavioral- health hospital.

$138 million

Outpatient health facilities, including renovating or replacing existing outpatient clinics and building new ones.

For more information

Yes on 480: yeson480.com.

Vote No on 480: vote

noon480.com.

MIHS bond advisory committee: mihsbondadvisory.org.

ON THE BEAT

Michelle Ye Hee Lee is a government accountability reporter whose coverage area includes the Maricopa Integrated Health System.

How to reach her

michelle.lee@arizonarepublic.com

Phone: 602-444-8290

Twitter: @myhlee

The ballot question

"Shall the Maricopa County Special Health Care District, operating as Maricopa Integrated Health System (MIHS), be authorized to issue and sell General Obligation Bonds of $935,000,000 to meet community need for healthcare facilities throughout Maricopa County, including, without limitation, facilities for outpatient care, behavioral health, and replacement of the District's teaching hospital Maricopa Medical Center, its Level One Trauma Center and Arizona Burn Center?"

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1xAZPe0