Lawmakers would have a much easier time and we would all be better served if they would follow the adage “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.”

But that common-sense approach flies out the window when politicians start talking about guns.

Sen. Vicki Marble, R-Fort Collins, is the lone sponsor of a so-called “constitutional carry” bill that would allow “a law-abiding person to carry a concealed handgun without a permit.”

Marble’s Senate Bill 32, coupled with Senate Bill 86, which would repeal legislation requiring background checks on gun transfers, narrowly passed the Senate Judiciary Committee last Monday.

It is unlikely that the legislation seeking to loosen gun restrictions and expand gun rights will become law in the split legislature and with Democratic Gov. John Hickenlooper wielding a veto pen. But the bill is worth reviewing nonetheless — in part because it’s one of the few gun bills that isn’t just a reaction to the laws passed in the 2013 session, and also because it represents a position of growing popularity in the gun-rights movement.

Marble and other gun-rights supporters say at least five other states have enacted constitutional-carry laws without any problems. And while that may be true, Colorado’s own concealed-carry laws also haven’t been problematic. Nor have they been a significant impediment to people who seek a permit.

Currently, adults 21 or older who want to legally carry a concealed handgun must apply for a permit from their local sheriff’s office, pay no more than $100, submit to fingerprint background checks and prove they have passed a handgun training course.

Marble’s legislation would do away with the safety course and the fingerprint background check.

But why lessen safety requirements and screening? Has anyone desiring a permit been unjustly burdened by such mandates?

Yes, the Second Amendment guarantees U.S. citizens a right to bear arms, but Colorado’s law doesn’t materially interfere with that right. It merely imposes a couple of minor but prudent safeguards to the entitlement.

In 2013, more than 50,000 concealed-weapons permits were issued or renewed with only a handful being denied for various reasons. Does that sound like Colorado has a broken system or one that is frustrating those who wish to carry a concealed weapon?

To us it sounds like a system that is pretty much operating as intended.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.