Bruce Caswell

Position: President of Maximus, a Reston-based company that operates government health and human services programs worldwide.

Bruce Caswell always had an interest in serving others, and at one point had political aspirations. Instead, he has found a way to serve the public good outside of government, first at Price Waterhouse, then at IBM and now at Maximus, where he has been elevated to the role of president.

Did you know what you wanted to do coming out of college?

Bruce Caswell is president of Maximus, a Reston-based company that operates government health and human services programs worldwide. (MAXIMUS/Courtesy of Maximus)

My life has been less about a planned trajectory than really trying to take advantage of opportunities as they arose. I always had an interest in public service. I grew up in an economically depressed area [Oneonta, N.Y.], and it remains so today. I’ve seen how helpful benefit programs can change people’s lives and provide supports that are essential to them and their families.

As I came out of [Harvard’s] Kennedy School [of Government], I distinctly remember facing a choice of maybe applying for presidential management internship or something like that. I choose a private sector path because frankly I had student debt that I wanted to pay off.

How will your responsibilities change in your new role as president of Maximus?

I still wear two hats within the organization, president of the company, but also I remain the general manager of the health services segment. It’s really health and federal, and it was through that work that I returned to my roots. I enjoyed doing that and we’ve grown the business on a global scale and we’ve done a great deal of work around implementing the Affordable Care Act.

My responsibilities are to look after the day-to-day operations of the business and ensure that our programs are operating at a high standard, serving our clients well, addressing issues as they arise and really promoting the organic growth of the business.

What do you hope to achieve?

Putting processes in place that can be systemized and repeated to help provide control but also accountability and visibility into an organization. I want to help the company to continue to grow. I want to continue the tradition of delivering quality service in everything we do and from that will follow profitability. If we’re doing a good job at that, we’ll continue to grow. I want to do my very best to provide opportunities for growth for our people. We have a value which is to promote from within as much as possible.

I want to ensure that I’m continuing to learn every day, that I’m continuing to listen actively, that I’m continuing to be engaged with our clients and our markets. We’re in a very dynamic world in a very dynamic environment, and every day I think about how we need to be changing as an organization to ensure that we are well positioned to continue to grow, and more importantly, that we’re well positioned to continue to serve our clients well.

What’s the most difficult lesson you’ve had to learn as a leader?

If you have an intuition or a gut [feeling] on how to deal with a problem, deal with it now. Don’t wait. Only wine seems to improve with time. I’ve learned that I should trust my intuitions. I should act sooner rather than later, whether it relates to a difficult employee situation or whether it deals with a difficult project situation. My boss [Maximus chief executive] Rich Montoni often says is it might be human nature to deal with the easiest stuff first, but good managers and good leaders deal with the hard stuff first.

What’s the best advice you’ve received in your career?

It’s not one piece of advice, but it’s the evidence through action in leadership that I’ve taken the most [from]. It’s just so different when there’s a leader or a mentor who clearly walks the talk. They espouse certain values and live those values in their actions every day. It’s so important to be authentic. I’ll give Rich credit for this. He taught me that you can be a good leader and also be a really good person. Being firm and holding people accountable doesn’t mean being desensitized and dictatorial.

Who has had the biggest influence on you?

I feel fortunate for what I learned from my parents along the way. Having a father who was a foreign service officer, having a mother who was very much ahead of her time founding major choral and theater institutions in upstate New York, I learned an awful lot from my parents. And I don’t often give them enough credit. I learned a little bit about dealing constructively with conflict from my dad. His training in diplomacy served me well. And then I say this many times, of the two managers in our house, I will gladly tell you that my wife is by far more capable than I. She has a PhD in philosophy. I’m so grateful that I’m in the position I’m in because I’ve had an amazing life partner along the way.

— Interview with Kathy Orton