Middlesex County College legal expert Ronald Goldfarb summarizes the 2015 term of the U.S. Supreme Court.

Ron Goldfarb (Photo: ~file photo)

The gavels were packed and the robes hung up as the 2015 term of the United States Supreme Court came to a close on June 30. Fewer than 70 cases were decided by a full opinion but the court certainly made headlines many times with blockbuster decisions dealing with the Affordable Care Act, same-sex marriage, free speech and capital punishment. There were also mundane issues such as taxation and intellectual property. Some have analyzed the results and concluded that the Court moved a bit to the left this term and that the three most liberal justices (Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan) formed a core group that regularly attracted Justice Stephen Breyer and frequently persuaded Justice Anthony Kennedy to vote with them, if not always agreeing with all aspects of their reasoning. Others point to recent decisions discussing the Voting Rights Act, campaign contributions and gun issues and find that the conservatives still hold sway.

Looking at the majority opinions at the end of the term, I was surprised to see that there was a nearly equal distribution of decisions among all of the justices — the range was only from seven to nine – and the most conservative members (Antonin Scalia, Samuel Alito and Clarence Thomas) collectively wrote just three more than the liberal block (24-21). There are certainly some deep ideological splits, with Justices Thomas and Sotomayor agreeing only 50 percent of the time, and clear alliances as Justice Ginsburg agreed, at least in part, with Justice Sotomayor 94 percent of the time and with Justice Kagan in 93 percent of the cases. (Thanks to SCOTUSblog for the statistical analysis.) That the court has an ideological bent as well as a legal one is bound to surface during the upcoming presidential election season, especially since four of the nine justices are over 75.

So what will the court be dealing with during the next term? So far, certiorari has been granted in 35 cases with 15 scheduled for oral argument in October. Three issues are sure to be closely watched: affirmative action, public sector unions and voting rights. In Friedrich v. California Teachers Association, the court will be asked to consider the validity of “agency shops” that require non-members of public employee unions to pay a fee to the union in lieu of dues. A related question is whether that money can be used to pay for “speech” that those individuals paying the fees do not agree with. The demise of agency fees would strike a strong blow against the unions.

Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin, will be a replay of an earlier case dealing with the University of Texas’ admissions policy that considers race as one factor. It actually applies only to a small group of students but it may be the case that ends race conscious admissions for good. In Evenwell v. Abbott, the Court addresses the question of apportionment of state legislative districts and how the methodology selected can effectively create “safe districts” for one political party or another.

Next time, we return to the general legal system and some advice on the selection and use of lawyers.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1NtrwNE