TALLAHASSEE -- The U.S. Supreme Court has featured John Roberts and Antonin Scalia as dueling justices, exchanging sharp differences of legal opinion on major cases, including the most recent decision upholding the Affordable Care Act.

Now the Florida Supreme Court has Barbara Pariente and Charles Canady playing a similar role as evidenced in the sometimes caustic exchanges in the 130-page decision ordering the state Legislature to redraw districts for eight of Florida’s 27 congressional seats.

In both cases, the dissenting justices, Scalia and Canady, accused the court majority of overstepping its bounds as an appellate court. The dissenters essentially argued that the court was taking on a role of a law-making body rather than staying within the bounds of a judicial arbiter.

Scalia’s complaint was that the U.S. Supreme Court, known as SCOTUS, went too far in upholding the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, and its tax breaks for Americans who purchase health insurance through federal exchanges.

“So it rewrites the law to make tax credits available everywhere. We should start calling this law SCOTUScare,” Scalia wrote in his dissent, saying Roberts’ reasoning was an act of “interpretive jiggery-pokery.”

Canady was equally forceful in his criticism of the majority opinion written by Pariente that is directing lawmakers to redraw the state’s congressional districts while offering specific guidelines on how the new districts should be shaped.

“This decision causes serious damage to our constitutional structure,” Canady wrote. “The proper functioning of the judicial process is deformed and the separation of powers is breached in an unprecedented manner.”

In her opinion, Pariente called Canady’s criticism “extravagant.”

“The barrage of epithets employed by the dissent includes the following colorful array: ‘fallacious;’ ‘fabricated;’ ‘extreme distortion;’ ‘revolutionary deformation;’ ‘teeming with judicial overreaching;’ ‘creatively cobbled;’ ‘aggressive invasion;’ ‘aberrant decision;’ and ‘unprecedented incursions,'” Pariente wrote.

“Perhaps we should take solace in not being accused of ‘jiggery-pokery,'” Pariente added in a footnote.

COURT POLITICS

But there is a major difference between the nation’s highest appellate court and Florida’s top appellate court: the U.S. justices have lifetime appointments, while Florida justices face a mandatory retirement age.

Four of the five justices who formed the 5-2 majority in the congressional case, and are viewed as the liberal wing of state court, will reach the retirement age of 70 in the next four years. Justice James E.C. Perry will end his current term in January 2017, allowing Gov. Rick Scott to replace him, most likely with a more conservative jurist.

Another epic Florida political battle may loom with the other three justices, Pariente, Fred Lewis and Peggy Quince, whose terms will end on Jan. 8, 2019, which happens to be the last day of Scott’s second term.

The unresolved question is whether Scott will make the appointments to those three Supreme Court seats or whether it will be his successor.

The Legislature placed a constitutional amendment on the 2014 ballot that clarified the issue by giving the appointment power to the sitting governor, which in this case would be Scott. But voters rejected the measure.

Given the ideological divide that was evidenced by this week’s congressional redistricting opinion, how those appointments are resolved will go a long way in determining who is accusing who of “jiggery-pokery” in future decisions.