A nationwide issue has sparked controversy between religious groups and the LGBT community. NBC News reports Indiana has signed a revised religious freedom law after it came under fire under the assumption it intentionally discriminates against gays and lesbians.

Now, Missouri has a law in the works and similar tensions have drawn Hobby Lobby representatives to Hannibal.

Last summer, the U.S. Supreme Court ruling on the Hobby Lobby case, which under the federal religious freedom restoration act (RFRA), created a religious exemption for family-owned corporations in Affordable Care Act requirements to cover contraceptives for women.

"They make it seem like Christians are just waiting to discriminate, we just can't wait," Dr. Joshua Hawley, a lawyer with the Becket Fund, a group that supported Hobby Lobby, said. "If we could just get the legal right to discriminate, we'll rush right out and do it. Nothing can be farther from the truth."

It was a message that brought dozens of local residents to Hannibal La-Grange University Thursday.

On the heels of controversy over Indiana's Religious Freedom Bill, a Hobby Lobby employee spoke at the 4th Annual Worldview Christian Conference.

Michael McAfee, Director of Faith Initiatives for Hobby Lobby, said that religious freedoms in the United States are under attack for the first time and RFRA bills are needed to protect citizens' right to worship.



Julie Loos, who came to hear the speakers, says the church is being unfairly targeted as discriminatory against the LGBT community. She says it's not discrimination, it's discretion.

"Just because I may not agree with someone's lifestyle or something like that, does not make me a hater or a bigot. It means I disagree," Loos said.

Robert Bedell, an LGBT activist, says states doubling down on an issue that's already federal law isn't necessary.

"I think the basis of the Constitution well protects the American citizen's right to religion, their own religion as they choose, or from religion if they don't choose a religion," Bedell said.

Now, House Bill 104, a Missouri bill similar to those in other states, would protect religious practice on college campuses. Bedell sees the legislation as a possible concern.

"My perspective is that the law in and of itself is not discriminatory. The application of that law and the interpretation of that law could potentially be discriminatory," Bedell said.

"It's not necessarily always discrimination," Loos said. "It's being able to use our discretion of what we support based on our world view."

Missouri's bill has passed out of the House. The Senate hasn't taken it up yet, but will look closely at the bill's language after Indiana's backlash.