A private venue doesn't mean kids are secure, a safe partying advocate has warned. Photo: iStock

What are your children doing this long weekend?

If they are in their mid-teens, a house party is probably on the agenda. But a private venue doesn't mean kids are secure, a safe partying advocate has warned.

Naomi Oakley is the founder of Safe Party Australia, an organisation that provides advice to parents on how to run a house party successfully. Her company, U-Nome, also offers specialist security to monitor parties and get rid of gatecrashers before they can get inside.

Liam Knight: has permanent brain damage after his head was speared by a metal pole thrown by a 16-year-old gatecrasher at a north shore party. Photo: Channel 9

She says all parties - even if you don't think your child is the kind to drink to excess - need adequate professional security and alert hosts watching out for teens putting themselves in danger. Guests between 14 and 16 are the most likely group to get in trouble, she says, as alcohol is a way for them to feel mature and exciting but they can't yet handle it.

Advertisement

"You may think it's up to the police, you call them when it gets out of control, but it's not," she says.

The advice is particularly timely for Sydneysiders after two teen parties in two weeks were violently gatecrashed in the city's south and inner-west.

The first, a 14th birthday in Five Dock, ended abruptly when a gatecrasher allegedly stabbed one guest in the chest and hit another in the face with a glass, leaving his two victims in hospital.

The second, in Kingsford on Friday night, was broken up when a 16-year-old girl was hit in the head by a brick allegedly thrown by a gatecrasher, requiring stitches.

Before this, the most prominent victim of an alcohol-fuelled party gone wrong was Liam Knight, who has permanent brain damage after his head was speared by a metal pole thrown by a 16-year-old gatecrasher at a north shore party in 2013.

Ms Oakley says 14- to 16-year-olds, in particular, often drink themselves sick, getting into fights or compromising sexual situations that follow them for life.

In a letter to Tony Abbott in April this year, she called on the federal government to take national action to address the dangerous effects of binge drinking and alcohol-related violence.

This echoed calls early in the year by the Australian Medical Association for a national summit on alcohol misuse, which would gather together all levels of government, emergency services, health experts and victims' families to discuss strategies to deal with drunken violence in the community.

“Alcohol abuse and misuse is affecting thousands of Australian families every day," then-president of the AMA, Dr Steve Hambleton, said in January.

“It is a national problem that needs a national solution. It requires action and leadership from the Federal Government to ensure we have a nationally consistent approach to addressing the problem,” he said.

But on Friday, just hours before alcohol helped a second Sydney party descend into chaos, the PM's parliamentary secretary Josh Frydenberg ruled out such a summit, offering a lukewarm response to Ms Oakley's concerns.

"I am aware that the Australian Medical Association has previously called for a National Summit to be convened to tackle issues arising from alcohol-related harm," Mr Frydenberg said in the letter to Ms Oakley, which was seen by Fairfax Media.

"However, the Australian Government considers that community level action is required, involving the police, local government, pubs and clubs and residents."

Ms Oakley said this isn't good enough.

"I'm on the front line every week and this issue's not going to go away. It's going to get worse," she said.

"Coppers didn't join the police force to break up fights at parties."

The AMA is planning its own summit into alcohol-fuelled violence, independent of the government, to begin in August.