Alabama's race for U.S. Senate is heating up as we get closer to the March first primary.

Republican Senator Richard Shelby faces four challengers in the primary election.

Shelby has represented the state in Washington for 37 years. He is one of the most senior members of Congress and serves as Chairman of the powerful Banking Committee.

His challengers say Shelby's been in Washington long enough and it's time for change.

"Since 1992, people have not had a reasonable alternative to Richard Shelby," said challenger Jonathan McConnell. "I think this time people should realize that. They have an opportunity for change."

The change won't come easy. The sitting senator has a more than $19 million in his campaign war chest, according to opensecrets.org.

Challengers made it clear the money is not deterring them. Instead, they're focusing their messages on what they'd do differently than the incumbent.

Marcus Bowman worked in Washington as a legislative analyst and a research consultant.

"The biggest difference between myself and Senator Shelby is that I would be a vocal voice up in Washington D.C.," Bowman told ABC 33/40. "I think he likes to point out that he votes the right way on a lot of issues, especially now that he has competition on the ballot. But I think I would be a voice up in Washington D.C . for conservative values, for conservative principals."

Jonathan McConnell was a Marine and now has a company defending ships off the coast of Somalia.

"I'm energetic," said McConnell. "I have a lot of accomplishments in my life. Senator Shelby says he fights Obama every day. I don't want him fighting Obama every day. I want him fighting Mitch McConnell. The problem is the republican establishment that keeps ramming everything down the American people's throat. They could have repealed Obamacare."

John Martin is another veteran running. He worked for the U.S. Army 40 years.

"I would be on the air a lot," Martin explained. "I would be the guy getting the attention just as Jeff Sessions does, be the guy getting the attention because he's working hard. He has great ideas, innovative ideas and he's banning Senators together to accomplish those ideas."

The fourth challenger, Shadrack Mcgill, was a small business owner and former state senator. He sent us this statement:

"I honor Senator Shelby for the good that he has done but at the age of 81, he deserves to take a rest from the mess this nation is in. I will bring a new energy and boldness to Washington like Alabama has never seen before. I will not rest until COMMON CORE, OBAMA CARE, EPA and the LIBERAL AGENDA, have been stripped from our nation. If elected God's Word, our Constitution and the voice of the People will be my guide. God bless The USA!"

Senator Shelby was not available Sunday for an interview but plans to sit down with ABC 33/40 for a one-on-one interview later in the week.

His campaign did send us this statement from Senator Shelby:

"Our national security, economic prosperity, and the American way of life are all under attack like never before. I'm running again because I'm not done defending Alabama and America on all three fronts. I have an unmatched, proven record of conservative leadership, and I will continue to fight to preserve our Alabama values in Washington."