Carrie Brown, 82, talks with with VNA Nazareth Home Care’s Bethany May and community health worker and social worker Ashley Dawson. (Photo: Provided)

Patricia Merriweather, a 64-year-old resident of west Louisville with COPD, is like many people who struggle with a chronic medical condition. During a 12-month period, she made eight trips to Jewish Hospital's emergency room, had four outpatient visits, and five inpatient hospitalizations at a total cost of $150,000.

But thanks to an innovative, home-based program called Health Connections Initiative, Merriweather developed the skills, confidence, and resources to better manage her health. The result? Just one outpatient visit during her four months in the program, even with the additional diagnosis of lung cancer.

As Louisville looks at the deep drivers of change, we should invest in efforts like this that address the social determinants of health − and have the greatest impact.

The research is clear: a small group of very complex patients account for most of our nation's health care spend. In fact, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality reports that just 5 percent of the population accounts for more than half of health care costs in the U.S.

Yet, as we've demonstrated right here in Louisville, health outcomes can improve dramatically for this high-risk group when care is comprehensive and coordinated—addressing patients' social and emotional needs as well as their medical care.

At KentuckyOne Health, our tradition teaches that preferential treatment of the poor and vulnerable is our obligation—compelling us to implement new care management models to deliver compassionate, coordinated, and comprehensive care to the most challenged and challenging patients. With the advent of the Affordable Care Act, financial incentives are beginning to support this innovation. But during this period of transition, health systems are still incentivized to hospitalize patients.

To spur a new approach, Catholic Health Initiative's Mission & Ministry Fund awarded a multi-year grant to KentuckyOne and VNA Nazareth Home Care to develop a program that better serves patients with high medical needs, disjointed health care, and high medical costs. Health Connections Initiative is grounded in strong evidence that a large number of emergency visits and hospital admissions of "super-utilizing" patients can be prevented by relatively inexpensive, early, and coordinated interventions.

How it Works. Potential participants are identified while they are hospitalized at Sts. Mary & Elizabeth Hospital, Jewish Hospital, or University of Louisville Hospital (all part of KentuckyOne) using a tool that calculates the risk of readmission by assigning points for hospital length of stay, acuity, comorbidities, and the number of emergency department visits in a given period of time. Those with high scores living in one of several low-income neighborhoods in west or south Louisville, and who have Medicare, Medicaid, or no insurance, are invited to enroll in the free program that entails frequent home visits over about 90 days.

A multi-disciplinary team works with each patient to set goals for health improvement, to identify any barriers to good health, and to work together to overcome them. The teams include a lead RN, licensed practical nurse, social worker, and community health worker, and draw on the services of VNA registered dietitians and mental health professionals as needed. They collaborate with physicians and often accompany patients to doctor appointments to improve the effectiveness of these interactions. In addition, in-home telehealth monitoring is often used for high-risk patients with congestive heart failure and COPD to help control these very difficult conditions.

But the model's success lies in the recognition that to impact intractable medical problems you must address basic needs like housing, transportation, food insecurity, and low literacy.

From our experience, compassionate support can make a dramatic difference, particularly when caregivers have the time to develop a trusting relationship and to address the root causes of poor health outcomes. Of the 124 people who have "graduated" from this program to date, almost 70 percent are single, widowed, divorced, or separated. Overlay this social isolation with the persistent presence of depression and addiction and it's easy to see why so many people cycle in and out of high-cost hospital care.

Perhaps it's not surprising then that our community health workers are arguably the model's "secret sauce." While all of the team members play critical roles, the CHWs log the most visits, becoming a trusted friend while serving as a knowledgeable connector to neighborhood resources. Kentucky should move forward with efforts to amend the state health plan, joining the dozen or so states that credential and reimburse for this very cost-effective service.

In designing Health Connections Initiative, a "hot spotting" method was used to map the home addresses of "super-users" of care. The data indicated significant opportunity for improvement among a relatively small population. In just one year, 976 Jewish Hospital patients met the criteria, but 126 accounted for charges of $19 million—more than 50 percent of the total.

Most live in just a handful of zip codes in the west and south end. Understanding these health disparities is key to Health Connections Initiatives' place-based model that works with participants in the context of their neighborhood's assets and barriers. As a result, VNA Nazareth Home Care was the logical choice to deliver this service, drawing on its skill in working with complex patients in the home setting.

From October 2013 through February 2015, the program has delivered impressive results:

The 30-day unplanned readmission rate dropped 18 percent.

Depression rates declined dramatically.

Participants reported significant improvements in their ability and confidence to manage their health and in perceptions of how well their care was coordinated.

Hospitalizations dropped from a total of 352 annually to 177. These admissions were also shorter, with a drop in average length of stay from 5.32 days to 4.89. The result was a reduction in inpatient charges of $6.1 million.

But the most compelling evidence of success is in the stories of individual graduates. They have newfound hope for a better quality of life and strong bonds with a trusted team of caregivers who help them take control of difficult circumstances. As Pat Merriweather says, "They encouraged me. They gave me confidence. They made me feel good about myself….now I have the strength to stay out of the hospital."

To see Merriweather's story, visit: http://bit.ly/1GavFkS

Alice Bridges is vice president of healthy communities at KentuckyOne Health.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1LlOGrk