Syracuse, N.Y. -- Kinney Drugs has opened a health clinic in its drug store at 104 Lafayette Road that will provide care to patients suffering from emphysema, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma and other lung problems.

The "Healthy You Wellness Center" is the first retail health clinic opened by the drugstore chain. The clinic is a partnership between Kinney, Pulmonary Health Physicians PC and Franciscan Companies, an arm of St. Joseph's Hospital Health Center. Pulmonary Health Physicians PC, a practice with three offices in the Syracuse area, will staff the clinic.

Kinney opened the clinic because it expects some patients may have trouble accessing health care as more people get health insurance through the federal Affordable Care Act, said Mike Duteau, a Kinney vice president. Kinney is launching the clinic at a time when Central New York and the rest of the nation are facing a growing doctor shortage.

Initially the clinic will be open 4:30 p.m. to 8 p.m. Monday, Wednesday and Thursday, Duteau said. Kinney may expand those hours in the future. The clinic will accept private insurance, Medicare, Medicaid managed care and self-pay patients.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease -- COPD for short -- is a progressive lung disease with no known cure that slowly robs its sufferers of the ability to breathe. Only heart disease and cancer kill more Americans than COPD. Smoking is the primary cause of COPD, but there are other important causes such as air pollution.

Dr. Thomas Aiello of Pulmonary Health Physicians said COPD has become an epidemic. COPD exacerbations characterized by shortness of breath and other symptoms often lead to emergency room visits and hospitalizations. One of the clinic's goals will be to reduce hospital admissions and readmissions, he said.

"We want to improve quality of life, minimize the reduction in lung function and reduce or eliminate acute exacerbations," Aiello said.

The clinic also will treat patients suffering from bronchitis, common cough, cold, flu, allergies and sinus infections.

Kinney and Franciscan are stocking respiratory-related medical equipment such as nebulizers and continuous positive airway pressure equipment for people with sleep apnea in the store. Franciscan respiratory therapists will put on educational seminars and screenings at the clinic.

Duteau said Kinney and its partners have not decided yet whether they will open additional retail clinics or expand services for other health conditions.

You can contact health writer James T. Mulder at jmulder@syracuse.com or (315) 470-2245. Follow him on Twitter @JamesTMulder.