Newly appointed French Prime Minister Manuel Valls Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

It is companies that create jobs. That simple acknowledgement by French President François Hollande in Monday’s address to the nation announcing the appointment of a new prime minister was again an attempt to change the tone of the economic discourse in the euro zone’s second largest economy.

After all, Mr. Hollande was elected on a platform of tax increases and the continuation of France’s generous spending on public services.

It also helps that it is Manuel Valls, the popular Interior Minister, whom Mr. Hollande has picked for the job. Mr. Valls is known as a hard-charging centrist.

Still, the reaction of investors Tuesday has proved suitably muted after the thumping defeat the Socialists suffered at the polls in the two rounds of municipal elections that concluded over the weekend. The French stock market rallied Tuesday morning in line with other European bourses while the price of French government debt barely budged.

The main problem Mr. Valls faces in trying to kick-start economic growth in France through lower taxes and cutbacks in public spending are the constraints of the Socialists’ electoral promises. They were reflected inevitably in Mr. Hollande’s speech Monday.

While Mr. Hollande promised his new government would press ahead with a so-called “responsibility pact” involving lower taxes for business to help create new jobs and spur investment, he said Mr. Valls would craft “a solidarity pact” to protect those less well-off.

That suggests that the growth-promoting reform France so badly needs—of the labor market, the unemployment-benefits system, and healthcare spending—will be difficult for Mr. Valls to pull off, said Eric Chaney, chief economist at AXA Investment Managers. “Mr. Valls’ appointment is a step in the right direction,” Mr. Chaney said. “But the new prime minister is in danger of being hamstrung by the promises Mr. Hollande made to get elected in the first place.”

Mr. Valls has little economic room for maneuver. The country’s budget deficit fell to 4.3% of gross domestic product in 2013 but that missed the government’s 4.1% target as revenue disappointed despite tax increases. It leaves Paris well short of the 3% target Brussels expects it to have met next year. Meantime, France’s debt is approaching 95% of economic output, up from 86% in 2011.