CHARACTER RECIPE

For our children

Begin with victimhood; it is the stock or this stew.

Mix in entitlement for flavor.

Chop the onions of injustice; be careful these can bring tears to your eyes.

Finally, add rage for spice.

Let these stew together until they are about to boil over. Have a taste.

But you’re right; something is missing.

I forgot the milk of human kindness,

We need some noodles of education

Finally, serve it with the bread of gratitude.

For best results, it should be eaten at just the right temperature in a stable family with unconditional love and self-esteem for all who share in it.

It is really delicious.

Eduardo Balbona, Jacksonville

NORTH CAROLINA

Support for bathroom law

North Carolina deserves credit, not vilification, for its bathroom-gender law.

It is an understandable attempt to deal with a difficult problem. No matter how a person claims gender identity, there will be behavior that is irrepressibly consistent with the gender of birth. That has been established scientifically.

Anyone so horrified by the law should have a daughter go into a bathroom with a birth male who claims to identify as a female. It should be interesting.

Roderick Beaman, Orange Park

PENSION TAX

Voters want more details

The Times-Union published a piece concerning the status of the pension tax.

It included a quote from City Council President Greg Anderson, “If the Curry plan passes in August, additional legislation will be introduced in which details will be provided.”

It appears he took a page right out on the Nancy Pelosi playbook, “We need to pass Obamacare legislation in order to see what is in it.”

We all know how that worked out

Anderson may have been just stating a fact and not expressing support for that chain of events.

However, if he or the mayor believes that this tax will pass with a “Trust Me” label, they have not been paying attention to the people.

Trusting politicians is how we ended up in this hole.

Randall Groger, Jacksonville

OBAMA’S RECORD

Poor in many respects

Where has a letter writer supporting President Barack Obama been for the past seven years?

The Constitution and Congress have been ignored by this administration.

Obamacare was passed without any Republican input or votes.

Obama has issued unlawful executive orders to make up his own rules.

We need a president who will protect the Constitution, not work around it.

We need a Supreme Court that will follow the law and not let politics dictate the direction of their votes.

Thomas Vaughters, Fleming Island

OUR CITY’S NAME

Let’s go with Jax

Maybe it is time to rebrand the name Jacksonville.

Although we are the biggest city with that name, there are too many Jacksonvilles around the country.

Our founding namesake “Jackson” has a negative connotation these days and fairly or not is a politically incorrect figure. Consider the removal from $20 bill and the Trail of Tears.

Also “ville” denotes small, and we are a big city. Competitors Miami, Tampa and Orlando have more memorable names.

Why not just shorten the name to “Jax” or something else?

Jax is trendy like shortened LA, DC, NOLA and matches JaxPort and the JAX airport acronym.

Jax is already being used in casual emails. We could keep our name “equity” for the most part while shedding the negative.

Although probably the least of our problems, it is something we may have to address for marketing reasons someday.

Bill Spinner, Jacksonville

MAGNET SCHOOLS

Best way to diversity

Jacksonville experienced the futility and foolishness of mandatory busing for the purpose of achieving a predetermined and supposedly ideal racial balance in all public schools.

By the 1980s, most parents of all races had their fill of that abuse of governmental power, and the community was able to win court approval of a much more sensible and humane approach: namely, using magnet schools to pursue diversity through shared interests instead of arbitrary racial quotas.

Now, the informative Times-Union news story indicates that voluntarism currently is not achieving a contrived “diversity” idea — at least 20 percent black students — in four of the 10 most-popular magnets.

But how big a deal is that really if children have the opportunity to go the school of their choice — whether regular neighborhood, charter, private on a tax-credit scholarship or magnet?

If some black parents are shunning magnets because they wrongly assume they would have to pay tuition, then that is a communications problem the school system should address.

Otherwise, choice serves the interests of students a lot better than government treating students as though the only trait that matters is the color of their skins.

Robert Holland, The Heartland Institute,

Chicago