A $5.1 million expansion of Valley Behavioral Health is complete and there are now 114 private beds to help more people in western Arkansas and east Oklahoma.

An open house was held Thursday for the mental health facility at 1031 Mayo Drive in Barling with The Jason Foundation President Clark Flatt of Hendersonville, Tenn., offering a one-hour presentation on what he calls the nation’s “silent epidemic.”

Over 100 teens commit suicide a week in the United States, and 80 percent of those gave enough warning signs to be helped, Flatt said. Jason Flatt committed suicide in 1997 at the age of 16. His father has worked the past 18 years to bring awareness to the issue through the support of companies like Valley’s parent company Arcadia Health System.

“It’s a big day for Valley and the company. We’re here because we believe,” Valley Behavioral Health CEO Anthony Walters said.

The expansion also means about 25 additional health-care jobs for the area. Registered nurses are still being sought to accommodate the expansion.

Valley provides private, individualized inpatient and outpatient treatment for children, adults and seniors who need help with mental-health issues. The Affordable Care Act requires mental health to be covered by health insurance.

Beverly Wilborn, director of development for the facility, said the expansion will help keep fewer people from being turned away due to a lack of space. She said Valley is the only in-patient mental-health facility in the Fort Smith region. The facility saw about 450 inpatient stays in 2014 and about 800 outpatient visits last year.

The Jason Act was passed in Arkansas in 2011, requiring all teachers to have at least two hours of suicide prevention awareness education. Georgia passed it last week and it is expected to be up for vote next week in Texas. At least 15 states have passed The Jason Act.

Suicide, something rarely reported in most media outlets, is the second-leading cause of death in America among teens and young adults, Flatt said using Centers for Disease Control and Prevention statistics.

“It’s not just the Goth or the loner,” Flatt said. “We’re talking about the average, all-American, the cheerleader, the football star, the guy on the chess team. And it’s even worse among our Native Americans.”

The Jason Foundation is also used as a resource to address suicide with soldiers in the National Guard because of less government resources offered to those troops. Free programs are offered to schools, churches and civic groups through the nonprofit organization.