What an irony to have the Confederate flag coming down around the Old South at the same time the saintly Atticus Finch — the iconic hero of Harper Lee’s Pulitzer Prize-winning “To Kill a Mockingbird” (1960) and the greatest father and public defender in American literature — outed as a xenophobic racist.

Lee’s “Go Set a Watchman,” released last week amid much fanfare, decanonizes Finch. He is shown engaged in what we today might call Donald Trumpism. In the novel, Finch’s daughter, now 26 and visiting her small-town Alabama home from New York City, cries “I looked up to you, Atticus, like I never looked up to anybody in my life and never will again.”

Finch, similar to Lee’s real father, is a prominent lawyer who served for many years in the Alabama House of Representatives. In “Mockingbird,” he is a paragon of decency and integrity who teaches his children to understand other people and transcend prejudice.

In “Watchman,” the Honorable Mr. Finch is a member of a local White Citizen’s Council dedicated to preserving segregation and fighting the NAACP and recent U.S. Supreme Court decisions, especially Brown vs. Board of Education (1954).

If the idealized Atticus Finch was almost too perfect to be true in “Mockingbird,” the Atticus Finch of “Watchman” is disconcertingly human.

Jean Louise “Scout” Finch is appalled by her father’s seemingly new racism. His political views, in Lee’s telling, may be even more backward than those of Scarlett O’Hara (Margaret Mitchell’s heroine in “Gone with the Wind”).

“Do you want Negroes by the carload in our schools and churches and theaters?” he asks.

Finch wants the feds, the courts and Northern liberals to leave them alone. “What would happen if all the Negroes in the South were suddenly given full civil rights? There’d be another Reconstruction.”

He says the feds are trampling on the 10th Amendment to the Constitution, adding the blacks “down here are still in their childhood as a people.”

Scout becomes outraged and calls him out as a coward and tyrant, almost like Sophocles’ Antigone rails against King Creon of Thebes. But Scout’s aunt, uncle and longtime boyfriend share Finch’s hardened political views. She asks her boyfriend, Henry Clinton — a young law associate in her dad’s law firm who aspires to run for the state legislature — why he is in league with the segregationists.

Henry, echoing Atticus Finch’s sentiments, says it was expedient and perhaps the necessary thing to do. “Have you ever considered that men, especially men, must conform to certain demands of the community they live in simply so they can be of service of it?”

She responds: “you’re a goddamned hypocrite.”

Nelle Harper Lee, now 89, has long since settled back into her old Alabama hometown of Monroeville, the model for the novel’s town of Maycomb. “Watchman” was written in the late 1950s, around the same time as her best-selling and much-loved “Mockingbird,” which was set in the 1930s.

“Watchman” is more political than “Mockingbird.” It probes the political values of the white community, and puts under a microscope the “pay-to-play” politics of the courthouse political cabal.

“Watchman” is not as endearing, charming or redemptive as the earlier novel. It suffers from being narrated in the third person and lacks the riveting courtroom drama of “Mockingbird.” It has some good stories in it, yet it is less entertaining and less lyrical. In fact, it is occasionally boring. But it builds slowly and then explodes in almost Shakespearean ways (like “King Lear” and “Othello”).

At one point, Scout — who is obviously the stand-in for the author — considers whether the South and her family have changed or whether she herself has changed. Her family implies that the African-American community has changed. Her dad says it’s the feds who have changed. Doubtless, a lot had changed.

Like Harriet Beecher Stowe of “Uncle Tom’s Cabin” fame, Scout asks, “How can they devoutly believe everything they hear in church and then say the things they do and listen to things they hear without throwing up?”

Lee’s grown-up and now “Yankee-fied” Scout assumes the role of “watchman” — or conscience — yet is treated as the bearer of unwanted criticism, like Ibsen’s Dr. Stockmann (“Enemy of the People”) or Joan of Arc, or Antigone.

Alabama famously voted for Dixiecrat Strom Thurmond in the presidential election of 1948 as a response to civil rights platforms of the Democratic Party that year. It had voted into office some Klan-supported governors in these same decades and, a few years later, would elect George C. Wallace, who pledged in January 1963 to be “for segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever.”

Although “Watchman” doesn’t tell their story, large numbers of Americans from South Texas to South Boston similarly feared and opposed the federal government’s initiatives in the 1940s and 1950s to enfranchise and empower blacks and poor whites around the country.

Public policy initiatives that alter the status quo, regardless of which branch of government is acting, invariably meet resistance. Backlash to affirmative action, busing and empowering minorities to vote is still apparent.

Lee’s “Watchman” may be about her small town in southern Alabama, but it is also instructive political anthropology. She helps explain political realities of our darker past and the reasons local political elites often act the way they do. Whereas “Mockingbird” was a consciousness-raising inspiration about how we can overcome intolerance, “Watchman: is a frank examination and analysis of the realities of the time.

But Lee conveys little or no understanding in either book of the leadership and politics in the African-American community. The novel’s fictional town (and Lee’s real hometown) were at least 50 percent African-American.

The great student of Southern politics, V.O. Key Jr., summed it up in 1949 in “Southern Politics”, in which he wrote, “a rural agricultural people views with distrust the urban, laboring classes of the North. The almost indelible memories of occupation by a conqueror create a sense of hostility toward the outsider.”

Court decisions and the evolving civil rights movement unsettled Harper Lee’s hometown and triggered a transformational political realignment in American politics. These effects are still being felt today.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.