On Christmas morning, boys and girls across the country will likely have some LEGO and Frozen toys waiting beneath their Christmas trees.

LEGO was the top toy for boys in 2014 and Disney’s Frozen was the top toy for girls, according to the National Retail Federation’s Holiday Top Toys Survey.

More than 6,500 consumers were polled by Prosper Insights & Analytics in early November.

“Parents will not have to go far to find good deals on the toys their children have put at the top of their lists,” said Matthew Shay, President and CEO of the NRF. “Retailers have spent weeks preparing for the holiday rush to make sure that the season’s hottest toys are both easy to find in stores and online, and competitively priced.”

About 42% of shoppers will buy toys during this holiday season, according to the survey.

Though Frozen came out in November 2013, the hype for the film has continued to grow. More than 3 million costumes for the characters Elsa and Anna have sold, according to Disney Consumer Products.

Major sales like that allowed Frozen to blast Barbie off of the top spot on the toy list for the first time in the 11 years of the survey. Barbie was the No. 2 toy for girls this year.

The other top toys for girls were dolls (No. 3), Monster High dolls (No. 4), American Girl (No. 5), LEGO (No. 6), tablet/Apple iPad (No. 7), My Little Pony (No. 8), Disney Doc McStuffins (No. 9) and apparel (No. 10).

After LEGO, the top toys for boys this year were cars and trucks (No. 2), Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (No. 3), video games (No. 4), Hot Wheels (No. 5), Xbox One (No. 6), PlayStation 4 (No. 7), Transformers (No. 8), remote controlled vehicles (No. 9) and a tie between Marvel action figures and tablet/Apple iPad (No. 10).

Retail sales for November and December 2014 are expected to increase by 4.1% over 2013, with NRF projections reaching $617 billion.

Get Free Updates! Stay in the loop with a weekly newsletter, with all our news from the previous week. We will never give away, trade or sell your email address. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Please follow and like us:

Please Leave A Comment

comments