Custer State Park, SD

KELOLAND TV is proud to announce that Vice President and General Manager Jay Huizenga is the Broadcaster of the Year. The honor was bestowed on Huizenga by the South Dakota Broadcasters Association at its annual leadership conference Saturday afternoon August 15, 2015 in Custer State Park.

The SDBA Broadcaster of the Year honors a person in broadcasting that has been especially active in the past year in community affairs. In the past year, Huizenga led station efforts to expand KELOLAND’s network of SkyCams providing viewers vital weather information; supported a coat drive, Keep KELOLAND Warm, that provided coats for thousands of needy people and he was recently inducted into the South Dakota Golf Association’s Hall of Fame for actively promoting golf in the state for more than 20 years.

He currently serves on the Sioux Falls Area Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors; Better Business Bureau Local Advisory Board; the Sioux Falls Area Community Foundation Board of Directors; SFACF Development, Finance & Audit Committees; Volunteers of America Advisory Board; The Banquet Board of Directors; the Sioux Empire United Way Board of Directors, and the South Dakota Broadcasters Associate Board of Directors.

“I am just delighted that Jay Huizenga is receiving this award. He is just the best leader. He’s been a leader at our company. He has been a leader at KELOLAND. He has been a leader in Sioux Falls and South Dakota communities,” said Deb McDermott, Senior Vice President and Chief Operating Officer for Media General.

Huizenga, currently in his 35th year in broadcasting at KELOLAND, served as the station’s General Sales Manager beginning in 1990. Having joined the station in 1980, he has served as a local Account Executive and Business Development Manager. From 2004-2005, he was the Business Development Manager at KRON-TV, the Group’s station in San Francisco. He became Vice President/General Manager of the KELOLAND Stations in April 2008. In addition, he has served as a Regional Vice President for Media General since June 2014.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.