The campaign trail is heating up in Lauderdale County as candidates for county offices take to the streets, in hopes of receiving support for their campaign. Several of those candidates took part in Collinsville Day in hopes of reaching out to the community.

"It's extremely important when you get out in the community, show your support to the community, talk to people, reach people and shake hands," Lauderdale County Tax Collector Candidate Bobby Faerber said. "People want to see you, they want to see their elected officials and talk to them."

Several candidates vying for positions were doing just that, getting to know the people they want to serve face to face.

"I mean if they don't get a feel for who you are and your personality and you can't look them face to face and share ideas and listen to their ideas," Lauderdale County District 1 Supervisor Candidate Jonathan Wells said. "They'll be guessing who you are and what you stand for."

For many candidates, like Doris Spidle, this is their first time on the campaign trail. Spidle says it's her past experiences that lead her to run for office.

"It's absolutely rewarding," Spidle, who is running for Lauderdale County Tax Collector said. "I absolutely love meeting the people. I will also tell you it's scary getting up their and making those speeches. I want everyone to know me and understand and what I am doing running for this position."

That was the common theme among many of the candidates. A rewarding experience, even for the family members that became involved in the campaign trail.

"One thing that I would like to say about Scotty is the mere fact that he has a passion for what he does, he never gives his second best, it's always his very best," John Cole, whose son is running for Lauderdale County Tax Collector said. "That is the reason why I am so supportive of this young man."

The primary election in Mississippi is just months away on Tuesday, August 4th. The General Election is November 3rd.

We'll have more on this story tomorrow from the race in District 3 and why those candidates say it's important to run a healthy campaign.