Health First Health Plans Rated Among Best In Nation

By Space Coast Medicine & Active Living // October 17, 2013

Receives 4.5 stars out of 5 stars

BREVARD COUNTY, FLORIDA – In the 2014 Star Ratings that were recently released by The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), Health First Health Plans (HFHP) earned 4.5 out of 5 stars as an Overall Plan Rating for their Medicare Advantage plans, placing the local organization among the best in the nation.

This is the fourth year in a row Health First Health Plans has received 4.5 stars for their Medicare Advantage plans.

CMS releases the Star Ratings during Medicare Open Enrollment to help beneficiaries compare each plan’s performance as they choose their coverage for the next year.

Open Enrollment for 2014 ends on December 7—and it’s important for people to study their options closely and make an informed decision soon. Detailed information about Health First Health Plans’ Medicare Advantage Plans can be found at HealthFirstHealthPlans.org .

“This is a true testament to the high level of care Health First Health Plans offers its members and our community, and we are honored to once again be recognized as having some of the best Medicare Advantage plans in the country,” said Health First President and CEO Steve Johnson.

Star Ratings are displayed on the Medicare Plan Finder (located at Medicare.gov/find-a-plan), along with other details about each plan—which is based on five categories.

Categories include Staying Healthy, Screenings, Tests and Vaccines; Managing Chronic (long-term) Conditions; Member Experience With the Health Plan; Member Complaints, Problems Getting Services and Improvement in the Health Plan’s Performance; and Health Plan Customer Service.

Health First Health Plans is an HMO plan and a PDP plan with a Medicare contract. Enrollment in Health First Health Plans depends on contract renewal. Medicare evaluates plans based on a 5-Star rating system.

Star Ratings are calculated each year and may change from one year to the next.

FULLY INTEGRATED HEALTH SYSTEM

Founded in 1995, Health First is a fully integrated health system. The not-for-profit employs more than 7,500 people and has four hospitals (including Holmes Regional Medical Center, Palm Bay Hospital, Cape Canaveral Hospital and Viera Hospital).

Health First Health Plans also offers a wide variety of health insurance plan options for Brevard and Indian River Counties. In addition, Health First is home to Brevard County’s only Trauma Center.

Health First Medical Group is the largest multi-specialty physician group on the Space Coast. Health First offers numerous outpatient and wellness services, including four Pro-Health and Fitness Centers. Visit www.Health-First.org for more information.

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free