Leslie Dach, Senior Counselor of U.S. Department of Health and Human Services speaks with WSJ’s Laura Landro at CEO Council about the future of the Affordable Care Act.

By now, supporters and opponents of the Affordable Care Act often divide along “glass half full or half empty” lines over similar facts, and each perspective was on display at the Wall Street Journal CEO Council on Tuesday.

“We believe coverage in general has been improved” by the 2010 law, said Health and Human Services senior counselor Leslie Dach. “That’s an important beginning.”

His agency has estimated that the law has extended coverage to 17.6 million people, between its provision requiring plans to cover young adult dependents to their 26th birthdays, the expansion of Medicaid, and the availability of subsidized private coverage to everyone through HealthCare.gov and state equivalents. The law also imposes new requirements on insurance plans on what they must cover, and says they must price coverage equally regardless of people’s medical history, and these affect everyone who gets insurance on their own.

Sen. John Thune of South Dakota spoke at the Wall Street Journal CEO Council on Tuesday. Ralph Alswang for The Wall Street Journal

It’s true that the law has made a significant dent in the number of people without insurance, and made sweeping changes to the way coverage operates in America. For critics, the issue isn’t how many people it’s covered – it’s how many have been left behind.

Republican Sen. John Thune of South Dakota, speaking after Mr. Dach, pointed to Congressional Budget Office estimates suggesting that as many as 35 million people are still without coverage, and 27 million will be uninsured five years from now, to argue the health law has required too much to do too little.

“It is an incredible amount of disruption to still have that many people uncovered when all is said and done,” he said. Mr. Thune said that Republican replacements for the law all aim to find some way of providing insurance for people with pre-existing conditions that once could have barred them from buying insurance on their own, but with relaxed requirements on what coverage must include, as a way of bringing the price down.

MORE FROM WSJ CEO COUNCIL:

Top Clinton Adviser Says Wealthy Should Pay More in Taxes

Obama Adviser Furman Sees Limited Economic Impact From Paris Attacks

Defense Chief Ash Carter Calls on Europe to Do More to Confront ISIS

Marco Rubio Says GOP Rivals Tried to Weaken U.S. Intelligence Efforts