Mitt Romney Endorses Elise Stefanik For Congress In New York

Former GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney endorsed Elise Stefanik to represent New York's 21st Congressional District on Tuesday.

May 27, 2014 12:45 PM EDT

(Photo : Twitter)

Former GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney endorsed Elise Stefanik to represent New York's 21st Congressional District on Tuesday, according to Syracuse.com.

Stefanik, 29, worked as an aide to U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan -- Romney's running mate in 2012.

"After working with Elise, I know she will make the 21st District proud and she will deliver results," Romney said in a statement. "Elise understands the needs of small businesses and how to grow the local economy. She is a person of integrity. Every campaign is different, but values don't change."

Additionally, Ryan will campaign with Stefanik on June 2 in Watertown.

On Tuesday, Stefanik will face off with businessman Matt Doheny in the first debate of the Republican primary at 7 p.m.

The nominee will run against Democrat Aaron Woolf for the North Country seat, currently filled by U.S. Rep. Bill Owens, a Democrat, who is not seeking re-election.

The election will be held on June 24.

The 2012 Republican presidential nominee has been making several endorsements as the midterm elections loom. In addition to Stefanik, Romney also expressed his support for U.S. Rep. Mike Coffman in Colorado on Tuesday as well.

"I am proud to endorse Mike Coffman for Congress," Romney said in a statement from the Coffman campaign Tuesday. "Mike has proven himself to be a voice of common sense for Colorado. He will fight to reduce reckless spending and hold the Obama administration accountable for its many failures, from Obamacare to coverups at the VA."

Later in May, Romney will also campaign with Joni Ernst, a state senator in Iowa running for U.S. Senate.

"We need Iowa to have a voice in the U.S. Senate that will protect and promote traditional conservative values, and Joni's proven record in the state senate, her decades of leadership as a military officer, and her commitment to the values that were passed on to her as a girl on a Montgomery County farm make it clear to me that she is the very best Iowa has to offer," Romney said in a statement.