By of the

On a recent weeknight, more than two dozen people at St. Mark's Episcopal Church, sitting at folding tables and chairs in a large room just off the kitchen, planned the launch of a new business.

The setting was as unusual as the venture itself: a new health insurance company that will compete against some of the largest health insurers in the country.

But then, little is ordinary about the Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative, and that may be its best hope for success.

The cooperative — a nonprofit health insurance company started with federal loans potentially totaling $56.4 million from the Affordable Care Act — is an outgrowth of an affiliate of a group founded by Saul Alinsky, a famed leftist community organizer best known for his book "Rules for Radicals."

Make no mistake: This is not a venture run by naïve idealists or, for that matter, radicals. Its management includes experienced executives. Its board includes small-business owners. And it has drawn on the expertise of top consultants and lawyers.

But what it is setting out to do — and how it plans to go about it — may be a bit radical.

Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative plans to draw on the tactics of community organizing to compete against the likes of UnitedHealthcare, Humana and Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Wisconsin.

The cooperative is one of 24 nationallythat received almost $2 billion in federal funding through the Affordable Care Act to start nonprofit companies to sell health insurance to individuals and small businesses.

Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative is one of four health insurers that will sell health plans to individuals and one of two that will sell plans for small employers in the Milwaukee area on the exchanges, the marketplace set up under the health care law, scheduled to start on Oct. 1.

On that day, volunteers will canvass the Third Ward, dropping off fliers to small businesses. The night before, it hopes to draw 300 volunteers to a kickoff event at Mount Mary College.

The event planned for the Third Ward will be just the first. In the months ahead, volunteers will visit neighborhoods in the Milwaukee area and other cities throughout eastern Wisconsin.

"How many people do you know that are going door-to-door telling their neighbors about health insurance?" said Bob Connolly, chairman of the cooperative, at the meeting this month.

That could be one of Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative's few competitive advantages.

"There's a lot of energy here," said Harry Moseley, one of the people attending the meeting at St. Mark's.

This isn't to underestimate the challenges ahead, and skeptics give Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative and its counterparts in other states little chance of success.

Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative is starting an insurance company from scratch. It won't have the marketing budget or economies of scale of its competitors. It has no competitive advantage when negotiating contracts with health care providers.

Its health plans won't even have the lowest prices — and the cooperative doesn't want to have the lowest prices.

"We are selling more than price — we are selling trust," said Bob De Vita, chief executive officer.

The cooperative hopes to stand out in a competitive market by being a nonprofit insurance company run by its members.

"The difference is who we are, what we represent and what we stand for," Connolly said.

From the ground up

Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative, which has its offices in Brookfield, has kept is administrative costs low and is drawing on contractors for such as tasks as processing medical claims.

It estimates that it can break even with 20,000 to 30,000 customers, said De Vita, a veteran health care executive who has worked for Wheaton Franciscan Healthcare, Ministry Health Care and Marshfield Clinic, where he helped start Security Health Plan of Wisconsin.

Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative's goal for its first year is 10,000 customers.

The cooperative is a separate entity but an outgrowth of Common Ground, a coalition of religious groups, community groups and other organizations, including some unions and a few small businesses.

The group is known for pressuring five major banks to commit $33 million to deal with foreclosures after the financial crisis.

To win two federal loans available through the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare, Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative had to survive a rigorous selection process that required detailed business plans.

The loans — contingent on meeting specific performance targets — are to help with start-up costs and to meet state requirements on reserves for insurance companies.

The loans for start-up costs must be repaid in five years, the loans for reserves in 15 years.

Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative can't use federal money for marketing its plan and instead will rely on volunteers with the goal of distributing 10,000 fliers

"As soon as they are gone," Connolly said, "we'll print the next 10,000."

The Affordable Care Act could result in tens of thousands of uninsured people in Wisconsin — most of them eligible for federal subsidies — buying health insurance.

"There's going to be a lot of people looking for insurance," De Vita said.

The cooperative — which has been meeting with churches and small-business groups throughout much of this year — isn't overlooking people and particularly small businesses that already have insurance.

Its training for volunteers recommends that their first question for small businesses is whether they know someone who is looking for new options for health insurance.

It also wants to direct people and small businesses to insurance brokers, who will earn a commission, knowing that their support could be critical to the cooperative's long-term success.

Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative, which will sell its health plans throughout eastern Wisconsin, will offer plans with two different networks. One will be largely tied to Aurora Health Care's system. The other will offer a broader network of hospitals and doctors.

Cooperative concept

Although its rates could be higher than its competitors, the cooperative concept could appeal to people, said Jim Wesp, owner of Kettle Moraine Hardwoods, which employs about a dozen people at its sawmill, dry kiln and lumberyard near Hartford and a lumberyard south of Milwaukee.

"As a member, I will have the ability to have some say in how the plan is run," said Wesp, vice president of the cooperative's board.

Kettle Moraine Hardwoods and five of its employees spend about $50,000 a year for health insurance.

"That's what got me interested in the whole cooperative idea," Wesp said.

Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative's success could hinge on its price increases in its second year.

"We have to prove to them we are not going to bait-and-switch," Connolly said. "We have to show we are on their side."

That said, Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative knows that it will have to make money — and relatively early. It doesn't have the capital to sustain years of losses.

De Vita acknowledges the cooperative will have its share of challenges. But he noted that all businesses face challenges.

What Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative is trying to do also has been done before in Wisconsin.

Group Health Cooperative of South Central Wisconsin in Madison was started from scratch in the 1970s with the help of a federal loan. Larry Zanoni, its former executive director, was one of Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative's early advisers.

"The best advice he gave us is to be persistent," De Vita said, "because people thought he was crazy."

Common Ground

Healthcare Cooperative

■ Is one of 24 co-ops nationallythat received almost $2 billion in federal funding through the Affordable Care Act to start nonprofit companies to sell health insurance to individuals and small businesses.

■ Is one of four health insurers that will sell health plans to individuals and one of two that will sell plans for small employers in the Milwaukee area on exchanges, which are the marketplace set up under the health care law, scheduled to start Oct. 1.