A new analysis shows that Sanders' proposals will double economic growth. The same can't be said for Trump, but he hasn't given us much to work with.

A business-tycoon turned reality TV star and a self proclaimed S-word (that's socialist, if you didn't know) have led a decisive victory in their respective parties in New Hampshire's presidential primary.

The New York Times said that both Republican Donald Trump's and Democrat Bernie Sanders' victories represent a "remarkable rebuke to the political establishment."

After the last economic downturn, it is understandable that voters would be galvanized by these two establishment outsiders, hoping to see their promises of more jobs and greater economic prosperity come true.

But what do these two presidential hopefuls really have planned for the economy?

According to some sources, here's what the economic climate will look like under each of the New Hampshire victors.

Sanders

Hillary Clinton has said that Sanders' economic goals are not acheivable, but according to a recent analysis reported by CNN, Sanders' proposals may yield tremendous economic growth.

If Sander's proposals were passed, by 2026 the median household income would reach $82,200 — more than $22,000 higher than the Congressional Budget Office's current projection.

Additionally, almost 26 million jobs would be created, economic growth would increase from 2.1 percent to 5.3 percent, and the deficit (which everyone seems to be ignoring) would become a surplus.

The analysis was done by University of Massachusetts Amherst professor Gerald Friedman and has been met with some criticism.

Some critics have assumed that Friedman's own political leanings do not allow him to make an unbiased analysis of Sanders' proposals. Friedman, however, denies political affiliation with Sanders or any other candidate.

"In truth, I have not yet decided for whom I will vote in the Massachusetts presidential primary," said Friedman.

Forbes contributor Tim Worstall said that Friedman's analysis makes "large and entirely untested assumptions about the amount of economic growth."

Worstall further claims that the analysis "counts the possible benefits and entirely ignores all of the known costs."

However, Friedman's remains the only comprehensive study of Sanders' economic outlook, reports CNN. Skeptics may criticize certain elements of Sanders' proposals, but they have not yet offered an alternative analysis.

How would your taxes change under Bernie Sanders?

Trump

Trump's plans for the economy, in short, are unclear.

During his New Hampshire victory speech, Trump said, "I am going to be the greatest jobs president that God ever created." He claimed that the 4.9 percent unemployment rate, recently released by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, is a "phony number" and that the real unemployment rate is as high as 40 percent.

But Trump has not said exactly how he plans to create jobs. Trump's one major economic proposal — major trade reform and tariffs on trade with countries like China and Mexico — is actually likely ot hurt American jobs, reports CNN.

Trump's campaign, instead, has focused on other issues such national defense, and immigration reform — issues that can still have a tremendous impact on the economy.

Some claim that Trump's plan to deport thousands of undocumented immigrants will upset several major industries.

According to ATTN:, undocumented workers make up a large portion of the labor force, especially in industries like food services, agriculture, and construction. If these workers were deported, production in these industries would shrink.

Trump also seems to forget that undocumented immigrants consume more than just American jobs.

The New York Post noted that these people pay rent, buy cars and other consumer goods, and even contribute to social security. Undocumented workers make $12 billion in payroll contributions a year to social security.

Trump's plan to repeal Obamacare also needs some fleshing out.

First of all, repealing the Affordable Care Act could be a costly process in and of itself. The Congressional Budget Office estimates that it would increase the deficit by $353 billion by 2025.

"We are going to replace Obamacare with something so much better," said Trump at the Republican debate in New Hampshire.

Trump suggested that the health care market should be ruled by free enterprise, but also said, "we're going to take care of people who are dying in the street."

Trump has given no specifics about how his free-market, people-dying-on-the-street-saving health program would work.

sturner@deseretnews.com

twitter: @zamturner