San Bernardino authorities report that 20 people have been shot and police are pursuing active shooters who opened fire in the conference room of the Inland Regional Center, a social services facility, in the area near Orange Show Rd/ Waterman Ave.

Authorities have shut down surrounding streets.

UPDATE (Cortney): An abandoned SUV has been found in San Bernardino. No one is yet in custody. "There is no indication where they are or who they are," Fox News' Shepard Smith reports. The situation has gone from a San Bernardino alert to a Los Angeles alert and may soon be statewide while the suspects remain at large.

At a press conference following the shooting, San Bernardino Chief Jarrod Burguan said his team immediately went into their active shooter protocol and entered the Regional Center building searching for the suspects. They have since locked down county buildings and have an increased security presence at local hospitals, schools, etc. They "do not yet know" if this was a terror incident.

President Obama has weighed in on the tragedy:

I’m signing off for the night. Christine will take over from here to provide you with any new information.

UPDATE II (Matt): Twelve people are reported dead. San Bernardino police and county sheriff reporting that there are one to three possible shooters.

BREAKING: 12 people reported dead in mass shooting in San Bernardino, California. Updating details here: https://t.co/1OoUNHGgBg — Fox5NY (@fox5ny) December 2, 2015

.@SanBernardinoPD has confirmed 1to3 possible suspects.Multiple victims. #SBCSD &other agencies assisting. More info to come. #SanBernardino — SB County Sheriff (@sbcountysheriff) December 2, 2015

UPDATE III (Matt): Via KTLA5:

The call first came in at 10:59 a.m. of multiple shots fired from the area of 1365 S. Waterman Ave., San Bernardino Police Department Lt. Richard Lawhead said. The department’s SWAT team was training nearby and was suited, “ready to roll” and responded rapidly, Lawhead said.

UPDATE IV (Christine):The death toll has been raised to "at least 14." No suspects have been captured or identified yet.

Police chief on #SanBernardino shooting: "Upwards of 14 people that are dead, 14 people there are injured." https://t.co/uzkLLFeXdb — CNN (@CNN) December 2, 2015

UPDATE V (Christine):

LIVE: Police surround vehicle in #SanBernardino during hunt for mass shooting suspects https://t.co/9KVfJvLveq — BBC Breaking News (@BBCBreaking) December 2, 2015

UPDATE VI (Christine): CNN is reporting that one suspect is dead and there is an "apparent standoff" with the others.

UPDATE VII (Christine): CBS News says that "one suspect is down, [and] one is in custody."

BREAKING: Police say one suspect down, one in custody, @CBSLA reports; SWAT team has yet to approach vehicle. pic.twitter.com/rRb10HFKfi — CBSN (@CBSNLive) December 2, 2015

UPDATE VII (Christine): The San Bernardino police chief is now saying suspects are down. Previously, it had only been reported that one suspect had been killed.

#SanBernardino police chief: Suspects are down, one office wounded — Rebekah Metzler (@rebekahmetzler) December 3, 2015

UPDATE VIII (Christine): The LA Times is suggesting that a "dispute" at a party triggered the attack.

A senior federal official who is monitoring the case said investigators believe one of the shooters left the party after getting into an argument and returned with one or two armed companions. The shooting took place in a large conference room on the grounds of the Inland Regional Center, which serves people with developmental disabilities in Riverside and San Bernardino counties.

UPDATE IX (Christine): Two suspects--one male, one female--are dead at the scene. They were armed with rifles and handguns. A possible explosive device was also found at the scene of the shooting. The FBI is "not willing to say" whether or not this is considered terrorism. A third person was seen running from the scene and is in custody, but it is not known whether or not he was involved in the shooting. No other age or description of the suspects has been released.

UPDATE X (Christine): One of the names of the suspects has been identified as Syed (or "Sayeed") Farouk.

JUST IN: Sources ID one of the attackers in San Bernardino mass shooting as Syed Farouk. https://t.co/r9eS1pN8sZ — NBCWashington (@nbcwashington) December 3, 2015

NBC News now reporting a US citizen named Sayeed Farouk believed to be one of the people involved in the shooting. — Christopher Hayes (@chrislhayes) December 3, 2015

There is an unconfirmed report that the second suspect is Farook's brother.

NBC News: Second suspect may be Said Farook’s brother — Jesse Rodriguez (@JesseRodriguez) December 3, 2015

UPDATE XI (Christine): A name of the second suspect released by the LA Times Rick Serrano appears to have been a hoax.