FILE - In this Sept. 18, 2015, file photo, Carly Fiorina speaks to supporters at the Take Back America Presidential Forum in Greenville, S.C. Fiorina has spent the last two weeks doubling down on her erroneous descriptions of videos secretly recorded by anti-abortion activists, and she shows no sign she'll back off her misrepresentations as she makes her strident opposition to Planned Parenthood a centerpiece of her 2016 campaign. (AP Photo/Richard Shiro, File)



DAVENPORT, Iowa (KWQC) – GOP presidential hopeful Carly Fiorina visited Iowa on Friday with stops in Clinton and Davenport. At the Figge Art Museum, Fiorina spent about an hour mingling with individuals and small groups. Around 100 people attended.

“There are a lot of things you’ll hear from her you wont see on TV,” Silvis resident Jim Robinson said.

“It was fantastic because she was so personable and gracious,” said Moline resident Jacyln Dooley, who represents Rock Island County Republicans.

Visitors had the opportunity to ask questions firsthand.

“In a general sense, I want to know how she is going to clean up America,” Robinson said

“I think one of the things that’s on just about everybody’s mind right now is basically the defense issue, defending the country against terrorist threats,” Coal Valley resident Bruce Peters said.

Fiorina says several issues, like Social Security and Medicare, are important. However, she says she wouldn’t prioritize them. She’s instead promoting what she calls her blueprint of things that need to get done.

“We have to secure the border and enforce a pro-American immigration system,” Fiorina said. “We have to restore the character of this nation by standing for life and religious liberty. We have to repeal Obamacare and replace it with a system that’s going to work for everybody. We have to go to zero-based budgeting.”

The sixth priority, she says, is to simplify the tax code from 73,000 pages to just three.

“Because unless we do those things first, we will not restore people’s faith in their government, in their leadership,” she said.

Dooley says she agrees with Fiorina’s plan.

“Well you have to prioritize because if you dont prioritize keeping our country safe is number one,” she said.

Davenport resident Julie Ross says there wasn’t enough focus on other issues. She asked Fiorina a question about whether CEOs have “the people in their best interest.”

“I think, in response to the question I specifically asked, she didn’t answer it,” Ross said.

The local event comes just days after the latest GOP debate. Fiorina has since been accused of lying in one of her answers. She didn’t address that at the Figge on Friday, but, elsewhere, on Wednesday, she insisted she didn’t misspeak.

“That’s probably one of the things that brought me here tonight is I deeply respect her integrity for not retracting a stand that she has obviously thought well through,” Peters said.

Fiorina is scheduled to stop in Burlington on Saturday.