Topics: From the Wires, News

BAGHDAD (AP) — Nearly every night for a year, mortar and sniper fire from Islamic State group militants has pinned down outgunned Iraqi troops on the edge of Fallujah.

The city, the first to fall to the Sunni extremists a year ago this month, exemplifies the lack of progress in Iraq’s war against the Islamic State group, which holds a third of the country. U.S.-led airstrikes and Iranian aid have helped Iraqi troops, militiamen and Kurdish fighters take back bits around Islamic State-held territory, but recapturing it all remains far out of reach.

“We are constantly on alert and don’t sleep very much,” said Saad al-Sudani, an Iraqi soldier among the beleaguered troops outside of Fallujah. “We are waiting for any kind of support.”

The fall of Fallujah in January 2014 started the Islamic State group’s dramatic blitz across Iraq. In June, the extremists captured Iraq’s second-largest city, Mosul, then swept south toward Baghdad in a march that put almost all the Sunni-majority regions of northern and western Iraq into its hands. The Iraqi military crumbled, with troops often dropping their weapons and fleeing.

A year later, the extremists still rule Fallujah, which saw some of the heaviest fighting of the U.S.-led war of 2003.

Gen. John Allen, the U.S. envoy to the anti-Islamic State coalition, said that advise-and-assist teams are working to train and equip 12 Iraqi brigades to prepare them for retaking Fallujah and Mosul.

“We expect that we’ll see the effectiveness of this force improve over time and ultimately that they’ll be able to take back the population centers and the municipalities,” Allen told journalists Wednesday in Baghdad.

But, he acknowledged, there is no timeline for an assault on Fallujah or Mosul. The U.S. recently assigned advisers to Anbar province, home to Fallujah, as part of its expanding training mission.

The U.S. and its coalition allies have carried out more than 1,000 strikes in Iraq since its campaign began in August — as well as hundreds more in neighboring Syria. American officials say the campaign has been somewhat successful, though there has been little success in stopping the flow of foreign fighters into Islamic State group territory.

Iraqi officials have grown increasingly critical of the U.S. and the coalition airstrikes. Lt. Gen. Abdul-Wahab al-Saadi, who led Iraqi soldiers to recapture the oil refinery city of Beiji, said his forces lack weapons, equipment and battle-ready troops. He also called U.S. air support erratic. Some Iraqi lawmakers say America provided greater help to the semi-autonomous Kurdish regional government in northern Iraq at the expense of the rest of the country.

Despite that, Iraqi troops and militiamen have made slow gains against the militants in an area immediately north of Baghdad in heavy fighting. They and the Kurds also have been able to push Islamic State group fighters out of parts of Diyala province on Baghdad’s northeast fringe.