EDMOND — Twin sisters Barbara Bush and Jenna Hager talked about their passion for worldwide health equity and shared stories of the men they call Dad and Gampy during an appearance Thursday at the University of Central Oklahoma.

Hager said the pair wanted to veto their father's plan to run for president when they were college freshmen who just wanted to be regular kids, but they came to see "the plight" as an opportunity "to meet incredible and inspiring people."

"It was trips to Africa that motivated both of us to work in HIV/AIDS and the rights of women and children all over the world," she said.

Hager is an author, contributing correspondent on NBC's “Today,” editor-at-large for Southern Living and the mother of two daughters.

Bush is CEO and co-founder of Global Health Corps, which mobilizes young leaders worldwide to work for health equity.

The 33-year-old daughters of former President George W. Bush appeared as part of the UCO@125 Distinguished Speaker Series.

Bush said a two-week trip to East Africa with her parents for the launch of a program that provides free drugs for people living with HIV changed her dream to be an architect and instead made her passionate about health care.

The President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) originally committed $15 billion over five years for HIV prevention, treatment and care services to millions of people. PEPFAR continues today and now is in Phase 3.

"At the time, it was a really controversial thing to do," Bush said, but her father was sure it was the right thing to do.

"Now 10 million people are living that otherwise would have died," she said. "I'm really proud of him for that."

Hager said according to some news sources, "you would think our dad is the most unpopular person in the world, but if you travel to Africa you would see that is quiet a different case."

His daughters receive hugs and thanks when they go to Africa and come across children named for their father.

Work

Millions of people around the world were "born at the wrong time in the wrong place to access the health care they need," Bush said.

"Seeing the disparity that exists in health care, I became obsessed with solving global health issues."

Bush soon learned thousands of young people wanted to make the world a better place. In 2009, the twins and three colleagues formed Global Health Corps "to move that interest into action."

Global Health Corp fellows — all younger than 30 — from 30 countries work with partner organizations in Africa and the U.S. helping poor communities with their health needs.

Most recently, 11,000 young people applied for 120 fellow positions, Bush said.

"They are going to be the change that we need to see in global health."

Family

Hager and Bush have met dozens of famous, interesting people in their lives, but they said one person stands out — Gampy.

That's the first President Bush to everyone else.

"He probably is my favorite person in the world," Bush said.

"He teaches us about humility and really just living your life fully and surrounding yourself with great people," she said. "I mean, he's a nut. He jumped out of an airplane last year for his 90th birthday."

The twins said their grandfather is kind, sweet, humble and funny.

"He's just such a terrific guy," Hager said. "He treated everybody — no matter if it was his best friend or the gardener at the White House — like they were the most important person in the world."

Hager said an illustration of his humility is how, as president, he acted like he was no different than anyone else.

The girls were in first grade when they went to their Gampy's inauguration.

Afterwards, Bush asked her schoolmates, "When is your grandfather's inauguration?

"I thought everyone's grandfather was president," she said.

9/11

Hager said her parents were "major role models to Barbara and me," and never more so than in the days following the 9/11 attacks. The twins were just shy of their 20th birthday.

"We are so proud of the fact of how our dad responded to it and made us feel safe," she said.

During that difficult time, the president and first lady also acted as parents and stayed involved in the girls' lives.

"They managed to make us feel important," Hager said.

Bush said one the most relevant memories of her father's time as president came the following month.

It was Oct. 30 in Yankee Stadium, Game 3 of the 2001 World Series.

The president was going to throw out the first pitch at a time when "everyone was scared to gather" because such a large crowd could be a target, Bush said.

Her father had to wear a bullet-proof jacket, but he was more concerned about throwing a good pitch, she said.

"I was so proud when he just walked out and threw a strike," Bush said.

"I just remember everyone breathed. He threw this strike and it was safe. ... Everyone wants their dad to be strong and protect them, and I think everyone in the stadium felt like that."