Born and raised on the mean streets of New York City's Upper West Side, Katie Halper is a comedian, writer and filmmaker. She is the host of the Katie Halper Show on WBA1, writes for places like The Nation, Feministing, Jezebel and appears on places like MSNBC, RT, Sirius radio (which hung up on her once). Katie's had her photo taken with Rudy Giuliani and was called "cute and somewhat brainy" by the National Review.

images via wikipedia

In an age of terrible, hyperbolic, trivializing analogies, it takes a special one to really stand out. Here are the best, or worst, examples of terrible comparisons from the week.

Black people… they’re just like zoo animals. Benjamin Cole, a top advisor to Rep. Aaron Schock (R-IL) wrote the following about two Black people he saw outside of his Washington DC apartment: “So apparently the closing of the National Zoo has forced the animals to conduct their mating rituals on my street.” Cole, the former Baptist pastor and energy industry spokesman is not just a brilliant anthropologist/ zoologist/ racist, but a sharp political aid, because he posted these thoughts on Facebook. See other racist gems from Cole, here. Shock accepted Cole’s resignation on Thursday. So, we are now back to living in that post-racial world in which Rosa Parks ended racism and the President is Black.

Obamacare… it’s just like the Holocaust. Of course there was an Obamacare-Holocaust comparison because, it’s a week day. Michael Greve, a law professor and activist, is also the former head and a current board member of the conservative Competitive Enterprise Institute (CEI). The CEI is “coordinating and funding” a case pending before the Supreme Court, which seeks to undo the Affordable Health Care Act. This week, Greve compared America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP), which is participating in the Affordable Health Care Act, to the Nazis:

By helping the ACA over the hurdle, AHIP signed its corporate members’ death warrant in exchange for the individual mandate, risk corridors, and a few other placebos. AHIP had the railroad cars to the camps neatly lined up.

Vaccine deniers… they’re just like Galileo. Glenn Beck isn’t known for his intellectual coherence but this still stands out for how inane it is. First, Beck explained how even though we have know idea about the link between autism and vaccines (even though science has debunked the alleged link):

We also don’t know what’s going on with autism… If you happen to be a parent and you say, you know, ‘I’m sorry. God gave me a brain, God gave me personal choice and responsibility for those choices, I’m going to say no to those vaccines because I’ve done my homework. Nobody that hasn’t done their homework says no to vaccines.

Then, after mocking science and praising the those who believe in God over science, Beck somehow manages to compare the science deniers to Galileo. You know… Galileo the Italian SCIENTIST who was charged with heresy, placed under house arrest and had his writing banned for challenging the Church’s claim that the sun rotated around the earth:

Where is anybody saying, ‘My gosh, we’re living in the days of Galileo… The Church has become the state, and if you don’t practice their religion exactly the way they tell you to practice it, you’re done. How many people have lost their jobs, have lost their credibility?

Marriage equality… it’s just like bacon-wrapped shrimp in Jewish delis. During an interview with CNN on Sunday, Mike Huckabee defended his opposition to marriage equality and encouraged the GOP to remain as un-evolved as he is on the issue:

And as a biblical issue, unless I get a new version of the scriptures, it’s really not my place to say, ‘Okay, I’m just going to evolve.’…. It’s like asking somebody who’s Jewish to start serving bacon-wrapped shrimp in their deli. We don’t want to do that.

But Huckabee has some gay friends. So, it’s cool.

There actually is an analogy to be made between accepting same-sex marriage and serving bacon-wrapped shrimp. Find out what it is on this week’s Morning Jew, where Heather Gold and I(Katie Halper)! We get to Huckabee at 28:55