House Republicans are making their voices heard in the budget process and upsetting at least one of their party's state officeholders. Read on in today's Ohio Politics Roundup.

No money (yet) for ballot mailings: "Money to cover the cost of mailing absentee ballot applications to all Ohio voters for next year's presidential election does not exist in the current budget before the Ohio House," reports Robert Higgs for the Northeast Ohio Media Group. "A state law enacted last year prohibited counties from mass mailing the applications to voters, but allows the secretary of state to do so.

"But the law allows those mailings only if the General Assembly specifically approves the money to pay for it, and they may only be made in even-numbered years."

A spokeswoman for Speaker Cliff Rosenberger, a Republican from Clinton County, tells Higgs that, because the money was not in the original budget requested by Gov. John Kasich, House members want more time to review the review the issue.

"Nobody has told us they are opposed to it," a spokesman for Republican Secretary of State Jon Husted tells Higgs. "We believe that they will do it."

No Yost: There's also this - "Ohio House Republicans have put language into the state budget plan that would shield them and other state officials from audits that would determine whether they are following public-records laws," Higgs writes.

"State Auditor Dave Yost, a fellow Republican, says the language is nothing less than a direct attack on the authority of his office. The language, included in the budget bill unveiled Tuesday, specifically limits Yost's ability to monitor whether state officers, such as legislators, are complying with the requirements of Ohio's open records act."

Yost calls the effort a "full frontal assault."

No PARCC: Risking the loss of three-quarters of a billion dollars in federal education funding, Republican leaders in the Ohio House have placed language in the two-year budget to ban the use of new student assessments and cut off the money to pay for them," Catherine Candisky and Jim Siegel report for the Columbus Dispatch.

"The House version of a two-year state budget prohibits the use of state funds to purchase the PARCC [Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers] exams. It also slashes $33.6 million per year from the Department of Education's budget for assessments and bans the reallocation of other money to pay for assessments."

Remember: These moves are all part of the House GOP's response to the Kasich budget - a response that also calls for gutting the governor's tax proposal.

Kasich reports gifts: State officeholders had until Wednesday to file their financial disclosure forms with the Ohio Ethics Commission. Kasich's notes gifts from, among others, Arnold Schwarzenegger, the actor and former California governor.

Others on the list include the Ohio Republican Party and Balanced Budget Forever, which have been paying for Kasich's travels across the country to promote a federal balanced budget measure and to promote Kasich as he considers a presidential bid. Kasich was not required to specify the nature of the gifts. But Schwarzenegger, you may recall, joined Kasich for some friendly grip-and-grin last October in Columbus.

Kasich also disclosed more than 40 investments worth more than $1,000, including his retirement package from Lehman Brothers, the defunct Wall Street bank.

Libertarians still mad at Kasich: The party's "would-be candidate for governor last year has filed an elections complaint claiming ... Kasich's re-election team violated campaign-finance law by keeping him off the ballot," NEOMG's Jeremy Pelzer reports. "Charlie Earl's complaint ... alleges that Kasich's campaign colluded with GOP activist Terry Casey to successfully disqualify Earl because of invalid petition signatures. Kasich's campaign and Casey have each denied the accusation."

Kasich will continue his testing of the 2016 waters. His Friday and Saturday schedule in South Carolina and New Hampshire, as provided by the Ohio GOP:

Noon Friday - Upstate Chamber Coalition Luncheon, Spartanburg, S.C.

3:15 p.m. Friday - Roundtable at Clemson University's International Center for Auto Research, Greenville, S.C.

6:45 p.m. Friday - Spartanburg GOP barbecue.

9 a.m. Saturday - Greenville GOP County Convention.

Saturday afternoon - First in the National Republican Leadership Summit, Nashua, N.H.

The Politico treatment: "Who Is the GOP's Strongest Candidate?" reads the headline from Politico Magazine, followed by the suggested answer - "Why Obamacare-loving moderate John Kasich may be the Republican Party's best bet."

The headline is good and bad for Kasich, who would argue he doesn't love Obamacare, even though he accepted the program's Medicaid expansion dollars.

The story, written by Daniel J. McGraw, a journalist based in Lakewood, Ohio, makes a Socratic case for Kasich. "Is he pretty much just Jeb Bush-lite without name recognition? Is he a man who had his chance on the big stage with a short-lived 2000 presidential campaign, but might be on the Joe Biden career path if everything falls into place? Or is he the most electable Republican candidate running?"

The Detroit News treatment: Kasich continues to draw positive reviews from his Monday speech in Motown. "John Kasich may be the presidential candidate America is looking for," Nolan Finley writes.

"But the question is whether they'll find him. The Ohio governor is a middle of the road Republican from the nation's middle. Should he decide to run, he'll bring to the campaign qualities that should appeal to voters weary of Washington gridlock and partisanship: Pragmatism and a 'willingness to solve problems with legitimate compromise that makes America stronger,' as Kasich described his governing philosophy to the Detroit Economic Club earlier this week."

The 'everyday' Ohioans who made Hillary Clinton's lunch: The Democratic presidential candidate's stop Monday at a Toledo-area Chipotle keeps creating buzz, and our favorite read on the much-hyped visit comes from Politico's Michael Kruse.

"The 25-year-old who cooked the chicken that went into the burrito bowl Hillary Clinton ordered at the Chipotle here on Monday makes $8.20 an hour and splits rent with two roommates," Kruse writes.

"The 29-year-old general manager used to work three jobs and now is thrilled to be able to have just this one.

"The young woman who was at the cash register was the only employee on duty at the time who thought she recognized her. She considered asking if anybody had ever told her she 'looked like Hillary Clinton.' But she didn't. It was 1:20 p.m., at the tail end of 'peak time,' lunch rush.

"They were busy."

Bookmark Ohio Politics Roundup: Find each morning's roundup and past editions here. Tips or links? Send here. Follow along on Twitter: @henryjgomez.