Topics: Affordable Care Act, Barack Obama, brian schweitzer, Chuck Grassley, Editor's Picks, Hillary Clinton, Inequality, interviewe, isis, Max Baucus, Mitt Romney, MSNBC, Obamacare, single payer, Warren Buffett, Media News, News, Politics News

In a new profile in National Journal, former Montana Gov. Brian Schweitzer — a self-styled populist Democrat who has long been rumored to be planning a run for the White House in 2016 — says that Southern men “are a little effeminate” and that outgoing House Majority Leader Eric Cantor sets off his “gaydar” to around “60-70 percent.” He also criticizes Sen. Dianne Feinstein’s relationship with the NSA, implementing a metaphor in which the influential California Democrat is likened to a prostitute. As you might imagine, these comments have not gone unnoticed.

When Salon called Schweitzer earlier this week (before the National Journal profile was published), though, the two-term governor and current MSNBC contributor had other things than effeminacy and the sex trade on his mind. In a wide-ranging interview conducted just after Schweitzer had appeared on “The Ed Show,” Schweitzer sounded off on the latest news from Iraq, why the Middle East isn’t America’s problem, why we should think twice before trusting the judgment of Hillary Clinton, how President Obama mucked-up healthcare reform and why he decided to speak at Mitt Romney’s annual donor gala. Our conversation is below and has been edited for clarity and length.

How’ve you enjoyed your new gig on MSNBC, and being a media guy in general?

I’m supposedly a media guy, but I’m not reporting any news. I’m saying what I think about things. I’ve done that most of my life. I did it for a time as governor of Montana. I was governor for eight years. Before that I was in private business. Now I’m in private business again, but this gives me an opportunity to say to a new group of people what I think about things.

Which issues have you been most fired up about discussing with this new, larger audience?

Well, I’ve been fired up for some time, if you’ve heard my discussion [on MSNBC]. I lived in the Middle East. I lived in Libya for a little less than a year, Saudi Arabia for about seven [years] during the ’80s. I was living in Saudi Arabia, working in Saudi Arabia, while Iraq was fighting its war with Iran. I fully understood, like everybody else in the Middle East, that Iraq was the tip of the spear for the rest of our allies — Egypt, Israel, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait — and while Saddam Hussein was a tyrant, let’s be honest: the Saudi Royal Family, the Kuwaiti Royal Family, the Egyptian leaders … there’s a limited number of good guys that are running countries in the Middle East.

But the one thing everybody seems to agree on among our Sunni allies is that the most dangerous actor in the neighborhood was Iran. So Iraq lost about a million people and Iran lost about a million people in that conflict; but Iraq was keeping Iran busy. So few people would listen to [former Sen.] Robert Byrd or, for that matter, this rancher in Montana who was screaming at the top of their lungs to anyone who would listen, “What are you doing? Iraq is what’s keeping the Middle East stable right now because they’re occupying Iran’s time. The enemy of your enemy is your friend!” So then we went into Iraq under completely false pretenses, but any of those folks who supported going in either knew, or should’ve known, it didn’t make any sense.

It does feel a bit as if we’re leaving a dream period when we thought we could just forget about Iraq —

No! No, no, no. Let’s think about this for a little bit. I don’t want to hear revision history from Lindsey Graham or George Bush people or Wolfowitz or Perle. I don’t want to hear anybody who supported going into Iraq saying, “Oh, well, gee, if only we would’ve stayed there longer …” You’ve lost your right to give me an opinion because you were so wrong and so many people lost their lives.

I’m passionate about this. The second day I was governor of Montana, I got in a Blackhawk helicopter and I went to my first funeral for a young man who came back dead [from Iraq]. The day that I was sworn in, I had no idea that I would be governor during the longest period of war in the history of the state. I had no idea that I would go to more of these funerals than any governor in the history of Montana. And at every single one of them I seethed with anger — anger at those people in Washington, D.C., who decided to send these people to their deaths, and maimed people. Because it was a false mission from the beginning … I looked around during these funerals, and I saw the grieving families, and I hugged the grieving mothers, and I did everything I could do to comfort them. I didn’t see those [pro-war] senators [at the funeral]. I didn’t see those people at the Department of Defense who sent them [to Iraq]. I didn’t see them at those funerals, helping those families get back on their feet.

And now to have the same cats in some cases, and the same kind of cats in other cases, trying to tell us why it is that we ought to go back to Iraq, and sort of defend those lines that were written at the end of WWI, separating the Sunnis and the Shiites and the Kurds, and calling it a place called Iraq and calling it other countries … these borders only make sense because we were dividing up the oil assets of the Middle East at the time. And [intervening in the region] only makes sense if we need the oil assets from the Middle East in the future — and we don’t. We are moving rapidly to energy independence.

Since you mentioned the basically artificial nature of many of the borders between states in the Middle East, I wanted to ask you if you agree with those who want to revisit a plan Vice President Biden put forward back when he was senator that would’ve essentially partitioned Iraq, allowing each group — Sunni, Shia and Kurds — to run their own affairs?

Biden wasn’t wrong at all. You could’ve asked me and I would’ve given you the same [answer]. The only glue that kept Iraq together was a strong-armed dictator that was willing to kill you if you crossed him. He used the chemical weapons that we gave him the capacity to make on the Iranians — and for that we cheered him, apparently — and when he starting using them on the Kurds we said, “Oh, now, come on! That’s not very nice!”

This [conflict] goes back a long time. The difference between Sunni and Shiite goes back a long, long time. The Sunnis believe that, after Mohammed died, they ought to be able to, as an Islamic nation, elect a new leader of Islam. The Shiites said at the time, and ever since, “No, you can’t elect it. It has to be a direct descendant of Mohammed.” That’s the key difference between Sunni and Shiite. Within the Sunnis there are the Wahhabis — [who] are very conservative within Saudi Arabia [and] who spawned Osama bin Laden — who were outraged that an infidel army (us, the United States) was propping up … the Saudi Royal Family … To have an infidel army in the country that protects the hajj cities is what was making these Wahhabis crazy. We spawned Osama bin Laden. By the way, we also funded him when he was called the Mujahedin and was in Afghanistan fighting the Russians, but I digress …

So you support the idea of partitioning the country?

Here’s what I think about it: Put your pencil away! They can partition their own country. We’re not going to partition them. Build your energy supplies in the United States; then you don’t need the Persian Gulf; then you don’t need those oil resources. Then it becomes the problem of the people who live in the Middle East and those people who need to buy [the Middle East’s oil] — the Asians and the Europeans. Let them worry about it.

How do you feel Obama has been handling the drumbeat to get involved again with Iraq, this time because of ISIS?

I don’t know. The drums are beating and I see the guys holding the sticks like Jon McCain and Wolfowitz and all the Bushies. I think I don’t hear that music [laughs]. Put down the instruments. You’re done playing the music. Some people listened to you one time before. What was it, 79 senators voted to go to war and 250 or so members of the house who voted to go in Iraq? They didn’t listen to those of us who knew better last time. So all of you who played that music, put the instruments down. We don’t want to hear that anymore.

Do you feel the same way about people who maybe weren’t playing it, but they were dancing to it?

Yep.

Do you feel that supporting that war should sort of be disqualifying on foreign policy issues, forever?

To have been so wrong so recently about a thing and a place — and now offering opinions on the same place — I think so. I think you’ve lost your credibility. Here’s the way I see it: If somebody lights fire to your barn and all your livestock get out, they don’t get to complain because the livestock are eating their corn. They burned the barn down!

I got to say, this sounds to me like you’re talking about Hillary Clinton. Are you talking about Hillary Clinton?

No. There you go. I haven’t mentioned anybody’s name; I actually mentioned Graham, and McCain, the Bushies, Wolfowitz …

That’s true. You only named Republicans.

You take any particular senator who voted for the war. That’s fine. You can do that. You could’ve said the name Chuck Schumer. You could’ve said the name Max Baucus. I can tell you the names you couldn’t say, I almost have them memorized, starting with Robert Byrd and Debbie Stabenow … There’s a long list of those who didn’t vote to go to war. Some of them who voted for it have said publicly, “Look, I’m not perfect. I make mistakes.” … Probably the best thing you can do is say, “I’m not perfect. I’ve made mistakes. I’ll try not to make them again.”

What did you think of Clinton’s recent statement that she didn’t publicly rescind her support for the war sooner because she wanted to keep faith with the troops?

The way I [kept faith with the troops], I would hug a mom, a father. I would hold a son or a daughter in my arms before, during and after a funeral. I refused to say the things to them that politicians like to say: “Your son died making this country free,” as if it was WWII or the Revolutionary War. I wouldn’t say that because I didn’t believe it. What I did was, I hugged them and said, “I don’t know. I don’t know what God’s plan was. I don’t know why this happened to your family, but here,” and I would write my personal cellphone number on a piece of paper and I would put it in their hand and close their hand on it and say to them, “If I could help you in any way — tomorrow, next week, next month, next year — call me. Twenty-four hours a day. Seven days a week. I’ll help you get through this, if I can.”

You feel that’s the most a politician can do?

That’s all I could do as governor. I didn’t have a vote. What I had was a National Guard [unit] … The best I could do was make sure they had all the equipment and all the training that they could to maximize the chance they would return in one piece. That’s all I could do as a governor.

To move away from foreign policy, I want to ask you about economic inequality. How do you approach that issue?

Here’s something we know for sure: One of the great equalizers is education. To make education available to everybody is one of the most important things we can do … It starts with an early education system. Secondly, it requires a system so that higher education is economically available for all of this country … [I]t starts with giving opportunities for education, but it doesn’t stop there.