F&M Poll: Obama Performing Well, Hillary Leads 2016

Written by Brittany Foster, Managing Editor

Obama

A strong majority of registered Democrats in Pennsylvania think President Obama is doing a good job, according to a new poll from Franklin and Marshall.

17% say the President is doing an excellent job, 41% said a good job, 25% say a fair job. Just 17% say he’s doing a poor job.

The poll also provided a breakdown of why registered Democrats approve so strongly of the President. The leading reason is working against strong opposition, particularly that Congress is to blame for lack of progress (26%).

And despite the many snafus of its rollout, 24% say that the Affordable Care Act is the reason they approve of Obama’s job performance. Conversely, when asked why they thought the President was doing a poor job, 22% said the Affordable Care Act made the health care system worse or ruined it entirely.

Coming in a close third in the approving responses is simply, “he is trying his best.” Democrats are apparently very lenient.

2016:

Unsurprisingly, based on her name recognition and favorability ratings, Hillary Clinton posted a massive lead in the race for the 2016 Democratic nomination for President.

If the 2016 primary were held today, 55% of registered Democrats said they would support Clinton, 5% said Vice President Joe Biden, 4% said Senator Elizabeth Warren, 2% said Governor Andrew Cuomo and 5% said “some other candidate.”

26 months away from said-primary, 29% don’t know.

This survey reflects interviews with 524 Pennsylvania registered Democratic voters conducted by the Center for Opinion Research at Franklin & Marshall College from March 25-31, 2014 (sample error of +/- 4.3 percentage points).

The Franklin & Marshall College Poll is produced in conjunction with the Philadelphia Daily News, WGAL-TV (South Central PA), Pittsburgh Tribune Review, WTAE-TV (Pittsburgh), WPVI-TV6/ABC (Philadelphia), Times-Shamrock Newspapers, Harrisburg Patriot-News, and Lancaster Newspapers.

April 3rd, 2014 | Posted in Front Page Stories, Presidential, Top Stories | 1 Comment