To see what the world may have looked like had Obama chosen the more moderate path, just examine the previous Democrat in the Oval Office: Bill Clinton. In his first two years, President Clinton chose the progressive route, leading a Democratic Congress in raising taxes on the wealthy, passing family medical leave, better regulating gun purchases, banning assault weapons, creating AmeriCorps, and addressing domestic violence through the Violence Against Women Act. The Clintons failed in getting their own version of healthcare reform passed into law, but President Clinton’s first two years still look impressive today.

These progressive accomplishments, however, came with a price. Opposition voters mobilized, and the “Republican Revolution” of 1994 swept Democrats out of Congress. In response, President Clinton’s team decided to scale back any remaining ambitions for progressive change. The initiatives that would pass during the rest of the Clinton era reflect his team’s willingness to moderate stances in order to maintain electoral viability—welfare reform, the Defense of Marriage Act, the loosening of regulations on Wall Street, and a series of balanced budgets. Looking back, you would be tempted to think a Republican was in charge at the time.

As an electoral strategy, this “triangulation” worked quite well. President Clinton oversaw a tremendous economic boom and managed foreign policy so deftly that in 1998—even in the midst of being impeached—the Democrats actually gained seats in the House, a historical rarity for midterm elections. If your goal is to avoid the wrath of the opposition’s voters, it’s not a bad idea to give the other party a lot of what it wants.

You can see presidents and Congresses making this tradeoff between progress and electoral success throughout modern American history. Ronald Reagan was as popular as they come, but he lost big time in the 1982 midterms as voters soured on his budget cuts and perceived poor handling of the economy. LBJ essentially forfeited the South for who knows how many generations with the Civil Rights Act in 1965. Even the unstoppable FDR lost 71 House seats in 1938 and 55 House seats in 1942 despite winning reelection three times. When presidents aren’t on the ballot themselves, it’s much easier for the opposition to motivate their voters to turn out relative to that president’s supporters.

Obviously, this is only Congress, and Democratic losses in governorships and state legislatures throughout the country are devastating in their own right. With Congress gridlocked, most real policy development and implementation is happening at the state and local levels. To make matters worse, losses at the local and state levels rob Democrats of a “bench” with which to draw talent for higher offices. Local elections have essentially become nationalized, which has largely been bad news for Democrats.