Sioux Falls, SD

As estimated 184 million Americans tuned in to watch the Super Bowl this evening. Some went to a Sports Bar to take in the sights and sounds of the big game. KELOLAND News was the first to tell you about how Overtime Bar and Grill is using the game to raise money for a family with a special connection to its owner.

Today is a big day for Overtime. It's not just a busy day at the sports bar, but there's exciting news for Owner Jeff Doughtery. His neighbor, 7th grader Nate Wick, is back home after spending time in the hospital after suddenly collapsing during basketball tryouts.

"Strange not to have a diagnosis as to why it really happened but obviously he's back and getting better," Doughtery said.

The bar is trying to make life easier for Nate and his family. Doughtery says the restaurant brought in extra staff to deal with the super rush. Ten percent of all sales will be given to Nate's family. People have been bringing in cash all week and dropping it off at this donation box at the front of the store.

"Sioux Falls obviously a very giving community and it's not more than I expected but it's what I expected, people would show up and support something like this and they've done so," Doughtery said.

According to the National Retail Federation, almost 26 percent of Americans that watch the big game watch it at a house party, but that's not stopping some from coming to Overtime to help out the Wick family.

"I think it's a great idea. I mean, there are going to be so many sales from the Super Bowl and people are going to be so willing so buy extra for this family, because that's just a tragedy," Kayla Hanson.

For Brian Mack and his family, he was planning on watching the game at home. When he heard the news of what Overtime was doing, he knew where he was going to eat before kickoff.

"We like to come to Overtime anyways and so we just like, snowy days, cooped up in the house, let's get out of the house and go over and have some lunch before the game," Mack said.

As the fans come together to cheer on their teams, the community comes together to help a family in need.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.