Tuesday on “The Alan Colmes Show,” Alan spoke with Congressman Charles Rangel about a brand new app called Frankly, which he is using to create a dialogue with his constituents in New York’s 13th congressional district. They also discussed Rep. Rangel’s take on the GOP field for 2016, the Tea Party, and the Patriot Act:

REP. RANGEL: The Republican party as far as the Congress has concerned in the last six years and soon to be eight, they could not create one positive thing that they stood for, except tearing down the President, attacking his foreign policy, attacking Hillary, attacking the Affordable Care Act, and blocking every meaningful piece of legislation. And then when you take a look at the candidates they have, and the candidates that are fighting to get on that stage, to me it looked like an audition for “Saturday Night Live.” I just could not possibly believe that that would be the only thing that’s left for the American people to do.

**********

REP RANGEL: Jeb Bush, with all of the Bush luggage that he carries into it, probably would be able to stand on his own two feet as a Governor, but if you think for one minute that the Tea Party is going to let him get by talking about he loves foreigners, he loves immigrants, he loves them so much he married one, you must be out of your mind. They’re going to tear him apart.

COLMES: So you don’t think he can get the nomination?

REP. RANGEL: No, I’m telling you they’re going to tear him apart. Already they’re going to Mexico to checking the background of his beautiful wife. I mean they are just mean people! All you have to do is go online and you will see exactly what they are willing to do to their own. They eat their own.

**********

COLMES: Do we need a Patriot Act? Do we need to renew the Patriot Act or is that the federal government going too far? Are you with Rand Paul on this?

REP. RANGEL: I’m with Rand Paul on it because I would take it back a step and deal with the question of national security. Why should people be able to have their lives exposed without a warrant?