Topics: #blessed, aol_on, Basic, Language, Not a good look, Innovation News, Life News

This time of year serves us with self-reflection whether we welcome it or not. It’s interesting to see how far we’ve come in the last 12 months. We’re also ready for new adventures so we can tell new stories — with new language.

Certain words and phrases have become as ubiquitous as brunch or Taylor Swift, and we owe it to ourselves to retire certain slang from our lexicon as we move into a new year. In “Little Gidding,” T.S. Eliot writes, “For last year’s words belong to last year’s language / And next year’s words await another voice.” We need more creative methods of expression to properly describe an experience or caption an Instagram, but are bombarded by distractions regarding resolutions for the upcoming year. Why not shake things up by starting with a language revolution?

Below are some of the most exhausted phrases of 2015 that are in definite need of a modern update. Change is hard, and if you’re reading this while thinking you “literally cannot,” I’m here to tell you that you absolutely can.

“Squad”: Do we even need slang to describe a group of friends? Yes, squad members share a certain degree of camaraderie, but the term is reminiscent of a middle-school cheerleading group: overeager and just kind of silly.

“Literally cannot”: Both “literally” and the phrase “cannot” are absolutely cringeworthy by now. There have been many think pieces on the misuse and evolution of “literally” to the point where the word sounds like little more than nails on a chalkboard. Congratulations, we’ve killed a word. Throw in any variation of “can’t” and… ugh, I actually won’t even go there.

“Basic”: Blah blah blah. This poor word has a formerly benign meaning (adjective; of, relating to, or forming a base), but now serves as a pejorative, albeit an unoriginal one. Referring to something or someone as “basic” is derivative, unnecessary, and oh so boring.

“On fleek”: It’s been nearly a year, and I’m still not quite sure what “fleek” is or means. Have I been on it? Have I accidentally stepped/tripped over said fleek? It seems like a variation of “on point,” which takes its roots from the French term “en pointe” referring to ballet and has since evolved to mean up to par, or of a certain standard. Whatever “fleek” may be, it’s all Greek to me.