Buy Photo Brandeis Elementary School coaches Emily Major, left, and Erin Altman apply temporary tattoos while wearing their school's tutu outfit as Girls on the Run Louisville hosts it's biannual 5K Fun-Run at Waterfront Park. May. 9, 2015 (Photo: Brian Bohannon, Special to the C-J)Buy Photo

As runners, their co-runner buddies, family and friends arrived for Girls on the Run, Louisville's biannual 5K Fun-Run at Waterfront Park on Saturday, coach Erin Altman applied a temporary tattoo that read "Run" under the eye of fellow coach Emily Major. Both were wearing the chosen costume for participants from Brandeis Elementary School: a tutu and hot-colored hair extensions..

"With 17 girls, crazy hair and tutus help you keep track of them," Altman said. The 20 participating schools had their own meeting tables and outfits to wear as costumes in the race. The Fun-Run was the final event for the 250 girls participating in the Girls on the Run's spring program for girls in third through eighth grades from Jefferson County schools. Altman, a chemical engineer at Dupont, was asked to be a coach for the program because Brandeis is a Mathematics/Science/Technology magnet school.

"You're supposed to talk about anything and everything, and cheer them on today," Altman said, explaining that a Girls on the Run coach mentors the participants and follows a plan book with lessons on bullying, gossip, positive self-esteem and healthy eating. Altman even made the tutus for the event.

"They're fun, and they float," she said.

Altman and another fellow Brandeis coach, Kalli Stull, were later awarded co-coaches of the season at the event.

"I'm excited and sweaty," Sofia Woods, 10, a fifth-grader at Camp Taylor Elementary School said, as her coach Sarah Howell, helped put fairy wings on her back. Because of the program, and in preparation for the run, Woods was running at George Rogers Clark Park every week. Her running buddy, step-mother Dara Woods, a longtime runner herself, said she was really proud of her step-daughter.

"Now that she can continue as an adult," Dara Woods said, "It's a pretty healthy lifestyle to take up."

After making their way with other participants along the Ohio River through Waterfront Park – past the Brown-Forman Amphitheater and back past the Tetra sculpture to the finish line at Festival Plaza – Byck Elementary School parent volunteer and coach Myrdin Thompson spun her running buddy, fourth-grader Brooklyn Britt, 9, around with pride.

"Brooklyn is amazing," Thompson said of her running mate. "Every practice, she's on pace, enthusiastic and always cheering on her teammates."

"She was pushing me to go faster," Britt said, excitedly. "It was tiring and awesome."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1H9Ho8B