Memories Pizza discovers that radicalized gays are now emboldened to use legal and social media pressure to force Christians to compromise their faith and sacrifice their own legal rights.

WASHINGTON, April 4, 2015 — Legalizing gay marriage does not satisfy gay extremists, while passage of a state Religious Freedom Restoration Act absolutely enrages them. Radicalized gays and their supporters are now emboldened to use the power of the law and the pressure of social media to force Christians to compromise their faith and sacrifice their own legal rights.

The RFRA was supposed to help protect individual Christians and all citizens who dissent from radical secular tenets based on their religious beliefs from becoming the target of withering personal attacks, lawsuits, boycotts, smear campaigns, persecution and even death threats from radical individuals and organizations.

But, having passed a measure that was meant to protect such individuals, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence and the Indiana General Assembly reversed themselves on this legislation after just over a week of intense criticism. By passing, under organized pressure, an amendment that undercuts the RFRA, they’ve transformed themselves from champions of religious liberty to appeasers of gay extremists’ demands with the stroke of a pen.

Read also: Memories Pizza new face of RFRA debate

Pence has clearly proved that officials elected to high office fear being the target of gays and their orchestrated hate campaigns as much as anyone. What chance does the average citizen have in securing his or her individual rights from these swift, organized propaganda attacks?

Case in point: After passage of Indiana’s RFRA, television reporter Alyssa Marino of ABC 57 News drove for half an hour simply to ask Crystal O’Connor, known to be a Christian and the owner of Memories Pizza in Walkerton, Ind., about her policy toward catering a same-sex marriage.

O’Connor answered, “If a gay couple came in and wanted us to provide pizzas for their wedding, we would have to say no. We are a Christian establishment.” O’Connor made it clear that otherwise anyone, including gay couples, are welcome patrons.

Memories Pizza never has never been asked, nor has the business actually rejected catering a gay ceremony. No matter. The story ran as “RFRA: First Indiana business to publicly deny same-sex service.” Within hours, pro-gay extremists began sending hate-filled tweets demanding boycotts and making death threats while leftist pro-gay media outlets fanned the flames.

Salon tweeted (and later deleted), “That anti-LGBT pizza shop in Indiana is getting exactly what it deserves.” The tweet linked to a short article that made no mention of the intimidation or death threats.

Legal analyst for CNN Jeffery Toobin declared, “Those who support the RFRA law are ‘precisely parallel’ to those who ‘indulged’ racial segregation in the 1950s and 1960s on religious grounds.”

The Huffington Post ran the misleading headline “Indiana’s Memories Pizza Reportedly Becomes First Business To Reject Catering Gay Weddings,” following that with the false narrative that Memories is “the first business to publicly vow to reject gay weddings in the wake of Indiana’s controversial Religious Freedom Restoration Act.”

Individual pro-gay radicals went even further. The Memories Pizza website was hacked and filled with obscene images. Jessica Dooley, a girls’ coach at nearby Concorde High School, tweeted, “Who’s going to Walkerton with me to burn down #Memories Pizza.”

When the superheated misinformation campaign began to backfire and support for the owners from across the nation raised $753,000 in a GoFundMe crowdfunding campaign for the besieged owners, intimidation and threats expanded to that website, targeting both O’Connor and the campaign organizer Lawrence Billy Jones III.

Austin Kasso (who now claims his Twitter account was hacked) tweeted: “Go to hell you stupid bigots. Don’t think you can hold onto that money for long – you don’t deserve this money and we are coming to rob you.”

Another tweet with the ominous moniker LawrenceMomIsScrewed threatened the family of one campaign organizer Lawrence B. Jones III: “…any smart person that is planning something will not threaten you. You won’t see it coming.” Another tweet asked, “got any family?”

Within a few days and seeing the political writing on the wall, Pence publicly asked for a fix to clarify any “misunderstandings,” which, in fact, were fabricated by the radical gay media campaign in the first place. “Last weekend I called upon the Indiana General Assembly to clarify that this new judicial standard would not create a license to discriminate or to deny services to any individual as its critics have alleged,” Pence said at a news conference.

But, like Obama’s supposed fix meant to answer religious freedom protests concerning the mandatory funding of abortion through Obamacare insurance premiums, Pence’s fix limited protection to religious organizations. He certainly did not enhance religious freedom for Indiana citizens in general.

The Indiana RFRA was gutted of the very religious liberty protections for individuals it was meant to enhance. Going even further, Pence specifically exempted the RFRA as any defense against gay lawsuits or the state of Indiana’s bringing possible criminal charges for sexual orientation discrimination.

Mark Rienzi, professor at the Catholic University School of Law and counsel for the Beckett Fund, says that Indiana’s “Christian business owners—florists, bakers, caterers and others—will now be forced to provide service[s]” against their own religious beliefs.

As founder of Mission America Linda Harvey said, “This ‘fix’ is everything gay activists could want.”

Meanwhile, the outpouring of financial support may keep Crystal O’Connor from financial ruin, but she still fears for her life. At last report, she is still in hiding.