Buy Photo The Space Coast Health Foundation held "Community Conversation on Health: Healthcare Coverage for Brevard's Most Vulnerable". (Photo: TIM SHORTT/FLORIDA TODAY)Buy Photo

Expanding Medicaid in Florida would mean $114 million annually for Brevard County and would cover thousands here who currently have no health insurance, said health care experts at a forum Wednesday.

At least 17,500 of Brevard's poor would be affected by this change, which would allow them to gain access to health care at a subsidized rate.

When Florida declined to participate in the expanded Medicaid program, it left approximately 750,000 state residents in the "Medicaid Gap." That is they made too much money or otherwise didn't qualify for traditional Medicaid, but did not earn enough to qualify for subsidies to buy health insurance on exchanges created by the Affordable Care Act, or "Obamacare." That law was written with the assumption that all states would participate in the expanded Medicaid program.

"Many uninsured residents of Brevard County earn too much to qualify for traditional Medicaid but not enough to afford market rates for health insurance nor do they qualify for premium tax credits," said Johnette Gindling, executive director of the Space Coast Health Foundation, which sponsored the forum. "Those who fall into the coverage gap often remain uninsured and unable to get the preventive care they need, so some small health problems wind up becoming bigger issues requiring hospitalization. Brevard County hospitals experience financial pressure when uninsured people turn to them for help but can't afford to pay the medical bills."

The expanded Medicaid program under Obamacare calls for states to offer Medicaid coverage to virtually all individuals earning up to 138 percent of the poverty level. The federal government would pay for 100 percent of the costs from 2014-2017 tapering down to 90 percent by 2020.

The Florida Legislature declined to participate, saying even the 10 percent costs were too high. Legislative leaders also said they were concerned that the federal government would not continue to pay the 90 percent in the future.

Gindling and others at her organization's forum argued that there is an urgent need for Medicaid expansion and the federal funding that goes along with it, because of what they describe as a looming financial crisis at Brevard hospitals. Roughly $10 million of federal funding for Brevard hospitals is scheduled to expire on June 30, and another $5.5 million of annual federal funding for program in Brevard will likely be revoked. Both funding streams may be cut off this year, thereby reducing the resources available for Brevard's uninsured.

Lisa Gurri, the CEO of the Brevard Health Alliance nonprofit, argued the Medicaid expansion is long overdue, and she said that federal grants for uncompensated care did not come close to accounting for the costs faced by charity health organizations like hers.

"Whether the money is there or not, uninsured patients are still coming in," she said. "Everyone that's in my line of work believes that these people need to be insured."

Gurri described the $15.5 million federal grants for local uncompensated care as an inadequate "Band-aid" for a major policy problem.

The keynote speaker of the health forum, Joan Alker of the Georgetown University Health Policy Institute, said that Florida had the second highest percentage of uninsured people in the nation, trailing only Texas, another state that did not expand its Medicaid program.

"Florida has one of the highest uninsured rates in the nation and is lagging behind other states in bringing in the federal dollars sitting on the table to help them meet those needs," said Alker, a prominent scholar whose research focuses on Medicaid. "Florida could catch up very quickly by taking advantage of the flexibility the federal government is offering right now in allowing states to design their own solutions to meeting the needs of their uninsured residents."

Another speaker at the forum, Charlotte Cassel of Florida Legal Services, said, "Florida's decision not to take federal funding to offer Medicaid coverage to more uninsured residents has a big impact on Brevard health care providers, which has a ripple effect through the whole community."

In a telephone interview prior to the meeting, State Sen Thad Altman, R-Viera, said that he was a strong advocate of Medicaid expansion, and that it is the most pressing issue facing Florida's state lawmakers in the upcoming legislative session.

"My position from Day 1 has been that we need to expand Medicaid," he said. "I think that it makes no sense for our state and our constituents to pay $50 billion to the federal government and to have that money spent in other states giving other people health care."

Altman continued, "There's a lot of unnecessary human suffering, and ultimately somebody has to pay for that. Really it's a great tragedy. I hope we can get policymakers to see the rationale of giving people back their money.

"The Florida Senate supports expanded Medicaid, and so does the Florida Medical Association and the Florida Hospital Association, and now the Governor does, too. There's only one group that doesn't support it — the House — and it happens to be a very important group. I'm certainly open to listening to the House and hearing their ideas about how tax dollars can be spent efficiently, but let's not spend Florida dollars in California."

Other Brevard legislators, though, including House Speaker Steve Crisafulli have opposed expanding Medicaid.

Rep. John Tobia, R-Melbourne Beach, said that he had not changed his mind about Medicaid expansion and that he is convinced it is an irresponsible policy. "My position is as stagnant as can be. I am against expanding Medicaid whether the Chamber [of Commerce] is involved or not," he said. "I just don't think it's a wise investment of government resources to provide healthcare to able-bodied individuals. Everyone has access to the private marketplace for insurance, and when I graduated from college and before I got a job, that's how I got insurance, and it was quite affordable. I just don't think people should be coming to the government for insurance."

Neither Crisafulli, R-Merritt Island, nor Rep. Ritch Workman, R-Melbourne, could be reached for an interview before press time. Both have expressed objections to Medicaid expansion in Florida in the past.

Cleave Frink of Melbourne, a longtime community activist, said that he is angry at Brevard politicians who have blocked Medicaid expansion. "When people are suffering because of a jam they put people in, then the question should be, who do they represent? If people cannot rely on their elected officials with an issue as important as this, then what are they there for?" said Frink, a former president of the South Brevard branch of the NAACP. "I really do sympathize with those people in the coverage gap that fill in the doughnut hole and fall through the cracks because of politicians."

Tobia said he was unsure of whether the House would vote in favor of Medicaid expansion. "I speak only for myself so I have no idea what they House will do," he said, "but that's what makes the legislative session interesting."

Contact Kowarski at 321-242-3640 or ikowarski@floridatoday.com. Follow her on Twitter @IlanaKowarski

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1ILNkAk