Photo

WASHINGTON — Dozens of people stood in line outside the Supreme Court on Wednesday, enduring the damp and chill to hear oral arguments in a challenge to President Obama’s health care law.

About 70 people were in place by 6 a.m., hoping for one of about 50 seats in the courtroom for those who want to watch the whole argument. Kathleen Arberg, a Supreme Court spokeswoman, said there were also about 20 seats for people to rotate into the room and watch up to five minutes of the proceedings.

Arguments were expected to start shortly after 10 a.m.

George Altshuler, a 26-year-old teacher from Washington, said he joined the line around 11:30 p.m. Tuesday with his girlfriend and her co-workers. They held a spot somewhere between No. 24 and No. 30 — someone in line had made a list — braving a March night to witness what Mr. Altshuler called “a quintessential D.C. experience.” He said he hoped the justices would not rule in favor of the challengers to the law.

“It’s nice to have that in the back of my mind, that I don’t have to have health care through my job necessarily,” he said.

Video

A large crowd of demonstrators gathered on the steps in front of the court as the oral arguments approached, listening to people affected by the health care law talk about their experiences.

Standing near handmade signs that read “The ACA Saved My Life,” Adam Kelley, of South Berwick, Me., became emotional recounting how being laid off from his job caused his family’s health insurance premiums to skyrocket as he battled Crohn’s disease.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I feel safe knowing I cannot be discriminated against for having an incurable illness,” he said, adding, “I’m proof that the Affordable Care Act is working.”

On the other side of a line delineated by a banner declaring “Keep the IRS Out of My Health Care,” a handful of the law’s opponents waved signs and listened to speeches from a few conservative members of Congress.

Representative Steve King, an Iowa Republican who has been one of the most active opponents of the health care law, said Congress was willing to find a new way to insure those who would lose their coverage without the law.

“Where were they before Obamacare was, in such an ugly way, implemented?” he said. “They got retooled to get into Obamacare. They can get retooled to get into another system along the way.”

Just under three years after the court first weighed in on the health care law, the justices on Wednesday will hear a second major challenge to Mr. Obama’s signature domestic achievement. At issue this time is whether the law bars the federal government from providing tax subsidies to help people buy insurance in states that did not set up their own insurance exchanges.

When the law was challenged in 2012, the line outside the court formed three days before the start of the three-day series of oral arguments, with those hoping for a seat braving drenching rains under umbrellas and tarps.

On Tuesday afternoon, a cold rain fell on Capitol Hill as the line formed on the sidewalk in front of the court. The first two people said they had gotten in line around 3 p.m., about 19 hours before oral arguments were set to begin.

They and several others who lined up behind them declined to be interviewed further. People standing farther back in the line identified many of those near the front — perhaps around 20 people — as place-holders.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Paid line-standers are one of Washington’s many quirks. For $40 an hour, for instance, a company called Washington Express will pay someone to hold a customer’s place in line, outside a crowded congressional hearing or, say, the Supreme Court.

But more than a few people were holding spots for themselves. John Osborn, a pediatrician from Fairfax, Va., huddled in line with the hood of his green raincoat pulled up. Dr. Osborn said he had come out to see how the court would handle a question critical to his patients.

“From my standpoint, I take care of complicated kids, and a lot of them lose their coverage if this occurs, if it goes down, and so the impact of that is huge,” he said. “It’s particularly problematic for children’s hospitals. It’s particularly problematic for kids with multiple problems.”