The cold and snow that put a shiver in Thanksgiving isn’t done with Denver just yet. Temperatures are expected to be about 25 degrees below the seasonal normal in the metro region Friday, with a forecast high of only 18 degrees in the city, according to the National Weather Service.

Light snow is expected to taper off after 9 a.m. but could return in the evening forecasters said, bringing an additional 2 to 3 inches.

Two to 5 inches of new snow was expected overnight Thursday to greet those who have to return to work or want to shop Black Friday sales.

“Roads will become snow-covered and icy due to light snow and areas of freezing drizzle,” the National Weather Service warned all of Colorado east of the Continental Divide on Thursday evening. “Snow-covered roads and slow travel conditions can be expected through Friday.”

A slight chance of snow in Denver continues into Saturday, when the temperature is expected to climb up to only 29, with a low of 11 degrees, and a 20 percent chance of snow Saturday night. The high could creep only to just above freezing to 34 degrees Sunday with a 30 percent chance of snow that night.

A mix of freezing drizzle and snow, however, could linger in the foothills in Jefferson and Douglas counties then change to all snow by late morning Friday with a chance of up to 7 inches, according to the National Weather Service.

Authorities are warning that roads could remain slick and treacherous.

The Colorado Department of Transportation was ordering chains, snow tires and other traction devices on Interstate 70 from C-470 to Vail Pass on Thursday night.

Denver International Airport had about three hours of weather-related delays Thursday before getting back on track by afternoon, said DIA spokesman Heath Montgomery.

About 10 percent of plane landings at Denver International Airport were delayed, but there was no dire flight expectations for Friday.

“Even though the flakes continue to fall, it is melting on the surfaces, which have been treated with de-icing chemicals. … We’re not anticipating significant delays and haven’t heard anything about delays from the airlines,” Montgomery said.

He said crews are monitoring the amount of liquid on the ground that could turn to ice. Crews also will be treating Peña Boulevard with de-icing chemicals overnight to assist those with Friday flights.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, kmitchell@denverpost.com or @kirkmitchell or denverpost.com/coldcases