Responding to complaints there aren't enough doctors to handle the surge of new Medicaid patients, Gov. Chris Christie's administration wants to bump up physician reimbursements by $45 million annually.

It will also add $27.3 million to help hospitals offset the cost of training new doctors.

At the same time, charity care payments to hospitals would be slashed by $74 million.

"We believe that will be well-received by the doctors and the hospitals as an offset to the reduction in charity care," state Treasurer Andrew P. Sidamon-Eristoff said of the increase in physician's fees.

The health care proposals were included in Christie's budget package, which he unveiled Tuesday.

New Jersey's fees are among the lowest in the nation, leaving Medicaid recipients to complain it's hard to find a doctor who will see them.



"That would be a tremendous start to fixing the problem," said Larry Downs, CEO of the Medical Society of New Jersey. Although it's too soon to tell if the increase would be enough to entice more doctors to take Medicaid patients, he said, "Any increase is welcome."

Nearly 400,000 residents have gotten coverage through Medicaid since the Christie administration accepted Obamacare federal funds to expand it to adults without children.

However, a report by NJ Advance Media last month detailed the problems people on Medicaid have in trying to find a doctor who will see them. Only 40 percent of New Jersey physicians participate in the program. Making the situation even more challenging to patients, an investigation of the insurance company lists of participating providers revealed those lists to be inaccurate or out-of-date.

A core premise of the Affordable Care Act is that it makes more financial sense to help people become insured instead of paying for their care when they show up at a hospital emergency room.

That is already starting to play out in New Jersey: The governor's budget summary indicated that because so many previously uninsured are now covered by Medicaid, the state has seen "steep reduction" in uncompensated care provided by hospitals.

It called this change in how the poor get medical care "a fundamental and welcome shift."

Those hospitals currently receive $650 million in state and federal funds. Once the $74 million proposed cut goes into effect — and is matched dollar-for-dollar by a comparable federal cut — they will receive $502 million.

That cut could've been worse, said David Knowlton, of the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute.

"Honestly, everyone expected a charity care cut. With people coming into the Affordable Care Act, charity care was going to drop," he said.

Boosting the pay of Medicaid specialists is designed to entice more doctors to accept Medicaid patients, said Knowlton. Directing money there is seen as a way to provide the type of care that forestalls a medical crisis and keeps patients out of the emergency room, he added.

He praised state Department of Health Commissioner Mary O'Dowd, whom he said may have been the architect of the funding change.

"There's a logic behind it, and she understands what it takes to provide care in the inner cities," he said.

In New Jersey, expanded Medicaid has been the most popular aspect of the Affordable Care Act. Nearly 400,000 people have signed up for the government-funded insurance, while another 253,000 have purchased private policies through the federal website, healthcare.gov.

Yet there are still hundreds of thousands of uninsured residents who may continue to seek care at hospitals, which are legally obliged to treat everyone.

That has New Jersey hospitals fearful the cuts will take place but the uninsured will continue to need services.

"We're very concerned about the charity care cut to hospitals. While we've made some strides in insuring more New Jerseyans, a new Gallup poll out today states that 11.7 percent of New Jersey's 8.9 million residents remain uninsured. That's roughly 1 million people that still rely on charity care provided by New Jersey's hospitals," said Betsy Ryan, president of the New Jersey Hospital Association.

The head of the Catholic HealthCare Partnership of New Jersey sounded a more dire alarm.

"Cutting charity care funding would be devastating to our hospitals and ultimately to our patients. Additionally, this policy is fiscally irresponsible, as it would leave millions of dollars of matching federal dollars on the table, said Sister Patricia Codey, president of the partnership.

However, 42 teaching hospitals around the state will see a small increase of $27.3 million in the money they receive for providing a setting for medical residents to complete their training.

That's important for the state, said Downs, because doctors who train here are more likely to establish a practice here. With more residency slots opening up, "we have a shot of keeping them in New Jersey."

Kathleen O'Brien may be reached at kobrien@njadvancemedia.com, or at (732) 902-4557. Follow her on Twitter @OBrienLedger. Find NJ.com on Facebook.