Associated Press

In his six months as a heroin dealer on Silk Road, Michael Duch was making $60,000 to $70,000 a month. He would hide bags of heroin inside moisture-sealed packages designed to ward off drug-sniffing dogs and sell them to almost 3,000 buyers across the U.S.

But Mr. Duch was eventually caught, he told jurors in Manhattan federal court on Wednesday.

The 40-year-old New York resident was arrested in October 2013 outside a post office in Monroe, N.Y., as he was attempting to deliver a heroin package. Mr. Duch pleaded guilty to conspiracy charges related to his drug distribution and, as part of a deal with the U.S. government, agreed to testify at Ross Ulbricht’s trial on Wednesday. Mr. Ulbricht is on trial facing potential life in prison for accusations that he was the leader of Silk Road, a secret website that allegedly sold drugs and other illicit goods.

Mr. Duch’s testimony on Wednesday had little to do with Mr. Ulbricht. Rather, it appeared aimed at revealing to the jury how Silk Road helped perpetuate the addictions of desperate drug users – and how easy it was for anyone to use Silk Road to buy and sell illegal substances.

Mr. Duch testified that he had been a self-employed computer consultant when he developed an addiction around 2007 to painkillers he was taking for sports injuries. He then turned to heroin, as he said it was cheaper and more potent than the painkillers.

Mr. Duch first started buying illegal drugs off Silk Road in October 2012, a year before his arrest. His habit became too expensive, so he decided a few months later to become a dealer himself, he said. He bought heroin for $3 a bag from a street dealer in New Jersey and then doubled the price to sell on Silk Road. By the time his business took off, he shipped between 400 to 600 bags of heroin every day to buyers from Illinois to North Carolina.

“My prescription painkillers became very expensive, and I could no longer afford it, so I resorted to selling drugs on Silk Road,” Mr. Duch told jurors on Wednesday. “I think being successful in purchasing drugs on Silk Road, I saw the relative ease that came with it.”

Mr. Duch, who wore dark blue prisoner clothes on the stand, said he felt the website’s anonymity made him feel safe from law enforcement, making him think he could “potentially get away with it.” Mr. Duch has been in prison since his arrest and has not yet been sentenced.

Mr. Duch advertised same-day shipping on his Silk Road vendor page because his buyers were often addicts who were going through withdrawal and needed the drugs quickly, he said. Prosecutors on Wednesday showed screenshots of messages that Mr. Duch’s buyers sent to him, pressing him to ship on time. “I am EXTREMELY dope sick and NEED something by tomorrow!” one message read. Another read, “I am throwing up, the worst of the worst withdrawal symptoms.”

“It was something that bothered me on a daily basis,” Mr. Duch said, referring to the guilt he felt in being a drug dealer.

Mr. Duch said he knew Dread Pirate Roberts ran and set the rules for Silk Road, but never had direct contact with him. Dread Pirate Roberts is the online pseudonym that prosecutors say Mr. Ulbricht used when he was operating Silk Road.