SIOUX FALLS, S.D. (AP) - The political fallout from South Dakota’s investment-for-visa scandal is likely over, but state officials are still investigating how to claw back roughly $1 million in public funds.

A legislative audit committee released a report this week that found that a former state official who committed suicide last year was solely to blame for the missing money, which spawned state and federal investigations. But the state is still examining how to reclaim the missing funds and legal fees stemming from a lawsuit, and evaluating whether a company involved in the scandal should be considered a financial institution - and therefore subject to banking taxes.

The handling of the EB-5 federal investment program in South Dakota was scrutinized during this election season. Former Gov. Mike Rounds faced accusations over his management of the program, but he overcame the criticism to become South Dakota’s newest U.S. senator.

The state Government Operations and Audit Committee’s final report said Richard Benda was the only person responsible for hundreds of thousands of dollars in “misdirected” funds. Missing from the report were others Democrats have accused of having a hand in the program’s mismanagement, including Rounds and Joop Bollen, a former state administrator who oversaw the program as a public employee and as part of a private company.

South Dakota was one of the pioneers in EB-5 financing under Bollen and Benda, a former Governor’s Office of Economic Development secretary. The program recruits wealthy immigrant investors for projects in exchange for green cards. Benda’s suicide came as state officials prepared felony theft charges against him in connection with the financial misconduct, which left the state short of more than $500,000.

Gov. Dennis Daugaard’s top aide Tony Venhuizen told The Associated Press Friday that Pierre attorney Paul Bachand is still working through the state’s options to reclaim the money.

The South Dakota Board of Regents is also evaluating how to recover about $510,000 in fees related to a lawsuit against the state. An arbitrator in early October dismissed the breach-of-contract lawsuit filed against the state in 2008 by California-based Darley International and later that month denied the state’s attempt to recover attorney fees and costs.

Darley filed the lawsuit against the South Dakota International Business Institute, where Bollen administered the EB-5 visa program while he worked for the public institute at Northern State University. Darley had an agreement to recruit investors in China for South Dakota projects.

Board of Regents CEO Jack Warner said the regents are exploring opportunities to reclaim the funds, but declined to comment further. Bollen on Saturday declined to comment on the matter.

Democrats want a more thorough accounting of Bollen’s role in the program’s troubles and have criticized Bollen for moving the program under a privately run company he created. The program was privatized in 2009 and turned over to SDRC Inc., a company which Bollen had founded and served as president.

SDRC Inc. continues to oversee existing EB-5 projects, and now South Dakota’s Division of Banking is considering whether the company should be considered a financial institution because it administers some loans. Such a determination could result in SDRC Inc. owing millions in banking taxes.

Banking Division director Bret Afdahl on Friday said that the state is waiting on some documents before deciding whether to label SDRC Inc. a bank. Meanwhile, the state Revenue Department has signaled that if SDRC is deemed a financial institution, it will work to collect bank franchise taxes.