Topics: Debt ceiling, Debt limit, Editor's Picks, GOP, Mitch McConnell, Ted Cruz, The Right, Video, Politics News

Last week the seams holding together factions of the Republican party burst open once again. And once again, Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, was the guy scraping at them with a scalpel.

He didn’t shut down the government, or talk himself hoarse on the Senate floor. But he did spoil his leadership’s plan to let Senate Democrats increase the debt limit on their own without implicating any individual Republicans — including the highest-ranking Republican, who just happens to be in the midst of an unexpectedly tough election.

This can get a little technical. But suffice it to say that Republicans — for once! — wanted to not filibuster a bill. To avoid the whole 60-vote requirement they’ve made so routine, and just get on to the up-or-down final passage vote. Let 50 Dems and Vice President Biden do all the dirty work.

But ending debate on a bill and going directly to final passage requires consent from everyone in the Senate, and Cruz refused to provide his. Now several Republicans, including Mitch McConnell himself, must wear scarlet letters whenever they face conservative activists, all because Cruz wanted to court another damaging confrontation with Obama and wants the people denying it to him to suffer for their actions.

The bad blood has grown redolent.

Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., one of the Republicans who helped end Cruz’s filibuster, sent his 1.86 million Twitter followers to a “must read” Wall Street Journal editorial titled “The Minority Maker: Ted Cruz hurts his party by forcing a meaningless debt-ceiling vote.”

Must-read @WSJ: "The Minority Maker" http://t.co/BxyNKMTrOG — John McCain (@SenJohnMcCain) February 13, 2014

Cruz fired back with an extraordinarily blunt attack on his colleagues on Mark Levin’s conservative radio show.

“In the 13 months that I’ve been in the Senate, it has become apparent to me the single thing that Republican politicians hate and fear the most, and that is when they’re forced to tell the truth. It makes their heads explode,” Cruz said. “A lot of Republicans wanted exactly what Barack Obama wanted, exactly what Nancy Pelosi wanted, exactly want Harry Reid wanted, which is to raise the debt ceiling, but they wanted to be able to tell what they view as their foolish, gullible constituents back home that they didn’t do it. And they’re mad because, by refusing to consent to that, they had to come out in the open, they had to admit what they’re doing. And nothing upsets them more.”