Topics: 2016 Elections, Baltimore, Bowe Bergdahl, clowns, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, GOP, Maryland, presidential candidates, Elections News, Media News, News, Politics News

The circus rolled into the Baltimore-Washington Metropolitan area yesterday, as Donald Trump delivered his first big speech as an official presidential candidate. As one of the outlets that said, repeatedly, not to believe that Trump was running until he filed his paperwork with the FEC, we at Salon figured it was only fair that we cover his address to the Maryland Republican Party’s annual Red, White, and Blue Dinner after he made it official.

The dinner was at the very beautiful, very classy airport Marriott in Linthicum, Maryland, just outside of Baltimore. Trump’s own press release announcing the speech noted that there would be “a record setting crowd” in attendance to hear him speak. Trump has a tendency to inflate crowd sizes, but this was actually true. The event quickly sold out after Trump was announced and the Maryland GOP had to add tables at the last minute to fit everyone in.

But what were they hoping to see? A celebrity entertainer from the teevee, or a candidate whom they could see themselves supporting for political office?

Because not many Republican voters could see themselves supporting Donald Trump for political office. We know this because the most recent NBC national poll asked Republican voters directly if they could see themselves supporting Donald Trump for office. A full 66% of Republican voters said that they could not see themselves supporting Trump, 11 percentage points higher than the second-worst candidate, Chris Christie, the butt of many jokes about whose presidential campaign is the most dead-on-arrival. Even the Suffolk University poll of New Hampshire voters released yesterday, which put Trump in second place with 11% trailing only Jeb Bush’s 14%, showed how difficult it’s going to be for Trump to build much more support than that. The poll found Trump’s favorability rating underwater, 37 percent to 49 percent. He was the only candidate with a net-unfavorable rating, so there’s not much room for him to grow.

Oh my God, though, this Suffolk poll. As soon as the numbers came out yesterday, the Trump campaign determined that Suffolk was basically the finest, most precise, most brilliant pollster in the history of pollsters. Trump’s team suggested to the assembled press last night that they might want to ask about this singular poll from the singular Suffolk University during his pre-speech press availability. About a dozen or so reporters came to cover the event — mostly local Baltimore news outlets, plus one stupid Salon scribe who foolishly decided to drive northbound on 295 during rush hour to cover a Republican party dinner at the BWI Marriott. An apocalyptic thunderstorm was rolling through the region, as it has every night this summer, and thunder boomed from outside the “Apprentice”–esque boardroom from which Trump was holding his press conference. Several reporters’ phones erupted with emergency alerts in the midst of Trump’s Q&A session.

“I heard that, I just heard that news,” Trump said when the Suffolk news was brought up. “We’re number two in Suffolk, which is a great poll.” After briefly trashing Jeb Bush on Common Core, immigration, and Iraq, he returned to his effusive praise of Suffolk University’s polling operation. “I saw that, that we’re the top two in New Hampshire. That’s a great poll, by the way. They say that’s the best of all the New Hampshire polls, so I’m greatly honored by the result.”

I asked him about that other part of the poll, that showed his favorability ratings in the toilet. Or at least, I began asking him about it, before he waved me off: “Okay, I know the answer to that before you ask the question.” What he said, however, was not so much an answer as a spiel of various thoughts with poor tense alignment. “We did very well in the Suffolk poll,” he reiterated, “but the second part of that question was, nobody thinks I was running! In fact I filed yesterday. Everyone was saying, ‘He’ll never file, he’ll never file, well, now he filed.’ My numbers are much, much better than people ever thought, the company is a phenomenal company, now they’re saying ‘Wow, it’s a really fantastic company.’ But as you know, they all said, ‘Oh, he’ll never file.’ So a lot of the numbers that you see are because people didn’t think I was running. So now that I’m running, the numbers are very good.”

None of this helped explain how he would win over the many, many Republican voters who are familiar with Donald Trump and have determined that they could never see themselves supporting his bid for political office. Oh well! He had to be whisked away to deliver a brief keynote address to the Maryland Republican Party.