Republican presidential candidates gathered for the Nov. 10, 2015, debate in Milwaukee. (Photo: Jeffrey Phelps, AP)

Corrections and clarifications: An earlier version of this story misstated Carly Fiorina's position on paid maternity leave. She does not believe it should be mandated by the federal government.

The four Republican debates have touched on the biggest issues in the presidential election, from terrorism and national security to immigration and taxes.

Yet, on a number of other critical matters, including plans for replacing Obamacare, equal pay for women and the sensitive issues of racism and criminal justice reform, there’s been little discussion by the top candidates.

In a number of cases, the questions have been limited to second-tier contestants, such as Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, who is no longer in the race, on criminal justice reform. That leaves some open questions for the top candidates, including the current front-runner, Donald Trump.

Women’s issues

In one previous debate, Carly Fiorina, the only woman in the GOP field, was asked about her position on paid maternity leave. She said it should not be mandated by the government. But that was just one question to one candidate on a big issue that’s gotten scant attention. Last year, the United Nations’ International Labour Organization said that, out of the 185 countries and territories with available data, the U.S. is one of just three countries that have no paid benefit law. Since then, Oman has established a law, leaving the U.S. alone with Papua New Guinea. Does the rest of the GOP field agree with Fiorina?

Carly Fiorina takes part in a CNN Republican presidential debate at the Reagan Library in Simi Valley, Calif., on Sept. 16, 2015. (Photo: Mark J. Terrill, AP)

Other issues of interest to women, such as the Paycheck Fairness Act and Lilly Ledbetter Act, have also received little discussion. Sens. Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz and Rand Paul have repeatedly voted against the Paycheck Fairness Act. In an August interview, Trump said he would take a position “in the not too distant future.”

U.S. troop levels in Iraq/Syria

Tuesday night will mark the first debate since the attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, Calif., so candidates have yet to have the opportunity to address how they'd respond on a debate stage. The issue figures to dominate much of the discussion in Las Vegas.

In recent weeks, though, none of the GOP hopefuls have been specific about how their approaches would be different from the president’s, with the exception of Lindsey Graham, the South Carolina senator who's called for 20,000 ground troops split between Iraq and Syria. The field's distinction with Hillary Clinton is even less apparent since she supports a no-fly zone. That, experts say, would have to be enforced with a large number of ground troops. The major candidates aren’t committing to that, saying they’ll rely on military advisers or, in the case of Bush and Rubio, that the bulk of the force should be Arab fighters.

Lindsey Graham speaks to the media after a debate in Boulder, Colo. (Photo: AP)

Black Lives Matter, criminal justice reform and voting rights

Republicans and Democrats agree criminal justice reform is needed. Yet the issue has come up only briefly at Republican debates.

Trump has called the movement “trouble” and has come under criticism for calling the behavior of a Black Lives Matter protester at a rally “disgusting” and saying “maybe he should have been roughed up.”

He’s not alone in making provocative statements about the movement, created in the aftermath of multiple police killings of unarmed African Americans. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has said that many such activists “advocate for the murder of police officers.” Ted Cruz has cited the group as evidence of a new anti-police “culture.”

Yet they haven’t had a full discussion of the issues underpinning the movement, including police brutality and racism. While making suggestions, the candidates have not explicitly linked the group to the killing of multiple law enforcement officers across the country. Do they think they’re responsible? Do they believe there is structural racism in policing or just in society in general? Can Cruz provide specifics of what he’s called the movement’s “rabid anti-police language?”

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie speaks at the Iowa GOP's Growth and Opportunity Party in Des Moines on Oct. 31, 2015. (Photo: Nati Harnik, AP)

Replacement for Obamacare

The candidates agree on one thing: They want to end Obamacare. Their dislike of the policy is dramatic, with Ben Carson even saying it’s the worst thing since slavery.

Ben Carson speaks a debate sponsored by Fox Business Network in Milwaukee on Nov. 10, 2015. (Photo: Scott Olson, Getty Images)

But what would they replace it with? And what percentage increase in the number of uninsured is acceptable? That’s murky. In one debate, Fiorina referred briefly to creating high-risk insurance pools at the state level. Beyond that, there hasn’t been much discussion.

The 2016 Republican field is facing the same dilemma as congressional Republicans, who’ve voted more than 50 times to repeal Obamacare without offering an alternative. House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., said earlier this month that he’ll roll out a plan next year. He hinted that his plan would include tax credits that, like under Obamacare, help people afford insurance. It would also repeal the individual and employer mandates that have been a target of Republican critics. Given this is a top priority for virtually all of the candidates, there’s lots of room for more details. Trump has said simply that he would replace it with “something terrific.”

Follow @HeidiPrzybyla on Twitter.

MORE COVERAGE OF THE TUESDAY DEBATE:

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1YhyrNX