Alexian Brothers Health System and Loyola University Health System have signed a letter of intent to affiliate and expand pediatric services, the Catholic systems announced in a statement today.

Arlington Heights-based Alexian Brothers, which has five hospitals in the northwest suburbs, and Maywood-based Loyola, which has two hospitals in the western suburbs, plan to recruit and share pediatric subspecialists, who can often be hard to find, Patricia Cassidy, Alexian Brothers senior vice president and chief strategy officer, said in the statement.

“This new affiliation will benefit patients by building on and expanding the clinical program strengths of each health system, making them more available to the communities we serve,” Ms. Cassidy said.

“Access to high-quality pediatric clinical programs in a coordinated network of care is a vision both of our organizations share,” said Daniel Post, Loyola senior vice president of clinical programs and chief business development officer. “The Loyola and Alexian Brothers Pediatric Affiliation will provide patients and referring physicians improved access to these high-quality programs in their communities.

The systems said they also plan to work with community-based pediatricians to better manage their patients' health. Under a dramatic transformation due to the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, physicians and hospitals are now being paid based on how well they manage populations of patients, such as receiving bonuses for improving their health while lowering medical costs, and being penalized for providing poor care.

Traditionally, doctors and hospitals were paid for each service they provided, which did little to discourage unnecessary testing and procedures.

The 126-bed Alexian Brothers Women & Children's Hospital opened in 2013. Loyola is an academic medical center that became part of Trinity Health in 2011. Livonia, Mich.-based Trinity is one of the nation's largest Catholic hospital chains with more than 80 hospitals.