Today Deloitte Consulting LLP announces the launch of ConvergeHEALTH by Deloitte, a business unit that supports the data-driven transformation of health care through the application of insights derived from new data, analytics, transformational services and collaborative business models.

The formation of ConvergeHEALTH is one part of a $150-200 million investment Deloitte is making in life sciences and health care analytics, which comes at a critical time as health care and life sciences organizations are facing new challenges driven by changing reimbursement models, technological and scientific innovation and increased regulatory and safety pressures.

ConvergeHEALTH combines Deloitte’s advanced capabilities in health analytics with its market-leading services in consulting. Kennedy named Deloitte a global leader in information management and analytics consulting based on capabilities, and Gartner ranked Deloitte No. 1 globally in consulting based on 2012 revenue.*

“As a result of the shift towards value-based reimbursement and personalized health care, our clients are facing new challenges that fundamentally change the way they will operate,” said Brett Davis, principal, Deloitte Consulting LLP and general manager of ConvergeHEALTH. “To survive and thrive in this new paradigm, new solutions are required that combine strategy and transformational services with data, content, analytics and insights along with new business and operating models. ConvergeHEALTH is committed to bringing these innovative, integrated solutions to our clients through innovative collaboration with leaders like Intermountain Healthcare as they become data-driven organizations.”

“Intermountain Healthcare understands ‘best care’ and how to achieve it on a consistent basis; higher quality means significant elimination of waste and significant reduction in the cost of care delivery,” said Brent James, M.D., chief quality officer, Intermountain Healthcare. “Intermountain had the data. Deloitte had the consulting services and the distribution network to make that better care widely available.”

“Deloitte has long been a leader in helping our clients transform their businesses through novel applications of technology. The investment in ConvergeHEALTH has accelerated our ability to deliver integrated analytics and insights to our clients,” said Andrew Vaz, chief innovation officer for Deloitte Consulting LLP. “As a result, Deloitte is uniquely positioned to help our clients on this transformative journey, and this investment represents our ongoing commitment to their success.”

ConvergeHEALTH will initially provide solutions in three key areas:

Clinical and Operational Excellence: Analytics, services and insights to enable health systems to help optimize business and clinical processes, reduce variation, enhance programs, improve patient safety, productivity and margin to offer higher quality care with lower costs. Value Based Care: Solutions and insights to improve population health management and clinical outcomes, manage risk, reduce unwarranted variation, coordinate care, leverage evidence-based guidelines and support new reimbursement models. Research Excellence: Solutions and insights to improve clinical and translational research capabilities, enable personalized, genomic medicine, support comparative effectiveness analyses leveraging real world evidence and improve safety and disease surveillance programs.

These solutions and new capabilities not only leverage Deloitte’s service capabilities but also combine them with new content, software platforms, analytics tools and collaborations. They also leverage capabilities, solutions and products from consolidating our analytic content and capabilities into ConvergeHEALTH and the formation of Deloitte Health Informatics and the landmark collaboration with Intermountain Healthcare.

“Deloitte’s Life Sciences and Health Care practice brings deep and broad capabilities in health care, life sciences, health plans and government,” said Jason Girzadas, principal, Deloitte Consulting LLP, and leader of Deloitte’s national life sciences and health care consulting practice. “ConvergeHEALTH extends these capabilities by providing market-leading health care solutions through teaming with leading health institutions, providing the leading applied analytics solutions, data, insights and services to solve some of the most important issues facing our clients. We feel that these solutions will help our clients excel at research as well as health system performance and bring to market critical innovations around accountable care.”

ConvergeHEALTH will be showcasing its new solutions at the HIMSS14 conference in Orlando, FL on February 23-26 in Booth 1611.*Source: Gartner, Market Share Analysis: Consulting Services, Worldwide, 2012, Jacqueline Heng, April 23, 2013

About ConvergeHEALTH

ConvergeHEALTH brings powerful, demonstrated analytics platforms and data models from Recombinant by Deloitte, advanced proprietary and open source analytics, content and benchmarks through collaboration with industry leaders and deep experiences from Deloitte’s Life Sciences and Health Care consulting practice to help our clients survive and thrive in the new paradigm of value-based, personalized medicine. For more information, visit www.converge-health.com.

About Intermountain Healthcare

Intermountain Healthcare is a Utah-based nonprofit system of 22 hospitals, 185 clinics, a medical group with some 1,000 employed physicians; a health plans division called SelectHealth, and other health services. Intermountain is widely recognized as a leader in transforming health care through high quality and sustainable costs. For more information about Intermountain, visit www.intermountainhealthcare.org.