The Paine Art Center and Gardens hosted the Festival of Spring May 17th. Guest were encourage to walk the grounds of spring flowers and visit local art and garden vendors. (Photo: Mark Ebert / Oshkosh Northwester)

It has been more than four years since the Paine purchased the Kelly home, or the Meyer home, or the Schreiber home, call it whatever you like. Shortly after purchasing it we were told that the Paine was negotiating with an independent developer to move the house to a new site.

Since then they have stripped the once lovely home of all of the beautiful foliage and landscaping that once surrounded it- They have also neglected the upkeep of the exterior of the house. As bad as the property has now been made to look by the Paine, a bigger concern is the Paine's desire to move or possibly level this grand historic home built in 1913. It has been said that this home is one of the last remaining examples of Georgian Revival architecture in Oshkosh.

I saw a picture of this home taken from the corner (before the Paine was even built) and I would imagine that when William Waters designed it, it was meant to stay at that location forever. lt is a truly historic residence that should be preserved at all costs. Because of its historic importance, the Paine should be prevented from damaging it. If it could be moved safely it would have been moved by now. If the home is damaged beyond repair in an attempt to move it, then it will be gone forever and that will be a shame that those who run the Paine will have to bear. More importantly as Oshkosh's Mayor-Elect Steve Cummings recently said, "We just can't keep taking our heritage to the landfill. Once it is gone, it's gone."

Attempting to move this three-story 5,000 square foot brick structure seerns like an insane process for a parking lot. The Paine is not just paving paradise to put up a parking lot. No, I believe they do not see the value of the historic character and quality of the home and personally value that because if they did, they would have included this home into their $7.5 million dollar rnaster plan.

Why did they not convert the home into an administration building, or a supplemental art gallery, or utilize it for a more intimate venue than the Conservatory or the Carriage House? (Imagine the Paine having a Bed and Breakfast or being able to rent the home for your wedding weekend or anniversary!) Why not remove the home's garage, pave the back yard for handicap parking, and make an opening between the two properties.

Then people with special needs could drive up the Paine's existing driveway and be dropped off at the main entrance to the Paine, and there would be adequate handicap parking behind the home, They could use the home's existing drive to exit the property, It is obvious that the Paine has all along decided (and wanted) this home to be gone because they have 5 acres of land within their walls, that they haven't utilized for handicap parking before. I question the Paine's core values (from their website) because I do not see it applied to this home and property.

I trust that the proper officials from the city of Oshkosh will be monitoring any attempt to move the home very carefully, and are prepared to hold the Paine's management responsible for any damage that might be inflicted on this one-of-a-kind structure. I am sending a copy of this letter to the Wisconsin State Historical Society, and asking that it do the same.

Catherine Reed,

Oshkosh

Read or Share this story: http://oshko.sh/1GOYNQM