Franchise businesses are optimistic about growing in 2015, but are concerned that increased federal regulations and a higher minimum wage could pressure that growth.

The International Franchise Association expects the franchise industry to add 247,000 jobs in 2015, an increase of 2.9 percent, it said Wednesday. In 2014, the industry added 235,000 jobs, an increase of 2.8 percent, it said. The association also anticipates 1.6 percent growth in the number of franchise establishments, in line with the growth it saw in 2014.

Job growth in the franchise sector has outpaced such growth in the overall economy in the last four years, according to the report, which was prepared for the association by IHS Economics.

Quick-service restaurants, the largest sector in franchising, are likely to add the highest percentage of new workers this year, followed by retailers, the association said. Quick-service restaurants account for 20 percent of all franchise establishments and 38 percent of employment, according to the association.

However, the association was quick to note that the growth in franchised businesses may be hampered by a variety of issues. Its main concern is a group of complaints issued last month by the National Labor Relations Board against McDonald's and some of its franchisees, which referred to the restaurant company and the franchisees as joint employers. Franchisers such as McDonald's have long maintained that they set certain standards but allow franchisees to make decisions on issues such as scheduling, hiring and wages.

"As soon as that happened, it was an issue which reverberated throughout the franchise industry," said Matthew Patinkin, a Chicago-based franchisee with about 67 Auntie Anne's pretzel shops in Illinois and other states. Patinkin also is an incoming board member of the association.

Patinkin, who said he has worked as a franchisee for more than 20 years, said he has never had to work with a franchiser on a joint-employer basis.

"It creates a lot of uncertainty and fear as to what that will do to the franchise business model," said Patinkin, who runs shops in O'Hare International Airport and several Chicago-area shopping malls. He said he has not discussed the NLRB issue with Auntie Anne's corporate offices.

The International Franchise Association said 97 percent of respondents in its Franchise Business Leader Survey said they believe a joint-employer ruling, were it to take effect, would have a negative impact on their business, with 82 percent calling the potential impact "significant."

Other concerns include minimum wage increases, which have begun to kick in across various states and cities, as well as the increased costs companies expect to face as they get ready to comply with the federal Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

Patinkin said he has not decided yet whether he will have to reduce employees' hours or make other changes due to the increase in Chicago's minimum wage, which begins in July with an increase to $10, from $8.25.

As his business faces cost increases, including wage increases, "we may have to increase our prices, we may have to adjust our schedules, but we'll have to wait and see how that impacts us," Patinkin said. His company did raise some prices in a "very modest" way in 2014.

Despite the pressures, Patinkin said he is "very optimistic" about the franchise industry, especially if the economy improves.

"If people are out shopping, that's good for us. When the economy does better, when consumer confidence is up, that's obviously good for us. So if the economy is improving, and hopefully it is, that's something to be optimistic about."

jwohl@tribpub.com

Twitter @jessicawohl