"It's about prolonging the indulgence'

Going out to enjoy a British high tea luncheon in the region is a Dec. 26 tradition for Dot Colagiovanni and her female relatives.

Saturday, the five women were at Wildflowers Tea Room in Broomfield, catching up on the family news of the past year. Colagiovanni's mother, her daughter, and her sister-in-law and her sister-in-law's daughter all were enjoying the scones with jam and clotted cream, cucumber sandwiches and other finger foods prepared by British owner Maureen Odde, her daughter Tracy and the staff at Wildflowers.

The restaurant and corresponding Hilltop Inn near Rocky Mountain Airport is owned by Odde and her husband John Odde.

Colagiovanni said she knew that Dec. 26 is Boxing Day in the United Kingdom and Canada, but that her focus is more on finding a special high tea for her family to enjoy.

But such lunch events certainly fit with the theme of the day, which is to spend time with family and give alms to the poor at a church or donate to a favorite charity, said Honey Ahijevych, the British owner of Boulder's Seize the Day event planning company.

"Spending (Boxing Day) with your family is very British," Ahijevych said. "It's an extension of Christmas, where everybody has time off from work."

Advertisement

In medieval times, Boxing Day was the day that servants received a boxed gift and a day off from their employers, Ahijevych said. Over the years, that has morphed into a charitable giving day, she said, noting that she and her sister will donate to the Stroke Association in the United Kingdom, in honor of their parents, both who suffered strokes.

"In America, Dec. 26 is more business as usual. But there, it's like an extension of Christmas, where you have dinner together and family time," she said.

At Wildflowers Tea Room, numerous other grandmothers, mothers and granddaughters celebrated high tea Saturday.

JoAnn Janssen brought her daughter, Linda Dean, granddaughter Natalie Dean, and grandson's girlfriend Madeleine Johnson for tea so the four could catch up as well as reminisce about times they all have spent in London. Janssen and her daughter live in Arvada. The two younger women were visiting from out of town.

"It's a nice, ladylike thing to do," said Natalie Dean.

Janssen is a neighbor of Sue Wood, a British woman who works for the Oddes.

Wood said Boxing Day is "a delightful experience" but noted that Anglophiles in Boulder and Broomfield counties may also have fun celebrating Burns night (in honor of poet Robert Burns) April Fool's day, and the queen's birthday.

Separately, Ahijevych's British friend James Done in Boulder is nostalgic about Boxing Day, explaining its nature to friends when they ask him what the holiday means. To him, the biggest part of the holiday used to be getting two days off of work when he lived in the U.K.

In fact, Done said he felt a little short-changed when he first started working for the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder and had to ask for a vacation day to get Boxing Day off. He has now lived in the United States for 12 years.

"It's about prolonging the indulgence," Done said of Boxing Day. "Christmas is always the biggest holiday in the U.K., where, here, I get two days off from my employer at Thanksgiving."

Beth Potter: 303-473-1422, potterb@coloradohometownweekly.com