Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share A Mattress Firm employee in Georgia accidentally sent a company email to the wrong person. That email then sparked a chain of events that helped the recipient's fiancé find the treatment he needed for his pancreatic cancer. VPC

It's a split second decision you can't undo, that moment after you hit send on an email, to the wrong person.

Marc Gelinas (Photo: WXIA)

It's a split second decision you can't undo, that moment after you hit send on an email, to the wrong person.

Crystal Lively didn't realize her mistake. Or that it was about to help someone in big trouble.

"We got engaged on a Saturday and on Wednesday he was diagnosed."

That mistake email popped into Donna Frederick's inbox two days after her fiance Marc Gelinas had been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. She remembers, "He was given this diagnosis at the end of the day on Wednesday. The next day is Thanksgiving. There's not a doctor in the office."

That weekend is when Lively, an area manager with Mattress Firm, sent the email 'Purple Perspectives,' to her fellow managers. It was an update on the latest research from Mattress Firm's big cause, pancreatic cancer. Purple dots every store, on trees and signs that show its commitment, along with the $2 million dollars the company has given to research.

Sitting in their condo, Marc recalls, "It was completely coincidence. She was accidentally added to an email thread in a corporate environment."

Donna, who works for a venue where Mattress Firm was holding its holiday party, called Crystal during Black Friday weekend after she received the email. Lively says she was shocked to discover her mistake.

"Just the varied emotions because how busy we were in the store," she said. "First thinking I'm going to be in trouble because I sent the email to the wrong person but then thinking 'This is okay, we can help them!' It worked out to be a small miracle."

And suddenly the sales of mattresses became secondary to connecting Marc and Donna with experts and help, and hope. Phone calls flew around the country that day. Lively says, "They were so scared. They were left with no information other than the diagnosis."

Mattress Firm foundation members got Marc and Donna in touch with the team at Emory that they recommended.

Donna and Marc walked into Emory and the journey began. Chemo shrank the tumor. Surgery removed it.

"They got all of it," Marc says.

Mark was cancer free for their August 15th wedding this summer. "It was like the end of what I went through. I needed that date. to be steadfast."

It was a mistake that became a happy accident. Donna says it was a message from God in her inbox. "I remember telling my mom I waited 38 years for this man and i'm not going out like this so we both just said what do we have to do."

For more stories like this, visit Humankind on Facebook.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS Puppy born without back paws gets leg up on life | 1:41 Being born without back paws hasn't stopped this playful pup. Now at Best Friends Animal Sanctuary, Justin will get all the help to give him a leg up in life. Video courtesy Jonathan Sizemore with Best Friends Animal Society. VPC 1 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS Garbage man surprises 3-year-old fan for birthday | 1:21 Three-year-old Brooklyn Andracke has been waving to her neighborhood's garbage man every Thursday morning for the past year. They finally met on Brooklyn's 3rd birthday and what he did for her will melt your heart. VPC 2 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS These lawn guys only cut lawns for those who can't | 1:19 This lawn care company is doing so much more than just mowing lawns and trimming hedges. They offer their services for free to those who can't care for their lawns themselves: the elderly, disabled, and single moms. VPC 3 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS Cancer survivor spreads hope with roses | 0:55 Elana Wight is helping cancer patients keep a positive outlook by spreading hope with roses. VPC 4 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS One mom's lunch notes to daughter inspire many | 1:46 Amelie Clarke knows there is something special waiting for her in her lunchbox every day when she goes to the lunch room. WTSP 5 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS Basketball cop known for acts of kindness ups the ante | 1:11 Officer White is known for his kindness, but he has outdone himself with his latest surprise for the kids who play basketball in this Florida neighborhood. VPC 6 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS Pups on a plane: Man flies to save furry friends | 1:15 These dogs and cats were likely going to be euthanized, until Dog Is My Copilot came to their rescue. Armed with two small planes, Peter and Judy are flying shelter animals to forever homes hundreds of miles away. VPC 7 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS Passengers grant last wish to ailing flight attendant | 1:34 Passengers on a Southwest Airlines flight gave a dying woman a chance to say goodbye in the most beautiful way. VPC 8 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS Officer is superhero at boy's funeral | 1:03 Fort Worth, Texas police officer Damon Cole wasn't able to save five-year-old Joshua Garcia from drowning, but he did honor the child's memory at a very special funeral service. VPC 9 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS Girl gives away her Make-A-Wish to kids who need shoes | 1:30 A young girl's life changed forever when she was diagnosed with an enlarged heart and needed a transplant to survive. She got her new heart and, with a mere wish, she has now touched the hearts of an entire town in Haiti. USA TODAY 10 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS Farmer gives away harvest to feed hungry in his town | 1:10 Farmer Jonathan Lawler never expected to see hunger in his very own farming community. When he discovered how many food insecure people were living around him, Jonathan made a big change on his farm. Video shot by Mykal McEldowney from Indystar.com VPC 11 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS Boy gets surprise after no one came for his birthday | 1:49 A group of Arkansas State Troopers went above and beyond for a 10-year-old boy after no one showed up for his birthday party. KTHV 12 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS Grandpa's wagons are comforting kids who need it most | 1:30 The red wagons seen scooting around Children's Healthcare of Atlanta are made by a special grandfather who invented a bracket that would allow them to carry a child's IV pole. The meaning behind the invention goes deeper than you'd think. VPC 13 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS Students surprise dining-hall employee with dream trip | 1:31 A dining hall employee at Arizona State University was surprised by 150 students with an oversize check for nearly $2,500, printed on an image of the blues, pinks and greens of the Aurora Borealis. USA TODAY 14 of 15 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share HUMANKIND: ACTS OF KINDNESS Retiree's last bus ride home leads to sweet surprise | 1:32 Angelo Fracassa, 86, is retiring after working for 60 years at the IRS and riding the bus to work everyday. His family surprised him by riding the bus with him to a surprise retirement party. VPC 15 of 15 Last VideoNext Video Puppy born without back paws gets leg up on life

Garbage man surprises 3-year-old fan for birthday

These lawn guys only cut lawns for those who can't

Cancer survivor spreads hope with roses

One mom's lunch notes to daughter inspire many

Basketball cop known for acts of kindness ups the ante

Pups on a plane: Man flies to save furry friends

Passengers grant last wish to ailing flight attendant

Officer is superhero at boy's funeral

Girl gives away her Make-A-Wish to kids who need shoes

Farmer gives away harvest to feed hungry in his town

Boy gets surprise after no one came for his birthday

Grandpa's wagons are comforting kids who need it most

Students surprise dining-hall employee with dream trip

Retiree's last bus ride home leads to sweet surprise

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1Or5AHC