Qatar's continued ties with some of the most powerful Islamist groups in the Middle East could cause serious difficulties for the Obama administration's international coalition to fight the Islamic State (ISIS), U.S. and Arab officials believe.The wealthy nation has links with Nusra Front, which is the main al Qaida affiliate in Syria, reports The Wall Street Journal , in addition to Hamas and the Taliban. Diplomats from Washington's closest Arab allies say Qatar is publicly supporting U.S. policies while still aiding its enemies.Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Jordan have all been pushing Washington to reprimand Qatar over the relationships, but the country is considered a vital part of anti-ISIS efforts. Its Al Udeid Air Base is being used to launch airstrikes on ISIS targets in Syria and Iraq, and the country is one of five that are formally taking part in the coalition against the militants.In addition, Qatar's air force has provided both surveillance and logistical support for the attacks, reports The Wall Street Journal.But at the same time, the U.S. Treasury alleges Qatar has been sending money to Islamist terrorists, including ISIS. For example, officials said that one wealthy Qatari last year sent $2 million to a senior ISIS commander tasked with recruiting foreigners to fight with the militants.The allies are also warning that the coalition against ISIS is at risk of splitting apart unless members can commit equally to combating the organization. Middle Eastern countries are deeply split over the role of Islam in the region, with Qatar and Turkey supporting Islamist movements while traditional Arab monarchies in Riyadh, Abu Dhabi, and Amman continue.Unless financial and diplomatic ties to terror groups are cut, the allies say, the coalition to defeat ISIS will fail. Further, they pointed out, Qatar has used its planes for surveillance, but has not yet launched airstrikes at the extremists.Some of the pressure from Middle East allies and the United States is forcing Qatar to make some tough decisions on its stance. For example, in September, Qatar asked members of the Muslim Brotherhood to leave its territory.Qatari officials refused comment on the allegations, but ruler Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, and the country's foreign minister deny ties to ISIS or other terror groups."Qatar can only follow a foreign policy that is independent of outside influence and this is something we are proud of," Qatari Foreign Minister Khalid bin Mohammad Al Attiya said during a Princeton University speech last month. "Often times, heavy criticism is the price that must be paid for taking a firm position on your beliefs."The Obama administration has used Qatar as a diplomatic partner since 2010, when the Arab Spring revolutions started. The White House uses the country to communicate with militant groups and credits the ally with securing the release of Army officer Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl in May.Secretary of State John Kerry also used Attiya to negotiate a cease-fire agreement with Hamas in hopes of ending the Israeli-Palestinian war.Kerry and other State Department officials, though, say Qatar and Turkey are the only Middle East nations with enough leverage to pressure Hamas."American diplomacy has seen utility in having an ally who brokers with the bad guys when necessary," said Juan Zarate, a senior White House and Treasury official from former President George W. Bush's administration. "This is one of the assets the Qataris play."