To the Editor:

Regarding the recent article "Verizon calls South Jersey outdated for wanting continued copper landline (phone) service" in the Times:

Everyone seems to be surprised at Verizon's attitude when it comes to copper facilities. Why? Verizon has always had this attitude, spawned by its one-time parent company, AT&T. They have always done what they wanted without concern for the public.

Verizon CEO Lowell McAdam was quoted as saying in 2012 that the company intends to phase out copper wire lines, and replace them with wireless service in some rural areas.

If you want to connect your alarms to wireless, you can't. If you want to test your pacemaker on wireless, you can't – and, in that case, you may have to go to the doctor's office and have it done at added cost.

Now that Verizon in New Jersey has a state Board of Public Utilities decision that effectively deregulates the copper-wire landlines, they're getting downright nasty in their statements. Has anyone asked them about all that wire hanging down from their poles? I, for one, don't want to be touching them when it's raining, nor anywhere near them when there is lightning in the area.

The current condition of many of the copper facilities is due to lack of maintenance. Verizon is in control of that maintenance, and the company doesn't address that fact.

Who thinks wireless service is so great? If you don't get cut off, you will lose some of the conversation at one time or another.

There seems to be a much larger story behind all of this. I only wish a good investigative reporter would look into it. We can't expect our 30-second-blip TV news to do it.

Bob Ainsworth

Deptford Township

GOP gives up too easily in Congress

To the Editor:

When discussing politics with our friends and families, we often hear the word "bipartisanship."

Many people who follow politics wish that Democrats and Republicans would work together, and say that if Congress could agree on more issues, the American people would be better off. What many fail to realize is that Congress works together more than they think.

Look at what Congress has accomplished since the Republicans took control of the Senate after the 2014 elections:

- It failed to restrict funding for President Barack Obama's executive order regarding limiting deportation of immigrants, which I consider to be unconstitutional.

- It continued to fund the Affordable Care Act.

- It confirmed Obama nominee Loretta Lynch as attorney general.

- It gave away its authority to change the deal regarding Iran and nuclear weapons.

Whether or not you agree with these policies is not the point. The point is that even though the Republicans hold majorities in both chambers of Congress, each of these decisions are exactly what the Democrats would have done had they been in control.

On Aug. 4, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., said that he will avoid any chance of a government shutdown over GOP policy disagreements. The majority leader's willingness to surrender the power of the purse leads me to assume that still more liberal policies will be funded.

The issue with our political class is not an unwillingness to compromise. The issue is that the policies on which they do compromise do nothing to help the American people.

In the 2016 election, I am looking for a candidate who stands for principles, and who can articulate those principles to the American voter. I want our next president to stand for free-market capitalism, personal property rights, the Constitution, and law and order. These principles know no race, gender or sexual orientation. When they are applied, everybody flourishes.

William McCauley

Glassboro

PATCO's 'new' train cars: Second-hand rows

To the Editor:

The good news is that officials at the Delaware River Port Authority and its PATCO Hi-Speed Line think they've found the culprits causing multiple operational failures - including sudden stops - on its oldest PATCO rail cars: brake pads and traction motors.

The bad news is that all of the cars are old.

Rather than spend a few million dollars more for a brand new fleet, like their Philadelphia transit agency counterpart SEPTA did, the DRPA Board of Commissioners voted to spend $191 million to refurbish the old cars with new seats and Wi-Fi access, and to polish the steel exteriors.

Apparently, that money-saving decision meant that our bridge toll money could be spent for other "essential transportation" issues, like dredging the Cooper River for regatta races and beautifying Gateway Park in Camden.

Carol Rhodes

Barnsboro

Send a letter to the editor of South Jersey Times at sjletters@njadvancemedia.com