Editor’s Note: The following is a guest blog authored by Tina Hoff, Senior Vice President, Director of the Health Communication and Media Partnerships Program, Jennifer Kates, Ph.D., Vice President and Director of Global Health & HIV Policy, and Talea Miller, Program Officer, Health Communication and Media Partnerships Program from the Kaiser Family Foundation .

An estimated one in four people with HIV in care in the U.S. are currently uninsured and many more are underinsured.

People with HIV could be among those who make the greatest gains in coverage from Obamacare, officially known as the Affordable Care Act, but finding insurance resources tailored to the needs of people living with HIV can be challenging.

In response to this need, the Kaiser Family Foundation with funding from Gilead Sciences has produced “Obamacare & You,” a new Greater Than AIDS consumer web portal to help PLWHA learn about new coverage options and how the law could affect their care and treatment. Greater Than AIDS is a leading national public information initiative developed by the Kaiser Family Foundation together with the Black AIDS Institute and supported by a broad cross section of public and private sector partners to increase knowledge, reduce stigma and promote actions to stem the spread of HIV in the U.S.

Presented by Greater Than AIDS, “Obamacare and You” is a one-of-a-kind tool that includes specially-tailored resources geared toward people living with HIV, including:

The Obamacare & You consumer web portal is part of the Foundation’s ongoing effort to help consumers understand the ACA and their choices under the law. The content is the sole product and responsibility of the Kaiser Family Foundation. Gilead Sciences, Inc. provided funding for its development. More of the Foundation’s consumer resources on the ACA can be found on www.kff.org/aca-consumer- resources .

The Foundation also produces fact sheets and analyses on the topic of HIV/AIDS, including materials on how the ACA affects people living with HIV. This information is available at www.kff.org/hivaids .

Greater Than AIDS appreciates the efforts by so many in the HIV/AIDS community to promote this portal to those who can benefit most. We also invite any feedback on the site from AIDS.gov readers. Please comment below.