“Weird Al” Yankovic brought his special brand of unhipness to the BMO Harris Pavilion. “Let’s get lame!” he shouted. Credit: Katie Klann

"Weird Al" Yankovic

The last person you'd expect to be fashionably late, "Weird Al" Yankovic, finally emerged at 10 p.m. Saturday at the BMO Harris Pavilion with, as fate would have it, "Tacky." He then wasted no time before introducing his classic, "Drum Solo." A pity to waste it so early in the night.

"Let's get lame!" Yankovic shouted at the end of "Lame Claim to Fame." No one except maybe Bono embraces extreme unhipness as completely as Yankovic. Still, amid the pre-expired jargon exercises like "First World Problems" there's the occasional timeless anthem like "Sports Song." His songs may be more camp than comedy, but his accompanying videos provided legitimate laughter.

Yankovic leaned heavily on material from last year's Grammy-winning "Mandatory Fun" album with occasional nostalgia trips like "Dare to Be Stupid," "Fat" and "Smells Like Nirvana." Ultimately, though, the "Weird Al" genre ties all its antecedents together in parody.

— Cal Roach,

Special to the Journal Sentinel

Big Data

Attendees exchanged puzzled looks Saturday at Summerfest's U.S. Cellular Connection Stage when Big Data emerged as a five-piece rock band. One fan turned to me and asked, "Are there two Big Datas?" The expected electronic project claims a single member: DJ/producer Alan Wilkis, and has thus far gained prominence through his lone hit, "Dangerous," and a handful of remixes.

Perhaps no one recognized lead singer Lizy Ryan, but she was the main source of energy onstage. The music was far from club-ready. It took a half-hour before the group seemed comfortable, and there still hadn't been a dance-worthy banger, particularly with between-song, prerecorded robot banter killing the momentum every four minutes.

As fans shuffled their feet waiting for the payoff, Big Data continued to rock slowly to industrial-lite beats, minus any discernible guitar. "Sick for Me" finally picked up the tempo, but by then it was too late.

— Cal Roach

Sammy Hagar and The Circle

When Sammy Hagar pulled together his current supergroup, The Circle, he recruited his own longtime guitarist Vic Johnson, original Van Halen bassist Michael Anthony and drummer Jason Bonham, son of Led Zeppelin's John Bonham. Saturday night at the Miller Lite Oasis, they took no time taking their own history full circle for a big rowdy and ready-to-rock 'n' roll crowd. With flashes of fireworks from surrounding communities filling the hazy horizon, Hagar roared into his 1981 hit, "There's Only One Way to Rock" as fans raised their fingers and beers to the sky. Next, Johnson's grinding guitar led the way back to the 1972 Montrose (Hagar's first group) track "Bad Motor Scooter" and Bonham pounded into Zeppelin's "Good Times Bad Times," as Hagar shimmied across the stage and bellowed his best Robert Plant scream. When the first thundering notes of Van Halen's "Poundcake" emerged, the crowd erupted, and it was clear that this supergroup was the ultimate party band.

— Erik Ernst,

Special to the Journal Sentinel

Matt Nathanson

Matt Nathanson has a reputation for humorous banter, so it was bothersome that his early jokes, delivered during his set at the Briggs & Stratton Big Backyard on Saturday night, landed with noticeable thuds. He deployed the word wacky, for crying out loud.

Then again, the San Franciscan lived up to his other reputation — for friendly pop-rock tunes — from the early notes of the first song he played, although that song and its successors didn't place him among pop-rock legends like Marshall Crenshaw or Tommy Keene.

He and his three-piece backing band were closer to Gin Blossoms or Del Amitri: consistently sugary, persistently melodic, romantic even when trying to be sexual and able to stomp for the sake of variety. Plus, Nathanson's jokes improved later in the show.

— Jon M. Gilbertson,

Special to the Journal Sentinel

Jane's Addiction

Perry Farrell is the founder and producer of Lollapalooza, another big music festival that has made its annual home in Chicago. But the Jane's Addiction frontman had no problem making himself at home a bit farther north on Lake Michigan's shoreline for one Saturday night at Summerfest's Harley-Davidson Roadhouse.

Sporting a black and white jacket and a dark fedora, Farrell spun and contorted his still-sinewy body across the fog-filled stage as he twirled and contorted the lyrics of "Mountain Song," a track from the group's 1988 debut studio album, "Nothing's Shocking," over the sustained wail of the shirtless Dave Navarro's electric guitar. That early song, paired with the driving rock of 2003's "Just Because" set the stage for a set that explored the quartet's now 30-year career and celebrated the funky early grunge of tracks like "Had a Dad" and the ethereal psychedelia of "Ted, Just Admit It."

— Erik Ernst,

Special to the Journal Sentinel

Failure

After a couple decades between albums, Failure didn't resume doing exactly what it had been doing when it downed tools. Playing the Harley-Davidson Roadhouse Saturday evening, the L.A. trio nonetheless ignited the supposedly dead embers of grunge.

The controlled conflagration thus burned with familiarity: the bass thrumming like a pulse in the gut or lower, the guitar riffs crunching like teeth suddenly gritted, and drums snapping as if leaving marks on the skin of a penitent.

As before, too, Failure added "Abbey Road" textures to its music, deepening it beyond the solipsistic despair that grunge used to connote. Reunited, the band wasn't really taking care of unfinished business; it was returning to welcome business as usual.

— Jon M. Gilbertson,

Special to the Journal Sentinel

Foghat

Every year Summerfest has one band in one slot that inspires the most snickers, and this year, the (dis)honor goes to Foghat, which played the BMO Harris Pavilion at 5 p.m. Saturday. The English-born, Southern-rock inspired band is best known for its biggest hit, "Slow Ride," from 40 years ago, and has only one original member, drummer Roger Earl, who's still in the group. (Two have since passed away.)

But the joke's on the critics because Foghat filled the 5,000-seat pavilion to near capacity. It helped that the band didn't play "Slow Ride" until the end. But Charlie Huhn and Bryan Bassett's swampy guitar licks were a fair time-filler.

Like Motion City Soundtrack at the pavilion June 27, this was a rare Summerfest show where the pavilion was nearly full. Since its inception in 2012, Summerfest has allowed people to reserve pavilion seats free in advance through Ticketmaster or on a first-come, first-serve basis the day of the show. The frequent downside is that people don't show up, resulting in bands playing a largely empty space and forcing fans who didn't get a reserved seat (or didn't know about it) to watch the show from behind the bleachers, where the sound and view of the stage is subpar.

Summerfest officials, heed the immortal words of "Slow Ride" and "take it easy" with the reserved seat system, so bands and fans can enjoy the $14 million pavilion to its full potential.

— Piet Levy,

plevy@journalsentinel.com