Buy Photo Bryanna Mesimer, 15, places a flower in classmate Aubrey Bowie’s hair. Mesimer profited from her floral arrangement business Jolie Fleur Amour. (Photo: Francesca Cocchi/Staff Photo )Buy Photo

When the high schoolers in Chris Aviles’ sophomore English class weren’t studying American literature, they might have been creating graffiti art or launching flames in the air.

Aubrey Bowie, 16, taught herself to tattoo on synthetic skin with tools she purchased from Amazon; Reese Hardy, 16, worked with a cobbler in Manahawkin to customize his Nike soccer cleats; Brenna Lutz, 16, fed sea turtles at the Wetland Institute in Stone Harbor.

Megan Jelinski, Sarah Thompson and Taylor Marcotte, all 16, volunteered for 10 days in Costa Rica over the winter break. Brienna Cooney and Erika Brechka, both 15, designed and hand-stitched a pink-and-black jazz dance costume without prior sewing experience.

Aviles, 30, told his 72 students in October to explore a free-choice project, requiring only that they share their experiences with the class in an online journal and discuss what they learned at the end of the year.

Aviles repeated the words “autonomy, mastery and purpose” for seventh months, encouraging students to set high goals and make their “Be About It” projects memorable.

“They all struggled at some point,” Aviles said. “That was part of the process; I just tell them to figure it out.”

Bryanna Mesimer, 15, did just that by launching her own floral arrangement business and making a profit. Mesimer uses a website she created as well as Facebook, Tumblr, Twitter and Etsy to promote Jolie Fleur Amour.

The exercise’s name comes from a saying Aviles used between friends: “Don’t talk about it, be about it.”

The students showcased a total of 58 projects on stage in the auditorium June 3 in front of about 250 guests from the school and community. On Twitter, #BeAboutIt trended during the day of demonstrations and presentations, which the students modeled after Ted Talks, according to Aviles.

John Michael Purdon, 16, demonstrated his homemade flame thrower for students outside the building on June 5. The gadget, which has a 330-volt capacitor, insulated wires, lighter fluid and a disposable camera’s circuit board attached to a glove, launches flames vertically when Purdon inserts the battery.

“Every little kid wants to be a superhero, so why not take that a little further,” said Purdon, who spent months modifying his design to make it work safely.

Alyx Wianecki, 16, sent 28 boxes of shampoo, conditioner, snacks and games to troops in Afghanistan, where her dad was based with the Department of Defense.

Dave Wianecki, who currently is on leave and joined his daughter on stage during her presentation, said he saw the people who received the packages — some who didn’t usually receive any from family of their own.

The combination of Aviles’ creativity and Principal Steve Nichol’s support was key to the project’s success the last two years, according to Superintendent Karen Wood.

Aviles, Nichol and Wood discussed expanding the project in the future. It places students in the community, fosters engagement and treats them like young adults, Wood said.

Alyssa Lagstrom, 16, “Be About It” was a project in which she said she could take pride. After creating original patterns and designs, Lagstrom hand-stitched stuffed animals and gave them to friends.

“I got what I wanted,” she said. “They all smiled.”

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1qaPfr0