If you look out your window and don’t see a clinic or other health care facility under construction, don’t worry — one might be going up near you soon.

That’s an exaggeration, of course, but not a huge one. Health-care-related construction is at a seven-year high in the Twin Cities, with vacancy rates in existing facilities under 10 percent and numerous “on-campus” (in-patient) and “off-campus” (out-patient) projects underway.

Consider this snapshot of projects in progress in the health care sector:

The 330,000-square-foot University of Minnesota Ambulatory Care Center in Minneapolis.

The 120,000-square-foot expansion at Fairview Ridges Hospital in Burnsville.

The 57,479-square-foot expansion at Fairview Southdale Hospital in Edina.

A planned 57,000-square-foot addition to the Southdale Medical Center in Edina.

The 63,000-square-foot North Memorial Health Care building in Minnetonka.

A planned 128,000-square-foot, four-story HealthPartners on Phalen Boulevard in St. Paul.

According to a Cushman & Wakefield/NorthMarq Compass report released over the summer, more than 900,000 square feet of health care-related projects are already under construction and another 413,000 square feet of projects are in the planning stages. Vacancies in the medical office sector are at 9.7 percent — about half the 17.4 percent vacancy for general office space.

At the time of the report, 13 medical office buildings totaling just under a million square feet were under construction in the metro area.

“Is it a boom? I’m not so sure I would call it that,” said Camille Helou, vice president and director of Kraus-Anderson’s Healthcare Group. “It’s a shift — from an inpatient environment to more of an outpatient environment. So, more money is being spent in specialty and primary care clinics and ambulatory care centers than on hospitals.”

Indeed, projects such as clinics, ambulatory care centers and other sources for routine care are being built at a swifter rate than traditional hospitals and other in-patient care centers. Eagan-based MSP Commercial, for example, is either developing or redeveloping clinics for Allina in Champlin and Oakdale, and for Children’s Hospital in Woodbury. Meanwhile, ambulatory care centers are going up in Coon Rapids, Maple Grove and the East Bank of the University of Minnesota.

Credit Obamacare

What’s behind the activity? One likely reason is the implementation of the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which has provided access to health care insurance for about 180,000 Minnesotans.

The Affordable Care Act, commonly called Obamacare, and similar state-level programs are driving huge numbers of new patients into the health care system, forcing providers to restructure their delivery models — in short, to go where the people are.

According to Helou, while some outpatient efficiencies were realized by providers before the ACA, a current issue that’s driving development activity is how to comply with federal and state regulations around the act.

“We all knew that primary care and specialty care were where the focus should be prior to the ACA,” Helou said, “but I don’t think many health care providers spent a lot of time and energy to go that way before the ACA was implemented.”

Tom Stella, senior director of Brokerage Services for Bloomington-based Cushman & Wakefield/NorthMarq, contributed to the recent Compass report and agreed that the ACA was a significant spark in the current wave of projects.

“ACA spurred it,” Stella said. “You’ve simply got more patients that you’re going to be seeing because of it. They have to figure out how to attract and serve that volume.”

But Obamacare isn’t the only factor in play. Stella said his company foresaw the activity at least in part because a number of projects were being discussed — but not started — over the past several years while hospital systems were dealing with the recession and converting their medical records to electronic formats.

“Those things put a huge capital drain on all systems — development and new deals went by the wayside for a while,” he said. “Now that those constraints are gone, they’re trying to figure out how to best compete in this environment. They want to get out into communities and away from campuses.”

Seeking efficiency

Along with the natural consequences of pent-up demand, there’s the growing prevalence of health care systems that are looking at their service areas as retail markets. With more health care options, patients are doing more shopping around, according to Alex Young, vice president of development at Eagan-based MSP Commercial.

“All the systems want patients to have more choices about where they go, who they’re insured by, who they’re treated by,” he said. “That’s been driving a lot of the construction.”

Even so, the activity in health care construction is still subject to cyclical forces and will likely level off soon, according to Stella. In the meantime, there are still enough projects in the discussion and planning stages to hold the interest of developers and construction professionals. Helou pointed to the planned consolidation of clinics owned by Hennepin County Medical Center, a project for which the selection process started recently.

“Like all development, this market will become saturated, and then it will slow down,” said Stella. “But this will continue for a little while.”