Lana Del Rey was originally asked to play her song “Young and Beautiful” during Kanye West’s surprise engagement to Kim Kardashian.

Unfortunately for the rapper, she declined to perform the tune.

Although everyone knew West would propose to Kardashian at one point or another, he finally popped the question on October 21. The rapper still played the song in question, though he was ultimately forced to use a 50-piece orchestra in place of Lana Del Rey.

According to the folks at Radar Online, no reason was given for the singer’s refusal. Although West tried his best to get her to help out with his proposal, she simply refused to comply with his wishes.

“Lana politely declined, and didn’t give any reason for not being able to perform. It was a very firm no from Lana and her camp. Kanye did try to push it, but didn’t get anywhere. Kanye decided to hire an orchestra to perform the song for Kim, and he was much happier with how it turned out,” the anonymous insider dished.

Lana Del Rey has yet to comment on the situation as of this writing. Considering it’s been almost two weeks since the proposal, chances are the singer might keep her lips locked on this particular matter.

However, you probably shouldn’t spend too much time worrying about West’s feelings on the matter. After all, Kim Kardashian said yes to his marriage proposal. Despite Lana Del Rey’s refusal to perform, everything turned out a-okay.

According to The Huffington Post, West admitted that he was a little nervous about what Kim might say when he popped the question. Although she’d already given birth to his child, West wasn’t sure if she wanted to walk down the aisle with him.

He reportedly told Ryan Seacrest:

“I was nervous. I was talking to her cousin. I was like, ‘I don’t know, what do you think she’s going to say?’ I’m not arrogant about love and feelings at all. I’m confident in the work I put so much work into, but this is someone else’s feelings. You never know what someone else may feel at the time. I just knew I wanted her to be my girl for a long time.”

It would appear West’s ability to get what he wants is starting to weaken. Not only did Lana Del Rey turn down a chance to play at his surprise proposal, Vogue magazine also refused to put pictures of North West on the cover. Don’t be too surprised if you catch him performing the Rolling Stones’ “You Can’t Always Get What You Want” in the near future.

[Image via Featureflash / Shutterstock.com]