Later this year, Longmont will install a new irrigation pump system and replace the pumphouse building at the city's Garden Acres Community Park.

Garden Acres Community Park Renewal Information is available online by going to city government's home page, longmontcolorado.gov, and searching "Garden Acres Community Park Renewal." Comments, questions and suggestions can be emailed to project manager Kathy Kron, at kathy.kron@longmontcolorado.gov, or calling her at 303-774-4528.

That's to be the first phase in a multi-year $3 million project to upgrade and improve the 26-year-old park at 2028 Spencer St.

People living in Garden Acres' northside Longmont neighborhood and visitors to the park got a preview of that project during an open house at its central pavilion this past Tuesday night..

Last fall, the city removed the structural remains of aging playground equipment due to vandalism and potential safety hazards. Awnings were left above the now-unequipped playground areas, though, for children to continue to be able to play in the sand.

An irrigation pond on the park's east side has been drained for maintenance dredging, work that city officials said should improve water quality and restore the pond's capacity in preparation for the improvements that'll be made to the park's irrigation system.

Preparation is nearing completion of an overall "park renewal plan" — an update of a master plan originally completed in 1986, prior to Garden Acres' actual opening.

City Natural Resources Division project manager Kathy Kron and Jeff Kroeger, a consultant from BHA Design Inc., the Fort Collins-based company that Kron said is being paid $189,000 to help the city with the park's renewal and renovation plans, presented the ideas under consideration to more than 20 Longmont-area residents who showed up to the open house at Garden Acres' central pavilion on Tuesday.

(Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

Renewal of the aging park, with much of the work expected to be done in 2016 and 2017, will definitely include upgrades to bring the community park into compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act standards, Kron said. It also will provide the park with new safety lighting.

Beyond that, the city staff and the consulting company have been firming up a plan that's expected to include proposals for improving Garden Acres' ball fields' dugout roofs, scoring booths, bleachers, fencing, gates and backstops.

Planning includes designs and locations for playgrounds and playground equipment, one of which would be part of a "neighborhood niche" park on Garden Acres' southwest side and another that would be underneath the present central pavilion.

There would be additional site and trail lighting and replacements of existing site, pedestrian and parking lot lighting.

The renovations might feature a food truck plaza that would replace the park's present seasonal and tournament concession stand.

The preliminary plan also identifies such needs as replacing furniture, improving the park's natural landscaping, relocating dumpsters, renovating an existing bridge over the Oligarchy Ditch, providing a portable-toilet area for tournaments and upgrading park signs.

The plan spotlights a number of other future capital improvement needs that likely will exceed the $3 million package the city expects to be able to afford, for at least the next next three to five years — including landscaped islands, striping and improved circulation in the park's parking lots, a full replacement of the Oligarchy Ditch pedestrian bridge, and renovation of the natural greenway running alongside that ditch.

The project is being funded by the city's Park and Greenway Maintenance Fee Fund, its Public Improvement Fund and Longmont's allocations of Colorado Lottery Conservation Trust Funds.

Longmont officials are still taking public comments and suggestions about the preliminary renewal plan, which is expected to be presented to the City Council later this spring or summer.

City officials have cautioned that current funding projections will not, however, provide sufficient money to implement everything that may wind up being shown in the updated long-range Garden Acres master plan.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc