Michele Goldman's promotion makes her top woman in public safety

LONGMONT -- Thirty years ago, Michele Goldman suspects that her competitive drive thrust her onto a career path dominated by men.

Over time, her love for firefighting was fueled by helping people in their worst moments, helping them solve problems that seemed insurmountable in those moments.

Now, a captain with the Longmont Fire Department, her helmet sits on a shelf in an office, and she regards her new role as the city's fire marshal as another way to help people in the city. Her promotion to captain and the position of fire marshal Aug. 1 also made her the highest-ranking woman in the Longmont Public Safety Department, which encompasses the police and fire departments.

Longmont Fire Marshal Capt. Michele Goldman, right, performs an annual inspection at Salud Family Health Center with Salud safety officer Malynda Oliver on Friday morning. ( LEWIS GEYER )

That was something she hadn't realized. She said that several other women in the department had achieved firsts as engineers and lieutenants.

"They are the ones that had a harder time because they were the first ones," she said, adding that she knew when she started that she was getting into a field commonly populated by men. But she said there is an important place for women in fire service, as well. She said women have to prove themselves. "You have to be better than the status quo."

Advertisement

She started as a volunteer firefighter in Lafayette 30 years ago, a role she picked up while teaching and coaching high school. She enjoyed the work, particularly as an athlete. She played international softball, college softball and tennis. She has a bachelor's degree from the University of Colorado and a master's in education from Grand Canyon University. Her volunteer work led her to the fire department at Rocky Flats and then the Longmont Fire Department 14 years ago. She was certified as a paramedic and promoted to lieutenant at Fire Station No. 2.

She said her competitive drive from athletics really made firefighting attractive in the beginning of her career. Her love of sports is evident in the décor in her office, including a framed Colorado Avalanche poster and plenty of University of Colorado clothing. The items are mixed in along with her fire helmets and photos of her yellow Labrador, Opal.

Goldman now leads a team that includes a fire protection engineer, hazardous materials inspectors and fire investigators. Her crew makes sure buildings in Longmont meet building and fire codes that will help the buildings withstand time and ensure their safety. This means lots of meetings with city planners and building inspectors and forging relationships with schools, businesses, and others who maintain public spaces in the city.

The role is a major change from helping people on the scene of emergencies, but she still sees it as helping.

"We can help by keeping Longmont a safe place to live, visit and work," she said, adding that she hopes to leave a legacy of structures in Longmont that are safe in the long term.

Goldman has been busy since taking over the portion of the job left by retiring Assistant Fire Chief Jim Lynch, who spent 37 years as a firefighter and administrator.

"A lot of experience left with him," she said.

Meanwhile, she said, lots of new construction is being proposed in the city and she and her team have had their hands full reviewing plans and measuring the plans against code. She said she started the role with a basic knowledge of building codes and she has worked to catch up.

Michele Goldman's promotion to captain and the position of fire marshal Aug. 1 made her the highest-ranking woman in the Longmont Public Safety Department, which encompasses the police and fire departments. ( LEWIS GEYER )

She said she has enjoyed helping people who want to develop in Longmont learn how they can make their developments successful.

Her biggest challenge now is getting to know everyone she has to work with to get all of the work done.

"It is the people and the relationships that you need to form," she said.

Pierrette J. Shields can be reached at 303-684-5273 or at pshields@times-call.com.