<p>Fernando Rosales</p>

Trial set for man linked to homicide

A Jan. 13 trial date was scheduled Thursday in Shasta County Superior Court for a man who’s the central figure in a Burney homicide.

But Fernando Sanchez Rosales, 20, who has not been charged with murder as sheriff’s detectives continue to investigate the death of Artis McHugh Jr., 61, of Burney, will stand trial on a felony vehicle theft count, as well as a misdemeanor petty theft charge.

Rosales is accused of allegedly stealing McHugh’s sport utility vehicle before he was later found dead Oct. 21 at his Burney home.

Rosales, who was arrested on a $1 million murder warrant, has admitted to taking the SUV, but has denied any involvement in McHugh’s death, sheriff investigators have said.

McHugh’s body was found lying in the garage of his Mountain Home Road residence after a neighbor requested sheriff’s deputies perform a welfare check.

An autopsy determined that McHugh died of blunt force trauma to his head and body.

Health care seminar set in Cottonwood

An upcoming seminar in Cottonwood will educate North State residents on the Affordable Care Act and help them enroll in a health insurance plan as well.

The seminar is 5 to 8 p.m. Dec. 4 at the North Cottonwood School Multi-Purpose Room, 19920 Gas Point Road.

Mercy Medical Center, St. Elizabeth Community Hospital and certified Covered California agents will be there to educate people on issues such as what type of coverage is available through Covered California, how subsidies work and what resources are available to help people apply before the Feb. 15 deadline.

Guests can drop by anytime and do not need to stay the full three hours.

Though not required, confirming attendance by calling 888-628-1948 is appreciated.

Sphere of influence discussion delayed

A proposed update to the city of Redding’s sphere of influence was postponed Thursday due to questions about past, present and future boundaries.

The Shasta Local Area Formation Commission (LAFCO) opened a public hearing into the matter during a special meeting Tuesday morning, but the board decided to hold off on any decisions until it convenes on Dec. 18 so newly unearthed – yet old – documents can be reviewed.

The city is seeking to scale back its sphere of influence from about 106 square miles to roughly 85 square miles in part because geography and housing developments in unincorporated areas near city limits would hamper future expansion in some areas, said Kent Manuel, Redding’s planning manager.

At issue with updates to Redding’s sphere are past agreements with the Buckeye Fire Protection District northwest of town. That district has shrunk since its formation in the 1960s and LAFCO officials are not sure why. Documents related to a service agreement with the city of Redding were recently uncovered by city staff.

Manuel asked the matter be continued so city staff and LAFCO officials could have a chance to better review those documents and make adjustments.

A proposed sphere of influence update for the Buckeye Fire Protection District on the agenda Tuesday was also delayed, and a public hearing for the Bella Vista Water District was continued to Dec. 18.

The LAFCO board unanimously approved a municipal service review and sphere of influence update for the Clear Creek Community Service District with some minor changes.

Hwy. 44 crash results in minor injuries

A head-on collision in Shingletown that resulted in minor injuries Thursday morning temporarily blocked both lanes of Highway 44.

The crash involving two sports utility vehicles was reported around 8:30 a.m. near Alpine Meadows Road.

CHP ID’s driver who died in crash

An Oregon man died Wednesday evening in a crash on Interstate 5 near Lakehead.

Officials said Darrell Lee Richardson, 66, of Arch Cape, Ore. was traveling south when he lost control of his 1997 Lincoln and careened off the roadway and 100 feet down an embankment.

California Highway Patrol investigators said Richardson was traveling between 65 and 70 miles per hour in light rain when he entered a turn with a 50-mile-per-hour posted speed limit. The vehicle began to fishtail, sideswiping a tree and hitting another head-on.

The second tree stopped the vehicle’s forward momentum, though it bounced off the trunk and continued to slide down the steep hillside before coming to rest on its side, the CHP said.

Richardson was pronounced dead at the scene. Alcohol was not believed to have been a factor, investigators said.

Staff reports