For social service providers who have witnessed the state's frequent flip-flops on funding dental benefits for low-income adults, the prospect of the program getting axed again is a bad case of history repeating itself.

Just three years ago, Illinois' Medicaid dental care program was slashed amid wide-ranging changes that ex-Gov. Pat Quinn said would "rescue the state's Medicaid system from the brink of collapse."

Two years later, Quinn and lawmakers restored the program, acknowledging that cutting it ended up costing taxpayers significantly more by forcing those without insurance to seek much costlier treatment in emergency rooms, often after their teeth problems became more serious and painful.

And that wasn't the first time. The same thing happened in the mid-1990s when state leaders dropped the dental program to trim expenses, then reinstated it the next year, for the same reason.

"A lack of dental care for low-income adults has always been an issue in the state," said Jeanne Winsted Rosser, social services administrator for New Trier Township, which launched its own modest dental assistance program after learning from residents that many lacked insurance. "When the state makes budget cuts to dental programs, they're not always thinking of the big picture."

Now, advocates like Rosser say the cycle could be about to repeat itself. Along with numerous other social service initiatives, the $32 million dental care program would be cut as part of Gov. Bruce Rauner's plan to address the state's ongoing financial crisis, in part by slashing Medicaid spending by $1.47 billion in next year's budget.

"This is one of the difficult choices that had to be made after years of financial recklessness in Illinois," said John Hoffman, spokesman for the Illinois Department of Healthcare and Family Services.

The possibility that the dental safety net will be cut once again comes at a time when a growing number of people are seeking treatment for dental problems in emergency rooms and when access to affordable care is becoming scarcer, according to experts and recent studies.

A recent Pew Center for the States study found that preventable dental problems were the primary reason for more than 800,000 emergency room visits nationwide in 2009 — up 16 percent from 2006. The same study found that Chicago-area hospitals received nearly 77,000 visits from patients with non-injury dental ailments from 2008 to 2011.

And the Chicago Dental Society said in a 2013 report that the prospects of the uninsured and underinsured to receive affordable treatment was dismal and on the decline.

Mobile Dental Clinic Stacey Wescott, Chicago Tribune Jessica Vavra, manager of the Mobile Dental Clinic, enters the clinic parked at a Palatine school Wednesday, April 1, 2015. It offers low-cost dental services. Jessica Vavra, manager of the Mobile Dental Clinic, enters the clinic parked at a Palatine school Wednesday, April 1, 2015. It offers low-cost dental services. (Stacey Wescott, Chicago Tribune)

For example, the study found that dental providers with the Cook County Department of Public Health served nearly 11,900 patients in 2000, but had resources to treat fewer than 5,000 in 2009. By 2011, more than half of those surveyed said they had delayed dental treatment for financial reasons.

Health insurance plans purchased under the Affordable Care Act are not required to cover dental care for adults, and plans that do provide it can come with steep out-of-pocket deductibles.

And though children from low-income families can get dental services through the state's All Kids program, state Sen. Heather Steans said that when parents lose dental care access, it can affect their children too.

"There are all sorts of problems that arise from cutting the Medicaid dental program for adults, but one of them is, you lose more kids who would come in to see the dentist with their parents," said Steans, a Chicago Democrat. "Even for people who do have dental insurance, it can be limited. And access to mobile dental clinics can be very hard to plan for."

Steans voted to cut the state's Medicaid dental program in 2012 but said she's now fighting to rescue it from the chopping block.

Dr. Loren Feldner, chairman of government affairs and access to care for the Chicago Dental Society, said it costs "at least three times as much when we are treating toothaches in the hospital emergency rooms."

If someone is suffering from a painful, infected tooth that requires an extraction and goes to the emergency room, the facility is unlikely to have the equipment to make a proper diagnosis, nor a dentist on call to provide the treatment, Feldner said.

"With pain and an infection, the ER will usually need to do a blood test, maybe do an MRI, and prescribe painkillers and antibiotics," Feldner said. "When you add in the fee for services, an ER visit can quickly add up to $4,600 ... and the dental problem is still there."

A dentist could handle the extraction for a fraction of that cost, he said.

"The fact that the (Affordable Care Act) requires coverage of pediatric dental care is a huge win for kids, but we hope some day it may also require adult care," Feldner said.

Even if the Medicaid adult dental program survives the upcoming state budget cuts, some community dental health advocates say it's imperfect at best, as it covers procedures like extractions and root canals but not preventive care like cleanings, X-rays and regular checkups.

"Probably with the right preventive dental care, these people would not have gotten to the point where they needed the procedures in the first place. ... It's just crazy," said Karen Baker, director of community services for Northwest Community Healthcare, which provides a need-based mobile dental clinic program in conjunction with northwest suburban townships.

Last year, nearly 2,100 visits were made to that mobile clinic, with providers delivering about $688,000 in services. Only a small portion of the program's $348,000 annual cost — about $8,000 — came from Medicaid reimbursements, Baker said.

"The state seems to be caught in this cycle of providing dental benefits, taking them away, and then giving them back," said Julie Villarreal, director of general assistance for Wheeling Township.

Elizabeth Salse, of Arlington Heights, said she would not be able to afford to go to the dentist without the mobile clinic.

"As you get older, your teeth get worse, but my Medicare doesn't cover dental appointments," said Salse, 85. "And I don't drive anymore, so the township bus service I use to get to the clinic is just as important."

Jose Cruz, 50, was among those who visited a recent mobile dental clinic in the northwest suburbs. He said he appreciated receiving affordable care near his Palatine Township home.