Jason Powell (Photo: File)

With lead increasingly becoming an issue across the nation in the wake of the crisis in Flint, Mich., one Tennessee lawmaker wants to ensure that the public is notified more quickly when lead is found in drinking water supplies.

Currently, Tennessee law requires water utilities to notify customers within 30 days if water tests positive for high levels of lead. But a bill sponsored by state Rep. Jason Powell, D-Nashville, would change that to between 24 hours and 72 hours.

“Everyone drinks water,” Powell said. “This is just about making sure a resource that we all use is safe. There is some ambiguity about notifying the public of lead found in the drinking water. I think there needs to be clear standard guidelines.”

The bill is similar to federal legislation recently approved by the U.S. House.

In Tennessee, there are currently two water utilities out of compliance with state rules over high levels of lead, according to state environmental officials. State regulators say the results were likely due to sampling errors and one agency is out of compliance because of how it notified residents.

Nationwide, a USA TODAY NETWORK investigation has identified nearly 2,000 water systems spanning all 50 states where testing has shown excessive levels of lead contamination. The network’s analysis of U.S. Environmental Protection Agency data also showed about 350 schools and day care centers failed lead tests about 470 times from 2012 through 2015.

Lead, even in small doses, poses a health threat, especially for pregnant women and young children. Lead can damage growing brains and cause reduced IQs, attention disorders and other problem behaviors. Infants fed formula made with contaminated tap water face significant risk. Adults are not immune, with evidence linking lead exposure to kidney problems, high blood pressure and increased risks of cardiovascular deaths. The EPA stresses there is no safe level of lead exposure.

The state requires water systems to provide each homeowner with the results of the sampling, regardless of whether the amount exceeded an action level, which is considered 15 parts per billion. Notification must take place within 30 days and include the results and an explanation of negative health effects of lead.

Powell’s bill would require water suppliers to notify the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation commissioner within 24 hours of the findings and water customers within 72 hours, after additional testing is conducted confirming the presence of lead in the water.

Powell also said his bill has bipartisan support and that it has no fiscal impact on the state.

"We are just working on a fair retesting timeline that is congruent with EPA standards," he said. "TDEC has been very helpful in the process to determine what is a fair retesting deadline and process."

Southern Environmental Law Center attorney Beth Alexander said that anything that could be done to increase the public notification process for lead found in the drinking water would be helpful, especially when other obstacles such as funding can hinder safe monitoring.

"In Tennessee, we have a problem because TDEC's budget continues to be cut by the lawmakers," she said. "They could be doing more to protect the people of Tennessee than they are, if they were better funded by the legislature."

The bill is expected to go before the House Business and Utilities subcommittee on Wednesday, Powell said.

USA Today contributed to this report.

Reporter Jordan Buie can be reached at 615-726-5970 or on Twitter @jordanbuie

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1pApKVg