Arun Sundararajan is a professor and NEC Faculty Fellow in the Stern School of Business at New York University, where his research studies how digital technologies transform business and society. His research has been supported by organizations that include Google, IBM, Microsoft and Yahoo.

Today's Economist Perspectives from expert contributors.

A variety of Internet-enabled platforms for peer-to-peer commerce seem to be under regulatory siege. If settlement talks fail, Airbnb is heading to court to challenge a wide-ranging subpoena for New York City host information issued by the New York State attorney general. The urban transportation platforms Uber Lyft and Sidecar have battled regulators in numerous cities – for instance, Sidecar left New York last spring after a sting by agents of the Taxi and Limousine Commission during a pilot program in Brooklyn led to the impounding of a driver’s car . A consortium of cabbies and drivers recently sued the city of Chicago with a claim that the city has allowed “unlawful taxi caste system” to emerge. RelayRides , a peer-to-peer car rental marketplace, suspended operations in New York a few months ago after being told that a regulator “believes there is noncompliance with certain unique aspects” of New York insurance law.

This is unfortunate, because the emerging peer-to-peer, collaborative “sharing economy” will be a significant segment of the country’s future economic activity, stimulating new consumption, raising productivity and catalyzing individual innovation and entrepreneurship. There’s a real danger that today’s misalignment between newer peer-to-peer business models and older regulations will impede economic growth. The solution is to delegate more regulatory responsibility to the marketplaces and platforms while preserving some government oversight, by creating new self-regulatory organizations like those that have succeeded in other markets and industries.

It’s not as if today’s city and state regulations are fundamentally flawed. They’re not. It’s simply that this wave of digital disruption is altering how we experience familiar services — short-term accommodation, point-to-point urban transportation, car rental. The economic engine at work here is an array of new peer-to-peer marketplaces that unlock dormant physical capital (real estate, vehicles, household assets) and put it to productive use, creating, in the process, a wide variety of new consumption experiences (contrast the modest range of hotel rooms with the diversity of Airbnbs), and catalyzing innovation by micro-entrepreneurs who can dip their toes into the world of small business unimpeded by the risks of an all-or-nothing start-up.

Not surprisingly, there’s a misalignment between the rules developed for the older, industrial-age, “analog” ways of shared consumption, like staying in hotels or hailing taxis, and the peer-to-peer business models enabled by the new digital platforms. If this gap – between the old regulations and the new models – isn’t closed soon, there is a real risk that the impending economic growth could be stifled. Moreover, a lack of genuine regulatory oversight and guidance where actually necessary can lead to backlash that might damage both the platforms and their millions of suppliers.

There is a solution to this regulatory conundrum. First, the government should recognize that the new peer-to-peer marketplaces have sophisticated controls naturally built in. For example, Airbnb offers its traders a robust digital reputation system based on detailed post-transaction ratings, as well as identity verification systems that combine the digitized social capital of Facebook or LinkedIn with the existing government ID infrastructure. Verifying identity lowers the risks of market failure by making users (both renters and suppliers) feel safer; instant and transparent user feedback makes government oversight — about, say, space cleanliness — less essential. Likewise, government-mandated taxi fares and meters seem unnecessary when Uber, Lyft and Sidecar set uniform rates and track routes exactly using navigation technology.

The platforms have voluntarily adopted additional nondigital safeguards. Ahead of any regulatory requirement, Lyft and Sidecar had put in place a fairly elaborate supplier-screening protocol, one that was perhaps a template for California’s recently introduced regulatory framework for ride sharing. Airbnb has more than 50 investigative agents, headed by a former army intelligence officer, on its trust and safety team. This isn’t surprising. The profit-seeking interests of these private marketplaces aren’t that different from those of a textbook regulator: encouraging productive trade, keeping market participants safe and preventing “market failure.”

Self-policing isn’t a universal panacea. We’ll still need government mandates to prevent effects like congestion, or for, say, providing accessible vehicles and ensuring disaster preparedness — things that markets don’t easily self-provide. As we better understand the scope and sustainability of effective self-policing, and what new forms of oversight are needed, we should encourage the creation of a new class of self-regulatory organizations that set and enforce regulations for peer-to-peer sharing marketplaces, perhaps initially with some federal or state oversight.

As hundreds of new peer-to-peer marketplaces emerge over the coming years, such organizations would ease what would otherwise be a tremendous strain on the government’s resources: having to constantly monitor and correct regulatory misalignment across an evolving set of industries. They could also inform the new oversight questions that emerge as these platforms reach mass-market scale, like the liability of ride-sharing platforms for accidents involving drivers between fare-paying rides, and whether residential zoning and noise laws should change when individual apartments become mixed-use real estate.

Following the Securities and Exchanges Act of 1934, a variety of securities markets have self-regulatory organizations like the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, known as Finra (and the predecessor regulatory arms of the New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq), all under the watchful governmental eye of the Securities and Exchange Commission. Granted, peer-to-peer markets for goods and services have different complexities than markets for financial securities. But industry-created organizations have led to effective self-regulation in other (nondigital) peer-to-peer businesses as well. The National Association of Realtors and the American Medical Association, which emerged organically from a need to self-regulate, are perhaps the best examples. Bar associations guide the behaviors of lawyers in each state. The historical roots of industry consortiums for self-policing go much further back, perhaps to the merchant guilds of medieval times. The idea has been around and worked for centuries.

This digital transformation that is creating today’s “collaborative economy” is quite different from the ones that preceded it. It affects everyday asset-intensive services. Today’s regulatory misalignment is slowing the immense innovation and economic growth it will generate. It’s time to place more trust in the digital trust infrastructure, and give the “sharing economy” platforms their fair share of the regulatory responsibility.