Top Obamacare executive behind troubled healthcare website launch steps down for new private sector role

Tony Trenkle, chief information officer for Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, has resigned



CMS spokeswoman Julie Bataille said he has moved to role in private sector



Comes as calls for Kathleen Sebelius to resign over website debacle

A top Obamacare executive behind the flawed roll-out of the health insurance website has stepped down.

Tony Trenkle, the chief information officer for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, has resigned and will move into the private sector.

CMS spokeswoman Julie Bataille sidestepped questions about the reasons for his departure or whether he was asked to resign.



Tony Trenkle, chief information officer for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, has resigned

President Barack Obama defended Obamacare and said they would overcome the difficulties

She said he 'oversees all of our IT functions,' but declined to describe his role in the website or say whether he had been asked to leave.

He is believed to have been part of the decision to issue a security certificate to the website before all the tests had been completed.



This has led to major concerns about the security of people's data.

His departure comes after mainly Republican Congress members called for the resignation of Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius yesterday.

The website, www.healthcare.gov, has been beset by problems since its launch.

Users have reported long sign-in times, problems logging in, page load issues and crashes.

During two hours in the Senate Finance Committee witness chair, Sebelius conceded the website launch was deeply flawed.



Under-fire Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius faced calls for her to resign yesterday

She disclosed that the so-called punch list for repairs had included 'a couple of hundred functional fixes' at the time the administration launched its urgent rescue mission last month.

Even now, she said, 'we're not where we need to be' and admitted the repairs may not be completed by the end of the month as promised.

Sebelius admitted the latest bout of problems mean few people will be able to sign up.

At a Dallas synagogue Wednesday, Obama assured volunteers that their efforts to sign people up for coverage would be well worth the trouble.

'As challenging as this may seem sometimes, as frustrating as HealthCare.gov may be sometimes, we are going to get his done,' Obama said.

He added: 'This is like having a really good product in the store and the registers aren't working and not enough parking spots and no one can get in the door.'



However, he was met by protestors outside the building who held up signs calling for him to be impeached and accusing him of lying.



People protesting against Obamacare wait for President Barack Obama at Temple Emanu-El yesterday

Just before leaving Washington, Obama met with 16 Democratic senators facing re-election in 2014 to discuss the troubled website rollout. They pressed him to extend the March 31 enrollment deadline, but White House press secretary Jay Carney rejected the idea.

Republicans said the administration put in jeopardy the personal information of Americans by taking the website live before security testing was fully completed.

Federal law requires all government computer systems to have a security certification before going live.