SILVER SPRING, Md. -- For the National Medical Association (NMA), a big focus for 2015 will be on partnerships, according to executive director Martin Hamlette, JD, MHA.

The organization, which mainly serves physicians and patients of African descent, already partners with government agencies like the CDC and the Health Resources and Services Administration on various issues, Hamlette said during a sit-down interview at which a media relations person was present. "But now we are rekindling partnerships on a corporate level."

Hamlette, who started in his job on Jan. 5, noted that the Affordable Care Act (ACA) has had a big impact on the types of corporations that have become involved in healthcare; now companies like Walmart and Target are beginning to engage in partnership discussions.

Today's consumers -- especially those who are newly insured under the ACA and used to seeking care in emergency departments -- "don't have this notion that healthcare means a doctor's appointment at a doctor's office," but instead see the retail clinics at places like Walmart and CVS as their doctors' offices, he said. "That offers a lot of opportunities for partnerships."

Hamlette highlighted the recent changes at CVS, which stopped selling cigarettes and is now calling itself CVS Health. "I think there's going to be more of that," he predicted. "As you have organizations that are traditionally not healthcare [providers], how do they make that jump to [being] a healthcare provider? And the NMA is one of the few organizations that is uniquely situated to help them make that switch."

The association is also continuing its focus on health disparities among blacks and other minority groups as compared with their white counterparts. The NMA has worked with physicians in addressing obesity, asthma, and heart and lung disorders among minorities, "but now we are extending the footprint of the NMA into aging and wellness," said Hamlette. "Yes, you're here, you're with us, but how productive is your life?"

The aging and wellness focus also includes grief counseling and caregiver support, as well as other issues, he said. "We're even getting into financial [planning]. Once you become a senior, the person you touch base with more often than not is your doctor," he added.

Access to healthcare is another big focus for the NMA, Hamlette said, noting that things have improved considerably with the implementation of the ACA and its Medicaid expansion and community rating. "It makes [insurance] viable for those most affected -- the sickest and those most in need."

On a national basis, the NMA is organized into six regions -- each comprising five states -- and affiliates with more than 100 state and local medical societies, he explained. As a supporter of the ACA, the association has helped out locally, such as with providing physicians to help with a big push in Missouri to have that state adopt Medicaid expansion.

The NMA also is concerned about increasing the minority physician workforce. To encourage minority students to pursue careers in medicine, the association partners with the American Medical Association’s “Doctors Back to School” program; NMA members visit grade schools and high schools — especially schools with high populations of minority students — and talk to students about medical careers.

Although the NMA is not a lobbying organization, it does discuss and offer letters of support on particular pieces of local and national legislation, he noted. For example, Hamlette recently met with District of Columbia council member Yvette Alexander, who chairs the council's health committee, to discuss two issues that are also of concern to the NMA: teen pregnancy and infectious disease, especially HIV and hepatitis C virus (HCV).

In terms of numbers, the NMA says it represents "the interests of 30,000 African American physicians and their patients." When asked if membership was going up or down, Hamlette said the number of members "fluctuates."

"Our strength is not just in the number of members but also in our institutional knowledge," he said, citing cultural competency training as one of NMA's strengths. "We offer web-based services to help impact the best outcomes of patients."

Physicians who treat minority patients may not be able to get all of the information from their patients that they would expect, according to Hamlette. "They are not going to have the minority patient push back [and say] 'I don't get up at that particular time to take this medication.'" Instead, the respect for the traditional doctor-patient relationship may cause minority patients to agree with everything the doctor says in the office but not follow through when they get home.

Cultural competency also comes into play on another issue: getting more black patients to participate in clinical trials. The NMA has had a program since 1999 called Project Impact, which promotes awareness of and participation of minorities in clinical trials, Hamlette explained. But "understandably, there have been some historical concerns" -- mainly, the memories of the Tuskegee experiment, in which 400 black men with syphilis died after a curative treatment was withheld, so that the natural disease course could be studied.

Hamlette, a graduate of Howard University and the University of Dayton Law School, also received a Master's in Health Administration from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. He previously served as a health policy adviser to former Washington mayor Adrian Fenty, and says that his selection for the NMA job resulted from the desire of the organization's board "to increase [NMA's] footprint in the national healthcare landscape. I think I'm uniquely situated as a healthcare attorney here with an education in public health [who also] understands the business side of things."