President Barack Obama, speaking at yet another fundraiser with a script that’s been recycled more than a Hollywood romantic comedy, had an unlikely culprit for the world’s problems: social media.

Listing the globe’s myriad crises, which very much exist in the “real world” and not simply on Twitter and Facebook, the experienced tan-suited fundraiser said the current times just “seem” unusually bad because of the new media’s megaphone. From a White House transcript of his remarks Friday in Purchase, N.Y.:

[Another] reason people are feeling anxious is that if you watch the nightly news, it feels like the world is falling apart. (Laughter.) Now, let me say this: We are living through some extraordinarily challenging times. A lot of it has to do with changes that are taking place in the Middle East in which an old order that had been in place for 50 years, 60 years, 100 years was unsustainable, and was going to break up at some point. And now, what we are seeing is the old order not working, but the new order not being born yet — and it is a rocky road through that process, and a dangerous time through that process.

So we’ve seen the barbarity of an organization like ISIL that is building off what happened with al Qaeda and 9/11 — an extension of that same mentality that doesn’t reflect Islam, but rather just reflects savagery, and extremism, and intolerance. We’ve seen divisions within the Muslim community between the Shia and Sunni. We continue to see an unwillingness to acknowledge the right of Israel to exist and its ability to defend itself. And we have seen, frankly, in this region, economies that don’t work. So you’ve got tons of young people who see no prospect and no hope for the future and are attracted to some of these ideologies.

All of that makes things pretty frightening. And then, you turn your eyes to Europe and you see the President of Russia making a decision to look backwards instead of forward, and encroaching on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of their neighbors, and reasserting the notion that might means right. And I can see why a lot of folks are troubled.

…

And the truth of the matter is, is that the world has always been messy. In part, we’re just noticing now because of social media and our capacity to see in intimate detail the hardships that people are going through. The good news is that American leadership has never been more necessary, and there’s really no competition out there for the ideas and the values that can create the sort of order that we need in this world.

That “American leadership” continued its national tour of raising money inside wealthy people’s houses for Democratic causes soon after the president completed his remarks. From New York, he traveled to Newport, R.I., where he pretty much repeated the same speech, doubtlessly FedExing fear to America’s enemies and reassuring its allies that all is normal with this crazy little world.

It’s all part of the plan, you see.