Texas Tech tight end Jace Amaro should be available when the Packers make the 21st pick in the first round. Credit: Reuters

Based on interviews with executives in personnel for five teams, it is possible to narrow down just a little bit the pool of players that might be considered by the Green Bay Packers regardless of position if they exercise their current 21st selection in the first round of the NFL draft May 8.

Prospects are conservatively divided into three categories: As Good As Gone — barring negative developments, these players have no chance of reaching No. 21; Probably Gone — players who appear to have no better than a 50-50 chance of remaining on the board at No. 21; and The Next Level — players who figure to fall next.

The Packers have their own selection in each round. In addition, they are likely to be awarded at least one compensatory pick for the losses of WR Greg Jennings (Minnesota) and OLB Erik Walden (Indianapolis) last spring in unrestricted free agency.

Here's an early look at 50 players who figure to fit into these layers of the draft (underclassmen are denoted by asterisk).

AS GOOD AS GONE (8)

Sammy Watkins*, WR, Clemson: 6 feet 1 inch, 211 pounds. In what might become an all-time class of wide receivers, he stands as the best entering the draft. "He can pretty much do everything," one scout said. "He's fast. He makes plays. Catches the hell out of the ball. Knows how to play." Caught 240 passes (101 in 2013) for 3,391 yards (14.1-yard average) and 27 touchdowns. "He'll be a great kickoff return guy, too," another scout said. "But he won't do that very long. Not real tall but he's thick. He looks like a running back more than a wide receiver."

Greg Robinson*, T, Auburn: 6-5, 332. Redshirt sophomore started two years at LT. "He's phenomenal," one scout said. "He's the most talented of all of them...the most upside." Long arms (35). Bench-pressed 32 times. Ran a fast 40-yard dash of 4.92 seconds Saturday at the combine. Ability to drive block is what excites some scouts. "He'll mash you," said another. "He needs work in pass protection but he can pass protect. You see his punch. And he comes off the ball."

Jake Matthews, T, Texas A&M: 6-41/2, 308. Started 46 of 49 games, playing RT from 2010-'12 before moving to LT in '13 as the replacement for Luke Joeckel. "You can't go wrong with him," one scout said. "You just take him and you don't worry about anything. He's probably the most solid of the tackles." Average size, arm length (333/8), hand size (97/8) and strength (24 reps on the bench). Good speed (5.07). Cousin of Green Bay OLB Clay Matthews. "Really good technician," said another scout. "Good, not great athlete. He's a little soft. Not that he won't be a very good player. He gives great effort."

Johnny Manziel*, QB, Texas A&M: 5-11½, 207. Third-year sophomore and two-year starter. Won Heisman Trophy in 2012. "Hit or miss? What the hell are they talking about?" one scout said. "He's a better passer than the guy (Russell Wilson) who won the Super Bowl, and he's got a better arm. Here comes the pressure, a guy breaks open and he finds the receiver. Does he have a gun? No. But he doesn't have a bad arm at all." Has had a colorful if not controversial career off the field. Nicknamed "Johnny Football." Said another personnel man with more than 15 years of NFL scouting experience: "I'm fine with him on the field. He's probably the most unique guy I've done at that position. Just the way he kind of controls the game when he's on. But it's the other stuff. He's not a worker. He doesn't show up. He does what he wants to do. They need him. Everybody just kind of shrugs it off. You try to pull some of the stuff he does in an NFL locker room and it's just not going to work."

Blake Bortles*, QB, Central Florida: 6-5, 232. Fourth-year junior. "He's either the first or second quarterback (drafted)," one scout said. "Really good athlete. Great size. Above average to very good arm strength. Tough. Poised. Very productive in his last year." Completed 65.7% of his passes and started two years. "He's actually more of a runner," another scout said. "They ran him a lot and roll him out. He's raw. If somebody takes him and thinks he's going to be their franchise guy, they're going to get burned. He's not very accurate, and guys that are inaccurate don't really become that accurate. You can depend on him. He works his (expletive) off. He's a leader. He's won. He kind of raised the program. But I'm shaky with him."

Jadeveon Clowney*, DE, South Carolina: 6-5, 266. Often compared to Mario Williams and Julius Peppers. "I don't know where people say he didn't play hard this year," one scout said. "Not in the games I watched. They hold him. Somebody asked if he could play linebacker. He'd be a great linebacker. He stands up now sometimes." Third-year junior and probable top-five pick. "I would not put my job on the line for that guy," another scout said. "Who has a profile like that that's been successful in the NFL? Lazy. Not playing hard....I think his physical talent is being overblown. At what point in his life has he had to push himself? Now you're going to give him this money and say, 'Do something you're never done in your life before. Against guys you just can't run over.' I would not do it."

Khalil Mack, OLB, Buffalo: 6-2½, 251. "He's the real deal," one scout said. "He can rush the passer. He kicks (expletive). Tough guy. Got interceptions and forced fumbles. Great kid. It wouldn't even be a discussion taking him over Clowney." Was skinny coming out of high school and lightly recruited. "You put on the Ohio State game, he dominated like a quarter," another scout said. "That tackle (Jack Mewhort) who is supposed to be a good player, he just tore him up. Then he disappeared for a quarter. He can play off the ball, too, if you wanted him to. But I don't know if you want to do that, because he's going to be a big-play guy and rush the passer."

Anthony Barr, OLB, UCLA: 6-5, 255. Senior. "Really athletic," one scout said. "He's got pass-rush ability. The guy was a running back until two years ago, so he's got hands. Some of the toughness is still not there, but he's a great kid. Great effort. Top 10." Long, fast and productive on the rush. "Looks the part athletically but is not a football player at this point," another scout said. "More developmental. He'll get overdrafted."

PROBABLY GONE (10)

Marqise Lee*, WR, Southern California: 6-0, 192. Played through nagging injuries in 2013. "He's a dynamic, smaller guy," one scout said. "Rough year this year because their quarterback was so terrible. Last year with (Matt) Barkley his stats were really good. But as far as athletic ability, quickness, speed, he's pretty special. He can play on the outside. He's so fast and runs by people." Had 118 receptions in 2012, 57 in '13. "He's a top-15 pick," another scout said. "Can take the ball and score."

Kelvin Benjamin*, WR, Florida State: 6-5, 240. Third-year sophomore for the national champion Seminoles. "He can take over a game," one scout said. "Pretty special talent. Just not as consistent as (Mike) Evans. He was a first-time starter this year. He's got a little off-field shadow. Can disappear in games." Some scouts say he could have really used another season. Had 84 catches in two years. "He'll go 12 to 20," said a second scout. "He really came on the scene this year. He can extend to make a lot of grabs. His route-running is raw."

Eric Ebron*, TE, North Carolina: 6-4, 250. Third-year junior. "He can probably do a little bit more than Tyler Eifert (last year)," one scout said. "He's athletic. He can challenge deep. He's not a great bulky guy but he'll block. Watch him against Clowney. He didn't win but he wasn't afraid. He's (Rob) Gronkowski-like, but he's a lot smoother than Gronkowski." Improved each year, finishing with 112 receptions. "The way they used him this year was almost like a glorified slot receiver," another scout said. "Good feel for it. Not a great blocker." Led TEs in the 40 with 4.60 clocking.

Taylor Lewan, T, Michigan: 6-6½, 309. Spent five years in Ann Arbor, starting the last four at LT. "He's one of those guys that's pristine," one scout said. "Takes care of himself. Watches what he eats. They had no quarterback there. You can't protect forever. Big, tall guy. It's hard to get leverage, but he can bend his knees." Has a penchant for taking dumb penalties. "I'm not sold on him," said another scout. "I don't really like his whole makeup. He's kind of a fake tough guy. Not an elite left-tackle athlete and not a tough (expletive) right tackle. Somebody will take him just because he's Michigan and got size and a good enough athlete." Ran an exceptional 40 (4.87).

Cyrus Kouandjio*, T, Alabama: 6-7, 322. Third-year junior and two-year starter at LT. "Talented guy but still very raw," one scout said. "Still makes raw mistakes. He's got more up side than Matthews. I think he is smart. Just doesn't have much football background." Blew out his ACL as true freshman in '11. Ran poorly (5.59) and bench-pressed poorly (21). Long arms (355/8). "Outstanding pass protector," a second scout said. "You're talking about a left tackle for a long, long time."

Teddy Bridgewater*, QB, Louisville: 6-2, 214. Three-year starter. "Louisville's success is because of Teddy Bridgewater," one scout said. "He's calm and composed, like you want in a quarterback. I'm not real crazy about his build. He has a linear build. I can't say he's a better scrambler than Russell Wilson, but he's not a statue, OK?" Ranked fifth in NCAA passer efficiency in 2013. Career completion mark of 68.4%. "I think you can win with him," another scout said. "He's not an elite talent but he's got a good enough arm, he's a good enough athlete and he's a leader. The big thing is his intangibles. He wins. He's clutch."

Stephon Tuitt*, DE, Notre Dame: 6-5, 304. Third-year junior with 12 sacks in 2012. "He's a 3-4 end all the way," one scout said. "He'll be on the field all the time. He's too big, too athletic and has been productive." Underwent hernia surgery in 2012. Long arms (34¾). "Just kind of up and down," another scout said. "Came in the year overweight. There are stretches of games where he doesn't really do anything. He will turn it on some plays and show his strength. He's a risk."

Louis Nix*, NT, Notre Dame: 6-2, 331. Fourth-year junior. "At 345 this guy can move," one scout said. "He's faster than (B.J.) Raji and he can be better (than Raji). A lot of people will get off him and say, 'Well, he's not into football as much.' But where do you find guys that big that can do that? He hasn't had a lot of sacks but he's been double-teamed a lot. Look at it this way. Notre Dame's linebackers aren't even going to the combine. That's how bad they were." One of the few legitimate nose tackles this year. "He's just a hold-the-point nose tackle," a scout for a 4-3 team said. "He doesn't fit us, but for the 3-4 teams there's a lot of value."

C.J. Mosley, ILB, Alabama: 6-2½, 234. Senior. "He can fit any defense," one scout said. "Very fast and athletic. Never comes off the field. Team leader. An all-intangible type kid. He's all about football." Long arms (333/8) and enormous hands (10¾). Undersized, which showed at times against the interior run. "He's not like (Luke) Kuechly," another scout said. "Sometimes his lack of size shows up tackling. He lacks tackling bulk. Sometimes he gets out-sized by linemen. Sometimes he'll hit 'em and they don't fall down. Good player. Very instinctive. Good pass defender. Just not the biggest."

Ha Ha Clinton-Dix*, S, Alabama: 6-0, 210. Third-year junior. "He's the real deal," one scout said. "He'll go middle of the first. If he's there at 21 (for Green Bay), it'd be a no-brainer. They'd be running to the podium if that happened. He's pretty much the most complete guy that I've done (at safety)." Another scout pegged him going between 15 and 25. "He's interesting," said another scout. "Pretty good player. He has good range and hands. He's pretty smart. He'll tackle."

THE NEXT LEVEL (32)

Mike Evans*, WR, Texas A&M: 6-5, 231. Redshirt sophomore. "He's safer than Benjamin," one scout said. "He's just a big, strong guy. You just throw it up to him and he'll make plays. He's a big dude that plays big." Ad-libbed a lot with Manziel. Caught 151 passes in two seasons. "Little stiff," another scout said. "He's dropped some balls." Arms measured a long, long 351/8 inches.

Odell Beckham*, WR, Louisiana State: 5-11, 198. Third-year junior. "He's not fast like Lee or Watkins but he's fast enough," said one scout. "He's a great route runner, hands, body control. He's got the return stuff that brings value, too. He's pretty damn good." Caught more than 40 passes all three seasons. "He goes 20 to 32," another scout said. "Excellent hands and very good route runner. Average size. Very productive. Is going to play early in his career."

Allen Robinson*, WR, Penn State: 6-2, 220. Third-year junior. "He can get in the bottom of the first (round)," one scout said. "He's just a natural receiver. Strong. Catches the ball. Knows how to play. He's not as spectacular as the other (top) guys but he's real solid." Two-year starter with 177 receptions. "Not polished as a route runner," a second scout said. "Very good hands. Should be a starter in a short amount of time."

Brandin Cooks*, WR, Oregon State: 5-10, 189. Third-year junior. "He's quicker than fast," one scout said. "Little guy with tons of production. But he's not DeSean Jackson, not a special guy in terms of blowing the top off (the defense). He's not a big-play guy." Had 128 catches in 2013 and 226 in all. "He goes 20 to 32," another scout said. "Very fast and explosive."

Davante Adams*, WR, Fresno State: 6-1, 212. Redshirt sophomore. "I'd have a hard time taking him in the first," one scout said. "He's a really good catcher and really athletic, but he's not a speed guy." Teamed with QB Derek Carr, he had 102 receptions in 2012 and 131 in '13. "Will need to develop his game in a more pro-style offense," another scout said. "Good hands. Mid-second-rounder. Should develop into a starter."

Martavis Bryant*, WR, Clemson: 6-4, 211. Junior played second fiddle behind Watkins at Clemson this year and both Watkins and DeAndre Hopkins in '12. "He's got talent," one scout said. "He's had some drops and he's a little bit of a knucklehead, but he can make all the catches. He's a build-to-speed guy. Would I draft him in the first round? No. Does he have first-round talent? Pretty close." Just 61 receptions for 1,354 yards (22.2) and 13 TDs. "If he blows it out at the combine, somebody might take a (first-round) flier on him," another scout said.

Jarvis Landry*, WR, Louisiana State: 5-11, 205. His 40-yard dash time Sunday will go a long way to determine his draft fate. "He's such a good receiver, but there's so many fast guys in this draft that he'll get pushed down if he runs slow, which he may," one scout said. "He's a lot like Beckham. Excellent hands. Very good routes. Not as fast as Beckham, not nearly the playmaker, but a very polished receiver."

Jace Amaro*, TE, Texas Tech: 6-51/2, 265. Third-year junior. "On 99% of the snaps he lines up in the slot," one scout said. "He makes a killing doing that. (Jermichael) Finley is a faster down-the-field guy. This guy is an underneath guy, like the way the Cowboys use (Jason) Witten. He just turns around and he's so damn big they just throw him the ball and he can catch it." Exploded for 106 catches in 2013 after having just 32 in his first two seasons. "He should be better than he is," another scout said. "He's got excellent hands but he doesn't run after the catch. He's a stalk blocker." Led TEs on the bench press with 28 reps.

Austin Seferian-Jenkins*, TE, Washington: 6-5, 262. Third-year junior. "He's going to be close to Gronkowski talent-wise," one scout said. "Now he's lazy and a (expletive). It's all kinds of just minor stuff. There's always something wrong with him." Had 146 receptions in three seasons. Played some basketball for Huskies. "I think he's a pretender," another scout said. "Not really a football player. The hype is big, but he don't want to block and he is kind of half-(expletive) in everything he does. Inconsistent and unreliable."

Zack Martin, T-G, Notre Dame: 6-4, 308. Started 50 games at LT and two at RT. "I love him," one scout said. "He's not real big. All I know is he's got a great jam. He can punch the hell out of you. Nobody beats him. He's just not a real bulky guy. Everybody keeps wanting to move him inside. You better have somebody that can block those outside pass rushers." Scored 21 on the 50-question Wonderlic intelligence test. "He's the guard that I like," another scout said. "He's athletic and strong. He understands the game." Arms were only 327/8, hands just 9½.

Gabe Jackson, G, Mississippi State: 6-3½, 336. Often compared to Lions RG Larry Warford, a third-round pick from Kentucky in '13 who had a strong rookie season. "He's big, in the Warford class," one scout said. "He moves better than Warford. He has second-round ability. My issue is if he can pass block." Experienced road grader. Ran just 5.51. "He's big and he plays big," another scout said. "If you're in his area, he's going to dominate you. Obviously, the speed and the range will never be his strength. But if you use him for what he does (best), he's pretty good."

Derek Carr, QB, Fresno State: 6-2½, 214. Broke all kinds of records in a spread offense. "Threw the ball 50, 60 times a game," one scout said. "Put up a ton of yards but has average size. He can start, no question. I thought he played well in the Senior Bowl." Career completion mark of 66.6%. Older brother David was top pick in 2002 draft by Houston and coach Dom Capers. "I don't trust him," said another scout. "In that system and against bad teams he can light it up. He's almost similar to his brother, where when things aren't going his way he just kind of folds." Wonderlic of 20.

Jimmy Garoppolo, QB, Eastern Illinois: 6-2, 226. Four-year player at the same lower-level school that spawned Tony Romo. "He's an interesting cat," one scout said. "Gets the ball out very well. He's sort of like Carr. He doesn't have the same arm but he's got great feet, a quick release and he's accurate. He played with some very pedestrian football players." Played well in the East-West Shrine Game and Senior Bowl. "This guy has everything you're looking for," said another scout. "(A.J.) McCarron isn't even comparable." Wonderlic of 24.

Carlos Hyde, RB, Ohio State: 5-11½, 230. Production improved each year during five years in Columbus. "He could be late first (round)," one scout said. "It's just if he clears through the personal stuff, the off-field. Because he's a big dude and he runs big. He's just a power back." Wonderlic score was merely 9. "I don't know if that makes a difference at running back," another scout said, referring to the Wonderlic. "Good player. Just the stuff they tell you about him, you worry about his work ethic. He had some stuff off the field."

Tre Mason*, RB, Auburn: 5-8, 207. Catapulted into prominence in 2013 with 317 carries for 1,816 yards (5.7) and 23 TDs. "Had probably the best games of his career in the last two or three," one scout said. "Speed is not great but good enough. Good vision. Doesn't wear down." Has a reputation for fumbling. Just 19 receptions. "He maximized all the talent he's got," another scout said. "He runs hard. Gives you everything he's got. Not going to look good at the combine as far as the 40, height and all that. But the guy knows how to run and is productive."

Jeremy Hill*, RB, Louisiana State: 6-1, 233. Third-year sophomore. "I see him as the first back to go," one scout said. "He's talented. Can catch the ball, run the ball. He can stay on the field all three downs. He's just got a few off-the-field issues." Has been arrested twice for unrelated incidents. "I don't like his makeup," another scout said. "I don't like the way he runs. He's soft for a big guy. Some people say he's strong. He's not at all. He's got athletic talent and he's big but he's a soft runner."

Ra'Shede Hageman, DT, Minnesota: 6-6, 310. Fifth-year senior. "He's unique," one scout said. "He's big and long, and when he wants to play he can play. He has an unusual ability of batting balls down. He does play (high). He does a lot of things you don't like. But when he doesn't want to be shoved, around they can't shove him." Wonderlic of 13. Regarded as somewhat hard to coach. "For the one or two plays a game he plays good, he's a first-rounder," another scout said. "For the other 30 when he's out of the game, or the other 20 when he doesn't do anything, then he's a free agent. It all depends how you value the kid."

Kony Ealy*, DE, Missouri: 6-4, 273. Fourth-year junior. "He really came on," one scout said. "Late first or early second. Got really good size. Can play in multiple schemes. He can be an outside backer or a DE." Scouts say he sucked up the double-teams away from fellow DE Michael Sam, who had 11½ sacks. "He's big, fast, strong," another scout said. "Got a lot of up side. He's not Justin Tuck."

Aaron Donald, DT, Pittsburgh: 6-0½, 285. Undersized three-technique in a 4-3 scheme. "He was the most valuable player in the Senior Bowl, not Dee Ford," one scout said. "He's a good player if you can get by with his size. He reminds me of the guy from Iowa who plays for the Falcons (DT Jonathan Babineaux)." Also regarded as a better prospect than Green Bay DT Mike Daniels, another ex-Hawkeye. "He's productive as hell," one scout said. "He'll get his (expletive) kicked for 10 straight plays and then he'll make a sack. It's the damndest thing. But down in and down out, playing the run, it's going to be hard."

Dee Ford, DE-OLB, Auburn: 6-2, 252. Fifth-year senior. MVP of the Senior Bowl with multiple sacks and pressures. "Second round," one scout said. "He'd be best as a 3-4 outside backer. He does get a lot of offsides penalties but then he got a lot of sacks that way, too. He's got really good timing on that. I don't think he'll be a great rusher but I think he'll be pretty solid. Everybody needs rushers." Not all scouts think he's athletic enough to stand up. "Just a little guy that's not a special pass rusher," another scout said.

Timmy Jernigan*, DT, Florida State: 6-2, 299. Third-year junior. "Late first, early second," said one scout. "Very strong inside player. Short but very strong." Probably best as a cocked nose tackle or three-technique in a 4-3. "Those little guys get swallowed up and haven't been very effective," another scout said.

Trent Murphy, DE-OLB, Stanford: 6-5½, 250. Fifth-year senior with meat hooks for hands (111/8). "Little bit of an enigma for me," one scout said. "He's got all that stat production, but when you watch him, he's not really tough or strong. I don't know where to play him. 3-4 backer probably is the best fit, but I don't think he's that great of an athlete. He's not really a true edge guy."

Demarcus Lawrence*, DE-OLB, Boise State: 6-3, 251. Fourth-year junior. "He can fit anywhere," one scout said. "He's athletic enough to play outside linebacker. He's long enough to play an edge 4-3 rusher like Seattle uses. Worker. Good athlete. Second round." Was suspended three times for team violations.

Ryan Shazier*, LB, Ohio State: 6-1, 237. Third-year junior. "He can really run," one scout said. "I don't think he's as tough as (Tampa Bay's) Lavonte David, but he's faster. He runs like a deer. You'd have to think about him over Mosley." Should be taken in the first round. "He's little but, damn, he's the most explosive guy on the field," another scout said. "He goes in the 20s."

Chris Borland, ILB, Wisconsin: 5-11½, 248. Fifth-year senior. "I love him...love him," said one scout. "Only thing that gets him in trouble is his length (29¼ arms). I made a mistake on a guy named Sam Mills, OK? And this guy is (taller) than Sam Mills. He is better than Chris Spielman coming out. That running back from Ohio State (Carlos Hyde), he jacked him up twice on the goal line. My problem with him is his hamstring and groin problem. He has had those. Is height going to be an issue? Yes, but this guy has great instincts. For a linebacker, that's what you have to have." Scored 32 on the Wonderlic. "He's a hell of a college football player, and some guys think he can be a good pro," another scout said. "Some don't. He's short and has short (expletive) arms. He's instinctive as hell. He plays his (expletive) off. But what's his pro up side?"

Bradley Roby*, CB, Ohio State: 5-10, 190. Fourth-year junior. "He or (Darqueze) Dennard go first," one scout said, referring to the cornerbacks. "I question a little bit his stuff off the field. You've got to do more homework on him. But he's an explosive, fast player." Character questions cloud his status. "He's the most talented (cornerback) but he's totally undependable for me," said another scout. "Something's missing with him. When you talk about quickness, speed, athletic ability, change of direction, he's got all that. Then he just gets beat every game. It's mental. Some guys just don't have a feel for it. He just plays that way."

Darqueze Dennard, CB, Michigan State: 5-11, 190. Senior. "He knows how to play," one scout said. "He's a good player and Roby's not. Roby's a better athlete. Dennard will get overdrafted, because he's not a true cover guy. He grabs and holds all the time. I'm not sure he's going to be able to get away with that." Played almost exclusively press-man coverage. "He has great ball skills," another scout said. "I'm worried about two things: durability and how fast he is. He's had some concussions and shoulder problems, and that affects his tackling sometimes."

Justin Gilbert, CB, Oklahoma State: 5-11½, 195. Senior. "He's very perplexing to me," said one scout. "Big knock on him is ball skills. He's a big, long athlete that can run. He didn't play real well last year. They were even going to bench him because of inconsistent play. I just don't think he sees the ball real well. He has first-round talent but he's just up and down." The track record of Oklahoma State CBs in the NFL isn't stellar. "Gilbert gets beat all the time," a second scout said. "He's got some interception production, but when you see the picks they're not really legitimate ones."

Kyle Fuller, CB, Virginia Tech: 5-111/2, 189. Senior. "He's the best pure cover corner," said one scout. "He'll hit you and plays tough. He's had a history of injuries." Missed about a month with a groin injury late last season. "Little thin but a good football player," another scout said. "Second round."

Jason Verrett, CB, Texas Christian: 5-9½, 175. Senior. "I love him but I'm just worried about his size," one scout said. "Hell of a player. He's been healthy. Tough. He's a little bit like the guy from Connecticut (Darius Butler) that the Patriots took, but he's tougher than Butler. I saw some bigger guys run by him deep. Just out-sized him. Hell of a kid. Everything's positive about him. He has first-round talent but there's no way I would draft him there."

Bashaud Breeland*, CB, Clemson: 6-0, 190. Fourth-year junior. "Second round," said one scout. "Good size. Long arms. Good speed. A still-developing type player with starter-type ability." Added another scout: "Kind of a raw speed guy. Second or third (round)."

Calvin Pryor*, S, Louisville: 6-1, 210. Third-year junior. "He'll go in the same range as Clinton-Dix — 15 to 25," one scout said. "Some will like Pryor better. Little bit more physical than Clinton-Dix. Really good athlete. Solid smarts. He'll run 4.55. There's really two good safeties. The rest could play, but they're just down the line." Another scout agreed that Clinton-Dix and Pryor were the top two safeties but said drafting Pryor at 21 would be a reach. "He's like a tough guy, box safety, hitter," the second scout said. "Coverage is a little suspect. Misses a lot of tackles."