Topics: Best of 2013, Bustle, Catherine, duchess of cambridge, Editor's Picks, elan gale, James Taranto, Kate Middleton, lululemon, maria kang, miss america, Richard Cohen, robin thicke, Sexism, Life News

Let’s not even go into the attacks on reproductive freedom or all the violence against women, or even the Aaron Sorkin characters who set your teeth on edge. Let’s just talk about the ways pop culture can chip away at the soul, the ways a jokey demonstration of a game or an imaginary Twitter fight or yet another celebrity explaining that she believes in equality but don’t call her a feminist or the sound of that song that just wouldn’t go away can make a person realize how far we still have to go. There were truly far too many contenders to choose from this year, but these were the sexist lowlights that raised our blood pressure most.

Elan Gale

It turned out “Diane,” the huffy airline passenger in the medical mask, never even existed. What Buzzfeed dubbed an “epic” encounter that “won” Thanksgiving was instead merely the “Bachelor” producer’s stunt to “entertain some people” with “a cautionary tale.” Gale’s “entertaining,” “cautionary” message? You can pretend to send a strange woman a note saying, “Eat my dick” and be lauded as a champion of civility. Got it.

Bustle

In an inadvertently revealing feature on Bleacher Report co-founder Bryan Goldberg’s attempt to “redefine what ‘women’s interest’ looks like,” the New Yorker showed the world a man who’s disappointed. Disappointed, because “Honestly, nothing would have been more helpful here than for some highly regarded feminist writers to say, ‘Bryan’s a good person.'” A man who explains, “I am a dude. I don’t have a lot of overlapping interests with most women my age. I’m really into history. I’m really into markets and finance. I don’t know a damn thing about beauty, but I don’t need to.” Because those unhelpful feminists wouldn’t be into history or finance. And the photo accompanying the whole thing? It was of a thoughtful Goldberg sprawled on the floor and surrounded by a gaggle of female employees, tapping away on a laptop perched on a high-heeled, short-skirted woman’s lap. Who says it’s tough for women to find desk jobs?

Sexism pretending to be journalism

Goodness, where to begin? James Taranto boo-hooing over a “war on men” and “an effort to criminalize male sexuality” in a story on military sexual assault? Richard Cohen’s bizarre Miley Cyrus-centric complaining about “the so-called Steubenville Rape” (an odd term for a crime that has so far led to two rape convictions)? How about CNN’s pity party for the rapists? Maybe a Fox News guest’s assertion that women should “thank men” for freeing us up “to embrace that side of yourself that isn’t about work”? We could list all the ways the media gave a platform to Dark Ages ignorance, but we’d be here till 2015.

Lululemon

What do you if you’re a “premium” clothing brand faced with accusations of deteriorating quality in your merchandise? If you’re Chip Wilson, you oh so subtly suggest maybe the problem is your fat, scratchy thighs, lady – perhaps because his company’s pants only go up to size 12 anyway. In a Bloomberg interview in November, the company founder said, “Some women’s bodies just actually don’t work for it … They don’t work for some women’s bodies. It’s about the rubbing through the thighs, [and] how much pressure is there.” Women and their thighs protested otherwise. Wilson abruptly stepped down as company chairman a month later.

Maria Kang

Speaking of body wars. First, she laid down the gauntlet – and got herself a whole lot of free publicity – by posing in an abs-flaunting ensemble surrounded by her three children and provocatively asking, “What’s your excuse?” Then Kang ramped it up by ranting against Curvy Girl Lingerie’s campaign of plus-sized women posting photos of themselves in their underwear and complaining, “We’re normalizing obesity in our society.” To cap it all off, she confidently told ABC in early December, “I said you can just tell by looking at someone if they are fit or not…. Anyone can tell this with a bare naked eye looking at a bare naked stomach.” For her obsessive fat-shaming, Kang is proof that a woman can be just as backward and toxic as any man.