I would like to donate $

Per Month Per Year One Time

Donate Now

Video by Brian Myers, Media Arts Center San Diego

Here’s her question:

“When I graduate in May, I will be looking at Covered California plans, and I wondered what kind of mental health services are available under the different plans.”

The Takeaway: Insurance companies must cover mental illness as they would a physical ailment.

California already had a law on the books that says insurance companies must cover mental illness as they would a physical ailment. So, if you can get outpatient services, hospitalization and medicine for a heart attack, you can get it for depression, too. And the law says it can’t cost more.

The Obama administration recently announced the strengthening of a similar federal parity law, which is not tied to the Affordable Care Act.

The health reform law, however, does offer some new benefits for people with mental disorders. Depression and other disorders will no longer keep you from getting insurance or cause you to pay a higher premium. And depression screenings and behavioral assessments will be offered free of charge.

The law also specifically includes services for mental health and substance use disorders in its list of required benefits, so there’s no getting around it. All new plans will let you see a counselor regularly, seek specialty care related to mental illness, be hospitalized and get prescription drugs. Generally, your copay or cost share for such services will match those for comparable medical services.

The Orders: Talk to your doctor about which insurance she accepts.

D’Alonzo said keeping her current counselor will be at the top of her wish list when she goes shopping on the exchange. Currently, Covered California’s doctor directory is far from perfect, so it’s best she asks her doctor which insurance she accepts before making a decision.

Other than that, it’s all about comparing prices. Mental health is covered, but what she pays per visit depends on what she pays in premiums.

Check out last week’s Second Opinion: What does Obamacare mean for health savings accounts?

This article relates to: City Heights, Community, Health Care, News, Share

Written by Megan Burks Megan Burks is a reporter for Speak City Heights, a media project of Voice of San Diego, KPBS, Media Arts Center and The AjA Project. You can contact her directly by emailing meburks@kpbs.org.