Weather impacts our daily lives, no matter the time, the month, or the day. As new year celebrations were wrapping up in January of 2015, many friends and families had to take shelter from the wrath of mother nature. It had been four years since an EF-4 tornado devastated the Rose Hill community in Jasper County, and once again residents were forced to take cover as an early January storm began to impact the area. One of the homes heavily hit was the family of Jalesa Bender, who saw her childhood home destroyed.

"I was in tears already, you know, once I heard the news," Bender said. "I was like what, this is my childhood, this is where I grew up. To think it was destroyed and gone just that fast, it's devastating. We're just blessed to be here, material things can be replaced."

The tornado damage was isolated along County Road 20, but for those who lived along the road it was a scene they don't every want to experience again. Several miles north in Lauderdale County, residents in Bailey also saw the wrath of mother nature, as an EF-1 tornado swept through their area, leaving trees down and homes damaged.

"It was just fear, praying, asking God to protect us and our kids," Bailey tornado victim Setabitha Hunt said. "Just a lot of emotions, you know it's kind of that moment you just don't know. It happened so fast, we were just praying for our lives."

Clean-up soon began across the state where numerous other tornadoes touched down, and then the weather for the most part calmed down. February saw a visit from Old Man Winter, as parts of Mississippi and Alabama saw measurable snowfall. March through early summer experienced normal conditions, before the middle of summer began to transition into a drought the state hadn't seen in several years.

"It is so dry, that the soil is dry pretty deep," Mississippi Forestry Commission Greg Chatham said. "It is going to take a pretty good amount of rain to get things damped back up."

The drought persisted through early Fall before much needed rain began to Fall on the area and by the end of October, which experienced one of the wettest on records. By then, the drought was over. As the calendar flipped to new a new month, Meridian saw one of the warmest Novembers on record and by December the warming pattern continued that carried on into Christmas week. That week saw a brutal winter cold front, which once again brought a round of severe weather in Mississippi. Several tornadoes impacted the Deep South, with Holly Springs seeing the brunt of the weather, as a long track tornado damaged homes for miles.

"This is a miracle," Ashland resident Dr. Patrick Washington said. "There's no way that three individuals were in the house at this time and they were able to walk away."

Clean-up is still ongoing and for many 2015 will be a year they will remember because the weather impacted them. With the close of 2015, we now shift our focus to the weather in 2016 and how it will affect us and who.