Emmanuel Mudiay left the Pepsi Center on Sunday in a walking boot and with the knowledge that, on Monday, he would miss his first game as a professional.

The sprained right ankle, which didn’t allow the rookie point guard to play during the second half of the Nuggets’ win over Minnesota on Friday night, will prevent him from facing the Houston Rockets, Denver’s next opponent.

Mudiay described the injury as “kind of what happened in China, but not as bad as what happened in China. Better treatment here, and everything is going to go a lot faster.”

The Nuggets surely hope it’s a faster process than what he endured playing for the Guangdong Southern Tigers last season in China. He suffered an ankle injury last December that kept him out of action until February. He played just 10 games before returning to play in two playoff games.

Nuggets coach Michael Malone mentioned that Mudiay tweaked his ankle during a practice session recently, but Mudiay said that didn’t have anything to do with what happened against the Timberwolves.

“It just happened on the court,” Mudiay said. “I jammed it a little bit. It wasn’t really a roll. I didn’t feel it roll. I just felt it jam. So that was really it.”

Mudiay has started all 23 games of his first season with the Nuggets and averages 10.7 points and 5.7 assists per game. Veteran Jameer Nelson is expected to get the start against the Rockets, whom the Nuggets are facing for the third and final time this season.

Nelson had one of his best games of the season in Friday’s victory against the Timberwolves, scoring a season-high 20 points on 7-of-12 shooting in a season-high 38 minutes. Nelson made four 3-pointers in the third quarter alone on his way to his first 20-point game since he scored 22 last March 28 against Portland.

“I’m never concerned about missing or making shots,” Nelson said. “It’s just me being aggressive. That’s the ultimate goal for myself, to be aggressive and pick and choose my spots when to shoot and know what the team needs.”

Malone praised Nelson’s overall play this season, saying “Jameer’s a pro, a guy that’s played in many, many big games, and I trust him.”

Asked how he thought his season was going, Nelson remained matter-of-fact.

“It goes up and down a little bit,” Nelson said. “As the backup point, you come in and be who you are, but you also have to see what the team needs at that time. You want to play all of the minutes, but everybody has a role; everybody has a job to do. I just try to do my job to the best of my ability.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or @dempseypost

HOUSTON AT DENVER 7 p.m. Monday, ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Clint Capela:

If you made a list of relative unknowns who make big impacts on their respective teams, Capela would be on it. The second-year center out of Switzerland gives the Rockets toughness in the post, rebounding and rim protection with averages of 8.2 points, 6.8 rebounds and 1.2 blocks per game.

NOTEBOOK

Nuggets:

Forward Darrell Arthur did not practice on Sunday due to soreness in his right knee, but he remains questionable for Monday’s game against the Rockets. He did not play in the team’s last game against Minnesota. … The Nuggets have already won the season series against the Rockets, up 2-0, going into the final matchup today.

Rockets:

Montrezl Harrell, the rookie out of Louisville has been assigned to the D-League. Forward Sam Dekker will not play against the Nuggets due to lower back pain. … Former Nuggets guard Ty Lawson has fallen out of the starting lineup in Houston, and in his last five games has struggled with averages of 3.4 points and 4.0 assists. He’s shot 27.8 percent from the field in that span.

Christopher Dempsey, The Denver Post