James H. Walsh was associate general counsel with the U.S. Department of Justice Immigration and Naturalization Service from 1983 to 1994. Read more reports from James Walsh — Click Here Now .

On March 13, 2014, The White House announced that President Obama has directed the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to enforce the nation’s immigration laws “more humanely.” Obama again has decided not to enforce laws of the United States, including making continual alterations and changes in his own Obamacare.“Humane enforcement” of immigration laws is just another name for amnesty and not even a backdoor amnesty.Speaker John Boehner understands that President Obama means what he says about vetoing any legislation that requires him to follow the law, as do all elected Republicans.With only 3 percent of Americans believe immigration is a priority, according to a Gallup poll, Obama and the Democrats resort to chicanery to thwart the will of the people.The 2014 Senate version of comprehensive immigration reform, entitled Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act (S.744) is really the brainchild of Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev.Nothing is passed by the Democratic-controlled Senate without his permission. In reality the bill is a replica of the infamous Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA). Reid’s bill pretends to provide more effective border and employment enforcement, preventing illegal immigration, and reforming and rationalizing avenues for legal immigration. Neither Obama nor Reid really believes that the proposed bill if passed would be enforced. The immediate past is prologue.Considering the present unemployment and underemployment figures for Americans the Senate bill would exacerbate an already bad situation. The “citizenship” provision would add a minimum of 13 million new workers to an anemic job market in the first year and about 3.3 million new workers each year thereafter.The House of Representatives under the leadership of Speaker Boehner appears to favor incremental immigration reform. Boehner is correct the nation does not need another legislative fiasco, while the Democrats want a comprehensive immigration bill regardless of the impact on the unemployed middle-class.Border control and enhancement were presented as the keystone of IRCA, but the Obama administration has reduced border enforcement by bureaucratic methods. Thus, border security is rendered useless. Border Patrol agents are told to release apprehended illegal aliens pending judicial hearings; often the aliens fail to appear, and the cases are dismissed.Those that do appear are released under Obama’s “prosecutorial discretion” policy. The recorded numbers of apprehensions are decreasing because the apprehended aliens are returned across the border within hours of apprehension.In 2005, Doris Meissner, commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) under President Bill Clinton, opined that the amnesty deal based upon employer sanctions, border enforcement, and legalization would disintegrate in practice. She was correct.The employer sanctions requirement of IRCA which was another major provision of the Act is a failure. IRCA made it unlawful to hire or recruit illegal aliens for employment in the United States and the government would seek financial penalties. However, it proved to be unworkable from the enforcement perspective and as a legal reality.The Washington Times reported on Feb. 26, 2014, that a DHS Inspector General’s audit established the Obama administration cuts the fines levied for the few people and businesses proved to have hired illegal aliens. The cuts in fines are as much as 40 percent, defeating the purpose of the law — humane treatment.The rudderless Obama immigration policy is based on Obama’s executive orders and bureaucratic regulations.Meanwhile, a new entry strategy by illegal aliens has developed and is being used. As the Los Angeles Times reported on Feb. 24, 2014, the Southern border is being flooded by children and teens illegally crossing the border.Children as young as 5-6 and teenagers are being apprehended sneaking into the country and they are never deported. The Obama administration has no will to enforce the immigration laws and certainly not as to children.Also in March 2014, Obama is by-passing immigrations laws by giving legal status to all illegal alien relatives of present and former military members, regardless of type of service or length of service — humane enforcement.All the economic indicators establish that America has been and will be for years to come in a “tight labor market,” as all economists know, with real unemployment is at 19 percent and rising.The president and the Democratic-controlled Senate have no interest what the American people know are the legislative priorities, jobs, and the economy — politics prevail over the best interests of the country.American laws be damned!