From the earliest days of our founding as a nation, our courts have served as a check on the power of the government to act. The Constitution is the supreme law of the land and no executive act or legislative enactment may conflict with it.

The courts use judicial review to declare actions of the executive or legislative body invalid if they are contrary to the Constitution. This applies to the federal government and to state governments.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

The people of Oklahoma can and have changed our state Constitution on several occasions throughout our history. This great document, although lengthy, is quite remarkable. The preamble states: Invoking the guidance of Almighty God, in order to secure and perpetuate the blessings of liberty; to secure just and rightful government; to promote our mutual welfare and happiness, we, the people of the State of Oklahoma, do ordain and establish this Constitution.

Article 2 ยง 1 states: All political power is inherent in the people; and government is instituted for their protection, security and benefit, and to promote their general welfare; and they have the right to alter or reform the same whenever the public good may require it. Provided, such change be not repugnant to the Constitution of the United States.

Recently, the judiciary of our state has come under attack from individuals and groups who disagree with decisions of the various courts of our state. There is an attempt to "regulate" them into submission to a specific way of thought or action that would destroy the independence and nonpartisan make-up of the judicial system.

Oklahoma has a colorful history of a partisan judiciary. Sadly, and as an embarrassment to justice and our state, some of our popularly partisan elected judicial officers perverted justice, and as a result they were ousted and sent to prison.

Thereafter the people established the nonpartisan, independent judiciary that provided for local involvement in the appointment of judicial officers. This is known as the Judicial Nominating Commission. A commission of attorneys and lay people selected independently and not of the same political party to recommend to the governor those people who are qualified by education, experience, temperament and background to be judges and justices of our courts.

To date, no judge or justice vetted through this process has been removed for misconduct.

Today in our present age in our state, there are competing interests that wish to destroy the independence of our judiciary and return to the bad old days of partisan politics in our judicial selection process. For example:

The governor will have the authority to fill all judicial vacancies subject to Senate confirmation. This is a process similar to the federal system, which has struggled for years to fill judicial vacancies. By requiring Senate confirmation you return to partisan politics in the judicial selection and since the Senate is only in session four months a year, a county may wait an entire year or more for a judicial confirmation.

Eliminate the Judicial Nominating Commission entirely. This would allow the governor to select whomever he or she wished to fill a vacancy and would return politics into the selection process. The people would no longer have a direct voice or representative in the appointment of judges.

Allow the governor to select the chief justice of the Oklahoma Supreme court. Twelve states use this process; 22 states, including Oklahoma provide the chief to be selected by his/her peers. In seven states the chief is selected by partisan or nonpartisan election and in seven states the chief is selected by seniority.

Term limits for justices and judges. The people no longer would have a direct voice in the retention of any justice or appellate judge. Many of the best lawyers will not accept judicial appointments if term limits are imposed on trial court judges. According to the National Center for State Courts, no other state or territory has ever adopted term limits for justices, appellate judges, district judges or associate district judges.

Our system of judicial independence is not broken. It is under attack. Laws can be changed by the Legislature and by the people if done so according to the Constitution.

Politicalizing our judiciary would have a chilling effect on the "check" the courts now have on the executive and the legislative bodies.

Citizens should beware of those who wish to change a system because they disagree with a decision or ruling. Their livelihood or liberty could be at stake someday and a judge beholding to the executive or Legislature may not be able to protect them from the long arm of the government.

The check and balance system of our Constitution is the marvel of all who love freedom and representative government. The judicial system is not broken. It does not need to be fixed. Keep it independent and nonpartisan.