Most of our nation’s leaders have visited this area since the middle of the 20th century. Among them have been Presidents Franklin Roosevelt, Dwight Eisenhower, Gerald Ford, Ronald Reagan, George H.W. Bush, Barack Obama and, as seen here, John F. Kennedy.

In this photograph taken Oct. 17, 1953, then-Sen. Kennedy sits behind his wife, Jacqueline, and his sister, Eunice Shriver. The trio were at Notre Dame Stadium for a football game against Pittsburgh, which Notre Dame won 24-14.

Born on May 29, 1917, in Brookline, Mass., John was exposed to politics early on. His grandfather P.J. was a Massachusetts representative and senator in the late 1800s, and his father, Joseph, was the U.S. ambassador to Great Britain in the late 1930s.

John, prior to embarking on his political career, graduated from Harvard University and served in the Naval Reserve during World War II. He was awarded a Purple Heart for the heroic rescue of his crew after the P.T. (patrol torpedo) boat he commanded was cut in half by a Japanese destroyer.

It was John’s older brother, Joseph Jr., who originally was groomed for the presidency. When he was killed in action during the war, the family’s great expectations fell to John.

Elected as a U.S. representative of Massachusetts in 1946, Kennedy served in Congress for six years. He then defeated Republican incumbent Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. in the 1952 U.S. senatorial election. Kennedy married Jacqueline Bouvier on Sept. 12, 1953, in Newport, R.I., and served from 1952 to 1960 as a senator for his home state.

Kennedy began his campaign for presidency in the 1960s, at a time when America faced increasing tensions abroad as well as at home. The race between him and Republican candidate Richard M. Nixon was uncomfortably close, with Nixon’s experience facing off against Kennedy’s youth and charisma. On Jan. 20, 1961, Kennedy was sworn in at the age of 43 as the 35th president of the United States.

Due in part to his Irish Catholic roots, Kennedy maintained a longtime relationship with the University of Notre Dame. He spoke at the winter commencement ceremony and received an honorary degree from Notre Dame in 1950, and he received the university's Patriot of the Year Award in 1957.

He was given the Laetare Medal, the university’s highest honor, in 1961. The Rev. Theodore M. Hesburgh and the Rev. Edmund P. Joyce, then Notre Dame’s president and vice president, respectively, were in attendance at the White House for the presentation of the medal.

In November 1963, on the day after Kennedy was assassinated, Notre Dame had been scheduled to play the University of Iowa in a football game. Out of respect and sadness, the game was canceled.

This information was provided by The History Museum. If you would like to donate photographs of political figures to the museum, or will allow a digital copy of your image to be made, call the museum at 574-235-9664.