Former three-term U.S. Rep. Carol Shea-Porter made it official Saturday. She is running again for the 1st District U.S. House seat she lost last year to Republican Frank Guinta.

New Hampshire Democratic Convention held Saturday Fired up by the cheers, chants and thunderous applause of their frenzied supporters, Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders vied for the hearts and minds of more than 4,000 Democrats Saturday at the New Hampshire Democratic Party's biggest convention ever. More

Democrat Shea-Porter filed her statement of candidacy earlier this year but had previously said only that she would be a candidate in a special election if Guinta had stepped down as a result of his campaign finance problems.

But Guinta remains in office and has said he will run for re-election.

At the New Hampshire Democratic Party convention, Shea-Porter told several thousand party faithful that she will be a candidate next year, regardless of what Guinta does.

“I’m in,” Shea-Porter told the crowd. “Are you?”

Shea-Porter compared herself to the late congresswoman Shirley Chisholm, who, she said, called herself “unbought and unbossed.

“I would add unbreakable,” Shea-Porter said.

In a statement issued as she delivered her announcement, Shea-Porter said:

“I’m running again because I have the experience, the competence, and the integrity to serve the rest of us and to fight against special interests. I never take money from corporate PACs and D.C. lobbyists, so, to quote Shirley Chisholm, I am ‘unbought and unbossed’—and, I might add, unbreakable!

"That’s why I have won most of my races in a district where Republicans have a registration advantage. Republicans, Independents, and Democrats deserve a member of Congress who provides honest service to the people of our state, and I look forward to doing that again."

Shea-Porter is the second Democrat to declare for the seat, joining Bedford businessman Shawn O'Connor.

Speaking after Shea-Porter, O'Connor called himself "a pragmatic progressive" and called for a nationwide "LGBT civil rights bill."

Calling for a $15 an hour minimum wage, he promised to take only that amount as a congressional salary if elected. He said he will donate the remainder of his congressional salary to New Hampshire charities.

State Republican Party Chairwoman Jennifer Horn issued a statement critical of Shea-Porter:

“New Hampshire voters rejected Congresswoman Shea-Porter last year because they were fed up with her lockstep support for President Obama’s harmful partisanship and reckless tax-and-spend agenda. Granite Staters haven’t forgotten her support for Obamacare, which caused thousands of working families to lose their health insurance and countless more to lose their doctors, their jobs and hope for a better future.

"Former Congresswoman Shea-Porter lost last year and will lose again next year because she is dangerously out-of-touch and does not represent New Hampshire values.