Gay marriage & its discontents

Manhattan: It’s a testament to the laziness of people that so many are cheering the Supreme Court’s gay marriage decision. Even the Supremes said it was, um, actually legalized in 1868 when equal protection was made federal law in the 14th Amendment. A hundred and five years to get the government to obey its own laws? If you call that progress, you need to raise your standards. Shauna Erlbaum

Rockaway Point: Sorry, but the Supreme Court has no right to tell 50 states what they should do about gay marriage or any other matter. Each state should be able to vote on the matter. Let the people decide. Regina Mangan

Copiague, L.I.: So the Supreme Court has now decided that same-sex marriage is legal in all 50 states. But what is most disappointing is that the Chief Justice John Roberts voted against it. The one person on the Supreme Court who is supposed to be the wisest. He should resign his post as chief justice for pandering to the extreme right religious zealots. Thank you to the five justices who did what was right. Carl J. C.-Hafner

Bayside: The Supreme Court decision to allow gay marriage is a grave error brought about by misleading representations by the psychological profession. Each of the assertions that the majority decision of the court used can easily be demonstrated to be invalid. The result is, in fact, an egregious assault on the institution of our courts. George W. Mouchette

SCOTUScare

Brooklyn: So I guess the people who do not work and have no income are happy that the Supreme Court upheld Obamacare. As far as the rest of us, who work and pay taxes, it stinks. If you do not have health insurance and you earn an income, you will get penalized. If you make a living and get Obamacare, it costs a fortune for a decent plan — and they keep raising the price each year. We who work and have other medical insurance are getting hammered for out-of-pocket expenses. We also now have to pay a percentage for MRIs, CAT scams and other tests. Obamacare has killed full-time jobs and put a lot of people out of work because no one wants to pay for benefits. America, come out, come out. wherever you are! Regina Sirico

One more look?

East Brunswick, N.J.: I think the Supreme Court should take a second look at Obamacare. If it’s so great, why don’t our elected officials in Washington and their staffs get it? If everyone can now get health coverage, than why can’t my son afford to be covered? Oh, you can get insurance, but your deductible is $6,000 and you pay $240 a month, so you are paying the insurance company for nothing. You still pay out of pocket for doctor visits, prescriptions and deductibles, so you get nothing for your money from Obamacare. Cathy Small

American shame

Bellerose: I found Voicer Rachel Eriksen’s letter disturbing and sad. Whatever the prisoners did to be incarcerated, there is never any excuse to treat human beings like animals. We need a prison overhaul that allows every prisoner a minimum number of hours outdoors and that allows them basic decent food, diversions and humane treatment. Living the better part of one’s days in a small cell is punishment enough. The fact that someone like Eriksen is unable to introduce positive changes for fear of retribution is despicable and a very sad statement about America. Kathryn Brickell

What’s up with that?

Medford, L.I.: I don’t understand all the attention Caitlyn Jenner is getting. She is a freak of nature, like a two-headed calf. The exception of same-sex marriage has opened a Pandora’s box to all sorts of debauchery. What happened to America’s Judeo-Christian ethic? Vincent Manente

And what’s up with this?

Brooklyn: How come Al Sharpton is not talking about black-on-black killings? All he does on his radio show is talk about white people this and white people that, but he never speaks out about his own people killing one another. Dennis Olsen

What’s going on

Brooklyn: What in the world is going on? We have a President who’s on a level with Jimmy Carter, so other nations see us as weak. As to our current mayor, who’s on a level with David Dinkins, I believe one of the reasons that crime is increasing is the dramatic reduction in stop and frisk. Sammy Sanseverino

America’s birthday nears

Manhattan: On July Fourth, we appreciate independence. It means that the United States are one, and we citizens have the civil and legal rights to be in it. It means we have the right to pursue happiness. It means, apparently, that we more or less come together to discuss important issues like the war on ISIS, immigration and immigration. Can’t you hear the words from 1776? Ruth A. Unterberg

What’s good for the horse

Astoria: To Voicer Barbara Bellucio: Why don’t you and all the carriage-horse lovers try standing all day, winter and summer, outside the Plaza Hotel, while at the same time sucking in car, bus and truck exhaust? Sound pleasant? Joe Ametrano

Hat trick

Bethesda, Md.: Your photos of the very attractive women at the Belmont Stakes were outstanding, but these women were clearly the exception, even in the owners’ box. There were many more women in attractive hats at the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness. Look at the pictures. Does this mean that the apex of women’s fashion is now Louisville or Baltimore? Edward A. Padelford

Behind the scenes

Brooklyn: Congratulations to American Pharoah for winning thoroughbred racing’s Triple Crown. Of course, not everyone got to share in the glory. I’m talking about the racetrack workers who are behind the scenes, doing hard, menial work at the track for low wages. Hopefully, fans will be able to take a moment to say thanks to them. Andrew Trontz

Sanders lives

Brooklyn: I for one am so glad Kentucky Fried Chicken, now formally known as KFC, resurrected Col. Sanders. That guy is a riot. Every time he sings I smile, and when he laughs I laugh harder. I wait for his commercial. I love that guy. Lottie Murphy

Bootleg Boone

Saratoga Springs, N.Y.: Pat Boone says he’s sick of Obama calling everything “racist.” This from a man who made a fortune covering — and ruining — Little Richard’s music. Shut up, Pat. Bob English

Semper Fi

Brooklyn: To Voicers Arnold and Barbaran Fortgang and Leila Farley: None of you must be Americans or none of you must have served in any branch of the American military to make such nonsense comments. My four brothers and I, as well as my son, are Marine vets. I also have done volunteer work in VA hospitals. If you have any decency, you should visit these wounded warriors and see how much they love serving their country and want to get back with their brothers on the front lines. I give $19 a month to the Wounded Warrior Project, which has helped so many disabled service men and women. The thing you forget about is that these same young people are fighting so you can live freely. You sound like a heartless, worthless person and can’t see beyond your nose. Emily A. Cole

From father to child

Woodhaven: Voicer Craig Schwab’s letter on the “purity of what Father’s Day means” details a walk he and his children took in Forest Park and a ride on the carousel there, where they were all smiles as they went “round and round.” This made me very happy, since thanks to 25 years of hard work by the Greater Woodhaven Development Corporation and with the support of Forest Park lovers and our elected officials, we finally secured landmark status for our beloved carousel. Because of this landmarking, this father’s grandchildren and all future generations of children can enjoy a ride on this magical carousel — on Father’s Day and every day. Maria A. Thomson

Playing it safe

Glendale: When I worked as a NYCHA maintenance man and installed window guards, I lowered the top window so it opened only 4” from the top. I then installed an angle iron so that the window only opened 4” from the top. This way a child couldn’t fall out of the top window past the guard. Hopefully this idea will save a life. Vincent Femenella