If you like Obamacare and its abortion funding and rationing of health care, Vivek Hallegere Murthy will let you keep it. Murthy is the physician President Barack Obama will nominate to become the next Surgeon General.

Murthy, if confirmed, would replace Regina Benjamin, who supported abortion. Prior to her selection as Surgeon General, Benjamin served on the board of directors of a pro-abortion organization and appeared to support an American Medical Association vote asking colleges to teach more about abortions.

For more on the nomination:

Vivek Hallegere Murthy, president of Doctors for America, will succeed Rear Admiral Boris Lushniak, who has been acting as the surgeon general since July, overseeing public health endeavors around the country, after Regina Benjamin completed her four-year term. Doctors for America is a group of 15,000 physicians and medical students that has rallied behind Obamacare through participating in marches, filing an amicus brief in the Supreme Court case on the law, and even visiting the Republican National Convention to promote it, according to the group’s website. In 2011 Obama appointed Murthy to an advisory group on prevention formed under the law, the White House said.

According to a report in the Washington Free Beacon newspaper, Murthy said in 2012 that the ida that anyone would lose their health insurance under Obamacare was a “myth.” Never mind that 5 million Americans have lost their insurance — includuing patients with cancer.

Murthy made the remarks at a forum about health care reform and physician advocacy, while he was discussing community outreach he was doing as a way of promoting Obamacare. CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE! “Along the way, we encountered a tremendous amount of misinformation that was out there,” he said. “And when we would talk to folks and we would dispel some of these myths about things like death panels and mandatory payments that everybody was going to have to make, and myths that people were going to lose their insurance, when we dispelled a lot of these myths, we found people were first relieved but then they were angry.”

—