When Mr. Spock passed away last weekend, President Barack Obama promptly eulogized him as “cool, logical, big-eared and level-headed, the center of Star Trek’s optimistic, inclusive vision of humanity’s future.” With those characteristics, Obama—a legitimate fan of Star Trek—has often been compared to Spock, but it’s clear looking around Washington that there’s no real Spock-style leadership to be found.

What would the late Mr. Spock have thought of American politics ethics? Undoubtedly he would have arched a Vulcan eyebrow, shaken his head with cryptic amusement, and summarized the American political system with that quintessential Spock-ian word: Fascinating.

Story Continued Below

The death last week of Leonard Nimoy, the actor who played the pointy-eared first officer of the starship Enterprise, was more than the passing of a cultural icon. It also marked the demise of a fictional character who might have been the only creature in the universe capable of saving Washington.

Spock was a Vulcan, a race devoted to logic, efficiency and ethics. President Spock would never have authorized waterboarding. His bearded doppelganger in the evil Mirror Universe did use torture, but even Bad Spock would never have sold out for a campaign contribution. And President Spock would have been very effective in his use of the Vulcan Mind Meld (what is John Boehner really thinking?), not to mention the Vulcan Nerve Pinch, which he could have deployed on many people on the Hill, starting perhaps with Darrell Issa.

President Spock’s foreign policy would have been principled but realistic. He found violence distasteful and frequently irrational. He could use force with deadly efficiency, but force proportional to the threat. Spock would have criticized U.S. foreign policy as a violation of the Prime Directive against interfering in other cultures.

If we ever did get lucky enough to have a Spock as president, the question is inevitable: Would he have been a Republican or Democrat? Almost certainly Spock would have joined the Democrats. Vulcan tenets such as “Infinite Diversity in Infinite Combinations” or “the needs of the many outweigh the needs of the one” are hardly Tea Party mantras. Spock was a product of the 24th century, when humanity had eliminated poverty, hunger and racism. That a nation would tolerate such afflictions would seem inconceivable. That the top one percent prospers while the other 99 percent don’t would strike him as not just wrong, but an inefficient allocation of resources.

Yet if you believe that President Spock would have been a liberal do-gooder, a green-blooded Ralph Nader or Elizabeth Warren, then you are in error. Spock would have disdained progressive parties no less than conservative, because the thought of voting against logic and ethics in the name of lockstep party loyalty would have been abhorrent. He was a half-breed born of a rigidly logical Vulcan father and a strongly compassionate human mother. It left him with a foot in two cultures and a home in neither. But this very alienation also made him the ultimate bipartisan. President Spock would try to understand the views of his opponents. He would never wish a pox upon them.

What Spock would have wished for was government that works. Even the most stoic Vulcan would grimace at the partisan gridlock that paralyzes Washington. Spock would have been astounded that Americans allowed the federal government to be shut down in 2013 because Republicans opposed Obamacare. He would have frowned at Democratic politicians who used the “nuclear option” because they didn’t get their nominees appointed. Perhaps such apocalyptic sentiments would have reminded him of “The Doomsday Machine,” a powerful alien weapon that ultimately destroyed both the enemy and its creators. Surely an intelligent species could find a more logical way to resolve conflict than mutual political destruction?

It is not that Spock would have found the issues of conservatism versus liberalism, big government versus small government, to be trivial. He was too deep a thinker to dismiss the power of ideas. But logic would have told him that a political system must function, because otherwise it serves no purpose.

Therefore, demonizing political opponents is illogical, because it ends in deadlock where no one gets what he or she wants. Heated rhetoric and vicious attack ads are illogical, because they only induce the opposition to fight harder. Even worse, they also betray a lack of self-control, the inability to master emotions and the failure to solve problems through the power of reason. Could there be a crime more unpardonable in Vulcan eyes?

Spock would sigh at the American habit of vilifying politicians for greed and incompetence, yet still re-electing them to office. “Well, there it is,” Kirk says as he prepares to fight the Klingons. “War. We didn’t want it, but we’ve got it.”

And Spock’s quiet reply: “Curious how often you humans manage to obtain that which you do not want.”

While Spock has often been compared with Obama, with whom he does shares a resemblance in appearance and mannerisms, relations between Spock and the president would probably be cool and correct as befits fellow Vulcans. However, Spock might have better enjoyed the company of John McCain, whose impulsiveness would have reminded him of his friend James Kirk.

Spock was often exasperated by Kirk’s emotional and erratic behavior. However, he was also wise enough to counsel Kirk to use emotion when logic simply could not provide an answer (“Without facts, the decision cannot be made logically. You must rely on your human intuition.”) Spock would decry the passions poisoning American politics, but he might also advise Obama to be a little more passionate about pressing his legislative agenda, because that is what voters respond to.

In the end, for all his bewilderment and frustration with humans, Spock also had an abiding respect for what humanity could accomplish at its best. Vulcans only turned to logic after their own violent passions nearly destroyed them. America, too, seems consumed by extreme and intolerant ideologies from right and left.

The political system seems bankrupt. Prosperity and freedom seem eroded—and yet Americans have the chance to enjoy them when so many others on Earth don’t. Perhaps Spock would remind us that while we have the potential to do better, maybe we’re not doing as badly as we think.

When Spock said goodbye, he used an expression that we can only wish we heard more on Capitol Hill.

“Live long and prosper.” And Spock would have meant every word.