Buy Photo Police say a teenager has been charged in the death of a New Brunswick woman. (Photo: File)Buy Photo Story Highlights The teenager is being held at the Middlesex County Youth Detention Center

Police say the victim had been visiting a friend when she was attacked

The investigation is active and is continuing

A 16-year-old boy was arrested and charged with juvenile delinquency in the death of a 23-year-old woman who apparently was stabbed in a New Brunswick apartment early Sunday, said Middlesex County Prosecutor Andrew C. Carey and Anthony A. Caputo, director of the New Brunswick Police Department.

The teenager, a resident of Bridgewater, was charged with delinquency in connection with murder and possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose in the death of Christine Huh, a resident of the Somerset section of Franklin Township.

The teenager, whose name is being withheld because of his age, is being held at the Middlesex County Youth Detention Center pending a juvenile hearing in family court.

He was arrested and charged at 6:25 a.m. Sunday after he was seen in Bridgewater by members of the New Brunswick Police Department and the Bridgewater Police Department, Carey said..

The prosecutor said police were alerted to the homicide at 3:12 a.m. Sunday and were dispatched to a ninth-floor apartment at 60 Paterson Street, where they found the victim.

She was taken to Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick where she was pronounced dead at 3:50 a.m.

Carey said while it appeared the woman had been stabbed, the cause of death has yet to be determined. The results of an autopsy being performed by the Middlesex County Medical Examiner’s Office were not immediately available.

An investigation by Detective Raymond Quick of the New Brunswick Police Department and Detective Wayne Canastra of the Middlesex County Prosecutor’s Office determined the victim had been visiting a friend when she was attacked.

The investigation is active and is continuing. Anyone with information is asked to call Detective Quick of the New Brunswick Police Department at (732) 745-5217, or Detective Canastra of the Middlesex County Prosecutor’s Office at (732 745-3809.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1HbtzX7