Hartford HealthCare announced this week that it was overhauling its IT systems to allow its patients' electronic medical records to be viewed by authorized clinicians at other hospitals in the state, and vice versa, including Yale-New Haven Health System, St. Francis Care and Connecticut Children's Medical Center.

Those hospital systems all use Epic software, allowing doctors and other clinicians to retrieve a patient's medical records from any other hospital that uses the same system, with the patient's permission.

But the three-year, $200 million investment by Hartford Hospital's parent company is not enough to convince some legislators that Connecticut will have a universal IT system to share patients' electronic medical records among health systems.

A legislative bill wending through the system would establish a State Health Information Exchange. The bill, Senate Bill 811, directs the state Department of Social Services to issue a request for proposals to manage an IT exchange of patient records among doctors and hospitals. It has the endorsement of Senate President Pro Tem Martin M. Looney, D-New Haven, and Senate Minority Leader Len Fasano, R-North Haven.

Looney and Fasano wrote in an op-ed piece that the federal government has invested more than $26 billion, including more than $300 million in Connecticut, to help hospitals and doctors adopt electronic medical records. The idea was to save money and improve the quality of care by reducing duplicative testing and medical errors and to create a system that allows health information to follow a consumer from one office to another, Fasano and Looney wrote in the op-ed.

Despite the fact that Connecticut's largest health systems use the same software, not all hospitals use the same IT vendors. Fasano and Looney wrote that the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology published a report detailing why hospitals and doctor offices don't yet have a fluid method for sharing patients' records.

The report found that IT developers use licensing and pricing schemes designed to deter connectivity with competitors, Fasano and Looney wrote.

"Examples of anti-competitive information blocking include hospitals refusing to use their IT systems to refer patients or transmit information to unaffiliated providers, or an IT vendor that charges $100,000 to allow its system to communicate with another vendor's system," Looney and Fasano wrote.

They added, "Only a statewide publicly accountable neutral system will ensure that we (1) empower patients to make informed decisions, (2) improve the efficiency of our delivery system, and (3) promote public health through timely disease monitoring and response."

Hospitals contend, however, that a public Health Information Exchange will duplicate what they have already done.

"As we move to integrated electronic health records, I think the good news is you've got four Connecticut health systems with a lot of physicians that have made decisions with the same vendor, and that vendor, Epic, provides as part of the product, its own internal health information exchange," said Dr. Rocco Orlando, chief medical officer for Hartford HealthCare.

Yale-New Haven Health System's Chief Information Officer, Daniel Barchi, said that Yale-New Haven has had the ability for a while to share electronic medical records with other hospitals throughout the nation through Epic.

"Epic has had this ability for many years, and it's really just a question of when health systems decide to turn on the functionality," Barchi said. "We turned on the functionality more than two years ago, and, as a result, have been able to share patient records when necessary for their care between Yale-New Haven Health System and, say, NYU or Cleveland Clinic or UCLA for quite some time now."

Yale-New Haven started implementing Epic software in 2011 and finished in 2013. Hartford HealthCare will have its primary care doctors on the Epic system by August and all of its affiliated hospitals will join at different times throughout 2016.

The Hartford HealthCare chief medical officer, Orlando, said a State Health Information Exchange might not be necessary.

"There are all kinds of health information exchanges," Orlando said. "Some of them — not terribly functional, not user-friendly. Some of them — quite helpful, in that they interact with the electronic health records. So, the selection and implementation, number one, is costly. And you can spend a lot of money and not get much value."

Some states have health information exchanges that require a clinician to log into a system separate from the one typically used by hospitals, Orlando said. Finding a patient's medical records is akin to looking for a needle in a haystack, he said.

Ideally, a state exchange would work with Epic software that Yale-New Haven, St. Francis, Hartford HealthCare and CCMC are already using so that a clinician doesn't have to go back and forth between different operating systems, Orlando said.

Fasano said it's absolutely false that a State Health Information Exchange would duplicate what hospitals are already doing privately.

"We know in New Haven private practices cannot upload and download to the Epic system," Fasano said.

Fasano said it strikes him that several major hospital systems in Connecticut are only now announcing that they will use the same software system to share medical records.

"If you're all on the same system, and you're telling me that Harford can lock out Yale can lock out St. Francis, then it automatically tells me … that prior to this arrangement, Hartford locked out Yale, Yale locked out Hartford, both of them locked out St. Francis. Which means there's a key for which you could turn off the information and turn the information on."

Fasano said that the information should be shared regardless of whether a health system uses the Epic software or any other.

Orlando, the Hartford HealthCare chief medical officer, said he was appalled that someone would suggest that Hartford HealthCare would use its software system to lock out information needed in caring for patients.