Premier Community HealthCare says the free Women’s Health Fair next month will help women achieve a goal to have a healthy mind, body and spirit.

The event will take place from 9 a.m. until 1 p.m. Jan. 9 at the Premier clinic inside the Mike Fasano Regional Hurricane Shelter, 11611 Denton Ave.

Health workshops, demonstrations, health screenings, healthy snacks and more will empower women to make their own health a priority, said Cheryl Pollock, director of business development and community services for Premier.

Obstetrician-gynecologist Joseph W. King, the Premier chief medical officer, and the medical team are arranging the free services. Health resources, body fat measurements, blood pressure screenings and sexual health screenings are planned. Limited slots are available for PAP tests.

Participants can call for the free well-woman exam at the health fair. To register or for more information, call Zenaida at (727) 645-4185, ext. 9505.

Health fair supporting sponsors are Pinot’s Palette and the Tampa Bay Community Cancer Network. Partners include the American Cancer Society, the Susan G. Komen for the Cure Foundation and the Florida Department of Health in Pasco County.

Premier operates eight sites in Dade City, Zephyrhills, Lacoochee, Hudson and Trinity. The Hudson clinic, the newest addition, opened in August to offer family medicine and pediatric health services.

Pollock has said Premier wants to be a “safety net.” Census data indicates about 170,000 Pasco residents fall at or below 200 percent of the poverty level, she noted.

Last year, about 36 percent of Premier patients had no medical insurance, while 42 percent fell under Medicaid coverage, Pollock said. Premier also accepts people with private insurance or Medicare.

“There are a lot of people that are still uninsured,” Pollock said, even after the federal Affordable Care Act passed.

A “Medicaid gap” developed after Florida lawmakers did not expand Medicaid here and refused additional federal funding. Some people who earn about $16,000 annually, or 100 percent of the poverty level, still don’t qualify for help through ACA.

“We just knew this was a commitment we needed to fill,” Pollock said of the long-delayed Hudson clinic, which was scheduled to open in 2009.

The demand at the Hudson site should emulate the clinic in New Port Richey that served 2,589 patients its first year, Premier officials expect. The patient schedule was full at the Hudson clinic even before it officially opened Aug. 31.