Market forces: Pakistan’s timing may have been off. Ahmad Kamal/Zuma Press

Pakistan this week brought into focus the impact that global market conditions are having on frontier economies. The country launched a $500 million bond issue with the hope that investor interest would be intense enough to warrant swelling the sale to $1 billion. No such luck, writes the Journal’s Qasim Nauman. In a development that market participants politely described as a “slight setback” for Pakistan’s reformist government, demand was weak enough to force the country to sell only the originally planned $500 million in bonds and to accept a relatively high yield of 8.25%.

Analysts questioned the government’s decision to go ahead with the issue at a time when markets are nervous and many frontier investors are nursing losses. “If there is uncertainty in the global environment…they could have waited for a few months,” said one Karachi-based broker.

Ghana is pushing ahead with its own debt sale plan, Emese Bartha writes. On Wednesday the country began a series of investor meetings in Europe and the U.S. with a view to launching a $1 billion U.S. dollar-denominated bond—and possibly a second issue of up to $500 million later in the year. Analysts have voiced concerns over the continued pressure Ghana’s finances are facing but potential investors could be reassured by the fact that the International Development Association has agreed to guarantee up to $400 million to support Ghana’s external debt financing.

Zambia, which has been struggling with power shortages that have crippled its vital mining sector, announced a plan to import natural gas from neighboring Angola to boost power generation, Nicholas Bariyo writes. The country’s government is backing a $2.5 billion pipeline that, according to President Edgar Lungu, would carry both gas and refined petroleum products and could end overreliance on imports from the Middle East and stabilize electric power generation. Several mining companies have had to halt operations in the country this year because of unreliable electric power supplies.

Ratings agencies were this week divided on Zambia’s prospects. Standard & Poor’s kept its rating steady but Moody’s took a harsher view. On Friday, it downgraded Zambia, saying it expects “a sustained deterioration in fiscal and debt metrics…amid an extended period of weak commodity prices, constrained copper production, and domestic electricity shortages constraining business activity.”

If the meetings taking place in New York this week in the run-up to next week’s UN General Assembly are any guide, business activity in Africa is actually booming. Africa-related events across the city attracted capacity crowds and the level of excitement about the continent’s prospects appears undiminished, despite the difficult global economic environment.

Hage Geingob, the President of Namibia: “We must create a conducive investment climate.” Dan Keeler/The Wall Street Journal

Amid the enthusiasm, though, there are some grave concerns. WSJ Frontiers caught up with Hage Geingob, the President of Namibia and Tony Elumelu, one of Africa’s richest businessmen, and found both men focused on remarkably similar issues. “Africa has to address the question of poverty,” Geingob told WSJ Frontiers. “And if we are to address poverty, we must create a conducive investment climate. The government must provide an environment for the private sector to create jobs.”

Elumelu is focusing his attention on the growing problem of unemployment, particularly among the young, as well as the poverty that is fueling the growing surge of migrants leaving the continent. “This unemployment is a disaster,” he explained. “The solution is in looking at the fundamentals. The jobs will come from the private sector. Political and private sector leaders must come together to create the right environment for the private sector to grow.”

Both men are extremely optimistic about the continent’s long-term prospects, economically and socially. Geingob believes we are seeing the creation of “a new Africa, an Africa of electoral democracy, with no more coups. There will be some reversals but the new Africa will stay,” he said.

With recent attempted coups in both Burundi and Burkina Faso, Geingob’s optimism might seem a little premature. But that, Elumelu said, is the point. Last week’s attempted coup in Burkina Faso was quickly overturned after six West African presidents flew to the capital of Ouagadougou to convince the renegade general to stand aside.

“You see? That is the new Africa!” Elumelu exclaimed.

London-based Capital Economics is not so upbeat on the continent. Its analysts described the consensus around Africa as still “far too bullish”, despite the decline in optimism triggered by China’s troubles. The firm forecast “tepid growth of just 3.8% in the region as a whole next year.” It was particularly concerned about Nigeria, whose government it argued is “engineering a slow-motion economic crisis by…squeezing liquidity out of the economy.”

Nigeria’s central bank appears to be at least partially addressing that concern. Although it left its key interest rate unchanged at 13%, the bank loosened its reserve requirements for commercial banks to promote lending. Explaining their decision, the bank’s policymakers cited declining output growth, rising unemployment and the evolving international economic environment “as well as the need to properly position the economy on a sustainable growth path,” the WSJ’s Matthew Cowley reports.

The IMF has declared Cyprus’ reform program a success and commended the fiscal management of the country, which two years ago needed a bailout as its economy buckled under its outsize banking system. “Economic activity in the first half of the year has been better than expected, and fiscal outturns are running ahead of projections. Liquidity in the core banking system has continued to improve, and the prospects for resolving non-performing loans are improving,” the IMF commented.

Ratings agency Standard & Poor’s is also impressed. This week it upgraded Cyprus to three notches below investment grade, Chelsey Dulaney reports.

Too close? Daniel Scioli with current Argentine President Cristina Kirchner. Reuters

Argentina’s leading presidential candidate Daniel Scioli has been getting specific, Taos Turner writes. Scioli, who is known for speaking in generalities, is offering more details about the policies he would pursue if elected, in an apparent move to appeal to voters who fear he wouldn’t differ from the current president Cristina Kirchner. Scioli’s plans include increasing investment in science and technology to 1% of GDP from the current 0.6% and bringing inflation down to single digits. Reining in inflation could be tricky. Accurate figures are hard to come by but it is thought to be hovering around 25% currently.

Bolivian officials are calling on Chile to negotiate a deal to its border demand, writes Ryan Dube, rather than let an international court decide on an outcome. The International Court of Justice threw out a request from Chile, which argued that the tribunal didn’t have jurisdiction over the case. Bolivia claims that it lost about 250 miles of coastline to Chile in a late-19th century war. Earlier in the week, a Bolivian legislative committee approved a bill to change the constitution, paving the way for President Evo Morales to stay in power beyond his current term.

Key Stories from the WSJ

Food Crisis Spreads Across Africa

Libya’s Rival Governments to Debate Final U.N. Peace Agreement

Myanmar Opens Japanese-Backed Economic Zone

Colombia, Venezuela Agree to Send Ambassadors Back to Posts

International Financial Institutions Prepare $1 Billion Gas Financing for Ukraine

Iran Sees Oil Exports Starting to Rise as Early as Late November

Emerging Market Currencies Continue Slide

Around the Web

Sri Lanka and India to Discuss $5.2B Bridge and Tunnel Link

Ride-Sharing Apps Vie to Replace Car Ownership in Vietnam

Vietnam Seeks Fix to Legal Vacuum Blocking Bad Debt Cleanup

Bangladesh Wants to Invest $8 billion in Infrastructure

Costa Rica Looks to China for Bond Sale

Morocco’s Growth Rate to Reach 4.6% in 2015

Kenya Looks to Woo Investors Amid Global Market Slowdown

Sign up here to have This Week on the Frontiers delivered to your inbox.