Jennifer DeCosta, left, event organizer and sales associate affiliated with the Coldwell Banker Residential Brokerage Metuchen/Edison office; Barbara Penny, sales associate affiliated with the Coldwell Banker Residential Brokerage Metuchen/Edison office; Matthew Victoria, MLB Residential Lending, LLC; South Plainfield Mayor Matthew Anesh; and Councilman Alex Barletta all attended the Kennedy School Area Yard Sale. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF COLDWELL BANKER RESIDENTIAL BROKERAGE)

Jennifer DeCosta, a sales associate affiliated with the Coldwell Banker Residential Brokerage Metuchen/Edison office, recently hosted the Kennedy School Garage Sale in South Plainfield. More than 50 households participated in the event, which was co-hosted by DeCosta, Matthew Victoria of MLB Residential Lending, LLC and Jill Ryan of The Scarlett Marketing Group.

DeCosta, Victoria and Ryan provided maps, entertainment and giveaways on Norwood Avenue near the Kennedy School. Shoppers had the opportunity to purchase items from baby clothes to cars to electronics at homes throughout the neighborhood. South Plainfield Mayor Matthew Anesh and Councilman Alex Barletta attended to show their support for the community event.

“This event was a great success, thanks to the participation and support of our neighbors and friends,” DeCosta said. “My colleague, Barbara Penny, who organizes a similar yard sale in Edison, inspired me to host this event in my own community. I called Matt and Jill and we put this together in one day. It turned out larger than we expected and we are so happy to hear all the excitement from our neighbors.”

Borough leaders and DeCosta are in discussions about hosting a larger, town-wide yard sale event next year.

DeCosta represents home buyers and sellers in Middlesex County and the surrounding areas. For more information about buying or selling a home, contact DeCosta at the Coldwell Banker Residential Brokerage office in Metuchen/Edison at 732-494-7700 or via email at Jennifer.DeCosta@CBMoves.com.

Coldwell Banker Residential Brokerage in New Jersey and Rockland County, New York, a leading residential real estate brokerage company, operates 55 offices with approximately 3,000 affiliated sales associates serving all communities from Rockland County, N.Y. to Monmouth County, New Jersey. Coldwell Banker Residential Brokerage in New Jersey and Rockland County, N.Y. is part of NRT LLC, the nation’s largest residential real estate brokerage company. Visit www.coldwellbankermoves.com for more information.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1zLnHg7