Mary McComb (Photo: Contributed)

EDITOR: As a resident of Stevens Point's District 9, I am pleased that we have two fine candidates running to represent us on the City Council. Mary McComb has stepped forward to vie for the seat that is currently held by Randy Stroik, a position he has held for 12 years. Now, with all the challenges faced by Stevens Point, it is time for someone new to come in to take a fresh look at how our community can best be served. That is why I am supporting Mary McComb for the District 9.

It is important to the entire community for the city center to thrive. While many residents have bemoaned the demise of the downtown over the years, Mary is one who has done something about it. Mary's commitment to Stevens Point is demonstrated by her choosing to open and operate her business, Sugar Doll, a candy and stationary store, in our downtown. As a downtown business owner, she has been active in the Downtown Business Association and participated in the committee that worked on the redesign of the Square and Farmers Market. She is aware that the challenges for Stevens Point are not only in the downtown but exist in many areas including pedestrian safety, housing, sustainable practices, traffic and transportation and she has been talking with city officials and local residents to better acquaint herself with the issues.

I am a firm believer in people participating and contributing to their communities. Local government benefits from people taking a fresh look at what and how things are done. Mary is already aware of many of the issues and concerns in the community, and is committed to developing her knowledge and expertise to participate in making the decisions that are so important to the community.

Mary's personal business experience, education, enthusiasm, willingness to listen and to take a fresh approach to issues all are qualities that would make her a welcome addition to the Stevens Point City Council. Please join me in the voting for Mary McComb on Tuesday.

Liz McDonald,

Stevens Point

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1al9pff