COLUMBUS, Ohio -- As Gov.John Kasich campaigns for the Republican presidential nomination, he will surely tout his record, especially his administration's efforts to bolster Ohio's economy.

"We turned Ohio around," he says in a one-minute TV spot his New Day for America political organization produced to air in New Hampshire. "We created jobs, cut taxes and balanced our budgets."

But some of his decisions will likely draw scrutiny from the national media and some of the other Republicans seeking the nomination.

Kasich is expected to formally announce his candidacy Tuesday. On the eve of that announcement, Northeast Ohio Media Group takes a look at some of the key events during Kasich's five and a half years as governor.

Balanced budgets and surpluses

Kasich took office facing a nearly $8 billion shortfall and a statutory demand to get a budget through the legislature in six months. By law, the budget had to be balanced.

In the end, his first budget let stand an income tax reduction that former Gov. Ted Strickland had delayed in the wake of the recession.

Kasich's first budget also returned more than $245 million dollars to the state's rainy day fund, which Strickland had been forced to drain to just 89 cents to help balance his last budget.

The state finished in the black under both Kasich's first and second budgets. The surpluses helped pay for income tax cuts. The rainy day fund also was replenished and now contains more than $2 billion.

But Kasich's budgeting is not without critics.

Communities and schools complained that cuts in state aid would force them to seek local tax increases.

The loudest complaints involve cuts to the local government fund, which was slashed by 50 percent in the first budget and has not been restored. That criticism can still be heard as Kasich's third budget kicks into effect.

"Instead of holding cities and communities back, state budgets should help them become desirable places to live and invest in," Ohio Municipal League spokesman Kent Scarrett posted on Twitter last week. "An ideology that promotes tax cuts at all costs has undermined Ohio's communities."

Employment, the economy and JobsOhio

Ohio unemployment was at 9.1 percent when Kasich took office. Federal labor statistics show the state lost 350,000 private sector jobs during the Strickland years, which spanned the recession.

Jobs data released last week set unemployment at 5.2 percent for June. Kasich often notes that since he took office, Ohio has added more than 300,000 jobs.

Critics note that Ohio trails the nation in job growth, and that part of the drop in unemployment is due to a shrinking labor force.

George Zeller, an economic research analyst in Cleveland, noted after the jobs data was released last week that June was the 32nd consecutive month that Ohio's job growth rate trailed the national average.

When Kasich campaigned for governor in 2010, he championed the idea of JobsOhio as part of his economic plan. The private, non-profit corporation functions as a development arm of the state, approaching companies about growth in Ohio and recommending projects for state assistance.

JobsOhio's annual report from 2014 states that companies that it assisted pledged to create nearly 21,400 jobs, retain more than 52,100 positions and invest more than $6.1 billion in the state.

Kasich praises JobsOhio for moving "at the speed of business," and landing some large growth projects. Among those are General Electric's U.S. Global Services Center for Cincinnati and Fuyao Glass America's new auto glass plant near Dayton. Those projects are expect to generate nearly 3,000 jobs.

But the JobsOhio approach has been criticized for a lack of transparency.

Lawmakers exempted JobsOhio from the state's open records law and later limited oversight by the state auditor. And the state privatized public liquor profits to give JobsOhio a funding stream. Critics still view JobsOhio as publicly funded and argue it should be open for inspection.

Tax reforms

Kasich has pushed for reductions in the state's income tax from the moment he took office.

He has not persuaded the General Assembly to overhaul the tax system as much as he'd like by shifting more of the burden to consumption taxes. But the governor and legislators have significantly lowered the individual tax rates.

The newly enacted budget provides a 6.3-percent, across-the-board state income tax cut as well as tax deductions for business owners. That reduces Ohio's income-tax rate from 5.33 percent to 4.99 percent for residents making more than $200,000 per year — a top rate not seen since 1982.

Since Kasich took office, the state also eliminated its tax on estates -- a tax he derisively referred to as a death tax.

Kasich has labeled income taxes as a deterrent to entrepreneurs taking risks. Lowering the tax, he argues, will spur job creation.

Critics say the tax cuts ultimately benefit the wealthy and do little to spark job growth. A 2013 increase to the sales tax, they say, ultimately hurts poor people who spend a bigger proportion of their incomes on goods and services.

And Kasich has been unable to get legislators to agree to increasing the state's severance tax on oil and gas resources extracted from Eastern and Southeastern Ohio.

Medicaid expansion

Kasich successfully fought with his fellow Republicans to expand Medicaid eligibility in Ohio to cover the working poor.

The expansion, funded principally under the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, extends Medicaid coverage to people with incomes from 100 percent to 138 percent of poverty.

The governor argued that the expansion would provide coverage to people who work but do not get health-care benefits from their employers and would provide greater coverage for treatment of mental illnesses.

The legislature refused to include the expansion in the 2014-2015 budget, so Kasich maneuvered the expansion through the state's controlling board, winning approval to use federal support that could be worth an estimated $13 billion to Ohio through 2020.

Restricting unions for public workers

Kasich's biggest setback while governor is the voter repeal of Senate Bill 5, a law that greatly restricted collective bargaining rights among public employees.

Kasich had lobbied for the bill, which won passage in the Senate by one vote, and signed the bill into law in March 2011.

But it never took effect.

Opponents, led by Democrats and organized labor, collected more than 1 million voter signatures to get a repeal issue on the ballot.

In November 2011, more than 60 percent of the voters backed its repeal.

"It's clear the people have spoken," Kasich said after the vote. "I heard their voices. I understand their decision. And frankly, I respect what the people have to say in an effort like this."

Since then, the administration has not sought to bring the issue back, and the official response is that the administration has moved on.