UNIVERSITY PARK, Pa. – Linebacker Brandon Bell dropped to a knee and motioned like he was rolling his helmet toward teammates who lined up in front of him resembling bowling pins.

On the other side of the field coach James Franklin tackled one staff member and gave out hugs to many others. Standing near the tunnel, Franklin repeatedly rang the victory bell, celebrating the Nittany Lions' 30-13 win against Temple and the postseason bowl game guarantee that came with Penn State's sixth win this season.

The Nittany Lions are going bowling this winter for the first time in 28 months, a sigh of relief and a point of celebration for a team that was banned from bowl play the past two seasons as part of unprecedented NCAA sanctions stemming from the Jerry Sandusky child sexual abuse scandal.

"It does mean something special, the fact that we had 49 [players] who stayed around this program when this university and when this community and when this football team needed them the most," Franklin said. "The fact that we're going to be able to send them out the right way and be able to continue our season and be able to continue to keep our family together for a month or so after the regular season ends is special."

It was at times a head-scratcher of a game with questionable decision-making from both quarterbacks, a flurry of turnovers and passes dropping off of the hands of the intended targets. The Nittany Lions capitalized on four interceptions Temple quarterback P.J. Walker threw to break open the contest in the second half. The Lions (6-4) scored just six points in the first half, but put together an offensive spark in the third quarter that doomed Temple (5-5) and Owls coach Matt Rhule's return to his alma mater.

For a Penn State team that struggled to run the ball most of the season and put together a first half that was a familiar scene for the Beaver Stadium crowd -- a Christian Hackenberg first-half interception, a few over- and under-thrown passes and two sacks -- a 37-yard Bill Belton run sparked the offense midway through the third quarter.

What Belton started, redshirt sophomore running back Akeel Lynch finished one play later, carrying the ball 38 yards and stiff-arming a defender en route to his third career 100-yard game. Lynch is the second Penn State running back to eclipse the century mark this season, joining Belton, who did so last week in a win against Indiana.

Lynch finished with 18 carries for 130 yards and one touchdown. Belton carried the ball 19 times for 92 yards and one score. Helping get the win for Belton and the senior class wasn't lost on Lynch.

"We committed knowing that we would never have a chance to go to a bowl game with the sanctions and we said it was more than football," said Lynch, a bubbly redshirt sophomore who never even attended a bowl practice.

After the game Lynch recalled "being on the edge" and nearly transferring to Iowa in 2012 when the sanctions were announced, a move he talked over with wide receiver Geno Lewis who reminded him that his love for the school, regardless of a bowl game, should be a factor.

All those details combined made getting that sixth win out of the way and guaranteeing another month to the season for the second-youngest team in Division I-A and the 15 valuable practices that come with it a point of celebration.

Penn State's offensive line received a boost as left tackle Donovan Smith returned to the lineup for the first time since Oct. 25 in the Ohio State game. He was joined by left guard Miles Dieffenbach, who played throughout the game, seeing more reps as the Lions continue working the senior back into the fold coming off a torn anterior cruciate ligament injury from spring practice.

"That's sort of been the story of our season if you look at it, just being inconsistent, up and down," Hackenberg said of the offense. "But I think when we find those streaks where we are consistent you see what we can do and that keeps us coming back for more."

The sophomore finished 12 of 26 for 112 yards, no touchdowns and two interceptions. He has thrown at least one interception in the past six games and the 112 yards was his lowest output this season. But he said his comfort level continues to improve with familiar faces returning up front.

As has been the case for most of the season for the Lions, the team's defense, a unit that entered the game ranked No. 3 in Division I-A and No. 1 against the run, kept the Owls on their heels.

Bob Shoop's defense had a lapse in the third quarter when Temple's top receiver, Jalen Fitzpatrick, slipped past cornerback Jordan Lucas and beat him deep for a 75-yard score, but other than that gaffe it was another game the Lions stayed tough.

Audrey Snyder: asnyder@post-gazette.com and Twitter @audsnyder4.