U.S. Adds Whopping 280,000 Jobs in May M. Spencer Green/AP What Happened:



Job growth last month exceeded expectations as the domestic economy added 280,000 positions, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Friday Employment Situation report. The larger-than-expected gains made May the best month for employment growth so far this year.



The unemployment rate ticked up slightly to 5.5 percent, but the civilian labor force expanded by nearly 400,000 people. The number of individuals not in the labor force contracted by 208,000, and the overall labor force participation rate ticked up to 62.9 percent.



What It Means:



"Today's report shows the U.S. labor market still has tremendous momentum," Andrew Chamberlain, chief economist at employment site Glassdoor, said in a research note Friday. "With 280,000 new jobs and unemployment essentially unchanged at 5.5 percent, all signs both from BLS and data from Glassdoor point to the strongest job market in 15 years – one that job seekers today should be making the most of while it lasts."



The economic watchdogs over at the Federal Reserve won't have much to complain about this month, either, though one solid employment report may not be enough to push the Fed to implement the country's much-anticipated interest rate hike in the near term.



"From the Fed's perspective, a modest but positive trend in employment reinforces the chairman's assessment that the labor market has made vast improvement since the end of the Great Recession, but there remains much improvement still to be made," Lindsey Piegza, chief economist at investment firm Sterne Agee, wrote in a research note Friday. "In other words, surpassing a low bar of expectations is not synonymous with an economy strong enough to withstand a rising rate environment." Average Income Continues Slow but Steady Rise

Average Income Continues Slow but Steady Rise iStock What Happened:



Wage indicators ticked up modestly this week, suggesting American employees are slowly but surely gaining ground in terms of compensation.



An income report out of the Bureau of Economic Analysis on Monday showed disposable personal income rose 0.4 percent month over month in April following a flat March.



And the Labor Department on Friday released data showing average hourly earnings jumped 8 cents in May to $24.96. Average hourly earnings are up 2.3 percent year over year.



What It Means:



Steady earnings increases are a welcome sign. And while it would be ideal for consumers if wages picked up a little faster, they're at least consistently heading in the right direction.



On a more alarming note, worker productivity dropped 3.1 percent in the first quarter, with a 1.6 percent drop in output coupled with a 1.6 percent increase in hours worked. That signals U.S. employees are working longer hours, but – at least in the first quarter – they've been doing less with that extra time.



That, in turn, means a larger wage hike may be a ways off, as positive productivity would give employers more incentive to boost pay.



"Without productivity gains, Americans' standard of living will continue to be eroded with waning support for future income growth," Piegza wrote in a research note Thursday. Greece Bundles Loan Payments

Greece Bundles Loan Payments Costas Baltas/InTime News via AP What Happened:



The International Monetary Fund on Thursday announced plans by Greece to delay a series of four loan repayments due to the IMF this month.



Greece's first deadline would have been Friday, but the embattled Mediterranean country instead has until the end of June to transfer $1.7 billion to its creditors in the IMF.



Negotiations between Greek and IMF officials are ongoing, as Greece attempts to unlock bailout funds that its creditors are withholding until Greece agrees to certain spending and policy restrictions.



What It Means:



IMF bylaws allow a country with outstanding loans to bundle them into one monthly payment, so the delayed deadline gives Greece more time to negotiate the release of more bailout funds. The cash-strapped country's at the point where it needs to take out more loans to pay back existing debt.



But the delay is also a smart move if Greece ends up defaulting on its payments (and potentially leaving the eurozone).



"If they’re going to default, and it seems to me they’re prepping for it, they’re better off doing it when they have some money in the bank. Why give the IMF all the money and then default?” says Brad McMillan, chief investment officer for Commonwealth Financial Network. “This to me says they’re doing what they say they were and they’re actually starting to prep for a default.” America's Trade Gap Shrinks

America's Trade Gap Shrinks (AP Photo/Stephen B. Morton, File) What Happened:



America's trade deficit shrunk in April after climbing to a six-year high in March, according to a report released Wednesday by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.



The U.S. exported $189.9 billion worth of goods and services in April, $1.9 billion more than in March. Imports were valued at $230.8 billion, $7.8 billion lower than the month prior.



The total April deficit clocked in at $40.9 billion, down nearly $10 billion from March.



What It Means:



"New exports hammered the economy in the last two quarters, cutting fourth- and first-quarter growth by 1.0 and 1.9 percentage points, respectively," Patrick Newport, director of long-term forecasting at IHS Global Insight, wrote in a research note Wednesday. "It's not clear that imports have steadied. They may drop again in May, but after that, they will climb on the heels of a strong dollar and relatively stronger U.S. growth."



Despite last month's uptick, America's strong dollar has weighed on exports in recent months, as unfavorable foreign exchange rates make trade with the U.S. less desirable. April exports were ultimately down more than $5.1 billion from a year prior.



Imports, meanwhile, become more affordable with a strong currency, widening the deficit and ultimately dragging down gross domestic product.



Although the dollar appears to be far from weakening, export activity is expected to pick up slightly in the second quarter, especially as America's West Coast port strike moves further into the rearview mirror.



"A larger-than-expected reduction in the trade balance suggests at least some of the outsized volatility at the end of [the first quarter] was the result of disruptions caused by the West Coast port closures," Piegza wrote Wednesday. "Trade may not be the large net drag on growth as it was across the first three months of the year, but will unlikely be a significant positive or driver of economic activity in [the second quarter]."

IMF Downgrades U.S. Economic Outlook