QUIET INTO THE WEE HOURS

As you and your friends and family either revel in the excitement of the big game and the heartburn-inducing food, or completely protest at a poetry reading and juice-detox revival, the weather will remain cool and calm. The 40s of the afternoon will slide through the 30s and into the upper-20s by midnight. Clouds will gradually cover more and more of the sky during this period. The weather will remain snow-free up to about 3 AM, then all bets are off.

SNOWY MONDAY

Here we go again: another workday, another snow storm. A coastal storm – a rather large one – will be moving up the coast, well east of the mainland. As it moves past New England, it will bristle along with snow and wind, with particularly bad winter weather in southeastern Massachusetts. Connecticut will feel some of the sting, too, in the form of snow and wind.

Timing. Snow may start as early as 3 AM along the southeastern Shoreline, and then gradually move inland. New Haven may start to see snow around 4 AM, Hartford/Waterbury/I-84 by 5 or 6 AM and finally northwestern Connecticut by mid-morning. Snow will then come in waves during the rest of the morning and into the afternoon. The snow will slowly wind down Monday evening.

Snow Accumulation. This storm, as the last several, will bring heavier snow east and lighter snow west. From start to finish, we think the accumulation spread will be something like this:

West of Route 8: 1”-2”

Central Connecticut, including Hartford, I-91, Farmington Valley, New Haven, Midlletown, Manchester and Waterbury: 2”-4”+. (There could be pockets of 5”.)

Eastern Connecticut, mainly east of Route 32: 4”-8”.

Wind. Connecticut will not be close to the strongest part of the storm’s wind field, but will experience some wind. The Cape and Islands will get the strong wind, with blizzard conditions likely there. We will see some stirring of the air with gusts occasionally going to between 20 and 30 MPH, especially along the Shoreline.

Type of snow. The air will be in the 20s inland and near 32 along the Shoreline during most of the storm. The snow will start as a stickier, wetter snow, but transition to a fluffier snow, especially inland.

Power Outages. More power outages are possible. Right now, we don’t think we will receive as much snow as Winter Storm Barbara, so the weight of the snow will be lighter. Thus, the hope is that the number of outages will be far fewer.

SCATTERED SNOW SHOWERS TUESDAY & WEDNESDAY

Tuesday: Although we won’t have steady snow, we may have scattered snow showers at times Tuesday. The coastal storm will exit but, at its heels, an “upper level low” will come into the area from the Great Lakes. The models are suggesting that the main focus of snow-producing “lift” will be mainly to our south during the day Tuesday, focusing steady snow around a developing wave imbedded in the low’s wind pattern in Appalachia and the Allegheny. As that system draws closer Tuesday evening, the chance for snow will increase from south to north. The day will otherwise be mainly cloudy and typically chilly, with highs in the 30s and lows in the 20s.

Wednesday: The “upper level low” will not have left yet on Wednesday. There may be another period of steady snow Wednesday morning. The weak “wave” forecasted to be southwest of us Tuesday will move close enough to bring steady light snow into the state then. This system does not promise to be strong, so any accumulation will be light, on the order of a coating to an inch or two. Just as on Tuesday, times in between snow will be chilly and cloudy with highs in the 30s.

COLDER STARTING THURSDAY

Better weather will start to move into the state Thursday. As the “upper level low” finally exits, any residual snow showers Thursday morning will go away and a drier northwesterly wind will bring in colder air. The clouds may be a bit stubborn, but gradually skies will clear out a little. Highs will be in the 20s and lows will be in the single digits and teens.

SNOW SHOWERS FRIDAY

Friday will be cold and blustery. We’ll also have the chance for a few scattered snow showers Friday afternoon as an arctic front approaches from the Great Lakes. Scattered snow showers will come during the afternoon, possibly coating the roads for the evening commute. Highs in the 20s and lows near 10 degrees are on their way!



ARCTIC BLAST SATURDAY AND SUNDAY

Next weekend will be cold! As arctic air drains south, a sunny sky will only support highs in the low-20s Saturday and Sunday. Since the wind will still be strong, wind chills will likely stay in the -10 to 0 degree range. Nighttime lows will go in the single digits and, where the atmosphere can “decouple” to allow the air to grow still, lows could go below zero.

Meteorologist Mike Cameron

JANUARY 2016

January was warm and dry. The average temperature in Windsor Locks was 30.2 degrees, which is 4.1 degrees warmer than normal. There was 1.96” of precipitation, which includes rainfall plus the water equivalent of snow and ice. This was 1.27” below normal. There was only 1.9” of snow in Windsor Locks, which is 10.4” below normal. However, many parts of the state had much more snow. Portions of Southern Connecticut received 16” of snow during Winter Storm Anna.

WINTER STORM NAMES

The theme this winter is “First Ladies”, since this is a presidential election year. The first name on the list is Anna, after Anna Harrison. The rest of the list goes as follows: Barbara (Bush), Caroline (Harrison), Dolley (Madison), Eleanor (Roosevelt), Florence (Harding), Grace (Coolidge), Helen (Taft), Ida (McKinley), Jacqueline (Kennedy Onassis).

WFSB has been naming winter storms since 1971 and we continue to tradition today independent of the Weather Channel, which names winter storms that affect the entire country. The storms we name are the ones that only impact Connecticut with 6” of snow or more for most of the state and/or ½” or more of ice. Both scenarios would severely impact the state.

“Copyright 2016 WFSB (Meredith Corporation). All rights reserved”