Roberts could face Wolf, whose great-grandfather is Obama’s great-great grandfather. Obama's cousin may primary Roberts

Barack Obama’s second cousin once removed, is laying the groundwork for a potential Republican primary challenge against Kansas Sen. Pat Roberts next year.

Milton Wolf has been gauging support, sources told POLITICO, sending an email to GOP activists the last week of August asking them to get in touch if they want more senators like Ted Cruz, Mike Lee and Rand Paul.

Story Continued Below

Wolf, a 42-year-old practicing radiologist, accused Roberts of raising the debt ceiling, bailing out Wall Street and supporting earmarks. He noted that Roberts said recently that he does not see a way out of using military force in Syria and endorsed former Kansas Democratic Gov. Kathleen Sebelius to be secretary of Health and Human Services.

( PHOTOS: Senators up for election in 2014)

“If you’ve ever asked yourself what you can do and you’re ready to fight for America … email me,” he wrote in his email. “It’s time for the patriots to save America from our failed political class.”

The president’s great-great-grandfather, Thomas Creekmore McCurry, is Wolf’s great-grandfather. His mother was five years older than Obama’s mother, and he writes on his Website that the two were childhood friends in Wichita.

Wolf’s potential candidacy comes as several Republican senators now face primary challenges, the latest sign that the tea party versus establishment battles are still dividing the GOP. But unlike past years, Republican senators say they won’t be caught off guard: They are pumping big bucks into their war chests and wooing conservative activists and lawmakers in their states.

( WATCH: Michelle Obama launches #drinkH20 initiative)

Democrats lack a deep bench in the state and would probably not be able to capitalize even if Roberts lost; Mitt Romney carried Kansas by 22 points last year. Wolf could use that to argue to voters that supporting him wouldn’t risk jeopardizing the seat. But tea party-backed Indiana candidate Richard Mourdock made that case against Sen. Dick Lugar (R-Ind.) last year — before the challenger went on to blow the general election.

Roberts, 77, said in an interview at the Capitol on Thursday that he takes every race seriously but expressed confidence that he would prevail.

“I’m not vulnerable,” he told POLITICO. “I’m in a very strong position. But I’m not taking anything lightly. Marines don’t do that. They take the hill.”

Roberts said he knows Wolf — even bought him dinner at one point — but was not aware that he was seriously considering a bid and has not had direct contact with him about the race. He said he assumes Wolf would phone him if he gets in.

( PHOTOS: Governors’ offices up for grabs in 2014)

“I think he’s a cousin of some sort to the president, but he’s very conservative,” said Roberts. “I have called him on occasion and congratulated him on some of his Facebook or blogs or whatever.”

“Obviously the water is fine: Anybody can enter a primary — for that matter, an election,” he added. “I take every race seriously. There isn’t an election that goes by that I haven’t taken seriously.”

Roberts, in Congress since 1981, voted against the comprehensive immigration bill this year and joined the controversial conservative push to defund Obamacare last month, even if it risks a government shutdown.

Wolf has nonetheless been a frequent antagonist, attacking Roberts for backing the fiscal cliff deal at the end of last year and assailing him as a career politician. Wolf did not respond to emails and a phone message seeking comment for this story.

( Also on POLITICO: The Big Apple goes small)

Roberts had $1.5 million cash on hand at the end of June, after raising $560,000 in the latest fundraising quarter. He has a campaign website up and announced the co-chairs for his reelection committee in June. Several prominent conservative leaders, including Gov. Sam Brownback and Secretary of State Kris Kobach, are honorary members. Former Kansas Sen. Bob Dole endorsed Roberts in April.

A knowledgeable Republican estimated Wolf could start off with support of 25 percent to 30 percent of Republican voters, given how conservative Kansas is. But the source expressed confidence that Roberts could fend off Wolf if the senator is aggressive and fights back early.

Capitalizing on his indirect link to Obama, Wolf has appeared on Fox News as well as Rush Limbaugh’s and Sean Hannity’s radio programs. He has written columns for the Washington Times and contributed to the Daily Caller.

After Lugar lost a primary challenge to Mourdock in May 2012, a POLITICO blog post asked whether Roberts was “in danger of getting Lugared in 2014.” The executive director of the Kansas Republican Party commented on the “substantial differences” between Lugar and Roberts, noting the latter voted more often against Obama, stays in close touch with the GOP grass roots and has a top-notch campaign team.

( PHOTOS: Obama’s second term)

Wolf responded with a comment on the post, “How many decades in Washington is too much?”

A big X factor is whether Wolf or another challenger would get help from outside groups.

Senate Conservative Fund Executive Director Matt Hoskins said every incumbent Republican could face a primary challenge.

“Americans have had it with Republicans in Washington who say one thing and then do another,” Hoskins wrote in an email. “Pat Roberts is no different. He voted to raise the debt limit and to raise taxes on 80 percent of American families. That’s a tough pill to swallow. He also voted to confirm Kathleen Sebelius who was picked to push Obamacare through Congress and to implement the law. That could be a very big problem for the senator if he faces a conservative challenger.”

Barney Keller, a Club for Growth spokesman, would say only that the Club is “watching” the race and pointed to Roberts’s lifetime 73 percent rating on the group’s congressional scorecard.

The title of Wolf’s speech at Erick Erickson’s RedState gathering in New Orleans last month was “ Shaking the moss off the GOP.”

“It’s time to clean house,” he wrote in an accompanying column for the Washington Times. “It’s time to take a page out of Sarah Palin’s playbook. It’s time to take on the establishment. For the sake of our party and the republic, it’s time to lock and load.”