Topics: 2016 Elections, Celebrity Apprentice, Donald Trump, Iowa, News, Politics News

I was having a Friday afternoon beer with a businessman friend, a Vietnam War veteran approaching retirement. We were talking politics, and he suddenly told me: “Donald Trump would be a great president.” I almost spit up my drink as he explained himself. “Damn Reagan and his big tent, drawing in all of the evangelicals. They’ve hijacked the party.”

“But Trump?” I asked. The birther? With the bankrupt casinos? Who teases a presidential run every four years and makes a mockery of the electoral process?

“Why the hell not?” my friend replied. “He’s the only one who isn’t a part-time preacher, and it’s about time we had a businessman as president. A businessman would do this country a hell of a lot of good.”

Turns out that Trump has more support than you might imagine in the Iowa business community. Some might say that’s a sign that nothing should start in Iowa, let alone the race for the world’s most powerful office. Early last month, I received an invitation to visit with Trump on his private jet, during a highly publicized visit to the Hawkeye State. I thought it might be fun to see whether this bizarre idea seemed a little less weird when viewed from close-up.

Scuttling across the tarmac toward what Trump claims is a $100 million Boeing 757, which had just landed at the Des Moines Airport, I asked a respected print journalist walking beside me if the situation seemed at all bizarre to him.

“Been on a lot of candidate buses before,” he told me. “But never a personal airplane.”

We were flanked front and back by TSA agents and Trump staffers as we were escorted to the plane. The sky was dark. There was a light drizzle. We were penned in.

“We’re behaving sort of like sheep,” I observed.

He smiled and nodded.

We climbed the aircraft steps, and I scraped my shoes on the ladder before I entered the plane, worried that I might be tracking mud. It felt like the discourteous kind of thing he might tweet about afterward. It was a good precaution, as I was soon to learn.

Once inside, we were greeted warmly by the same pleasant woman who apparently greets all of the guests on “The Apprentice.” On television she cheerily intones: “Mr. Trump will see you now.” But she didn’t use the line on us, and I wondered if, like her boss, even she holds the media in lower regard than a reality TV contestant.

Behind her was Trump himself, who welcomed us, shaking hands before moving to the front of the cabin to take questions. The plane looked opulent, reportedly with a marble bathroom and 24-carat gold seat belt buckles, as well as a tropical wood inlaid table, and carpet fibers woven with fleece taken from yearling Peruvian llamas. (OK, those last two things were made up.)

There’s a reason why rulers have for many millennia built pyramids, great temples, coliseums and the like to impress the masses. The truth is, we’re easily impressed. And on Trump’s plane, we especially were. It was difficult not to be, in much the same way that a toddler might fixate on a brightly colored object.

And so, Trump suffered the media with the same brand of tolerance as a tired new parent, as we all started jostling for position with cameras and microphones in the confined space. It’s a big plane. But a supposedly $100 million plane is still just a plane. Every time the cameras and boom mics approached the ceiling or the woodwork, Trump let out a weary sigh.

“Watch… watch…. watch your ceiling,” urged Trump. “If you hurt the ceiling you’re going to make it a very expensive day…”

One camera touched the ceiling gently. “Oof,” groaned a Trump staffer. “Careful with that on the ceiling.”

“I am being careful,” a short reporter shot back, a selfie stick extended toward Trump over the backs of other reporters. Trump eyed it hovering like it was a potentially rabid bat.

Eventually, the requisite questions about his recently launched exploratory committee began. “It’s going really, really well, it’s going amazingly well,” he said, referring to some poll that had him in “either third or fourth place,” even though, of course, he isn’t even officially running.