House members approved a resolution, 245 to 186, accusing President Obama of failing to provide Congress with all the documents pertaining to the nuclear deal with Iran, in violation of a law giving lawmakers the right of review.

It was a party line vote, with Republicans in part taking cues from a widely reported Washington, D.C., rally – fueled by the attendance of conservative powerhouses like Sarah Palin, Donald Trump and Ted Cruz – to oppose the deal.

Get the hottest, most important news stories on the Internet – delivered FREE to your inbox as soon as they break! Take just 30 seconds and sign up for WND’s Email News Alerts!

Rep. Peter Roskam, co-chairman of the House Republican Israel Caucus, pressed a proposal to delay votes on the Iran pact until Obama aides provide lawmakers with the text of the side deals that were forged between Tehran and the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Hill reported. Those agreements set forth the specifics of inspections of suspected Iran sites by international watchdogs.

The resolution targets the White House, but as the Hill reported, the IAEA commonly keeps the documentation from its private deals confidential.

But Republicans aren’t happy with that situation and want the White House to present them with what was forged.

“When a Jew Rules the World: What the Bible Really Says About Israel in the Plan of God” – a chance for Christians to rediscover their true identity as fellow heirs of promise with the House of Israel. Get your copy of this important book today at the WND Superstore!

“No American citizen has read this entire agreement,” said Rep. Mike Pompeo, who authored the resolution, the Hill reported. “And yet we’ve got members who say, ‘This is a great deal and I’m excited to vote for it.'”

Congress recently approved a law that gives lawmakers a 60-day window to review the pact, else the White House can’t lift sanctions. Republican leaders in the House and Senate said this 60-day timeline hasn’t actually kicked in yet because they haven’t been provided all the documents involved in the deal.