The "Palestinian" economy consists of

1. The UNRWA

2. US foreign aid

3. US, UN, EU, etc subsidies for non-profits

Imagine a terrorist group that also doubles as a charity while occasionally pretending to be a government and you have a good summary of the Palestinian Authority. But if it wasn't for Israel, it would just be booming. Booming, I tell you. (And not in the usual exploding people sort of way.)

On the positive side, it said that "even without a final peace deal, there is substantial upside potential in the Palestinian economy." However, it blamed the current lack of potential not on the fact that terror groups Hamas and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) run Gaza and the PA, but on Israeli and Egyptian "restrictions" on imports, exports, and travel designed to combat the terror threat.

What exactly is this "upside potential"?

Is stealing money from America, Japan and Europe suddenly going to be an upside?

Is there a plan to subsidize the huge level of security forces by taxing the same dates and olive oil "exports" that everyone in the region is already exporting?

The closest thing to a for-profit economy in the PA involves monopolies by government officials over imports, like cigarettes. Its exports steal Israeli water, electricity and infrastructure to produce a little olive oil. That's a unique product what with every other country in the region making olive oil.

The percentage of the population living under the poverty line has reached 39 percent in Gaza and 16 percent in the Palestinian Authority (PA).

Of course since nobody out there is accurately reporting income, those numbers don't mean much. Also 37.5 percent of neighboring Jordan lives below the poverty line.

So despite Israel's supposed brutal repression and Gaza being an open air prison and all the constant whining... the Gaza poverty level is only 2.5 percent below that of Jordan. Behold the oppression.

The report also hailed the "very good progress" made by the PA in reducing its fiscal deficit. In March 2014, Ramallah announced it had reached a staggering $4.8 billion in debt, with a 2014 budgetary deficit of $1.5 billion. But while blaming Israel for the PA’s financial woes, PA chairman Mahmoud Abbas continues to spend six percent of the PA’s annual budget to pay $4.5 million a month to jailed terrorists and another $6.5 million to their families.

The PA fiscal deficit is the difference between the money the donors give it and the money it spends. What does talking about a fiscal deficit mean, when your economy is demanding money from other people?