George Cook (Photo: Special to news-press.com)

Trey Radel taught us one thing it would seem we really needed to know: there's a slight-of-hand difference between what we expect from our representative and what we can possibly hope for.

Certainly, Mr. Radel had as much support and as many endorsements as a magician can carry in his bag of tricks.

So now, the expectant and hopeful constituents, on the right and the left of Congressional District 19, have sent our best guess, Curt Clawson, to Washington D.C. He's presentable and engaging in every way, with the fiscally savvy game face of the successful businessman. And that's why even Democrats voted for him. He spent all that money. But do we even know the man? Well, we're expecting a lot. Which begs the question: what can a fiscal conservative and a social liberal hope for?

There's little doubt that he knows which side of his bread is buttered and he'll do what he can for local folks. There is some question, however, about the political and economic complications that have confounded the nation and all its people.

For starters, of course, we're hoping for honesty, steadiness, courage, fairness. In this regard, we all want the same thing. Don't lie, don't steal, don't cheat. Yes, but which comes first, the character attribute or the political issue?

So his constituency on the left might expect Rep. Clawson to criticize Obamacare rather than suggest specific improvements to our first real attempt at universal health care — at least until after the November elections. There's no hope here.

However, an open mind would hope Rep. Clawson will be able to imagine and appreciate the difference between a stone-cold killer and a pregnant woman in anguish who, well, the expectation is that he'll avoid the real question: can you be for life without criminalizing her choice?

In the sainted 1950s, when everything was illegal — to include sitting at a lunch counter— the rich flew off for a long weekend and the poor went upstate to visit their aunt for a few months.

And here's hoping that Rep. Clawson does not sign any pledges. He's free to vote as he thinks best, but pledges of the past can haunt freedom in the future.

Before he left our embrace, did we remind him not to default on our debt and not to shut down the government? It's unnecessary and unseemly. There is still some maturity on his side of the aisle who will tell him the same thing. We expect that Rep. Clawson agrees and we hope he'll be able to say as much — when it counts.

Are we expecting climate change denials? Can we hope that the environment is a subject for concern beyond just the quality of the water in the Caloosahatchee?

The war on terror is never over. There are no expectations; there's only hope. Maybe we really are the world's police. But how can we stop burning up the same soldiers over and over again? Let's pay as we go, if only to be sure that everybody feels the sacrifice.

All in all, there's some expectation that in the feral cat colony we call Congress, Rep. Clawson could easily end up on the losing side of history on many social issues. But again, there's hope on the left that the young man we all sent to D.C. will evolve before he goes extinct. That's not fair, of course, because we don't really know how he feels. Nonetheless, it's hard to resist passing along life lessons: rights are only bestowed on parchment — in the street they have to be forcibly taken.

Gays are here. Gays are not going anywhere. Gays will be gay. And they will be married.

Finally, Rep. Clawson already knows what we all know about those wild cousins who will not leave us alone: poverty and immigration. This was an issue in the 1850s. They were our relatives from Ireland and Italy. Is it really all about food stamps, gaming the system and abusing benefits, about a porous border and chronic welfare, about people who won't help themselves and illegals taking all the jobs? Why isn't it ever about trying to feed your family?

We know and we expect and we hope that Rep. Clawson also knows in his heart and in his gut that no child in America should ever go to bed hungry. Regardless.

George Cook lives in Fort Myers.

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1m4RNH8