Rosalind Wiseman, author of "Queen Bees and Wannabes" and "Master Minds and Wingmen." ( COURTESY )

If you go What: Parent Engagement Network presentation on "Bully Prevention and Social Competency" featuring Rosalind Wiseman When: 6:30 p.m. to 8:30 p.m. Monday Where: Centaurus High School, 10300 South Boulder Road, Lafayette Cost: $15 for adults and youth ages 13 and up, scholarships available Registration, info.: parentengagementnetwork.org for registration and a calendar of future events

Rosalind Wiseman, a bestselling author and mother who lives in Boulder, started a conversation about the hidden world of girl behavior with her 2002 book "Queen Bees and Wannabes."

She's now delving into the social dynamics of teen boys with her new book, "Masterminds and Wingmen" that's No. 3 on the New York Times bestseller list in the "Advice, How-To & Miscellaneous" category. There's also a free companion e-book for the teen boys themselves that was written with the help of about 200 boys Wiseman talked to around the country.

"I've worked with kids for 20 years," she said. "I know that boys are much more complicated than we give them credit for. When we say things like boys are simple, it sends a message that they can never ask for help or tell us what's going on. Boys need support, and they need to know there are people who care about them who will help them."

Wiseman will be the featured speaker at Monday's kick-off event for Boulder Valley's Parent Engagement Network, which puts together a speaker series for parents every year. The Monday event will focus on bullying prevention and social competency.

Wiseman said she plans to address how to talk to boys, noting that parents tend to "interrogate" their boys when they see them at the end of the day. Instead, she said, they should give them some space and then talk, not pepper them with rapid-fire questions.

(Courtesy photo) ( COURTESY )

Friends ruthlessly insulting each other is part of the boy world, she said.

"If you can humiliate and go back at somebody as hard as possible, then that gives you power," she said.

But, she said, relentlessly degrading someone shouldn't be accepted.

In her work with schools, Wiseman said, engaged students require social connections, the hope of being successful with something they're curious about and being able to work on something that has meaning beyond themselves.

Centaurus High School Principal Rhonda Haniford, whose school is hosting Wiseman's presentation, said she's interested in learning more about helping students, especially boys, navigate the challenges of the teen years.

"Finding real ways to talk with boys about the pressures they face is really important," she said.

Paula Nelson, executive director of the Parent Engagement Network, said her group chose to feature Wiseman because "she offers youth strategies to develop a positive and strong sense of self so that they can successfully navigate their world."

She said the presentation will be the basis for the group's work this school year, which will focus on understanding children's worlds. Future topics include creating safe and welcoming schools, suicide prevention and "slow parenting."

The goal, Nelson said, is to "promote conversations, build relationships, connect people to local and national resources, and empower people to take action."