Many foreigners visit Costa Rica specifically for the purpose of getting quality medical attention and medications at very affordable prices, and a few of these medical tourists become interested in returning for an extended visit. Now that the two major medical centers CIMA and Clinica Biblica have expanded to Guanacaste, some medical tourists are intrigued by the expat lifestyle. As foreign residents of Costa Rica, expats can actually enjoy free medical treatment and medications through La Caja.

Contrary to what some foreigners in Costa Rica think, the nation’s public health care system does not limit its services to those born here. La Caja is a truly universal and all-inclusive health care system; no one is denied services, but patients need to either be active contributors or be in need of lifesaving emergency care in order to get medical attention for free.

Contributions to La Caja are actually expected of foreigners in Costa Rica who intend to become residents. There are eleven categories that residents can obtain temporary residence in, from marriage-based immigration to investment-based residency, and they all require registration in La Caja as well as contributions. The monthly contribution amount is based on a percentage of earnings; non-earners pay a nominal amount between $25 and $30 per month; this is all it takes to access a world of free health care and 653 prescription medications.

Foreigners who become indigent for any reason in Costa Rica are entitled to free medical care at La Caja as long as their immigration status is legal. Lifesaving medical care is always free, and so is acute care for children regardless of their immigration condition.

Foreigners who are not registered with La Caja and wish to receive services may do so at clinics and hospitals that can accept payments (EBAIS primary care centers are not usually set up for this purpose).

For example, an expat in Guanacaste who suffers a sprained ankle can go to Dr. Enrique Baltodano Briceno in Liberia and get x-rays to rule out fractures, a splint, a prescription along with corresponding medications, and a follow-up visit for about 22,000 colones (less than $45). More information on doctors in Costa Rica