A police officer could decline to defend a mosque on the basis of his religious beliefs if a religious exemption bill passes the Colorado Legislature, Boulder D.A. Stan Garnett writes. Above, young Muslim girls prepare to greet President Obama at the Islamic Society of Baltimore earlier this month. ( Pablo Martinez Monsivais / AP )

As the Boulder District Attorney, it is my job to achieve justice in every case, apply the law fairly to maintain public safety, and assure that everyone in our community is treated equally.

As a society, the laws that we create are designed to guarantee the public's safety and establish rules that all of us should follow. When someone breaks the law, they are held accountable by a jury of their peers and our justice system — as it should be.

However, there is a proposal making its way through the Colorado Legislature that would undermine our laws and allow people to claim their religion gives them permission to ignore laws they don't like. If House Bill 1180 passes, it will create great uncertainty for law enforcement and prosecutors across the state. The way in which these proposed exemptions could undermine the rule of law are vast and unpredictable.

Freedom of religion is one of our most valued rights as Americans; that's why the First Amendment in the Constitution already protects it. It is also important that everyone plays by the same rules, and we can't just create sweeping religious exemptions that encourage people to pick and choose which laws to follow.

With such a statute in place, a man could obstruct law enforcement by claiming that certain domestic violence laws don't apply to him because of his belief that a husband has the right to discipline his wife and children as he sees fit, a landlord who believes a man should be the head of household could refuse to rent an apartment to a single mother, and a police officer could refuse to defend a mosque or synagogue by saying it goes against her religious beliefs.

Advertisement

This law could give those who want to break the law a way to game the system and make up religious beliefs, or cherry-pick beliefs, to get out of following a particular law. It is not hard to imagine the troubling range of intended and unintended consequences House Bill 1180 will have because it makes our laws more complicated and harder to enforce. I'm not just speaking hypothetically. In New Mexico, a religious leader used a law similar to House Bill 1180 to appeal a conviction for sexually abusing two teenagers. And in Oklahoma, a police officer referenced the state's so-called "religious freedom" law as justification for refusing to attend an event held by the Muslim community.

This legislation is not truly about so-called "religious freedom" as the proponents would claim. It is about fundamentally rewriting our laws so that they no longer apply equally to everyone in Colorado. Regardless of whether one agrees with a certain policy, the law is the law. This religious exemption legislation is bad for Coloradans. It is not just bad public policy; it is unnecessary and deserving of a swift death in the General Assembly.

Stan Garnett is district attorney of Colorado's 20th Judicial District, headquartered in Boulder.