WETHERSFIELD — Continuing what has become a St. Patrick’s Day tradition in Connecticut, labor officials, legislative leaders and community representatives will pay tribute to a truly unique contribution to the workplace – the state’s Registered Apprenticeship Program – at the 2016 Apprenticeship Awareness Breakfast and photo exhibit.

The year’s breakfast, to be held 8 to 9:30 a.m. March 17 in Room 310 of the State Capitol, will focus on promoting the diversity and opportunities provided by Connecticut’s apprenticeship system. Following the breakfast, tabletop displays will provide program and contact information regarding apprenticeship opportunities. The photo exhibit will remain on display in the upper concourse of the Legislative Office Building through March 28.

According to State Labor Commissioner Scott D. Jackson, the state’s apprenticeship program is often referred to as ‘the other four year degree.’ Administered by the Department of Labor’s Office of Apprenticeship Training, the program has been an integral part of the state’s employment and training picture for nearly 80 years.

“Registered Apprenticeship combines on-the-job training with classroom instruction to develop a skilled workforce for high-skilled careers that benefit our workforce and the economy,” Jackson noted. “Employers, labor-management trusts, apprentices and educators all rely on this program to provide comprehensive classroom and on-the-job training for many professions, including electricians, plumbers, tool and die makers, and advanced manufacturing. These are the types of jobs that build wealth in our families, add stability to communities, and strengthen our state’s economy.”

“Registered Apprenticeship is a nationally-recognized program that goes back to the 1937 National Apprenticeship Act,” according to Apprenticeship Program Manager Todd Berch. “We are proud that there is a strong Connecticut connection to this program – the National Apprenticeship Act, also known as The Fitzgerald Act, that was sponsored by Congressman William Fitzgerald of Norwich.”

Today, close to 1,600 active employer-sponsors and labor-management training committees in Connecticut employ nearly 6,000 apprentices in registered programs. Information about the Registered Apprenticeship Program can be found on the agency’s website at: www.ctapprenticeship.com.