Emily Osborn

Osborn completes master's degree

Emily Osborn has completed her master's degree in Environmental Tourism and Outdoor Recreation at Penn State this spring.

Osborn did her undergraduate studies in Natural Resource Recreation and Tourism at CSU in Fort Collins. She is a 2008 graduate of CCHS, and the daughter of Margie Stratton and Chuck (Becky) Osborn and the grandaughter of Iris Osborn.

Osborn is back in the Rocky Mountains, making her home in Leadville.

Packard graduates from Southwest Baptist

Southwest Baptist University has released its Spring 2014 graduate and honor roll lists.

Included was Rachel Packard, of Florence, who graduated cum laude with a bachelor of arts degree.

Undergraduate students graduate with honors according to the following GPAs: Summa cum laude, 3.850-4.00; magna cum laude, 3.700-3.849; and cum laude, 3.500-3.699. In order to graduate with honors, students must have earned a minimum of 45 semester hours of credit at SBU prior to the semester of graduation.

Packard also was named to the university's president's list on its honor roll. To be listed on the semester's honor roll, students must carry at least 12 hours of college work at Southwest Baptist University and earn at least a B (3.00 GPA), with no grade below C: Trustees' List, 3.85-4.00; President's List, 3.70-3.84; Deans' List, 3.50-3.69; and Honor's List, 3.00-3.40.

Hoffman named to KU honor roll

Advertisement

About 4,600 undergraduate students at the University of Kansas earned honor roll distinction for the spring 2014 semester.

The students, from KU's Lawrence campus and the schools of Health Professions and Nursing in Kansas City, Kansas, represent 94 of 105 Kansas counties, 43 other states and 38 other countries.

Included on the list was Emily Hoffman, Cañon City, College of Liberal Arts & Sciences.

The honor roll comprises undergraduates who meet requirements in the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences and in the schools of Architecture, Design & Planning; Business; Education; Engineering; Health Professions; Journalism; Music; Nursing; Pharmacy; and Social Welfare.

Honor roll criteria vary among the university's academic units. Some schools honor the top 10 percent of students enrolled, some establish a minimum grade-point average and others raise the minimum GPA for each year students are in school. Students must complete a minimum number of credit hours to be considered for the honor roll.

Local students named to dean's list

The local students listed below have been named to the dean's list of distinction or the dean's honor roll in recognition of their outstanding scholarship for the 2013-14 academic year at the University of Northern Colorado.

Dean's List qualifications: 3.75-4.0 grade point average in any two terms of the year.

Honor Roll qualifications: 3.50-3.74 grade point average in any two terms of the year.

Included on the list from Cañon City are Spencer Bradford, dean's honor roll; and Taylor Symons, dean's list of distinction.