Facebook executive Sheryl Sandberg is enlisting Cleveland Cavaliers star LeBron James and other NBA stars in the Lean In campaign for gender equality at home and in the workplace.



Sandberg “is hoping to persuade men that they will be better off financially and emotionally if they take more responsibility for housework and child care, while also backing equal rights for women at work,” according to this feature from The Associated Press.



“Gender equality doesn’t just benefit women, it benefits men in lots of ways,” Sandberg tells the AP. (Then the story gets a little weird, noting, “Among other things, she believes most women are likely to have sex with their husbands or partners more frequently when they get more help at home — a phenomenon she has branded as ‘choreplay.’ ”)



James, Golden State’s Stephen Curry and other basketball players will deliver “Lean In” messages in public service announcements aired during NBA games over the next few months.



Bloomberg notes that LeanIn.org is using #LeanInTogether to drive discussion on social media.



The campaign, its promotional literature states, “will emphasize how men benefit from supporting women at home and at work—happier marriages, more successful children, and better team outcomes—and provide practical information on how men can do their part.”



Bloomberg says it furnishes a lifestyle magazine’s worth of practical, downloadable tips for “Men at Work, Men at Home, and Managers,” as well as videos on “Getting to 50/50,” developed in conjunction with Stanford’s Institute for Gender Studies.



Rachel Thomas, the co-founder and president of LeanIn.Org, tells Bloomberg that there’s no way “we can get to true equality if men don’t actively participate.” She says that “women face pushback when they take the lead, and men often face pushback when they nurture,” and that we need to twist that around.





This and that

Hey, good lookin’: Downtown Cleveland looks mighty sharp in a new ad campaign launched by the Horseshoe Cleveland Casino.





The campaign launched this week on television and soon will launch on radio, billboards and in print. The TV spot features gorgeous images of downtown nightlife set to the sounds of Petula Clark’s 1964 hit “Downtown.” Stern Advertising of Cleveland created the campaign.Here’s the TV spot:Politico.com notes that four-and-a-half months after its original publication, the Associated Press “has issued corrections to an article in which it misconstrued remarks made by Ohio Gov. John Kasich .”The AP story, published Oct. 20, 2014, “quoted the Ohio Republican saying he did not believe the Affordable Care Act would be repealed if Republicans took control of the Senate,” Politico.com says.Kasich, however, had been referring to the expansion of Medicaid."When he said he thought 'it' would not be repealed, the AP initially understood him to be referring to the entire health care law, known formally as the Affordable Care Act, since Medicaid expansion is part of that law and not a separate piece of legislation," the AP reported on Wednesday. "Kasich later told the AP he had been referring only to the expansion of Medicaid. The AP's initial story should have made this distinction."Paul Colford, director of media relations for the Associated Press, wouldn’t comment to Politico.com on why it took the AP so long to correct the story. "We're going to let the clarification speak for itself," he said.A Cleveland band played a key role in the development of the highly regarded record label Carpark Records , according to this Washington Post profile of the company.The Post says Carpark Records, founded in Manhattan in 1999 but now based in Washington, “has had quite a 16-year run, helping break the careers of indie mainstays like Beach House, Toro y Moi and Dan Deacon.”In addition to albums from those three, The Post says one of Carpark’s most influential releases was “Attack on Memory,” the 2012 album from Cleveland’s Cloud Nothings From the story:After two releases of bratty, bouncy lo-fi — 2009’s “Turning On” (reissued on Carpark in 2010) and 2011’s self-titled album — the Cleveland band embraced a grittier punk sound with “Attack,” a record that helped contextualize its live sound. “I drove out to see them (perform) in Virginia in 2010 and I thought they were awesome,” (founder Todd) Hyman says. “So much energy. After that [show] I asked if we could work together.”





You also can follow me on Twitter for more news about business and Northeast Ohio.