Hospitals use 'hot spotting' to zero in on super-users





















Photo: Liz Hafalia, The Chronicle Image 1 of / 6 Caption Close Image 1 of 6 Patient Gabriel Vicario, Jr. (left), meets with registered nurse Fern Ebeling (right) to discuss his medication at San Francisco General Hospital in San Francisco, Calif., on Friday, January 24, 2014. SF General Hospital has a program inspired by Dr. Jeffrey Brenner focusing on "hotspotting" -- basically reducing costs for the most frequent utilizers of the hospital. less Patient Gabriel Vicario, Jr. (left), meets with registered nurse Fern Ebeling (right) to discuss his medication at San Francisco General Hospital in San Francisco, Calif., on Friday, January 24, 2014. SF ... more Photo: Liz Hafalia, The Chronicle Image 2 of 6 Ebeling talks with Vicario as part of a program to cut costs for frequent users of the hospital. Ebeling talks with Vicario as part of a program to cut costs for frequent users of the hospital. Photo: Liz Hafalia, The Chronicle Image 3 of 6 Gabriel Vicario Jr., once a frequent visitor to the ER, hasn't been admitted since March 2013 as result of the S.F. General program. Gabriel Vicario Jr., once a frequent visitor to the ER, hasn't been admitted since March 2013 as result of the S.F. General program. Photo: Liz Hafalia, The Chronicle Image 4 of 6 Vicario brings his prescription drugs and a pill box for help in keeping track of his complicated medication regimen during his visit with a nurse. Vicario brings his prescription drugs and a pill box for help in keeping track of his complicated medication regimen during his visit with a nurse. Photo: Liz Hafalia, The Chronicle Image 5 of 6 Dr. Jeffrey Brenner introduces the "hot spotting" project designed to help frequent hospital users. Dr. Jeffrey Brenner introduces the "hot spotting" project designed to help frequent hospital users. Photo: Terry Lorant Image 6 of 6 Patient Gabriel Vicario, Jr., meets with a registered nurse to discuss his medication at San Francisco General Hospital in San Francisco, Calif., on Friday, January 24, 2014. SF General Hospital has a program inspired by Dr. Jeffrey Brenner focusing on "hotspotting" -- basically reducing costs for the most frequent utilizers of the hospital. less Patient Gabriel Vicario, Jr., meets with a registered nurse to discuss his medication at San Francisco General Hospital in San Francisco, Calif., on Friday, January 24, 2014. SF General Hospital has a program ... more Photo: Liz Hafalia, The Chronicle Hospitals use 'hot spotting' to zero in on super-users 1 / 6 Back to Gallery

At San Francisco General Hospital, less than 3 percent of patients who come to its adult medical clinic are responsible for 35 percent of all admissions.

In Oakland, just 5 percent of patients in Alameda Health System's Highland Hospital account for 50 percent of hospital "days," meaning a sliver of the population racks up the bulk of the hospital's long, costly hospitals stays.

But a growing trend of "hot spotting" - using sophisticated data mapping to zero in on the chronic "super-users" of health services - is taking hold, spurred in part by provisions in the federal Affordable Care Act that financially reward efforts to help keep patients healthier and out of the hospital.

Alta Bates Summit Medical Center in Oakland and Berkeley is among the more recent converts to hot spotting. The center invested $400,000 in new software data to help identify - down to specific addresses - patterns in how Oakland residents are using health care and what additional resources super-users may need to avoid hospitalization, such as providing neighborhood clinics with flexible hours.

The hospital plans to bring in Alameda County health services and other hospitals in the area in the effort to improve the health of struggling neighborhoods.

"We're really trying to use the data to help us see if there is a group that just needs a lot of help," said Jim Hickman, president and chief executive officer of Better Health East Bay. Better Health East Bay is a newly formed philanthropic group created by Sutter Health, a large, private hospital and physician network that includes Alta Bates Summit.

Spreading the effort

Alta Bates Summit is one of six hospitals or health systems in the country to be part of an advisory committee that has taken the idea of hot spotting and helped spread the effort to other local hospitals nationwide.

The committee is in partnership with Camden Coalition of Healthcare Providers, a nonprofit organization in Camden, N.J. The coalition is the brainchild of Dr. Jeffrey Brenner, a family physician who doesn't claim to have invented the concept, but spent a lot of time over the past decade poring through hospital records and billing data to try to figure out how residents were using health care.

He found the top 1 percent of Camden patients accounted for 30 percent of costs, including one patient who had gone to the hospital 113 times in a year. Residents in just two buildings in Camden accounted for nearly $30 million in medical spending from 2002 to 2008.

Care helps cut costs

"Right now, laying there in hospitals all over San Francisco and every hospital in the region are people who've been there over and over and cost the system huge amounts of money," Brenner said on a recent trip to Oakland. "If you could take one of those patients and keep them out, that's a huge amount of savings."

His work earned him a grant last year from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. He's using the $625,000 no-strings-attached grant to help further efforts to improve the health of the most vulnerable residents in the nation's most impoverished communities.

Hospitals know how to "cut, scan and zap" patients, but they don't necessarily give them what they need, Brenner said.

For example, a Camden patient who was trying to manage his diabetes kept ending up in the hospital, Brenner said. As part of the new approach, a nurse visited the patient's home and learned he couldn't see well enough to properly fill his insulin syringes.

Personalized approach

By trying a more personalized approach that included visiting patients where they live, Brenner's team was able to reduce hospital visits and cut costs for those frequent utilizers by nearly half.

Brenner recognizes not all hospitals have to invest in sophisticated geocoding and mapping tools to benefit from hot spotting.

"What I've learned is you can go to an ER in any hospital in the country, talk to a social worker, an ER doc or a discharge planner and say, who's here a lot?," Brenner said. "They're not hard to find. They spend a lot of time in the hospital."

Several Bay Area hospitals and health systems have already reviewed their own medical data and developed programs that focus on their super-users, either independent of or inspired by the Camden approach.

Alameda Health System started an initiative last year called Hope Center, which since opening last year has enrolled more than 100 patients who had been frequently hospitalized.

Two years ago, San Francisco General Hospital created a program in its adult medicine clinic called the Care Management Program. In both San Francisco and Alameda County's programs, patients who've been hospitalized at least three times in the past year are flagged as potential super-users.

Hospital stays reduced

And for years, official said, San Francisco's Department of Public Health has been focusing on its most expensive repeat users across all types of health services.

One of those high utilizers used to be Gabriel Vicario Jr.

The 64-year-old San Francisco resident stopped using drugs nine years ago, but four decades of abuse left a toll on his body. He has congestive heart failure and emphysema among other chronic medical conditions.

Before March 2013, Vicario took frequent trips to the emergency department, landing him in the hospital for a total of 24 days the previous year. One was a 17-day stay to have a pacemaker put in and to undergo a procedure to treat his irregular heartbeat.

Since March, Vicario hasn't spent a night in the hospital nor has he made a single trip to the trauma center's busy emergency department.

During a recent checkup, Vicario met with Fern Ebeling, a registered nurse who works with 50 patients who are currently in the program, for more than an hour.

They reviewed his complicated medication regimen and talked about his efforts to control his weight and take walks with his sister. They discussed his living situation, which was revealed in an earlier home visit. Vicario shares a house with eight other people, some of whom abuse drugs and alcohol, and the clutter and chaos make it hard for him to manage his health.

"My life has totally changed for the better since she's taken notice of me," said Vicario, referring to Ebeling with a sly smile.

So far, San Francisco General's program appears to be working. Patients in the clinic's Care Management Program had a 63 percent reduction in hospital days and a 27 percent drop in emergency department visits. Reductions in costs were not available, but one day in a California public hospital costs an average of $2,590.

Incentives

Dr. Elizabeth Davis, the program's medical director, said it makes a lot of sense to concentrate on the more complex and costly patients, but it didn't make much financial sense until recently to try to make the chronically ill healthier.

That's because hospitals are typically paid by government programs and private insurers for what they do - the treatments, surgeries and hospitalizations. But the federal Affordable Care Act offers financial incentives to create coordinated systems of care and rewards health organizations for improving health quality and reducing costs of care.

"Suddenly, both the hospital and the health plans have an incentive to keep patients as healthy as possible," she said. "Healthy patients have lower health care costs. When that risk is shared between providers of care and payers, that helps everyone work together."

So sometimes, instead of providing a patient with another procedure or a different prescription, she said, a better approach may be to simply talk with a patient to figure out what's really going on. That in itself has benefits.

"It's a big deal for people to feel like someone else cares," Davis said. "It's an even bigger deal when you're frail and socially isolated."