editorials

chieftain editorial

AN UNPRECEDENTED $25 billion tax increase hasn’t deterred the Colorado Democratic Party from endorsing Amendment 69 on the state’s Nov. 8 ballot.

Touting the supposed benefits of universal health care, the Democrats adopted a campaign platform to “support a YES vote on ColoradoCare (Amendment 69)” without ever mentioning that it would come with a $25 billion price tag.

That price would be exacted from everyone’s pay in Colorado as a 10 percent income tax, two-thirds of which would be born by employers and one-third by employees in all walks of life. The self-employed would have to fork over the entire 10 percent by themselves.

Only a few years ago, it would have seemed inconceivable that a major political party would endorse such a tax, let alone the largest tax increase in Colorado history. But Colorado Democrats did just that at their state convention on April 16.

Either the party activists were so enthralled with the very idea of universal health care — socialized medicine, to be blunt — that they didn’t notice the $25 billion cost. Or they purposely left the cost out of their endorsement from fear it would turn hard-working taxpayers against Democrats heading into a very partisan election.

For the record, Gov. John Hickenlooper and U.S. Sen. Michael Bennet are two prominent Democrats opposing Amendment 69.

Note that the federal government’s payroll withholding tax for Medicare is 2.9 percent (1.45 percent employer, 1.45 percent employee) — less than one-third of ColoradoCare’s 10 percent hit on our pay.

Besides, Americans’ experience with government-run health care has not been so good with Obamacare — the misnamed Affordable Care Act.

Amendment 69 would grant a board of trustees — initially appointed, but then elected — the awesome power to increase the 10 percent, if in the previous year ColoradoCare ran a budget deficit as many of the Obamacare exchanges have. How soon would it be before the tax rose to 15 percent, 20 percent or more?

Amendment 69 would exempt ColoradoCare from Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights limits. It does say the 10 percent tax could be raised only by approval of a majority of ColoradoCare members. That may mean all taxpayers, although it doesn’t say so.

We strongly suspect an exodus of the private health insurance industry and businesses, both small and large, from Colorado if Amendment 69 passes.

We also wonder how many Coloradans — including the labor unions and most public employees — would take having to pay more for less than their present health care plans.

Amendment 69 appears to be the biggest threat to Colorado’s economy and general welfare ever to make the ballot. The $25 billion tax is a bitter pill to take.