Here’s a selection of top gift ideas for action figure fans in the family.

Jim Gordon (Diamond Select Toys, $24.99, for ages 8 and older) – Batman’s trusted ally in crime-fighting stars in Fox’s live-action television show “Gotham” that covers the early years of his life as a detective in the famed city’s infamous police department. Diamond teams up with Gentle Giant Studios to offer a 3-D look at the 7-inch-tall cop in a figure featuring 16 points of articulation.

Dressed in full suit, slightly loose tie and wielding a pistol, Mr. Gordon features a decent head sculpt of his onscreen counterpart, actor Ben McKenzie. The figure also gets a deluxe display base revealing a Gotham back alley where he first met Bruce Wayne, complete with garbage cans and crumpled cardboard box.

SEE ALSO: Zadzooks: 2015 Gift Guide for young superhero fans

Additionally, Diamond offers a Selina Kyle deluxe-action figure set ($24.99) with a solid sculpt of the actress playing Miss Kyle, Camren Bicondova, that includes a fire-escape display base with ladder presenting where the young criminal witnessed the Wayne murders.

Both the Gordon and Kyle bases can be attached together to form a larger street scene showing the eventual Catwoman sneakily observing the famed police officer.

Master Chief (McFarlane Toys, $15.99, for ages 13 and older) — The iconic superstar of the video-game franchise “Halo” returns to the world of action figures to support his UNSC brethren against the evil Covenant forces. The almost 5.5-inch-tall figure features a whopping 27 points of articulation, detailed armor and signature weapons (assault rifle and magnum handgun).

SPECIAL COVERAGE: Zadzooks 2015 Holiday Gift Guide

McFarlane Toys’ “Halo 5: Guardians” collection not only features John-117 (aka Master Chief) but other stunning figures including: a Spartan Kelly-087 (with golden visor, custom shotgun and Magnum handgun); a Spartan Technician (with green armor, a Battle Rifle and Magnum pistol); and a Spartan Centurion (with a marksman rifle and Magnum pistol).

Marvel Super Hero Mashers Ultimate Avengers Set (Hasbro, $19.99, for ages 4 and older) — Children can now easily assemble their own, 6-inch-tall, multi-articulated superhero or villain from the Marvel universe with this snap-together, action-figure building set.

A collection of heads, torsos, body appendages and weapons — 20 in total for the set — includes noggins of Captain America, Thor, Iron Man, the Hulk and Hawkeye, Hulk’s fists, and accessories such as the hammer Mjolinar, Cap’s shield and Hawkeye’s bow.

It’s a quick build for Junior, once parents extract all of the parts from stubborn plastic packaging that uses eight pieces for a figure that is more than rugged for extended role-play sessions.

Additional “Super Hero Masher” sets are available ($9.99 to $14.99) to mix-and-match with “The Avengers” set and include versions of Electro, Spider-Man, Wolverine and Hobgoblin to name just a few from the current line-up.

Rick Grimes (McFarlane Toys, $14.99, for ages 13 and older) —This latest collection of figures paying homage to AMC’s “The Walking Dead” television show now offers a definitive version of the grizzled and determined leader of Atlanta’s survivors after the attack on Terminus. The bearded Mr. Grimes stands 5.5 inches tall, is dressed in jacket and filthy clothing, and has 22 points of articulation. He comes with a revolver, a tethered holster for the revolver, an assault rifle and a red-handled machete.



Other eighth series figures that are more than worth stocking stuffing include Morgan Jones (with alternate masked head, walking stick and assault rifle); Eugene Porter (with helmet and body armor); and Dale Horvath (with folding lawn chair, bucket hat, binoculars and scoped rifle).



Arkham: Bruce Wayne and Batman (DC Collectibles, $84.95, for ages 14 and older) — A collection of Dark Knights assemble in the 7-inch-tall set of five plastic action figures paying homage to the best Batman video-game franchise ever made.



DC Comics’ famed scowling vigilante comes to 3-D life via masterpieces representing costume designs seen in the Arkham Asylum, Arkham City, Arkham Origins and Arkham Knight games. The set also offers an exclusive version of a pinstripe-suited Bruce Wayne with an extra set of hands.



Each buff figure boasts up to 21 points of articulation and features a set of Bat’s important weapons and devices used in the third-person action — including a pair of batarangs, a line launcher, explosive gel dispenser, cryptoanalyzer and batclaw.



With the fantastic detail to the blue, grey and black armor variations, each set of gauntlets and evolving utility belts make the collection primed for reverence behind a display case and not in the hands of younger role players.



Ghillie Suit Sniper (Mega Bloks, $6.99, for ages 10 and older) — The famed block-building set company pays homage to the video-game franchise “Call of Duty” with a lethal selection of 2-inch-tall action figures.



This super-poseable gem (down to multiple arm and wrist joints) arrives with a highly detailed camouflage suit and sniper rifle with removable scope. By using the 42 pieces, owners can construct a stone base with foliage and motion sensor plate to place the figure upon for display or role-play.



At that small price, add the riot-shield-wielding Juggernaut figure ($6.99, 47 pieces) to give the warrior someone to talk to.