Should anyone have been surprised that Michele Bachmann would go out with a bang, a big bang? On Tuesday, in what the retiring congresswoman from Minnesota figured would be her last White House holiday party, Bachmann used the grip-and-grin moment when she got her picture taken with President Obama to raise a reliably grin-killing topic. “The U.S. needs to take out Iran’s nuclear facilities today,” she informed him.

His response?

Story Continued Below

“A condescending smile and laugh,” she tells Politico, making a little pat-on-the-head gesture. “‘Michele, it isn’t that easy, but that’s OK,’” she remembers him telling her. To which the gentlelady from Minnesota replied that it would be on him, then, to have failed to keep Iran from wiping Israel off the map.

Merry Christmas!

Bachmann, who, amid a probe into possible campaign finance violations during her 2012 presidential run, announced last year that she would not seek a fifth term, put a lot of thought into that final “substantive word with the president,” as she puts it, even if it did make her the holiday guest from hell. “I made the conscious decision I was going to run hard through the tape at the end” of her time on the Hill, she said in a long interview in the borrowed committee room where her staff has been camped out since they packed up her office before Thanksgiving. And using even those few seconds with Obama in the most provocative possible way is just one reason the 58-year-old firebrand feels “like an accomplished person” as she exits stage right.

“I feel almost like my life is over, in a positive way,’’ she says.

Bachmann, after all, came to Washington to fight—and she did, summoning thousands of tea partiers to protest at the Capitol, questioning the president’s patriotism, and “tirelessly,” to use one of her favorite words, painting the Affordable Care Act as downright deadly: “Let’s repeal this failure before it literally kills woman, kills children, kills senior citizens,’’ she once argued from the House floor.

One of the first to tap into the deep vein of discontent and distrust among those who identify with the tea party, she reveled in taking on her own party, too, even opposing the auto bailout supported by President George W. Bush, who had campaigned for her back when she was, as she said in her final floor speech this week, “essentially nobody from nowhere.” In 2011, she gave the “tea party response” to Obama’s State of the Union speech—in competition with the official GOP rejoinder.

During her presidential run, she won an Iowa straw poll, briefly becoming a front-runner as well as a punchline, and unmistakably moved the debate to the right. She leaves a far more conservative Republican caucus than the one she joined in January of 2007. And with her congressional battles behind her, she leaves, she says, a happy woman.

In a mocking salute on Hardball with Chris Matthews on Thursday night, the MSNBC host called her “queen of the hard right-wing clown car,” and showed a blooper reel of her incorrectly claiming that the HPV vaccine causes developmental delays, airbrushing American history by insisting that our nation’s founders “worked tirelessly ’til slavery was no more in the United States,’” and locating the battle of Lexington and Concord in New Hampshire rather than Massachusetts. Al Sharpton ran a similar tape that showed her mispronouncing ‘chutzpah’ and vowing that “President Bachmann will allow you to buy any light bulb you want,” a reference to her bill, the Lightbulb Freedom of Choice Act, which pushed back against Democratic attempts to phase out energy-inefficient incandescent light bulbs.

Yet not unlike liberal House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, Bachmann genuinely seems to see most criticism as proof that she’s effectively “contending.” When I spent time with her as she was campaigning for the presidency in Iowa late in 2011, I came away thinking the key to understanding both her personal and political perspective is that she sees adversity as redemptive, and life itself as one hell of a fight.

Michele Marie Amble was formed more than anything, she always says, by the poverty her family had to work its way out of after her parents divorced when she was 13. Their family fell on such hard times, she regularly said on the campaign trail, that her mom had to sell her pretty wedding china for pennies from a card table she set up in their driveway. Nobody gave her anything she didn’t earn, she always said, and from a young age had to work to pay for “my clothes and my glasses and if I wanted lunch at school; that’s life.” Again in the interview this week, she cited that struggle as one that ended up being “good training.”

It certainly made her who she is as a parent who raised her five kids to fend for themselves. For one thing, they never got an allowance: “We told them, ‘We’re not paying you to breathe.’” Instead, because they lived on a golf course, they grew up harvesting golf balls, washing them and selling them back to the golfers, and then moved on to other part-time jobs as they got older. They also grew up knowing that they would mostly have to work their way through college, as Bachmann and her husband, Marcus, had done. (The result, she brags, is that the last two graduated last spring, none has any debt, and none is living in her basement. “We didn’t smother them, we weren’t helicopter parents, and now we can be free.”)