DNA tests have reportedly confirmed one longstanding rumor about Warren Harding, America's least bad president of the 20th century, while putting another rumor to rest.

First the confirmation: It looks like Harding did indeed have a love child with one of his mistresses, Nan Britton. Britton claimed to have carried on an affair with Harding in her 1928 book The President's Daughter, published five years after Harding died in office. The accusation's effect on Harding's reputation can be seen in a passage from Frederick Lewis Allen's Only Yesterday, the book that may have done more than any other text to shape Americans' memories of the '20s. Harding's private life, Allen writes,

The flipside of this is that Harding rolled back Woodrow Wilson's war state, releasing Eugene Debs and other political prisoners; was pretty good on civil rights, making a push for an anti-lynching bill; reduced taxes; advanced international disarmament; and adopted fiscal policies that allowed the country to quickly weather the slump of 1921. His presidency had its problems—several of his appointees were corrupt, he erected new barriers to trade and immigration, and he sent federal troops to suppress a strike in West Virginia—but all in all, I have to prefer the small-town ordinariness that Allen mocked over the messianic ambition of the men who typically get praised as great presidents.

On to the other rumor. The New York Times reports that the DNA tests "also found that President Harding had no ancestors from sub-Saharan Africa, answering another question that has intrigued historians. When Harding ran for president in 1920, segregationist opponents claimed he had 'black blood.'" This news comes as a bit of a blow to me, if only because Harding's alleged African ancestry played a role in one of my favorite novels, Ishmael Reed's Mumbo Jumbo.

Are there any Harding mysteries left? Well, there's the dubious tale that he was secretly inducted into the Ku Klux Klan in the White House Green Room. That claim is hard to credit in light of Harding's public attitude toward the Klan (he accused the group of "misguided zeal and unreasoning malice") and his general support for civil rights, but it occasionally surfaces in respectable historical texts.

And then there are the persistent conspiracy theories about Harding's death. The most common is the notion, put forward in Gaston Means' 1930 book The Strange Death of President Harding, that the president was poisoned by a jealous first lady. But there is also the more outré position described in The 103rd Ballot, Robert K. Murray's book about the Democratic Party convention of 1924. "When Harding died in 1923," Murray mentions in passing, "some witless citizens were even willing to believe that he had expired from hypnotic waves generated by the minds of Jesuit telepaths."

Here is some newsreel footage from British Pathé following Harding's death. It doesn't say anything about Vatican mind control, but I'm sure a committed believer will be able to find what he wants by creatively reading between the lines:

(For past editions of the Friday A/V Club, go here.)