Sachin Tendulkar delivers impassioned farewell speech as he retires in front of Mumbai crowd

Video

Image Sachin's farewell speech Sachin was renowned for not saying a lot - especially late in his career - but he made up for it with his farewell speech in front of the Mumbai faithful.

INDIAN cricket great Sachin Tendulkar officially retired today as India routed the West Indies in his final Test match.

Tendulkar, who scored 51 Test centuries and will be remembered as one of the greatest batsmen of all time, delivered a long and impassioned speech to his home crowd in Mumbai.

"Friends please settle down, I'll get more emotional!" Tendulkar said as he took the microphone to rapturous applause.

"It's hard to believe my wonderful journey is coming to an end."

Tendulkar had "a long list of names" to thank, starting with his father, who died in 1999.

"Without his guidance I wouldn't be standing in front of you. He said 'chase your dreams, don't give up, the path will be difficult'. I still miss him today," Tendulkar said.

"My mum, I don't know how she managed a naughty child like me. She just prayed and prayed from the day I started playing the game."

But Tendulkar reserved his most fervent praise for his wife Anjali, whom he married at the age of 22.

"The most beautiful thing happened to me when I met Anjali in 1990. I know that being a doctor there was a big career in front of her. But she decided I should continue playing and she took care of the children."

As Tendulkar thanked his wife for "bearing with me for all the nonsense I've said", she wiped tears from her eyes. He then moved on to his children, Sara and Arjun.

"I've missed out on several birthdays, holidays. I know for 14-16 years I've not spent enough time with you. But I promise you I will spend the next 16."

Sachin's final goodbye After 664 international matches, 34,357 runs and an average of 48.53, Sachin Tendulkar says his final goodbyes to international cricket.

Lastly, Tendulkar thanked his teammates, his fans and the Mumbai crowd.

"Thanks to all the senior cricketers who have played with me," he said. "I know when MS (Dhoni, India's captain) presented the 200th Test cap, I had a message to the team - I said we are all so proud to be representing the nation. I hope to continue to serve the nation with dignity. I have full faith that you will serve the country in the right spirit.

"I know my speech has become long. I want to thank people who have flown in from different parts of the world. I want to thank my fans from the bottom of my heart. 'Sachin, Sachin' (his fans' chant) will reverberate in my ears till I stop breathing."

With that, "the little master" handed back the microphone and embarked on a tour of the ground. Tendulkar's captain, MS Dhoni, carried the retiring batsman on his shoulders.

It was an appropriate way for Tendulkar to exit after 200 glorious Tests, in a career spanning 23 years.

###