This is Swiftboating 101.

In the eyes of the liberal media, Dr. Ben Carson has transformed from a mealy-mouthed retired pediatric neurosurgeon into the direst threat facing this nation today: a black Republican who could become president.

This means one thing. Reporters must put the uppity Dr. Carson, 64, in his place.

To the vast left-wing conspiracy, the good doc exhibits extreme chutzpah — simultaneously bearing black skin and being a conservative.

How dare an African-American, an educated, accomplished, evangelical Christian, think for himself?

Well, he won’t be taken down easily.

Exhibiting a fire that I haven’t seen from him before, Dr. Carson Tuesday night blasted critics for spreading lies “being put out there as truth.’’ At the televised Republican presidential candidates’ debate, he took aim at the double standard protecting a serial fibber, Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Rodham Clinton, 68.

He said this about Clinton’s account of the deadly 2012 terrorist attacks on American diplomatic compounds in Benghazi, Libya, which occurred on her watch as US secretary of state:

“When I look at somebody like Hillary Clinton, who sits there and tells her daughter and a government official that ‘No, this was a terrorist attack,’ and then tells everybody else that it was [triggered by] a video, where I come from, they call that a lie.’’ Go Ben!

Dr. Carson has been ripped — unfairly — for his claim, made in his 1990 autobiography, “Gifted Hands: The Ben Carson Story,’’ that in 1969, Army bigwigs offered him a “full scholarship’’ to the United States Military Academy at West Point.

The account was “fabricated,’’ Politico initially shrieked. Huh?

Dialing back the reckless report into oblivion, the website not only removed the “fabricated’’ claim from its story, it acknowledged that scholarships are never awarded at West Point; there’s just a requirement that grads perform military service. Dr. Carson has never said, written or emitted smoke signals asserting that he applied to West Point, as Politico suggested. At most, he mistook an offer for a free education as a “full scholarship,’’ but didn’t pursue it.

Just as pathetic is CNN’s attempt to prove that Dr. Carson, who grew up poor in Detroit, pretended to be a badass teen. He’s said and written that, as a 14-year-old ninth-grader, he tried to hit his mom over the head with a hammer in an argument over clothes, that he smashed classmates’ faces with a rock and a lock, and that he once attempted to stab someone in a fight over which station they’d listen to on the radio, but the knife hit the youth’s belt buckle instead.

Aside from his apparently rotten aim, it boggles the mind that reporters from the TV news network interviewed nine people who may (or may not) have known Dr. Carson five decades ago. None could remember him being violent. Some scoop.

Dr. Carson is a threat because he leads Donald Trump in some polls of Republican voters. In one jarring survey, he leads Clinton among all voters in Michigan!

In recent days, I’ve seen these stories regurgitated, like iffy pieces of fish:

Dr. Carson compared the US to Nazi Germany last year, because the government uses the IRS to intimidate people. More recently, he said Jews could have defeated the Nazis during the Holocaust if they’d been armed. He also said two years ago that ObamaCare is the worst thing “since slavery.” I would say the doctor is guilty not of being offensive, but rhetorically lazy. Nazis and slavery were evil? Duh.

He floated the theory — 17 years ago, and stood by it last week — that the Egyptian pyramids were not built as tombs for pharaohs, but were constructed by the biblical figure Joseph to store grain. How insulting. To ancient Egyptians.

A painting seen in his Maryland house last year — first spotted by a magazine reporter who profiled him in 2009 — shows a depiction of Dr. Carson, a Seventh-day Adventist, sitting next to the image of a smiling Jesus Christ. The creepy picture may not be this Jew’s cup of java, but I can think of worse people Dr. Carson could pose alongside. (Lefty reporters?)

Dr. Ben Carson sprang into national popularity in September after he expressed a decidedly politically incorrect view. He said he did not think that a Muslim should be elected president. Since then, his poll numbers, and fundraising, have shot through the roof.

Now he’s the left’s No. 1 bogeyman. He should be proud.

No pit-y for killer dogs

The New York City Council voted last year to ban the sale of rapidly multiplying, but harmless, pet bunnies. Nothing has been done to stop the ownership of pit bulls.

On Sunday, a vicious dog of that breed named Kane mauled to death a beautiful 9-year-old girl, Amiyah Dunston, on Long Island.

Pit bulls, sometimes bred to have freakishly strong and deadly jaws, have been outlawed in some municipalities, but the beasts are legally owned throughout New York state. Except in Larchmont, where, I’ve read, owners must register them, carry liability insurance and keep the creatures away from people.

It’s a start. Pit bulls should be banned everywhere.

Single-minded Vonn, for now

World champion skier Lindsey Vonn says she’s taking a break from men.

“I think this is just a good time for me to focus on myself,’’ the 31-year-old US Olympic hottie says in the December issue of Health magazine, a statement that translates roughly to, “Up yours, Tiger Woods!’’

Vonn and the faded golfer, 39, announced their split in May after nearly three years of dating, as a Vonn pal said that Woods cheated on her. No surprise.

You won’t be alone long, Linz.

Give beggars what they really need

New York City Police Commissioner Bill Bratton said this week that the best way to get rid of the homeless is to stop giving the bums money.

Generous people obviously ignored this advice when it came to 43-year-old Will Andersen, who isn’t even homeless. He boasted to The Post in a Page 1 story Wednesday that he rakes in up to $200 — an hour — from strangers outside Grand Central Terminal by putting out one hand and cradling his pet pooch, Rizzo, in the other. Disgusting.

The best way to rid the city’s parks, subways and sidewalks of guys such as Andersen (who disappeared from his begging spot the day after the story broke), as well as genuine homeless folks, is to require them to move inside — to shelters or into their own apartments — or leave town. Only if authorities get tough will folks get help.

‘Pop’ up at Citi Field

PepsiCo is ending its sponsorship of Citi Field, home of the New York Mets and its popular seating area, the Pepsi Porch. Coca-Cola is in negotiations to step in as the Mets’ official soda.

Hooray!

Will we soon be able to sip superior Coke products while watching ballgames from the sure-to-be-named Coke Couch? If the Mets would just soon win a World Series, outrageous beverage prices might be forgiven.