CAMBRIDGE – One of the most prominent city projects moving forward in the new year will be restoration of Galt’s former post office on Water Street, ultimately transforming it into a new digital library.

“The first part, which I’m really glad about, will be restoring the old building – the actual heritage of the building,” said Mayor Doug Craig. “That’s going to take a good year for the contractor to do that on the outside. We’re taking off all those old parts – the really kind of awful looking parts that don’t belong there – and moving ahead and getting it ready for the addition in 2016.”

Although 2015 promises much anew, the past year saw its fair share of controversy that began with city council’s approval of the schematic design in July.

Numerous delegations came forward, upset council chose the approve the design, including a glass addition, just four days (including a weekend) after it was released during a public meeting.

Many people called the design ugly, some referring to the glass addition to facilitate a new digital library as a “glass tumour” that would ruin the heritage appeal of the downtown area.

Since that time, however, alterations have been made to reduce the size of a cantilever and other features deemed extrusive.

“The steering committee is still meeting and there’s still modifications that are taking place (with the architects),” said Craig.

“We’re still in the design right now. There will still be some modification. There’s a number of different things they have to answer, from accessibility for the handicapped to library needs to the restaurant and all of that being put in together.”

During a tour of the building this past summer, Slobodanka Lekic, the city’s manager of building construction, pointed out that more of the historic building’s stonework will be visible once the revamp is completed.

The current wooden addition tacked onto the west side of the original structure will be removed to accommodate a larger, glass addition, thereby revealing more of the original stonework.

As part of the project’s $12.5-million budget, approximately $5 million will be spent on heritage preservation, she said.

The city has posted an animated, 3D video of the design concept. People can view it by logging onto the city’s website at http://goo.gl/7tJY4R.

The schematic design proposes a teen space in the basement, a reading area, outdoor terrace overlooking the Grand River and restaurant on the main floor, a family discovery centre and outdoor terrace on the second floor and digital learning labs on the third floor.

Though a needs justification wasn’t conducted to warrant a new digital library, project backers have pointed out the building was falling into disrepair without any purpose and space for programming at the nearby Queen’s Square branch of Cambridge public library is limited.

A restoration and reuse project of such magnitude just isn’t feasible for businesses in the private sector, according to John Oldfield, chair of the Municipal Heritage Advisory Committee.

“If the city hadn’t purchased the building, it would have continued in a downward trajectory,” he noted.

City council has also put in an offer to purchase commercial property next door to the former post office.

The purchase proposal, though still not finalized, is intended to gain better access to the river from the downtown area and was completely independent of the library project, Craig emphasized in a recent interview.

“The old post office design implementation and go-ahead did not depend on that property,” he said.

The city’s $350,000 proposal to purchase the building upset a commercial tenant who learned about it from the Times.

A number of residents have also attempted to garner more information about the post office project through Freedom of Information Act requests, questioning documents and reports pertaining to the purchase of the building, the basis for cost estimates and partner arrangements for the restaurant with the Landmark Group, the former owner of the post office building, which operates several restaurants and facilities in the local region, including the Cambridge Mill.

One of those individuals seeking more information is Jan Liggett who was elected during the October municipal election to represent Ward 4 on city council.

During a previous interview, Liggett said she believes the process behind the multi-million dollar project has been deliberately secretive.

“To me, the public should have the information and it’s not there, and it’s a struggle to get that information,” she said.

Liggett was recently appointed to the post office project steering committee and said she intends to ask questions moving forward.

The next steering committee meeting is scheduled for Jan. 20.

bjackson@cambirdgetimes.ca