By VICKY HALLETT, The Washington Post

At Orangetheory Fitness, the walls are orange, and so is the suspension training equipment. Ditto with the rowing machines, the lighting and the balloons tied up by the entrance.

Soon, Reggie Williams promises me, I'll turn orange, too.

The names of the dozen people in our "Orange 60" session, including mine, appear on a TV screen mounted above a row of treadmills. The color of the box around each name changes depending on the individual's heart rate. In this and every hour-long class, the goal is to spend 12 to 20 minutes in the "orange zone."

That color represents 84 percent or more of your maximum heart rate, explains Williams, regional general manager of the rapidly growing Florida-based franchise (with a location in Lakewood Ranch).

Orangetheory's high-intensity workouts, which shuffle students among treadmills (or low-impact cardio equipment), rowing machines and a strength-training area, would be effective even if no one wore heart rate monitors, he says. But when students have them strapped beneath their breastbones, they can gauge exactly how their bodies are responding and use that information to get the most out of a day's routine.

"People are learning they don't have to go all out for an hour for results," Williams says. "There's a time to work hard and a time to recover."

And the fitness industry is learning a lesson of its own: Embracing this kind of technology can be beneficial for both waistlines and the bottom line.

Activity trackers that calculate every step you take, every stair you climb and every minute you've moved are now in the hands of thousands of consumers. As people get hooked on data, health clubs have recognized an opportunity to educate their clients on how to make sense of the numbers.

That premise is the very DNA of Koko FitClub, says co-founder Mike Lannon. The technology that powers his "digital gym" franchise, with 130 locations and counting is the Koko Smartraining System: Members plug a Koko Key that stores their workout history into the strength or cardio equipment, and the machines use that information and various sensors to offer a custom routine.

If someone wants to see results beyond what's in the mirror, he or she can log into the MyKoko Web site. The dashboard displays gym activity, strength gains, changes in lean muscle and something called a "Q" score.

"The secret sauce of Koko is that it's not just about data and tracking. Data is a big deal. But data alone doesn't complete the circle," Lannon says. "It is a means to an end for us."