“The message from voters was an emphatic rejection of President Obama’s policies, which he said were on the ballot,” said Richard Viguerie, Chairman and Founder of ConservativeHQ.com, and one of the fifty+ signatories to the newly released “CITIZENS MANDATE FROM THE NOVEMBER 2014 ELECTION”.

"The Republican Party's Capitol Hill leaders have an obligation to the voters who entrusted them with this historic majority to stop Obama's unconstitutional executive amnesty, repeal Obamacare and return heath care choices to doctors and patients, and most importantly to end the culture of lies, lawlessness and corruption with which Barack Obama has infected our government,” said Mr. Viguerie.

Unfortunately, said Viguerie, after the passage of the “CRomnibus” grassroots limited government constitutional conservatives have already lost faith in the willingness of the Republican Party’s Capitol Hill leadership to actually produce on the mandate We the People gave them.

The contentious vote for Speaker of the House the week of January 5, 2015 reflected the frustration of voters nationwide, who did not have confidence that last year’s Republican House Leadership would have the courage to carry out the voters’ mandate. A poll conducted in late December by Pat Caddell confirmed a growing rift between voters and Republican leaders in the House and Senate.

As a result of this loss of faith in the Republican leadership, a broad coalition of conservative activists, thinkers, leaders and organizations came together to put on paper specific policy proposals for the new Republican majority on a wide range of economic, social and national security issues.

They come under the headings of “Fighting for our Founding Principles, Smaller Government and Constitutional Rights,” “Shine the Light of Oversight on Abusive Power,” “Promote and Fight for Limited, Accountable Government,” and “Return to Regular Order.” The mandate document concludes with a strong admonition to honor the verdict of the voters and not deviate:

“Congress has an historic opportunity to lay down a marker for freedom and stop the erosion of freedom emanating from the pen of President Obama. They were elected to do just that, to not only stop the fundamental transformation of America, but to create the alternative vision of a prosperous, free America where citizens know that hard work is the pathway to success. They were elected to protect and defend the Constitution from the tidal wave of encroachments that threaten the basic God-given freedom from government that individuals are guaranteed. They were elected to stop and reverse the President’s agenda and policies. They were not elected to relinquish more power, compromise and enable Obama to use their acquiescence to justify continued abuses.”

The November election was a repudiation of President Obama’s dramatic expansion of government power both through legislative and executive actions. The voters demanded that Congress stop this President's fundamental transformation of America using every power at their disposal, restoring Constitutional balance of power, and ending the Executive Branch abuses against both the citizenry and the foundational concept that individual rights are derived from God, not government.

The new Congress was elected to stop and reverse the President’s agenda and policies. They were not elected to relinquish more power, compromise and enable Obama to use their acquiescence to justify continued abuses.

Failure to fully engage in this historic political battle over the future of the nation is not statesmanship or governing, it is a base betrayal of both the principles Congress swore to defend and those who entrusted them to do just that.

We expect to take stock of Congress’ progress annually on the American Mandate to preserve America’s greatness, as started by the 56 men who pledged their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor to establish self-government and liberty as opposed to being governed by a king. It is the least this Congress can do to push back for us and those daring founders who had a bold vision.

We urge all CHQ readers to read the mandate and then contact their Senators and Representative (the capitol Switchboard is 1-866-220-0044) and urge them to stop caving in to Obama and Washington’s Big Business elite and to follow the CITIZENS MANDATE FROM THE NOVEMBER 2014 ELECTION. We have also adopted a social media “hashtag” for the Mandate: #NoRetreat. We urge you to use the #NoRetreat in social media to help spread the word to your friends, family and contacts through social media posts. SIGN THE PETITION TO STOP OBAMA'S LIBERAL POLICIES!