Eagles first program to win state title in Loveland's history

Thompson Valley's Morgan Fogg celebrates a championship with his coach during the 4A 113-pound Wrestling State Championships on Saturday in Denver at the Pepsi Center. The Eagles won the first state wrestling title in city history. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

DENVER — Truth was, it didn't really matter to the Thompson Valley wrestling team how the goal was met, just that it was reached.

The Eagles had three days to accomplish something that had never happened in city history — winning a state team title in the sport — and if it came down to the final match, that would be fine.

Truth was, the Eagles were so dominant in the 4A State Wrestling Tournament field by the time the team hit the pillows Friday night, the goal had been met. Only coach Dave Juergensen didn't want them to know.

Not quite yet.

"I wanted them to keep on gunnin' for a state championship instead of having it in the bag already," Juergensen said. "I just thought it might give them a little extra effort if they were trying to still win a state championship instead of not having that pressure. I think this team handles that type of pressure well."

By the time the first of a record eight wrestlers placed on Saturday afternoon — and long before any of the six finalists had walked through the Parade of Champions that evening — the team had pretty much figured it all out on their own.

When you've wrestled that well, a calculator isn't required.

"We were looking at the gap in the team score, and we were pretty sure," junior Parker Simington said. "We were just going to go wrestle and win everything we could and try to make that gap as big as we can."

In sending six wrestlers to the finals — the team had never had more than two in a given year since the school opened in 1976 — the Eagles had secured themselves the crown. Even if the Eagles didn't win another match and either Pueblo County or Windsor pinned their way through the rest of the event, they would fall at least 10 points shy.

With each win, the feeling just grew.

"Well, last night after we put six in the finals, the whole suite was freaking out," senior Ben Hewson said. "We knew that was about it. We kind of said we did, we said, 'hey man, that's a state title,' but we didn't know for sure.

"It's so big. We've had this goal since I've been in high school. This team really is a dream team, and all the guys are doing the right things. We're staying out of trouble, we're close as a team, we practice hard. ... Everything has paid off."

None of the scenarios were realistic, anyway, and with three wins early in the finals, the Eagles had 189 points and the largest margin of victory in any classification.

Thompson Valley had just one tough round, and it was the third of consolation where the Eagles dropped three matches, but by the time the Pepsi Center was cleared to have the mats rearranged for the finals, Collin Williams (third, 138) and Patton Graff (fifth, 182) had earned their medals.

In the end, each of the 12 Eagles who made the trip scored points to contribute to the total, making it that much sweeter for Juergensen, as did turning a three-day job into a two-day affair.

Thompson Valley not only won 10 matches the first night, but added 16.5 quality points. In the next round, eight more wins produced 10.5 more.

"It means that they're pretty good. It means we had some amazing things happen, some upsets happen," he said. "I just think those guys fed off each other, and I think that quarterfinal round is one of the biggest rounds we had of all of them, and we kept feeding off that."

Having the title secured meant the six finalists could go out and focus on their match instead of thinking they had to win. Of that group, four return, with Hewson and David Eusea the only seniors.

The first two out will come back as defending state champions, too, as Morgan Fogg and Vlad Kazakov kept the momentum rolling into the finals.

Thompson Valley's Vlad Kazakov, top, wrestles Durango's Matthew Barela in the 4A 120-pound Wrestling State Championships on Saturday. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Fogg wasted little time in getting to work in his match with Randen Espinoza of Palisade, hitting a takedown and adding three near-fall points on two separate moves in the opening period to take an 8-0 lead, eventually winning the 113 title 8-1.

The first thing he did was find his father, Dave, in the stands as the two of them now share that winning moment. Dave won three titles wrestling for Berthoud from 1985-87.

The only pre-match advice from Dave was for Morgan to give it his all and he was proud of him. Walking off the arena floor, Dave came charging down the aisle and the two shared a hug that Morgan said made him cry.

"That was the first place I was looking," said Morgan, who said he actually found his father in the crowd during the Parade of Champions. "I found him and then I found him and I knew where to go."

Kazakov's win proves the power of having quality workout partners in the room. Unlike Morgan, Kazakov was in an early hole to Matthew Lavengood of Durango, who hit the first takedown.

Undeterred, Kazakov scored an escape in the second, then won a pair of scrambles for takedowns in each of the final two periods to post the 5-2 decision at 120. The totality of all that had happened was beyond expression.

"This feels awesome. I just can't wait for next year already," Kazakov said. "The team, everything. Everything worked out perfect. There's no words to explain it."

Hewson won his match at 152 over Myles Wilson of Glenwood Springs 4-2; Simington, Eusea and Mike Berg had yet to wrestle at press time.

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and twitter.com/rhpreps

Class 4A State Tournament

At Pepsi Center, Denver

Team scores (top 10 plus local) — Thompson Valley 189, Pueblo County 135, Windsor 114, Pueblo South 95.5, Greeley Central 74.5, Fort Morgan 71, Discovery Canyon 63.5, Mesa Ridge 53.5, Pueblo East 52.5, Pueblo Centennial 52; 21. Roosevelt 26, 30. Mountain View 18.

Local Championship Matches

113 — Morgan Fogg, Thompson Valley, d. Randen Espinoza, Palisade, 8-1. 120 — Vlad Kazakov, Thompson Valley, d. Matthew Lavengood, Durango, 5-2. 152 — Ben Hewson, Thompson Valley, d. Myles Wilson, Glenwood Springs, 4-2. 160 — Parker Simington, Thompson Valley, vs. Adam Rojas, Greeley Central, check online. 170 — Mike Berg, Thompson Valley, vs. Austin Zuniga, Pueblo South, check online. 195 — David Eusea, Thompson Valley, vs. Alex Mai, Fort Morgan, check online.