BEAVERTON – Beaverton City Council voted 5-0 (with Councilperson John Andrist excused) at a special meeting Tuesday evening, Aug. 4, to hire Chris Olson as their new City Manager.

Olson, who currently lives in Gaylord, signed the contract at that meeting, and will take over the position on Monday, Aug. 10. His salary is $54,000, with a $300 payment per month in lieu of health insurance, $50 per month toward a cell phone, and a 7.5 percent [of his salary] yearly contribution to his pension.

His contract is good for three years.

Olson has served as City Manager in the past, as well as a county administrator. He has also worked for a Property Owners Association, and for a Road Commission, in addition to being a Private Municipal Consultant working on a Deficit Elimination Plan and Corrective Action for the Village of Elberta in Benzie County.

“I am looking forward to helping the mayor and council, and the boards and commissions with their current projects to move the community the direction they would like,” Olson said, noting that economic development is something that he plans to work on.

“I know the DDA [Downtown Development Authority] is active, and I look forward to helping people be successful in their own businesses, as well as attracting new businesses to the area,” he added.

He noted that he also looked forward to working with the schools to help them further accomplish their goals.

Olson is married to his wife, Grace, who works with Community Mental Health. They have three children between the ages of 22 and 26; as well as three grandchildren.

He explained that he hopes that people will take advantage of the open door policy he hopes to cultivate in order to help resolve any issues they may have.

“One aspect of this job is that every person comes in with something that needs to be accomplished,” he said. “That is the most important issue at that time. They have expectations coming in that the situation will be handled.”

As for the council, Matt Lang noted that he was happy with the time that members of the Beaverton City Council put into finding someone that they felt was the right candidate.

“I’m proud of the decision we made,” he said.