Norman Borlaug, at work on his wheat research. (Photo: WORLD FOOD PRIZE ARCHIVE )

Iowa is the proud home of the world's richest farmland and the world's most honored hero in the fight against hunger, Norman Borlaug. Iowa is thus the logical state to champion broadening of the battle against global starvation.

Borlaug planted the seeds of the "Green Revolution" and the Des Moines-based World Food Prize. His pioneering work in plant genetics won the 1970 Nobel Peace Prize.

But his wisdom ranged far beyond biology. Borlaug understood that scientific advances in food production must ultimately reach a limit. They cannot endlessly keep up with an endlessly expanding population.

"There can be no permanent progress in the battle against hunger," he said in his Nobel acceptance speech, "until the agencies that fight for increased food production and those that fight for population control unite in a common effort."

The significance of his words grows with every day that passes, as every day the global population increases by 220,000 more people.

The scientific study group known as the Global Footprint Network reported last year that population growth is eating up the planet's resources one and a half times as fast as they can be sustainably replaced. And as the population grows, that disparity expands, steadily darkening the future outlook.

Projections based on current consumption of resources and consumptive farming practices point to dwindling water supplies, increasing erosion, increasing air pollution. Our failure to recognize, let alone cope with, population growth guarantees an ever-worsening stretch of resources.

To a dismaying degree, the crisis exists not through lack of knowledge or finances but due to obstacles deliberately placed in the path of a solution.

Today, 220 million of the world's women of child-bearing age are denied the means of birth control, while forces in the U.S. House work to halt any American aid to the United Nations' family planning services.

Meanwhile, India's birth rate will soon push its population beyond that of China — while already, 600 million of its people lack modern sanitation.

Today, one in eight people on Planet Earth go hungry. One in 10 lack safe water. Those who oppose birth control out of a professed concern for the sanctity of human life seem not to notice the swarms of homeless children on Third World streets, the painful spread of childhood diseases in bodies weakened by malnutrition, or the outright starvation among children of Africa, where in some impoverished nations women give birth to an average of seven children.

All faiths, all factions must surely agree that it is more humane to repopulate the Earth with children for whom the basics of physical and emotional nurture can be supplied than with twice as many children whose common fate is hunger, depravation and exploitation.

Does it not make sense to expand the scope of the World Food Prize, offering similar honor and recognition in the same forum to those who lead the effort to defuse the population bomb?

Acting on Borlaug's premise of cooperative effort would fit perfectly with the intent of the prize. The problem of hunger cannot be solved until population control renders it solvable.

The longer we ignore that reality, the greater the suffering that we not only tolerate but, through inaction, encourage.

THE AUTHOR:

BILL LEONARD of Des Moines is a retired Des Moines Register editorial writer. Contact: LBleona@aol.com.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1xFdzEt