Topics: Alan Grayson, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, Tea Party, TPP, Politics News

This is a short essay on voter anger — its origin, its attributes, its meaning and its cure. Hint: Most Americans are worse off than they were a long time ago.

I started noticing voter anger around 2009. Initially, its locus was the Tea Party. They’re the ones who would form a circle around a political event, holding hands, and start chanting expletives. I attributed this to the Tea Party’s deep dissatisfaction with living in the 21st century. To them, basically, everything went south when Jane Wyatt stopped playing Robert Young’s Stepford wife on Father Knows Best, and started playing Spock’s mother, Amanda … Grayson, on Star Trek. (Does that mean that Spock and I are future relatives? I don’t know.) For them, things have never been the same since.

Generally speaking, the problem for Team Blue is not anger; it’s apathy. However, by roughly the year 2012, Team Blue had caught up in the Anger Games, and the score was tied.

Politically, we then entered very interesting territory. For many years up to that time, polling had showed that even when Congress had a negative approval rating, most voters wanted to reelect their individual members of Congress. (It’s as though Congress had become Garrison Keilor’s Lake Wobegon, where all the children are above average.) No more. Now polls showed a majority in favor of voting out one’s own member of Congress, a matter quite unnerving to one’s own member of Congress. Moreover, polls showed that most voters wished that voting booths offered a magic Shakespearean “let’s kill all the incumbents” button that would let them throw out all the bums by extending a single digit. (The middle one, I surmise.) And speaking of digits, Congress’s approval rating sank into single digits.

Why? Well, the superficial explanation is that voters feel that elected officials simply aren’t listening. We had a good example of that a few weeks ago, on the Fast Track bill. A GOP member of Congress confided in me that his calls and emails were running 100-to-1 against Fast Track. In some Democratic offices, the numbers probably were even more one-sided. (Many of the people reading these very words had something to do with that.) Nevertheless, in the Party of the People, 13 Democratic Senators initially voted against proceeding with Fast Track, and then voted for proceeding with Fast Track. So that gutless anti-egalitarian bill slipped past a Senate filibuster with no votes to spare. Then, in the House, 28 Democratic Congressmen broke ranks, passing Fast Track by only four extra votes. (Meaning that if four votes had switched, Fast Track would have been halted in its … tracks.) From the voters’ perspective, that’s a very good example of “you’re not listening to me!”