Topics: Editor's Picks, Life stories, Love and Sex, Sex, Sex therapy, Surrogate Partner Therapy, Life News

I saw a male sex surrogate for five months last year. It started with a date at a café and ended with a date at a café, and in between there was a relationship that took place mostly at a private clinic. I don’t know his full name, his phone number, or where he lives. He doesn’t know any of that about me. Money was never exchanged between us, as the clinic’s administrators handled logistics and finances. Now that it’s over I am heartbroken, because while I understand what I experienced was therapeutic role play, it felt very real in my head.

I’m a 44-year-old spinster. I hate that word – “spinster” – but it’s the most succinct way of describing me. I turned to Surrogate Partner Therapy (SPT) in a desperate attempt to change my life, because I could count the number of sexual encounters I’d had on one hand. Dating makes me extremely anxious. I haven’t experienced any obvious trauma, like rape or molestation. I have no physical handicap. The reasons for my anxiety are complex and nuanced, a combination of screwed-up circumstances and family dynamics, augmented by self-imposed physical obstacles along the way, like weight gain and scars. Habits of living alone and being independent are part of who I am now. I make the most of my situation by traveling and investing in various forms of personal growth. But these habits have built a shield around me over the years, and this shield was suffocating me.

I’ve been hyper-sensitive about intimacy and sex since I was a teenager, so overwhelmed that I usually preferred to go without. In my 20s and 30s it was less of a priority; I had time to work it out. But as I edged into my 40s, I couldn’t ignore it anymore. I could no longer accept my current state of being.

I had tried online dating; clearly any woman can get laid if she really wants to. I didn’t experience any intimacy. It was more like something I was proving to myself. I felt like I was constantly lying, pretending to be someone I’m not. A confident, experienced, sexy woman. She’s not me. I needed a fundamental change in my character or attitude. How much can people change? How much can I? I have no idea.

So I started to consider SPT. It sounded lurid at first, but so did the mere thought of really talking about sex. SPT was right for me, because it’s an emotional challenge, albeit one with a major physical component to it. Sex is a straightforward, set goal, but the physical intimacy is a clear result of a deep emotional one. I told a small circle of friends, mostly women but also a couple of their husbands. They encouraged me, though a few were shocked at first. But ultimately, they all seemed to think I was courageous to try it. In truth I am a coward and a fool to have reached my 40s without benefiting from one of life’s fundamental joys. It took me years of “regular” therapy before I was even willing to consider it.

But I was ready to admit defeat and face my problems. It was clear in my first meetings at the clinic that these therapists have seen the likes of me often enough, to the point where I sometimes felt like a stereotype. The sexually stumped neurotic woman who focuses on her career instead of love.

I was given a talk therapist I’ll call A. While I spend my days online, or buried in presentations and spreadsheets, A. sits around talking about sex and relationships. The ease with which she discusses the most intimate of details is astounding. Over time it became contagious.

A. met me at the clinic, which is located on a quiet city side street. Most people walking past the clinic have no idea it is an oasis for the likes of me, because from the outside it looks like a law firm, or a dentist’s office. There is a huge, old ficus tree right in front of the entrance. It has an uneven, thick trunk with roots bulging out of it like strained veins.

I met with the head of the clinic only once. She is a renowned, global leader in her field and has a strong, stern, austere presence. She spent the first few minutes of our meeting quietly going over my talk therapist’s notes, while I sat there watching her read about me. I was terrified and ended up sobbing throughout most of the session. She was impressively observational, pinpointing my anxiety so quickly it felt almost embarrassing. I later told my sex surrogate partner this story and he reverently explained she’s a Dumbledore: wise, knowledgeable and the epitome of goodness. The Dumbledore of intimacy and sex.

S., my surrogate, was selected for me out of a group of male surrogates in the clinic’s team. I made only one request, which was that he not be too thin. Not that S. is fat, but I am, or have been, and body image is a major problem for me. I didn’t want to feel more self-conscious than I was going to anyway.

Although the time I spent with S. was a lot more conversational than physical, I was beyond nervous in the beginning. My left eye started twitching lightly in the days before our first date. I meet with men on my own all the time, but that’s for work. This was different. I spent most of our first date actively distracting myself from crying. There was no obvious reason to be upset, because S. came across as a warm, kind man. Comfortable in his own skin, which is more than I could ever say about myself. He seemed to be the opposite of me, to the point where I was concerned we’d have nothing in common. But I am accustomed to lying to men about my predicament and in this case he already knew about it, so all the energy I usually devoted to insincerity became a welcome, available resource. I shifted it toward dealing with the moment. The opportunity to speak honestly and openly with S. was a huge relief.

S. is a 38-year-old artist. The clinic’s surrogates must all have other sources of income, so besides his work as a musician, S. also teaches art and film to kids. And he’s a bartender, although I don’t know where. He’s originally French and has gorgeous hazel eyes.

Our last date “outside,” before sessions at the clinic, was on the beach. S didn’t own a bathing suit because he prefers to mostly skinny dip at night, but he made an exception in my case and kept his underwear on. We went into the water for a while and then hung out drinking cold beers he brought, ending up in an intense discussion about the meaning of intimacy. S. has had numerous sexual partners – he wouldn’t tell me how many, but I’m pretty sure he’s in the triple digits. So I shot off a statement about it not being intimacy if he can experience it with so many women. He seemed to take it in stride, but I felt awful, like I’d crossed a line. Rude and judgmental. Childish, cynical and mean. I became anxious about the whole thing in the following days.

SPT includes a report from the surrogate about every session, which my talk therapist read to me in between sessions. I always met with her after seeing S. He also met with her after every single session we had together. They were essentially a therapeutic team.

It turned out he’d enjoyed our discussion at the beach. In fact, he said it had been our best date up to that point. I couldn’t understand why he didn’t hit me back with the obvious rejoinder — it’s definitely not intimacy if you don’t have it with anyone at all. But S. didn’t get offended as easily as I do; sex and intimacy are a few of his favorite conversation topics. I’ve naively gone through life thinking there is a single correct definition for intimacy, one that is morally superior and therefore clearly the right choice for me. That day I came to realize it was a completely subjective term and started to think about what it really meant to me as an individual.

The more I got to know S., the more preoccupied I became with this whole relationship being fake. I was growing attached to him. But at the end of each date, we both went back to our “real” lives. I had no way of communicating with him in between sessions. I was a job and therefore he probably felt some of what I feel about my own job, which isn’t all good. He’d never meet my friends or family. He wouldn’t visit my great apartment.

When S. saw I was having a hard time trusting the process, he tried to comfort me. He suggested that what we had between the two of us was more real than everything else going on around us and compared it to when the kids he’s teaching ask him whether scenes in a fictional movie are real. He tells them it doesn’t really matter because it’s real to them in the moment. So I stopped concerning myself with what he was up to when I wasn’t around. I stopped debating his motives or questioning his sincerity. He was helping me deal with my problem and very much present in doing so. That’s the only thing that mattered. Every other date I’d ever been on was a big lie and a waste of time.