Noemi Reyes was just a toddler when her family left the Mexican state of Oaxaca for a better life in California. In the two decades that have passed, Reyes said she has harbored a deep fear of being torn apart from her loved ones by deportation.

On Friday, that fear subsided more than a little for Reyes, who said she breathed a sigh of relief after President Barack Obama pledged Thursday to provide a temporary stay of deportation for an estimated 5 million undocumented immigrants living in the country.

“It’s been very stressful, not knowing and waiting,” said Reyes, a Santa Rosa resident whose undocumented parents would qualify for the reprieve because one of her brothers was born in the United States. She was granted a reprieve two years ago through a separate move by Obama, known as Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA.

Her parents now can look forward to carrying out daily chores — “driving and walking around” — without fearing immediate deportation, Reyes said Friday.

It’s a feeling that will be shared by the thousands of immigrants in Sonoma County and the Bay Area who are expected to benefit under the new deferred action. It is expected to ease travel to their home countries and open up opportunities for education, work and other everyday connections to community life.

Some organizations and institutions already are starting to prepare for that emergence.

Rafael Vázquez, who works with immigrants as an outreach specialist for Santa Rosa Junior College, expects to see more undocumented parents pursue higher education.

“We definitely have a good number of individuals who would want to come over and join classes, including English,” Vázquez said. “They all tell me the same thing: ‘I want to go to college. I want it to be more accessible.’ ”

The college already has an open-door policy, but those formerly leery of filling out applications with their personal details may feel more comfortable now, said Kristin Shear, the student financial services director.

At other agencies, Obama’s action won’t change much.

Those eligible for the reprieve won’t qualify for benefits under the Affordable Care Act, Medi- Cal or the CalFresh supplemental food program, according to Karen Fies, an assistant director for the Sonoma County Human Services Department.

“There will be no change to that,” she said. “They’re still not eligible.”

But undocumented immigrants may be more inclined to walk into a government building to apply for aid for their U.S.-born children if they no longer fear deportation, Fies said.

The Graton Day Labor Center is working on a plan to help those who may be affected by the presidential action. The center plans to hold clinics and bring in attorneys and other experts to help fill out applications. Staff also expects to raise money to help some people cover the application fee, which could be between $500 and $1,000, according to immigration attorneys familiar with similar processes.

The path to securing a reprieve from deportation is not an easy one, according to immigrant advocates.

Two years ago, roughly 2 million people were said to be eligible for deferred action under DACA, but only a quarter of them applied and were approved, said Jesus Guzman, a Graton labor center organizer.