A massive blizzard that blanketed much of the eastern United States set records, paralyzed travel and damaged property. Here's a look at the storm's impact:

___

WHO GOT IT WORST?

Glengary, West Virginia, can boast it took the storm's biggest blow: 42 inches. Several other spots saw more than three feet, according to the National Weather Service: 40.5 inches in Shepherdstown, West Virginia; 39 inches each in Philomont, Virginia, and Jones Springs, West Virginia; 38 inches in both Gainsboro, Virginia, and Redhouse, Maryland; 37 in Clear Spring, Maryland; and 36.9 in Mechanicsburg, Pennsylvania.

Among major cities, New York got 26.8 inches in Central Park. The bulk of that — 26.6 inches — fell on Saturday, making that 24-hour period the snowiest on record, according to the NWS. The entire storm was the second-biggest on record for the city, falling just a tenth of an inch short of one from February 2006.

Washington recorded 22.4 inches at the National Zoo. Philadelphia also recorded 22.4 inches — exactly matching the average snowfall for the entire season.

Elsewhere, Baltimore got 16 inches; Richmond, Virginia, got 11.4; and Boston saw 8.2.

The blizzard also packed some serious winds, gusting up to 75 mph at Delaware's Dewey Beach and Virginia's Langley Air Force Base. Three spots in Massachusetts also tallied winds of 70 mph or more.

___

STORM DEATHS

More than two dozen weather-related deaths — from car crashes, shoveling snow and carbon monoxide — were reported by authorities.

Among the dead were a 23-year-old New Jersey woman and her 1-year-old son, who died of carbon monoxide poisoning after snow covered the tailpipe of their car. Passaic police said the woman's 3-year-old daughter was also hospitalized.

A 44-year-old U.S. Capitol Police officer died of a heart attack after shoveling snow in front of his Delaware home on Saturday afternoon.

In Kentucky, a transportation worker died Saturday while plowing snow-covered highways. His plow slid into a ditch.

___

THE DAMAGE

The blizzard's heavy snow, powerful winds and churning high tides collapsed roofs and inundated homes.

A Pennsylvania church held a cyber-only service on Sunday after its roof collapsed in the storm. Pastor Lee Wiggins says it will take about six months to repair the $1 million in damages sustained by Calvary Fellowship Church in Downingtown.

A historic theater in Virginia billed as "Home of Virginia's Lil' Ole Opry" was a total loss after its roof collapsed on Friday. The Donk's Theater opened in 1947 as a movie house near the Chesapeake Bay and was resurrected as a country music venue after closing in the 70s.

A Maryland farmer who thought he was protecting his cows from the elements by moving them inside lost part of his herd when the structure's roof gave way. Douglas Fink said he and his wife were getting ready to go inside the barn to feed the cows when the roof buckled.

Along the mid-Atlantic coast, water swept into some communities in New Jersey and Delaware. Restaurants along the Jersey shore were partially submerged by flood waters on Saturday — one business owner said the water was waist-deep. In Delaware, about a dozen people to be evacuated from the low-lying community of Oak Orchard.

___

GETTING AROUND

Airports began returning to normal on Sunday, and airlines intended to resume service at all Eastern airports by Monday. However, 80 flights have been cancelled for then. Travel bans that restricted non-emergency vehicles from streets all across the region were lifted, but mass transit services faced hurdles.

In New York, trains started running out of Grand Central Terminal but service on the Long Island Rail Road — the nation's busiest commuter rail service — was still suspended.

Officials for both LIRR and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said almost all mass transit services will be running in time for the morning rush hour.

In Washington, partial rail and bus service would resume Monday — for free — at 7 a.m., officials said.

In Philadelphia, where subways ran through the storm, transit officials began restoring bus and trolley services but most commuter trains were canceled Sunday. Officials said they expected those trains to be operating with delays on Monday morning.

Amtrak operated some trains through the busy Northeast Corridor on Sunday and said they will continue operating a modified schedule on Monday.

And traffic was moving again on highways that were shut down by the storm — including those in Kentucky and Pennsylvania where motorists were stranded overnight.

___

SCHOOL'S OUT FOR WINTER

Many schools canceled classes for Monday, despite the fortuitous weekend timing of the storm. District of Columbia Public School officials said schools would close Monday, as did Baltimore City Schools and the School District of Philadelphia.

Other students were not so lucky: New York City's nearly 1 million public school students still have classes Monday, despite the record snowfall.