Key health trends emerging locally in 2015 included a focus on mental health, access to health care and new medical facilities springing up around town.

Local leaders, clergy and other community members collaborated, worked to sustain a dialogue about mental health and mulled how to offer more services and expand access.

The discussion had been percolating for years but gained traction in 2014 with the Peace of Mind conference, an event that charged the faith community to do more to recognize, acknowledge and seek help for congregants needing mental health care services. By 2015, many organizations and agencies would host conferences, walks and other educational sessions on mental health access, suicide prevention, depression and post-traumatic stress disorder.

Tyler Recovering-Oriented Systems of Care, or ROSC; Greater Recovery Initiative of Tyler, or GRIT; Samaritan Counseling Center of Tyler; and UT Health Northeast were among those that offered education.

By the summer, the Smith County Behavioral Health Leadership Team was formed. It aimed to pull together resources related to the lack of mental health services and access. Guiding the team is the Meadows Mental Health Policy Institute, a nonprofit organization that helps communities implement policies and programs to improve the access and delivery of mental health services.

They hope to develop a crisis stabilization unit to address an immediate crisis, and they hope to nudge the county to establish an assisted outpatient treatment court. The program would identify residents with serious mental illness who may be going in and out of the judicial system or who have frequent mental health crises. A court-ordered treatment program would prevent the judicial system revolving door.

Mother Frances announces new hospital

In May, Trinity Mother Frances Hospitals and Clinics administrators announced they would be opening a community, or micro-hospital, at the corner of Cumberland Road and South Broadway Avenue.

The three-story, 41,200-square-foot hospital, which will be the health system’s seventh, broke ground Dec. 4 and is expected to open in November 2016.

The new hospital will feature an emergency department, eight inpatient beds, advanced imaging and diagnostic laboratory services.

Administrators are in a joint venture partnership with Emerus, a physician-founded, for-profit company that makes investments in established hospital systems.

They've had joint ventures with 15 hospitals in the Dallas, Houston and San Antonio areas.

Mother Frances officials said the hospital bridges a gap of care needed in a highly populated area, also bringing some relief to emergency services at the downtown flagship hospital.

Stand-alone ER trend hits Tyler

Tyler became home to the freestanding emergency room boom, with at least four freestanding emergency centers planned for the city.

Excel ER opened in October, one of 13 Texas locations, along with Longview, Nacogdoches and Texarkana, where Excel ER is opening centers. Neighbors ER also opened in October and crews are in the groundbreaking phase for Patients ER. Meanwhile, Tyler Urgent Care is preparing to merge with Complete Care to become a licensed freestanding emergency center early next year.

In Texas, the emergence of such centers followed the Texas Freestanding Emergency Medical Care Facility Licensing Act in 2009, which allowed for emergency centers providing medical care 24 hours a day to operate independently of hospitals.

There are 168 licensed in Texas so far, according to the most current data from the Texas Department of State Health Services. This does not include the four coming to Tyler, or others that have not opened their doors yet.

Most centers are part of a chain of facilities and are physician-owned, while investment groups own a minority. A criticism of these emergency centers is they are more costly than a traditional emergency department or urgent care center, although some officials contend the costs aren't much different from traditional emergency rooms. In addition, The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services does not recognize freestanding emergency centers and therefore does not reimburse them for services.

ETMC fights Blue Cross Blue Shield

A Smith County district court granted an injunction to East Texas Medical Center Tyler in November, immediately designating the hospital as a preferred provider in the Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Texas (BCBS) preferred provider organization, or PPO.

Earlier this year, ETMC Tyler alleged that BCBS's exclusion lessened consumers’ choice of health care providers and increased health care costs for some patients. According to BCBS, 30,000 East Texans in Smith County alone are covered under its PPO network.

ETMC officials, who note the suit was a last resort, said physicians throughout the hospital’s 37-county service area have for many years been frustrated that patients covered under the BCBS PPO plans could not access ETMC Tyler services without facing significant barriers.

BCBS plans to appeal the court’s decision. The organization announced earlier this year that it would no longer offer PPO plans on the health insurance marketplace, which offers subsidies for lower income people through the Affordable Care Act.

UTHNE adds prominent administrators, gets accreditation

UT Health Northeast officials added two high-profile administrators and received accreditation to offer a masters degree in biotechnology in 2015.

In January, Dr. David Lakey, commissioner of the Texas Department of State Health Services, left that post to serve as senior vice president for population health at the UT Health Northeast and as associate vice chancellor for the University of Texas System.

It was the hospital's first-ever joint appointment of an individual for two concurrent positions, which will focus on improving health outcomes across the state, officials said.

Lakey was approached by the hospital to develop plans and partnerships to tackle health problems in northeast Texas, including disparities in access and treatment, particularly in rural areas.

Similarly, Dr. Paul McGaha, former regional director of the Texas Department of State Health Services, in April joined the administrative team as associate professor of community health and preventive medicine and as deputy director of The Center for Rural Community Health. McGaha will focus on providing community and preventive medicine education through the Graduate Medical Education program and the School of Community Health and Health Professions at UT Health Northeast. He works closely with Lakey to maintain a solid partnership with Department of State Health Services.

Access to care tops focus of local organizations, clinics and hospitals

Since 2003, Bethesda Health Clinic had been providing health care to Smith County residents who fell through the cracks - working people without insurance who are ineligible for state programs.

Since then other organizations have examined health care disparities and targeting populations that need health care or other services the most.

This year, Bethesda Health Clinic officials started mulling the expansion of its women’s health services program, offering pap smears, mammograms, birth control and other services. UT Health Northeast, which also implemented a women’s health program for low-income women late in 2014, began another population health initiative with a focus on colon cancer. It was made possible through a $1.23 million grant from The Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas. Community health workers went to barbershops and other spaces to provide education about colon cancer prevention and screening.

In November, UT Health Northeast received another grant for $2.2 million, and it expanded its project from seven to 19 counties in East Texas where there’s a high incidence of colorectal cancer.

In addition, organizations have implemented nutrition classes, such as Cooking Matters, including Bethesda and The Center for Health Living. Residents, who may not otherwise have access to these services, receive free cooking and nutrition education to help improve their condition or prevent chronic illness.

TWITTER: @cdillard_TMT