Beech-Nut Nutrition, an Amsterdam, New York-based baby food company, has issued a voluntary recall for approximately 1,920 pounds of baby food after a customer found a small piece of glass in one of the company’s products. Recalled items that were shipped to retail locations across the United States include 4-ounce glass jars containing “Stage 2 Beech-Nut CLASSICS sweet potato & chicken.”

“At Beech-Nut, we strive to make baby food with the best ingredients nature has to offer — freshly prepared and packaged in clean, safe, and environmentally-friendly packaging. So, when any product of ours falls short of those standards, we take swift action to correct it,” the company said in a statement.

Jars of baby food included in the recall were produced on Dec. 12, 2014. Products are marked “DEC 2016” and feature product numbers “12395750815” through “12395750821” on the cap. The recall does not affect any other production dates, jars, or varieties, Beech-Nut explained:

We have initiated a voluntary recall for our Classics Stage 2 Sweet Potato & Chicken following a single report of a small glass piece found in a jar of the product. Outside of this single report, we have no indication that any other jar of our Classics Stage 2 Sweet Potato & Chicken is affected, but as a company of parents and families we are acting with an abundance of caution.

According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Beech-Nut Nutrition was first made aware of the problem after receiving a complaint from a consumer who found a small piece of glass in the product. The company also received a report of an oral injury tied to the consumption of recalled products.

“The quality and safety of our products is our number one priority,” the company added. “We know we have not met the expectations of parents who rely on Beech-Nut for quality nutrition for their babies and toddlers in this case, and for that we apologize.”

Customers who believe their child may have consumed a recalled product have been advised to consult a medical professional. Those in possession of recalled products can return them to the store where they were purchased.