TELLER COUNTY, Colo. -

Teachers in Woodland Park say their schools are desperate for money and the answer is a sales tax increase. Voting "yes" on Ballot Issue One would mean a 1.09 sales tax boost for people in Woodland Park. The tax hike would generate about $1.8 million every year, with money going toward schools in the district.

"Our school district is so underfunded," said Carol Greenstreet, president of the Woodland Park Board of Education.

Greenstreet showed KRDO the plastic tarps that hang from leaky ceilings at Woodland Park Middle School.

"We've done our best to patch them up," Greenstreet said.

But, Greenstreet said, keeping and retaining teachers is the biggest issue in Woodland Park.

So far this year three promising applicants have said "no thanks" because of low pay.

"It's an obstacle that effects everyone. People with experience feel disrespected,” said Veronica Wolken, principal of Columbine Elementary.

Wolken said a starting teacher's salary in Woodland Park pay is $30,000. But - down the hill in Colorado Springs, the same teacher would be offered at least $3,000 more.

"We have people crying on the phone. We have people expressing their deepest regrets," said Wolken.

But not everyone is saying "yes" to Issue One.

"If you have a greater sales tax, people will buy less. There's a car dealership down the road. If the taxes go up people will go to Castle Rock where the taxes are cheaper,” said Freddie Brook, a voter against Ballot Issue One.

If successful, this will be one of the few times in recent history a sales-tax hike gets the approval from Woodland Park voters.

The Woodland Park City Council supports Issue One. Councilman Philip Mella was the only council member who voted against the idea. Mella says the tax will hurt people with lower incomes.

Voters have the final say, on April 5.

A School Sales Tax Initiative is gaining momentum in Woodland Park, but not everyone thinks it's a good idea.

City council says, if successful, the sales tax would be raised slightly by generating possibly $2.3 million annually in additional funds for the Woodland Park RE-2 School District.

If voters pass the sales tax increase, the initiative would become one of the few times in recent history that a sales tax hike gets the okay from Woodland Park voters.

KRDO is speaking with Woodland Park teachers, the school board, and city council members about the possible sales tax increase.

Hear more tonight on KRDO NewsChannel 13.