The chairman of that committee, California Republican Darrell Issa, said, "After touting 8 million initial sign-ups for medical plans, four months later they engaged in a concerted effort to obscure a heavy drop-off rate of perhaps a million or more enrollees by quietly adding in dental plan sign-ups to exchange numbers."

"Faced with large numbers of Americans running for an exit from Obamacare, instead of offering the public an accurate accounting, the administration offered numbers that obscured and downplayed the number of dropouts," Issa said. "Now they're saying this was just a 'mistake.' The claim that this was only accident[al] stretches credulity. The administration misreported Obamacare's enrollment figures not once, but twice, and officials cautiously changed their statements from 'health plans' to 'marketplace coverage.' "

The disclosure of the juiced enrollment numbers comes a week after HHS chief Burwell had bragged about how transparent HHS has been about Obamacare data.

Read MoreBusinesses not 'clamoring' to enroll in Obamacare



It also comes just five days into Obamacare's second enrollment period. At the same time, Obamacare critics have seized on a series of videos showing Jonathan Gruber, an MIT economist who acted as a consultant in the designing of Obamacare, describing how the law was written to avoid drawing attention to costs that might have made it unpalatable to the public or to a majority of Congress.

"Lack of transparency is a huge political advantage. And basically, call it the 'stupidity of the American voter' or whatever, but basically that was really, really critical to getting the thing to pass," Gruber said in one video.



Burwell recently sought to lower expectations about enrollment this season by saying HHS expects just 9.1 million people to be enrolled in Obamacare coverage by the end of 2015, as opposed to the 13 million projected by the Congressional Budget Office.

Burwell last week had said there are about 7.1 million people enrolled in Obamacare coverage as of now. She did not say if that number includes people with dental plans.

But, as it turns out, that number also was inaccurate.

HHS, in a statement released more than an hour after Bloomberg posted it story, said, "A mistake was made in calculating the number of individuals with effectuated Marketplace enrollments. We have determined that individuals who had both Marketplace medical and dental coverage were erroneously counted in our recent announcements. The correct number of individuals with effectuated Marketplace medical coverage as of October 15 is approximately 6.7 million."

"Our target for 2015 open enrollment remains 9.1 million individuals. Moving forward only individuals with medical coverage will be included in our effectuated enrollment numbers," HHS said.

During a Facebook chat with MSNBC's Chris Hayes on Thursday afternoon, Burwell said, "This mistake was unacceptable. I will be communicating that clearly throughout the department."

"While we understand some will be skeptical, our clarity that this is mistake and the fact that we have quickly corrected the numbers should give people confidence.It is important to continue to focus on the fact that millions of Americans are getting affordable health care," Burwell wrote.

Hayes pressed her later in the chat, asking " Are you going to investigate how the dental enrollment error happened and make those findings public?"

But Burwell punted on answering that directly.





"HHS must provide a clear and detailed account of who knew about this decision and when they knew it."

"This Administration still appears to be calling its Obamacare transparency plan from the Jonathan Gruber playbook: dismissing the American public's right to know with the same deceptive arrogance that helped them pass the bill in the first place," Issa said.

Read the full Bloomberg News story here.