The effects of climate change are expected to have negative impacts on human health, according to data released Monday by the White House.

The Obama administration released the “Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States: A Scientific Assessment“ as a part of commitments made in President Obama’s Climate Action Plan.

According to the report, climate change can affect outdoor air quality and cause extreme-weather events such as flooding, resulting in death, cardiovascular and respiratory illnesses, and mental health consequences. The White House also predicts there will likely be an increase in air pollution and airborne allergens, which could worsen allergies and asthma. Increased temperatures are expected to lead to “thousands to tens of thousands of additional premature deaths per year across the United States by the end of this century,” according to the report. However, the U.S. population has become less sensitive to heat than in the past through advancements such as increased access to air conditioning and health care.

The White House also predicts illness, such as lyme disease and salmonella will increase as temperatures increase and seasonal weather patterns change. Extreme weather such as hurricanes and tornados could lead to trauma and cause distress, grief and behavioral health disorders.

The White House used the findings to support the Obama administration’s actions to reduce emissions and increase renewable energy to combat climate change.

“Already, under President Obama’s leadership, the United States has done more to combat climate change and protect the health of communities than ever before,” the White House said in a statement. “For example, the Clean Power Plan will deliver better air quality, improved public health, clean energy investment and jobs across the country. Since the historic global climate agreement was reached at COP21 in Paris last year, the United States has announced plans to not only implement the agreement to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, but has also committed to adopting an amendment to the Montreal Protocol that would phase down HFCs, a potent greenhouse gas.”