Young pregnant woman portrait (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Teen girls in South Dakota are having fewer babies than a generation ago, though the decline here is less dramatic than in other states.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s National Center for Health Statistics reported this month that South Dakota’s annual teen birth rate has declined 39 percent since a peak in 1991.

That’s the good news — driven in large part, experts here say, by the introduction of long-acting reproductive contraception and by improved education curriculum.

Yet despite that, South Dakota still only ranks 48th out of 50 states for the percent decline — far less than California. Massachusetts and Connecticut, for example, who have seen 68 percent drops.

“Historically, South Dakota’s rate has been lower than the national rate, so our declining rate might not seem as significant as some other states,” Colleen Winter, director of Health and Medical Services in the state Department of Health, explained by email.

Asked if there were other factors, Winter said it could be due to educational programming, but added “the data doesn’t really tell us why the teen pregnancy rate is declining.”

Dr. Laurie Landeen, who works in obstetrics for Sanford Health, said she knows the reasons. In a state where the unintended pregnancy rate is 46 percent for all age groups, the evolution of long-acting reproductive contraception has dramatically curbed the number of those unplanned pregnancies, she said.

What happens now is that contraceptive devices implanted in the uterus or under the skin prevent conception for three to five years. Women don’t have to worry about whether they took a pill or how long ago they had a contraceptive shot.

“They are almost as effective as having sterilization, though they are reversible,” Landeen said. “That’s why the actual birth rate is decreasing among all populations, but specifically among teens.”

As a result of the long-acting devices, South Dakota has also seen a dramatic decrease in its abortion rate, she said. Where there were 826 abortions in the state in 2002, the number had dropped to 597 in 2011 and 634 in 2012.

“To me,” Landeen said, “that’s one of the biggest success stories.”

As to why South Dakota hasn’t enjoyed even more success on its teen birth rate numbers, Dr. DenYelle Kenyon, a scientist with Sanford Research, said it’s likely tied to the state’s rural nature.

The National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy noted that in 2010, the birth rate for teens ages 15 to 19 in rural counties — those with a population of 50,000 or less — was 43 per 1,000, almost one-third higher than the 33 per 1,000 in urban counties.

In South Dakota, 64 of 66 counties fall into the rural category.

That reality and the high birth rate among the state’s tribal population both explain South Dakota’s ranking at 48th to Kenyon.

“Because we are a rural frontier state ... that’s probably what is driving it,” she said.

Working with a grant from the Centers of Excellence through the National Institutes of Health, Kenyon and Sanford Research have been developing a health and sex education curriculum called “My Journey” that focuses on tribal youth but could be applied widely across the state.

The curriculum has been written, revised and tested in pilot programs. Kenyon said she is waiting for a grant from the Office of Adolescent Health to pay for rigorously testing it. She is convinced it can help lower the teen birth rate even further.

But to do so, both she and Landeen agree that a discussion on the use of long-term reproductive contraception needs to be part of that curriculum.

“There is no doubt that we live in a very conservative state,” Landeen said. “We are more conservative ... than many other states. And many people in South Dakota believe in abstinence-only education.”

That said, research has shown comprehensive sex education that includes discussions of birth control has been shown to more effective than abstinence-only education, she and Kenyon say.

“Ultimately, we know that it’s both education and access to contraception” that are driving the teen birth rate down, Kenyon said. “Without the education piece, the youth may not know about contraceptive methods. Or that it’s even accessible in rural areas and clinics.”

In her mind, one of the benefits of President Obama’s Affordable Care Act is the fact that Medicaid now pays for long-acting contraceptive devices, Landeen said. The coverage of what can be a $2,000 bill for the device and implantation has tremendous repercussions, she said, especially since a lot of teen mothers come out of poverty situations.

According to the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy, South Dakota taxpayers spent $500 million between 1991 and 2010 to cover costs incurred by 23,209 teen births. It would have been even greater except for the decline in the birth rate during that same time frame, resulting in a $12 million savings alone in 2010, the organization said.

For those reasons alone, South Dakota should not become complacent now and be satisfied with a 39 percent annual decrease in the number of teens giving birth, Kenyon and Landeen said. The alternative to not staying vigilant is more unintended pregnancies, more high-risk births, more pre-term babies in intensive care — and a rising cost to taxpayers.

“We have a ways to go,” Landeen said. “But if you ask me, I think we’re doing the right thing.”

Declining teen births

The number of teens giving birth in South Dakota has been steadily declining since 1991. Here’s a look at the numbers between 2004 and 2013.

2013: 822

2012: 937

2011: 974

2010: 983

2009: 1,102

2008: 1,130

2007: 1,198

2006: 1,134

2005: 1,103

2004: 1,134

Source: S.D. Department of Health, Office of Health Statistics

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1Noi4e7