Advanced Practice Nursing will help in Delaware. (Photo: Getty Images)

In September, Gov. Jack Markell signed into law new legislation that supports the independent practice of qualified, experienced nurses to provide care to the fullest scope of their education.

These are nurses with master’s or doctoral degrees that qualify them as certified nurse practitioners, clinical nurse specialists, certified registered nurse anesthetists or certified nurse-midwives. For thousands of new Delawareans who have secured health insurance since the Affordable Care Act was implemented in 2010, expanding the practice of qualified nurses is an accomplishment that will improve access to health care and ultimately lead to a healthier Delaware.

Even the best health insurance plan won’t do a person much good if quality care isn’t available where he or she lives. And for those living in central cities or rural areas, access to care is a real problem. Simply put, there is a shortage of health care providers in many of these communities, often among the poorest in our state. In Delaware, Advanced Practice Registered Nurses – specifically certified nurse practitioners and clinical nurse specialists – are helping to fill the care void, and at the same time, promoting the health of Delawareans while containing costs.

To qualify to operate independently in Delaware, an APRN must complete their graduate courses and work a minimum of two years or 4,000 hours in collaboration with a private practice physician, medical clinic or hospital. The new law also establishes a panel of representatives from all corners of the health care community, charged with developing performance standards and benchmarks to ensure nurses are ready to provide the highest standards of health care.

What will that mean for patients and the community at large? It’s all about choices. APRNs are educated to focus on a person’s total health profile, whether in the hospital or a community setting. APRNs may qualify for prescriptive authority in Delaware, so they can prescribe medication, enabling patients to receive all of their primary health care from a single provider. All of this can lead to more care choices and ultimately less expensive care.

To be clear, this shift in how health care is provided in Delaware hasn’t materialized out of thin air. Delaware’s health community – physicians and nurses included – has been working collaboratively for years to develop a workable framework for independent advanced practice nursing. And even before this legislation was signed into law, the role of nurses was evolving in our state. Under cooperative – and collaborative – arrangements with doctors, some nurses have already been diagnosing and treating patients, or referring them to medical specialists for more advanced care.

The final piece of this puzzle is ensuring we’re preparing our nursing students for these new roles. That means working closely with faculty members at all of Delaware’s great nursing programs to make sure there is a smooth transition in place for students who wish to pursue advanced degrees after receiving their basic nursing degree. It also means growing our nursing faculties so we can provide entry to nursing careers for the many students now turned away because of insufficient faculty and inadequate classrooms. And finally, we need to identify more community practice partners, where graduate students can complete their clinical work.

No one would go so far as to say this APRN legislation represents a cure-all for our state’s many health care challenges, but it represents an important step forward. Credit should be given to the medical and nursing communities, which came together to improve care delivery for Delawareans. By expanding the field of professionals who can offer a full-range of health care, we should be able to reduce costs and increase access for those in our state who have the most difficulty getting the care they need.

Sen. Bethany Hall-Long is a Democrat representing the 10th Senatorial District. Dr. Emily J. Hauenstein is a professor.

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1NDJyzA