MISHAWAKA — Saint Joseph Health System’s distribution of medical supplies is about to become a lot more efficient.

The health care system’s parent company, Trinity Health, is building a $26 million, 400,000- square-foot distribution hub for medical and surgical supplies in Fort Wayne. The new hub would allow the organization to have complete control of its supply chain from the manufacturer to a patient’s bedside.

“It reduces the role of the middleman,” said Chris Karam, president of Saint Joseph’s Mishawaka Medical Center. He explained that Trinity Health will purchase its supplies directly from manufacturers instead of through a third-party distributor and store them at the Fort Wayne hub. The health care organization will then distribute medical and surgical supplies to its health systems, like Saint Joseph.

Not only will the move cut costs, Karam said, but it will also improve the health care system’s control over its inventory and ensure speedier delivery of supplies.

Work on the Fort Wayne hub is expected to begin this month and be complete this fall.

It will affect the Mishawaka and Plymouth hospitals first, but will expand eventually to include Saint Joseph’s other operations, including its senior living and home care services and the physician network.

“If we are able to successfully reduce costs,” Karam said, “then it allows us to focus more on programming for the Michiana community.”

Trinity Health plans to build three more satellite warehouses by 2020 in other regions of its network, which covers 21 states. However, the Fort Wayne building will remain the central hub for its distribution system. It has hired Connecticut-based XPO Logistics to manage and operate the four facilities.

“What really allows us to do this now is the scale and size of Trinity Health,” Karam said. Like other health care organizations across the country, it’s been consolidating and growing to better operate under changes the Affordable Care Act has brought to health care. It now has about 90 hospitals.

The Washington Post reported Friday that the new model would save Trinity Health $20 million in costs annually.

aculp@sbtinfo.com

574-235-6343

@AliceCulpSBT