ColoradoCare a prescription for chaos

As we march to the November election I’ve been doing a careful economic analysis of some of the measures that will be on the ballot. One such is entitled Amendment 69 which will coincidentally, if passed, be an amendment to the Colorado Constitution. (Article XXX. Make of that what you will.)

The extremely simple explanation of this amendment is that it would create a healthcare payment system for all Colorado residents, predominately by increasing various taxes and costing an estimated $25 billion in additional expenditures from the Colorado state budget.

After some analysis, I’ve determined the precise economic term applicable to this proposal is known as “whee doggies, that’s a lot of money” — which is 35 percent above the monetary term, “good Lord, that’s a bunch of moolah.”

For those not familiar with these precise economic terms, it’s helpful to know that this would double the entire state budget. Of course, that is just an estimate and we all know estimates involving the cost of government programs usually come in noticeably less expensive.

Normally, you can raise a lot of money by taxing the assets of a few rich Republicans who have undeservedly accumulated wealth by “rigging the system” to their own advantage.

However, once one gets into the stratospheric numbers of the “whee doggies” economic continuum, more drastic measures have to be taken. The amendment creating this payment system would be funded by increased taxes on just a few luxury items, which according to Ballotpedia.org, includes: salaries, wages, tips, rents, interest, capital gains, dividends, business income and obviously, Social Security and pension benefits.

This elevates Colorado from being an also-ran in the tax burden on its citizen’s, right to the top — finally No. 1 in something besides skinny people and mountains.

The system would also do away with the traditional worker’s compensation system and all residents would be covered under one big care umbrella.

Colorado would be able to accomplish this by utilizing a provision of the Affordable Care Act that allows states to waive the provisions of the act if they create their own healthcare systems. Once again, according to Ballotpedia, the state would then receive subsidies directly that would normally go to the taxpayers, like premium tax credits and small business tax credits which presently are received by individuals would instead, be fed to the state.

The new system would cover everything from pediatric examinations to hospice care or as the phrase goes — from cradle to grave.

I spent some time reading the ballot title and it’s a long one, which does the usual things that people craving this sort of thing want to see, like exempting the entire program from the Taxpayers Bill of Rights and creating a new government entity called ColoradoCare “to administer the healthcare payment system… assessing initial tax on the total payroll for employers, payroll income from employees, and non-payroll income at varying rates (and here’s an interesting part) authorizing the (ColoradoCare) board to increase the taxes in specific circumstances upon approval of the members of ColoradoCare.”

This will certainly give the Legislature a lot less to worry about and residents a lot less money to spend.

What’s not addressed is how do you make this work? And by make it work, I mean force it to work.

Systems like this can’t even approach being operational — forget successful — without restricting the ability of citizens to pay directly for healthcare out of the system and must be seen as an overall attempt at wage and price control of the entire health care economy and by wages, we are looking at you people in the medical profession.

Allowing people to pay for service directly would create a parallel and competing tier of independent healthcare which would cause providers to move from the compensation dictates of the state system to a private enterprise-setting competitive prices and siphoning off more sought-after or qualified practitioners from the state system.

Just to throw it out there, in the vaunted Canadian system, a family care physician makes about $50,000 less per year than she does in the United States, which explains the lack of American medical school graduates flocking to the Great White North.

Amendment 69 is a prescription all right; for chaos.

Rick Wagner is a Grand Junction attorney who maintains a political blog, The War on Wrong. He can be reached at .(JavaScript must be enabled to view this email address) .