Just a few more days and kids will be getting out of school for summer. Parents are you ready? I know teachers and students are and I am too! But before summer starts this girl is having carpel tunnel surgery. In fact by the time you are reading this, I will more than likely already be done with surgery.

When I first went to the doctor about this and talked about surgery, I never thought I would be wearing an arm sling and not able to move my right hand. Luckily, I can type one handed, it will just take me a little longer. I'm quite sure it will all be worth it to get relief from the constant tingling and numbness I am dealing with now.

I know a lot of people, especially on social media, gripe about the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), but I am here to tell you for me it has been a Godsend. Having it has allowed me to be proactive in my health care and at my age, that's a good thing. If it weren't for it I would have to just deal with my health issues after they became a more major issue. I daresay there are hundreds of thousands of people just like me throughout the U.S. who now have health insurance and therefore they get the care they need when they need it. With my income there is no way I can afford health insurance, so I am thankful for it and I apologize to those who may have to pay more because of it.

I saw a headline this weekend that absolutely infuriated me. It read “Congress says $174,000 is not enough to live on.” So they are approving themselves another raise. I feel they need to live at the poverty level of what, $32,000 a year. Frankly, I live on half that, so forgive me if I don't feel sorry for them. Those in office need to remember who elected them and who they are supposed to serve. Big business is not who they serve, or not supposed to, but more and more it seems special interest and big business are exactly who most of our congressmen and senators tend to serve. On a program last week I watched how incoming senators and House of Representatives are expected to raise something like $68,000 a day from donors. They even have special phone booths to make the calls. This is just ridiculous! When are, “we the people” going to take our country back?

We have the right to vote, but over half of those eligible don't. That my friends is sad. How are things ever going to get better if we keep things at the status quo? As long as politicians continue to worry more about special interests and big business, we will continue to lose freedoms, continue to lose the middle class and get more in debt. That's not a good thing for our country. So, get informed on the issues, and vote!