Rep. Michael Burgess has demonstrated principled leadership representing the 26th Congressional District in Washington and deserves another term over challengers Joel Krause and Divenchy Watrous.

A fiscal conservative, Burgess also brings a background as a physician to his work as vice chairman of oversight committees assigned to review the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. While he continues to oppose the act, Burgess, 63, is a pragmatic and passionate watchdog who provides an informed eye for detail on the ACA and other health care issues that few others in Congress can match. He also has worked on a bipartisan solution for Medicare doctor reimbursement that includes incentives for quality service.

While well-intentioned, Krause, 55, the owner of a small video-sports company, says he prepared for this race by “reading more books in the last eight months than in my entire life.” When pressed, he was unable to clearly state why he should replace the veteran congressman.

Watrous, 25, is rigidly ideological and anti-government. He said he would vote against deficit budgets in Congress even if the impact was indefinite shutdowns, and he talks about how federal agents can bust down your door, “beat you up and kill you” for not paying your income taxes. He lacks a college degree and wrote in the Voter Guide: “I don’t need a government degree to tell me what I know.”

The winner of this primary contest faces a Libertarian candidate in November.

This is one in a series of 50 Dallas Morning News candidate recommendations in the upcoming primary elections.

Last day to register to vote: Feb. 3 (more at votetexas.gov)

Early voting starts: Feb. 18

Early voting ends: Feb. 28

Election Day: March 4

For more information:

Texas Democratic Party and candidates: txdemocrats.org

Texas Republican Party and candidates: texasgop.org

Collin County elections: 1-800-687-8546 or co.collin.tx.us/elections

Dallas County elections: 214-819-6300 or dallascountyvotes.org

Denton County elections: 940-349-3200 or votedenton.com

Tarrant County elections: 817-831-8683 or tarrantcounty.com/eVote

For more help, including how to check your registration status, contact the Texas secretary of state at 1-800-252-8683 or visit votetexas.gov.