Get The Power Lunch newsletter, a must-read weekday roundup of what's buzzing in Florida politics:

Marco Rubio:

Who is it in the press that calls on me? I hear a tongue shriller than all the music cry, "Rubio!"

Soothsayer:

Beware the ides of March.

Marco Rubio:

What man is that?

Donald Trump:

A soothsayer bids you beware the ides of March, you choke artist.

"Marco Rubio, Act 1, Scene 2."

The vote is upon us: It is indeed March 15, the ides of March, and with all apologies to Billy Shakespeare, it's Marco Rubio, not Julius Caesar, who needs to fret over this year's coming of the portentous date. As the Sun Sentinel's Anthony Man tells us, the polls universally have shown our hometown candidate behind the unstoppable force that is Trumpism. The only question is whether he's behind by single digits or 20 points. A massive early voting turnout could be bad for Rubio (per Daniel A. Smith's Florida elections blog), or it could be good (per the Wall Street Journal).

And that early voting turnout has indeed been massive. Just over 2 million Floridians have already voted, about 17 percent of the electorate. Here's everything you need to know to vote in today's election.

And if you're still not sure who to vote for, here's a link to the issues page of every major candidate still in the race.

Hillary Clinton

Ted Cruz

John Kasich

Marco Rubio

Bernie Sanders

Donald Trump

Wait, I'm not registered with a party. You mean I can't vote? That's right. You can't vote. Welcome to the club. Florida is one of 14 states with closed primaries. Orlando Sentinel columnist Beth Kassab thinks that's bunk and we ought to move to an open primary system.

All those other elections: it's not just presidential primary day. There are also local elections in five Broward cities and two in Palm Beach. The Sun Sentinel Editorial Board has a voter guide complete with who's running and who the paper is endorsing.

Endorsing Trump: State Attorney General Pam Bondi announced her support of Donald Trump yesterday at a rally in Tampa. She became the first statewide official to do so, with Gov. Rick Scott not endorsing and other elected officials all pulling for Marco Rubio.

Politico points out that Bondi's endorsement comes after her office declined to go after Trump over his Trump University scam fabulous institute of higher education. Totally coincidentally, that refusal came after the Donald J. Trump Foundation dropped $25,000 into a Bondi-controlled political action committee. According to Bondi's office, they declined to investigate because the matter was already being pursued by the New York attorney general's office.

One thing I can add to Politico's story for context: Bondi's office has a history of joining other states in pursuing lawsuits. She joined several other states in fighting the Affordable Care Act's contraception mandates, and did so again in fighting against stricter pollution controls. Both of those cases were against the feds, not private citizens such as Trump, but it does go to show that Bondi is more than willing to enter into multi-state investigations and lawsuits when it suits her.

Not endorsing Trump: The CEO of Fort Lauderdale-based AutoNation, Mike Jackson, has left the Republican Party over its descent into Trumpery. The Sun Sentinel's Anthony Man reports that Jackson has sent some cash to John Kasich's campaign and is holding out hope the Ohio governor can win his home state today.

Jackson had been a supporter of Jeb Bush and, in 2012, of Mitt Romney. And we all know how that went.

Florida is Marco Rubio Country: Or at least, that's what the signs say. The Florida senator has been racing across the state. The Sun Sentinel's Anthony Man caught up with the senator at a stop in West Palm Beach.

"My whole life, I've been told being humble is a virtue. And now being humble is a weakness, and being vain and self absorbed is somehow a virtue," Rubio told the crowd. Despite his gobsmackedness at the state of political affairs in the year of our Lord 2016, Rubio made his case for why voters should punch his ticket.

Coming soon: The major players in our Floridian drama will all be in South Florida tonight. Marco Rubio will be in Miami. Donald Trump will be in Palm Beach at his estate, Mar-a-Lago. Hillary Clinton will be in West Palm Beach. The Sun Sentinel will have reporters at each of the campaign sites, so check back often at sun-sentinel.com after polls close at 7 p.m.

MEANWHILE IN THE TWITTERVERSE ...

Today is an incredibly important day for our movement. Can you call voters today and get them to the polls? BernieSanders.com/Phonebank ≥140 CHARACTER HOT TAKE: There's a reason this is the first mention of Sanders in today's Power Lunch outside of an issues-page link. It's gonna be a long day for Sanders supporters. Steve Schale @steveschale If TV is going to cover politics like sports, let's put strategist win/loss records on screen like they do sports teams. ≥140 CHARACTER HOT TAKE: Seconded. You'd be surprised how many "strategists" on TV have almost no record to show. Marco Rubio @marcorubio This campaign is about our children -- and what kind of America they are going to inherit. rub.io/AkRHjw ≥140 CHARACTER HOT TAKE: And right now, it's looking like they're going to inherit an America with a massive wall and a Muslim ban. As always, I'm @Daniel_Sweeney. Troll me there.