A former Justice Department attorney says Donald Trump is so "divorced" from the conservative movement that he doesn't know who would make a good Supreme Court justice.

The replacement for the late Justice Antonin Scalia has become a major political issue this presidential campaign. Senate Republicans have stood firm thus far on refusing to allow President Obama's pick, Appeals Court Judge Merrick Garland, to even have a hearing. They are arguing that the next president – in their minds, hopefully a Republican president – should make that decision.

J. Christian Adams, a former Justice Department attorney, now serves as legal editor for PJ Media. With Donald Trump more than halfway to securing the GOP nomination, Adams is concerned who the GOP frontrunner might nominate to the nation's highest court.

Adams

"I would guess that he's probably has never heard the name Edith Jones, who's a fantastic judge on the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals," he begins. "He probably never heard of her until a couple of months ago, if at all. And so he's divorced from the conservative judicial movement."

Another reason to be concerned, according to Adams, is the fact that Trump somewhat jokingly suggested he might nominate his sister Maryanne Trump Barry to the Supreme Court.

"She's so pro-abortion that for him to even make a joke should give people concern," he tells OneNewsNow, "and I think that's why at least on this issue people are concerned."

Adams says being grounded in the conservative movement is important to a lot of people particularly when it comes to judges.

PAC: Cruz a 'consistent, solid' conservative

An organization that pushes pro-growth economic policies is convinced Senator Ted Cruz is grounded in the conservative movement and has therefore officially endorsed him for president.

Club for Growth Action, which endorsed Cruz in his 2012 Senate race before he appeared on the national scent, has never endorsed a candidate for president before. But this year is different, says the group, arguing it sees "a vast gulf" between the two leading candidates on matters of economic liberty.

Sachtleben

"... We feel like [Cruz has] been consistent and solid on the issues of ObamaCare, in terms of spending and actually reforming and trying to downsize government," says Doug Sachtleben, a spokesman for the organization." We feel like he's the serious consistent player in the room on that."

And Sachtleben says it's quite telling that Jeb Bush decided this week to endorse Cruz. "There's a genuine concern here that Donald Trump, for all of his argumentation about how he's going to bring together the Republican Party, at the same time almost seems to be singlehandedly destroying it in terms of where he stands on policy issues," he shares.

According to Sachtleben, Trump in some cases takes positions that would be more suited to a Democratic presidential candidate.