Counselors are comforting students at Simeon Career Academy Monday after a student athlete was shot and killed over the weekend.

Michael Flournoy, 16, a promising wrestler and football player at the school, was found shot around 8 p.m. in front of St. Anthony’s Church in the 1000 block of East 93rd Street in Chicago’s Burnside neighborhood.

Tearful Mother Reacts to Son's Death

A mother describes her final moments with a Chicago teenager who was shot and killed. Regina Waldroup reports (Published Monday, April 7, 2014)

Flournoy's uncle said the teen was at his cousin's house and was on his way to buy potato chips when the shooting happened.

A makeshift memorial has been set up at the scene of the shooting, in front of St. Anthony's Church, and includes Flournoy's wrestling headgear and his favorite potato chips.

South Side Teen Fatally Shot in Front of Church

A 16-year-old boy was fatally shot outside of a South Side church Saturday night. Emily Florez reports. (Published Sunday, April 6, 2014)

"I know he was a good person. I just didn't want to see this. This really breaks my heart when I see somebody die like this at Simeon," student Alante Mobley said.

Simeon Academy Remembers Former Football Star

A young football star at Eastern Michigan University and former Simeon Academy player was shot to death in an apparent robbery. Simeon Academy's varsity football team honored the slain mentor at the game Friday night. (Published Friday, Oct. 18, 2013)

Flournoy's mother says he wasn't the type of kid to hang out in the streets, and would stay home to help take care of his three younger brothers. She said he aspired to be an architect.

"He was funny, hard working and he was really smart. He was all about money, football, and his family, and his friends," the victim's classmate, Nautia Heard, said.

Flournoy's family tells NBC 5 that the teen and his cousin got into an argument earlier that day with a man who didn't want them speaking to his daughter. They believe that man had something to do with his death, but police are investigating and do not have any suspects in custody.

Simeon's wrestling team has set up a memorial page to raise funds for Flournoy's family.