U.S. Rep. Ted Yoho, a Gainesville Republican elected with tea party support, criticized President Obama on a number of fronts at a town hall Saturday.

But Yoho also said his own party shared responsibility for congressional dysfunction, adding he is working on bipartisan bills to, among other issues, curb mandatory minimum sentences for crimes, such as drug possession.

The town hall was held Saturday morning at Kanapaha Middle School with a crowd that, from the questions asked and applause given, appeared to be made up of predominantly Yoho supporters.

“We’re starting to that build bridge across the aisle ... We don’t have an option anymore,” Yoho said. “This is something we as a nation have to fix. It’s not a Republican problem and it’s not a Democratic problem. It’s an American problem.”

Yoho was a strong detractor of former House speaker, Republican John Boehner, who resigned last year. But he praised current speaker Paul Ryan.

Ryan has a vision and communicates that vision to Congress, Yoho said. That vision primarily deals with the process of appropriating money.

Yoho said the process hasn’t been done properly since the early 1980s, resulting in continuing resolutions to fund government while failing to shore up key programs such as Social Security.

“My goal is to help Paul Ryan get that accomplished,” Yoho said. “The other thing he wants to do is true tax reform.”

Other big issues for Yoho are national security and killing the Affordable Care Act — the health care program known as Obamacare — and replacing it with something better. Regulation and immigration are also key issues for the Republican party, Yoho said.

In addition to Obamacare, Yoho took shots at the president on several topics, including the Iran nuclear agreement and his handling of the tangled morass in the Middle East in general, and for what Yoho called Obama’s lack of leadership.

Meanwhile, the rule-making authority of federal agencies such as the Environmental Protection Agency is the subject of a Yoho bill.

“That power would be revoked or repealed and that power needs to come back to Congress so when the EPA comes out with a rule ... before they can implement it, it has to come back to the committee with jurisdiction that can vote yes or no or change that rule,” Yoho said.

Yoho said he is working on a bill with Democrats about sentencing reform — a cause Obama has also embraced.

The bill's goal is to have mentorship programs to help offenders to straighten out their lives without going to prison.

“To take a person who had a bad moment or made a bad choice, that really is not criminal, and to put him into our criminal system, they get that stamp on them and people won’t hire them,” Yoho said. “Another bipartisan bill is to reduce mandatory sentences. Some of these guys are going to prison for getting Oxycontin tablets, which is a terrible, terrible problem.”