Joey Hishon added a seemingly scripted feel-good moment to a disappointing Avalanche season Tuesday night.

The 2010 first-round draft pick, who was out of hockey for 19 months because of postconcussion symptoms, scored his first career NHL goal — the game-winner — in a 3-2 triumph over the playoff-bound Nashville Predators at the Pepsi Center.

Hishon, 23, who has battled injuries throughout his junior and pro career — including neck and elbow ailments since his March 2 call-up from the minors — beat goalie Pekka Rinne with a wrist shot from between the circles 7:06 into the third period to break a 2-2 tie.

“I couldn’t ask for any more for that to come in a win,” Hishon said of his first goal — and first NHL regular-season point. “It’s pretty exciting, but I’m going to have to build on that. This is the best league in the world, so I can’t take anything for granted. I have to come to work again tomorrow. Tomorrow is another day, and I have to keep working hard and build on that.”

Hishon was promoted from the fourth line to the third in the second period when winger Dennis Everberg suffered a likely season-ending shoulder injury.

“It’s awesome to see,” Avs captain Gabe Landeskog said of Hishon’s goal. “He’s been through a few injuries, a tough time. But he’s never given up, always wanted to develop and keep going. In the (11) games he has played, you can see the skill, patience and vision he has with the puck.”

Center Ryan O’Reilly, who scored the Avs’ second goal, said Hishon’s goal might have been “the best first goal I’ve ever seen.”

O’Reilly played a big part in one of Colorado’s best offensive sequences in franchise history. In an otherwise poor offensive season, the Avalanche has put two goals together quicker than any team in franchise history.

On Feb. 16 at Arizona, Cody McLeod and Matt Duchene scored nine seconds apart, tying a franchise record.

And Jarome Iginla and O’Reilly matched the feat against the Predators.

Iginla scored on a high wrist shot from the left circle at 15:52 of the second period after accepting a rink-wide pass from Tyson Barrie, tying it 1-1 with his team-leading 27th goal.

O’Reilly won the ensuing face- off, and Landeskog took possession near the Predators’ blue line. Landeskog dished to O’Reilly, and No. 90 took a couple strides before ripping a slap shot inside the left post.

The momentum didn’t last long.

Avs defenseman Jan Hejda was called for interference with five seconds left in the second period, and Preds defenseman Ryan Ellis scored on the power play early in the third.

Shortly thereafter, the Avs got a big break when referees negated a Nashville goal on the premise that goalie Semyon Varlamov was interfered atop the paint. But replays showed Varlamov caught an edge and tripped himself.

Footnote. Avs forward Daniel Briere missed his eighth consecutive game with a foot injury and is not likely to play in what figures to be the final two games of his NHL career. Briere, 37, is a pending unrestricted free agent who is stuck on 307 career goals, plus 53 in the postseason.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers