The Fitz Files

Illustration: John Shakespeare

OF course I'm looking forward to the footy season starting this week, but before we properly get into all that, is there anything more important than saying, "Go Mitchell Johnson, you bloody beauty!" Having terrorised Englishmen all summer long he is now doing exactly the same to the South Africans on Thursday, on the second day of the first Test, was nothing less than stunning. The man not good enough to be picked for Australia just seven months ago, capped his Ashes man of the series award last month by taking 4-51 from just 13 and a half overs on day two.

And they were no bunnies, either. They included South Africa captain Graeme Smith, opener Alviro Petersen and rising star number-four batsman Faf du Plessis - and Johnson took a superb catch, dismissing JP Duminy off the bowling of Nathan Lyon, by running backwards and hauling in a ball that most others wouldn't have got close to let alone held on to. I'll say it again. Since Johnson grew the handlebar moustache, both he and Australian cricket has got its mojo back, and he MUST keep it. And how terrific, after the devastating rout of the Poms, to now put the South Africans to the sword in the First Test. Go, you bastards, and congrats, so far.

TEAM MOURN

Advertisement

As horrifying murders go, this one was off the scale. As widely reported, 11-year-old Luke Batty was at cricket training with his mates in the small Victorian town of Tyabb on Wednesday afternoon when his mentally ill father arrived and beat him to death with a cricket bat. There are no words … But, what a poignant and touching gesture from the Australian cricket team to wear black armbands on Thursday, in his honour.

FIGHT CLUB

Intersecting points in the lives of the Welsh halfback Mike Phillips and that blond singer in the boy-band One Direction, Niall Horan? I can't see them either. But, strange as it may seem, the two engaged in a fantastic spat last weekend. The Welsh team, see, was on the wrong end of 26-3 drubbing by Ireland, and after the final Irish try Phillips got involved in an angry confrontation with some of the Irish players.

Niall Horan, who is Irish, was watching while on tour with One Direction and tweeted: "Mike Phillips is like a child throwing his toys out of the pram! his attitude is terrible, looks like a right arrogant idiot." Informed of this after the match, Phillips tweeted back: "@NiallOfficial come down to training in the week big boy. Bring the rest of The Beatles with you."

GUILLOTINE FC

What's going on in the A-League? I don't mean who's winning because, of course, I follow that closely, and think it is likely the Perth Victory or the Brisbane Glory or the Adelaide Wanderers or one of those. I mean why are they constantly dismissing coaches with such frequency that it would make even the NRL blush? This week the headlines have been filled with all the troubles engulfing Sydney FC, where the very likeable Frank Farina looks likely to be given the big punt very shortly, in which case he will be no less than the eighth Sydney FC coach - count 'em, EIGHT! - in just the last nine years. I am further advised that since the beginning of last year, no fewer than five clubs of the 10-club league have lost coaches to dismissal or resignation, and only Brissie and Western Sydney have kept the same one. Carnage, my friends, absolute carnage! Now, Simon Hill, is this just some statistical aberration, or does it go with what you are pleased to call soccer's "culture"?

ENERGY SAVERS

There's this bloke I know, sort of, see, who played for Manly Rugby Club Colts 1sts, back in 1980 when they - RAH! - lost to Sydney Uni Colts in the grand final. But I digress …

Anyway, just this week, he told me the story. A mate of his - let's call him Big Jack - goes for a swim on Christmas Day at Manly Beach, and is standing on a sandbank in chest-deep water when a sudden surge sweeps his feet out from under him, to take him seawards in a strong rip! Not panicking, but swimming hard, of course he looks to the shore, where he can see the lifesavers watching him intently and … chatting earnestly. But not actually doing anything. Still not panicking, he keeps swimming hard until, finally, exhausted, his feet touch the sand again … only to be swept away once more! Same thing: he looks to the shore, and there are the lifesavers, all with their eyes on him, talking animatedly, and one or two pointing in his direction. And … stroke. And …… stroke. And ……… stroke. One more time, his feet touch the bottom, and this time he gets purchase and manages to stagger to the shore where he sinks to the sunny sand. A shadow falls across him. He looks up. There are the lifesavers. They have a six-pack of beer with them. "Mate," one of them says, giving him the six-pack, "we were taking bets on whether we would have to come out and rescue you. You deserve this." Gotta love this city!

DES THE POACHER

Don't ask me how I know, I just do, OK? I hear from a very good source - eat your heart out, Danny Weidler, I've got this - that our man Dessie Hasler made a very good offer over the summer to his erstwhile charge, Daly Cherry-Evans, to leave Manly in the lurch and go to the Bulldogs. Cherry-Evans thought long and hard but in the end graciously declined.

BUDDY OUTSHONE

As if you didn't know, the Swans had an intra-club practice match on Wednesday evening at the SCG, and all eyes, of course, were on the $10 million man, Buddy Franklin. (Seems to me like he's carrying a bit of pud, but, again, I digress.) Every time Buddy goes up, he's covered by a new Swans recruit from Sudan, a 19-year-old by the name of Aliir Aliir. And he's doing really well! Buddy goes up, Aliir Aliir goes up, sometimes higher and sometimes better. And the best thing of all? Every time he even touches the ball, all the players around him call out, "Shand! Shand!" (As in Shand-Aliir, geddit?) Buddy finished the game goal-less. (Not that there's anything wrong with that, even when the board bet the entire club on your unremitting brilliance for the next decade.)

WHAT THEY SAID

Russian ski jump coach Alexander Arefyev: ''If I had a daughter, I'd never let her jump - it's too much hard labour. Women have another purpose - to have children, to do housework, to create hearth and home.''

US snowboarder Sage Kotsenburg, the gold medal winner in slopestyle at the Winter Olympics, explains how he pulled it off: ''So I, uh, dropped in, and I did a cab 270 on to the first down rail, then followed up with a half-cab on, back-five off, on the second feature, and then a half-cab up, lay backside 180 off the cannon box, then a cab double cork 1260 Holy Crail from 10 off the toe with rocket air, then a back 1620 Japan.'' Translation: I did lots of twirly-gigs and the judges freakin' LOVED it!

An NFL fan tweets his views about the fact a likely NFL recruit has come out as gay. ''Michael Sam first openly gay athlete in the NFL??? That's freaking disgusting!!!!!! Should be kicked out of the NFL and the USA.''

Adam Ashley-Cooper on the Rugby Sevens being in the Olympics. ''It would be un-Australian not to be excited by the prospect of playing in an Olympic Games.''

Rampaging Roy Slaven on Channel Ten's Roy and HG's Russian Revolution at the Winter Olympics: ''Isn't it interesting how ice can hurt and ice can heal?''

Does LeBron James think he is one of the four greatest NBA players of all time and belongs on its Mount Rushmore? ''I'm going to be one of the top four that's ever played this game, for sure. And if they don't want me to have one of those top four spots, they'd better find another spot on that mountain. Somebody's gotta get bumped, but that's not for me to decide. That's for the architects.''

Rafael Nadal on the Australian Open final: ''I knew I had no chance of winning, but I had no intention of retiring. It was the worst hour and a half that I have spent on a tennis court.''

Melbourne Heart's Harry Kewell, now 35: ''I still feel fresh and still feel young in my mind - the only time I feel my age is the next day.''

Cheyenne Woods, niece of Tiger, on winning the Australian Ladies Masters: ''It was a big week, I'm really proud of myself. It is my first major tour win, so I am really excited. I can't wait to talk to my family.''

Melissa Breen broke Melinda Gainsford-Taylor's 20-year-old national 100 metres record when she clocked 11.11 seconds in Canberra on Sunday: ''I just smashed it. I'm the fastest Australian ever, that's just insane. Running under 11 seconds is more than possible in the next year, it's obviously very early in the season.''

Andrew Strauss writing on Kevin Pietersen: ''His relationship with English cricket has been like an illicit affair. Full of thrills and excitement, but destined to end in tears.''

Brisbane Roar's lady of the match Elise Kellond-Knight, after beating Melbourne Victory, and being asked by the ABC reporter how she was feeling: ''Well, totally buggered!!''

TEAM OF THE WEEK

Torah Bright. The defending gold medallist in the half-pipe this time won a very worthy silver medal, after being placed eighth after the first round.

Shaun Marsh. The 30-year-old scored a cracking 148 in the first innings of the first Test against South Africa.

Steve Smith. The rising star of the Australian Test team - by the bye, I suspect he will be Michael Clarke's successor - nearly matched Marsh blow for blow and went on to score 100 in his own first innings.

Alex Doolan. Became Australia's 437th Test cricketer, scoring a stylish 27 on debut.

Ole Einar Bjoerndalen (right). The Norwegian, nicknamed ''The Cannibal'', made a mockery of his 40 years on Saturday when he won a record-equalling 12th Winter Olympic medal.

The Leeton Phantoms. TFF's co-favourite regional rugby club - with Inverell Highlanders and Mudgee Wombats - are hosting their 40-year reunion this June long weekend (June 7-8). Call ol' Bilge-Guts for info.

Clint Eastwood. The 83-year-old successfully performed the Heimlich manoeuvre on the lucky punk of a tournament director at the Pebble Beach tournament to save him from choking. It made his day!

Cheyenne Woods. The class act of the Woods clan - and Tiger's niece - won the Australian Ladies Masters on the Gold Coast last Sunday, after being pushed by Australian amateur Min Jee Lee all the way.

Melissa Breen. Broke Melinda Gainsford-Taylor's 20-year-old national 100 metres sprint record when she clocked 11.11 seconds in her heat at the ACT championships in Canberra on Sunday. Marjorie Jackson, the Lithgow Flash, won gold in Helsinki 62 years ago with a time of 11.5 seconds.

Twitter- @Peter_Fitz