Nearly five years after President Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law, congressional Republicans have their best chance yet to follow through on a promise to undo part of it by repealing the medical device tax.

A number of Democrats are on board for the repeal too. In fact, the tax is anything but a wedge partisan issue. But the bipartisanship may not have much to do with ideology: Republican lawmakers heading the effort have clear ties to the medical device industry and so do many of the Democrats who have signed on as cosponsors to the repeal.

Opponents of the tax say the 2.3 percent levy on the devices — which can include anything from artificial hip replacements to rubber gloves — will inevitably mean layoffs, diminished profits, restructuring and higher prices for the consumer. In recent weeks, though, a Congressional Research Service report found that the actual impact may be “modest.”

The effect of a repeal on the health care law would be similarly modest. It’s projected to raise $29 billion over 10 years. Meanwhile, provisions that require medium and large employers to offer insurance, and a tax on the insurance companies themselves, would raise $101.7 billion and $130 billion, respectively, according to Joint Committee on Taxation estimates.

However the debate is framed, though, there’s no arguing that the medical device and supply industry has poured money into a relentless lobbying effort, as well as into lawmakers’ campaign coffers, and that may be paying off soon.

The industry spent more on lobbying in 2014 than it did at any other year going back to 1998, the first year the Center for Responsive Politics has data for the category. Last year, it laid out $32.8 million, surpassing its high of $31.8 million in 2009, when the industry wanted to make sure medical devices would be covered under President Obama’s healthcare bill.

While lobbying efforts beefed up, the industry began contributing more, as well. In 2012, medical device makers gave $10.3 million to candidates, parties and outside spending groups, with $6.5 million of that coming from individuals and the rest from PACs. That year, Republicans were clearly favored, bringing in 61 percent of the money the industry contributed to candidates and parties.

In the nonpresidential 2014 cycle, donations dropped back down to $6.3 million, about the same level as in 2010. The top recipient that cycle was Rep. Erik Paulsen (R-Minn.) who has sponsored several versions of legislation to knock out the tax and took in $92,549 from the industry. On Jan. 6 he introduced the Protect Medical Innovation Act of 2015 with 271 cosponsors.

Those cosponsors include 32 Democrats, 27 of whom received money in the last cycle from the medical device industry. One of those, Rep. Ron Kind (D-Wis.), received the eighth-highest amount, at $56,900. Among House candidates only, Kind was second only to Paulsen and one spot ahead of Speaker John A. Boehner (R-Ohio).

In the Senate, the most recent repeal bill, the Medical Device Access and Innovation Protection Act, was introduced by Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) on Jan. 13. Along with 23 Republican cosponsors, five Democrats have signed on, and all of those Democrats received money from the medical device industry in 2014. Democratic Sens. Al Franken and Amy Klobuchar, both of Minnesota, came out on top of that list with $47,249 and $39,900 respectively.

Minnesota is a big state for medical device makers, including Medtronic Inc., headquartered in Minneapolis and the biggest donor in the 2014 cycle at $604,772. Lawmakers in other states with a lot of jobs tied to the industry, like Indiana and Massachusetts, have expressed opposition to the law as well — including Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.), who penned an op-ed against the tax.

Who got the most cash from Medtronic in 2014? First, second, and third: all Minnesota lawmakers.

How many of Medtronic’s top five are supporters of repealing the medical device tax? Four — and it would likely be five if the No. 1 recipient, Mike McFadden (R), hadn’t been running against the No. 3 recipient, Franken, for the same seat.