Highmark's preliminary plan for hospitals lacks detail, state says

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Highmark Health's preliminary plan to gain state approval for a $175 million infusion to Allegheny Health Network falls short in details, according to a letter from the Pennsylvania Insurance Department.

But Highmark and Allegheny Health Network officials said Tuesday they'll meet all requirements in their final plan, which is due Sept. 30.

The insurance department in June approved Highmark's request to lend the money to the hospital network but with conditions, including that it submit a plan of how the hospital system will improve its finances.

Highmark filed a preliminary plan July 15.

On Aug. 21, Deputy Insurance Commissioner Stephen Johnson responded in a letter to Highmark that the plan needs more specifics.

“While we understand that this is preliminary, the documents that Highmark submitted do not begin to address the detail that will be required for the final AHN Corrective Action Plan,” he wrote, adding, “Most important, the drafts fail to provide or describe the particular corrective steps or actions that will be taken to turn around Allegheny Health Network's performance.”

Ali Fogarty, a Pennsylvania Insurance Department spokeswoman, said the intent of Johnson's letter “is merely to ensure that both parties are on the same page regarding what is to be included in the final plan that is due by Sept. 30.”

The state is requiring that in the final plan, Highmark include detailed financial projections through 2017, building schedules for new facilities, projected patient volumes, employee pay schedules and other information. The state also requires an accounting of the changes Highmark has made in its effort to turn around the hospital system.

Stephen Foreman, an associate professor of health administration and economics at Robert Morris University, said it's a fair request.

“What we're concerned with here is the use of a nonprofit insurer's reserves to realign the hospital market in Western Pennsylvania. If there are substantial risks of losses or inefficient use of money, it's the public's business,” he said.

Highmark spokeswoman Lynn Seay said the insurer plans to submit a final plan, including the requested information, by the state's deadline. Allegheny Health Network spokesman Dan Laurent concurred.

“We expected the PID to scrutinize the preliminary plan and to weigh in on it, and we're prepared to address the issues raised in the letter in the final plan,” Laurent said.

Samuel Marshall, president of the Insurance Federation of Pennsylvania, said Highmark's July 15 filing was too vague to be labeled a preliminary plan.

“The preliminary plan, as the department pointed out, doesn't set forth its corrective actions,” said Marshall, who testified before the state on the matter during a public meeting in May. “Maybe Highmark is going to get everything right on the nose in the final plan, but I'd expect some give and take even after that is filed. Right now, it's impossible for anybody to evaluate the quality of the plan.”

Highmark wrote in its preliminary plan that expansions of outpatient facilities in Pine, Bethel Park and Peters are key drivers behind Allegheny Health Network's road to financial viability and reduction of operating losses.

Highmark has invested more than $1 billion to form Allegheny Health Network, the region's second-largest hospital network behind rival UPMC. It rescued the former West Penn Allegheny Health System, a five-hospital network that was on the verge of bankruptcy, to form the backbone. Allegheny General and West Penn hospitals were part of West Penn Allegheny.

Allegheny Health Network wants to build outpatient centers across the region, expand women's services and increase access to emergency and trauma services in key communities.

Highmark last week disclosed an operating loss of $171 million for the first half of 2015, compared to a gain of $12 million during the same period last year. The insurer attributed the loss to higher-than-expected medical claims from people who signed up for health plans through the Affordable Care Act's online exchange. It reported a loss of $16 million for Allegheny Health Network.

Ben Schmitt is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-320-7991 or bschmitt@tribweb.com.