(News Release) Robeson County will soon be home to a facility that officials say will bring dental care to low-income, underserved residents while providing educational opportunities to East Carolina University dental students.

That was the message today as Robeson leaders and the ECU School of Dental Medicine announced plans to build a “community service learning center” in Lumberton.

ECU will build the facility next to the Robeson County Health Department on land donated by the county. Construction dates will be announced later.

At the center, fourth-year dental students and dental residents will hone their patient-care techniques and learn the ins-and-outs of operating a community practice under the watch of experienced faculty members. It is the seventh center that ECU has announced since it began its new dental school in 2008.

The $3 million, 7,700-square-foot center is one of up to 10 ECU plans to build across the state. The first two centers have opened in Ahoskie and Elizabeth City. Two more are under construction in Lillington in the central part of the state and Sylva in the mountains. Others are planned for the mountain town of Spruce Pine and in Davidson County in the Triad.

“We are excited about working with the county health department and the local dental community and look forward to providing quality dental care to people of Robeson County and the surrounding counties,” said Dr. Gregory Chadwick, dean of the School of Dental Medicine at ECU.

The center will have 16 dental chairs and will employ local staff members, including 1.5 full-time dental faculty positions, a business manager, five to six dental assistants, two to three dental hygienists and two general dentistry residents. Four to five students will be at the center for nine-week rotations.

Once open, the center will provide a variety of services, including general, preventive and emergency dental care and will include services such as crowns, root canals and bridges.

While services won't be free, charges will be on a sliding scale. Officials have said fees typically will be about 70 percent of those at a private dental practice.

William Smith, director of the Robeson County Health Department, said the center will help the 14,000 people in his county who don't qualify for Medicaid or insurance under the Affordable Care Act. The department closed its dental center in July due to financial pressures after the state did not expand its Medicaid program.

“I think not only for Robeson County but the region as a whole the clinic is going to be vital for a segment of our population that heretofore has not accessed dental care,” Smith said.

The setting will also provide students and dental residents with an opportunity to learn what practicing in a community setting is like. The school admitted its first class in 2011, and all students are North Carolina residents. Goals of the school are to educate students from underrepresented groups and disadvantaged backgrounds and to improve access to dental care.

“The ECU approach – educating students and residents in our community service learning centers – could become a future model for dental education,” Chadwick said. “Community service learning centers are more than just dental clinics. They are an integral part of our dental school where our seniors will spend much of their fourth year.”

North Carolina ranks 47th out of the 50 states in the number of dentists per capita, according to the Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Many people without good dental care live in rural areas, where North Carolina averages three dentists for every 10,000 people. That compares to urban areas of the state, where the ratio is nearly five dentists for every 10,000 people. Nationally, the ratio is six dentists for every 10,000 people.

Robeson County had a population of 134,168 in the 2010 census, with Lumberton being home to more than 21,000. The county has fewer than 2.1 dentists for every 10,000 people, according to the Sheps Center.

Smith said the center will help maintain a level of service in the county as dentists there retire during the next few years.

ECU hopes the centers will help improve the status of dental health in the state while adding an innovative educational aspect to dental school. Chadwick compares to centers to moving the students' fourth-year clinical work off the ECU campus and into communities across the state.

“We are not only providing much needed care, but we are also educating students in areas similar to where we hope they will practice,” Chadwick said.

Construction will be paid for with funds appropriated by the state to ECU. Additionally, the CSLCs will generate revenue through patient care each of the centers will provide.