The Council for Medical Schemes this week highlighted that medical schemes’ vital signs are healthy, but there are still strong arguments that the industry needs “medical attention”. One particularly nasty symptom for members is that contributions are increasing at a much higher rate than most members’ income.

The Council for Medical Schemes’s latest annual report, which was released this week, shows that over the past 12 years schemes have each year, on average, increased their contributions by four percentage points more than the inflation rate, as measured by the Consumer Price Index (CPI).

At this rate, members will more rapidly reach the point at which the proportion of their income that they spend on contributions is unsustainable, Alexander Forbes says (see “End is nigh for most members’ ability to afford health cover”, below).

The Council for Medical Schemes uses CPI plus three percentage points as the benchmark to determine if annual contribution increases are reasonable.

Dr Monwabisi Gantsho, Registrar of Medical Schemes, says his office still believes that schemes should implement contribution increases above this level only if they have good reasons for doing so.

The two main reasons for the council approving contribution increases that exceed this benchmark for individual schemes over the past 12 years are that a scheme has a dwindling or an ageing membership, Gantsho says.

The annual report shows that the contribution income that medical schemes collected in 2012 increased by 9.4 percent to R117.5 billion, from R107.4 billion in 2011.

However, claims increased at a higher rate of almost 11 percent over the 2012 financial year, resulting in medical schemes making a much smaller operating surplus last year than they did in 2011.

Schemes’ overall operating surplus deteriorated to R25.7 million, from R1 billion in 2011. However, medical schemes were cushioned by their investment income and recorded a net surplus of R3.7 billion for the 2012 financial year.

In the annual report, Gantsho recognises the need for the tariffs that healthcare providers charge for their services to be regulated. However, he denies that the absence of guideline tariffs, as well as the requirement that schemes must provide their members with certain prescribed minimum benefits (PMBs), is – as many schemes assert – responsible for the large increase in the amount that schemes are paying out in claims.

The registrar says that scheme members’ growing awareness of the benefits to which they are entitled is resulting in an increase in the utilisation of these benefits.

In the annual report, Gantsho says that, in the 13 years since the Medical Schemes Act was implemented, no evidence has emerged to support the “myth” that PMBs are driving up medical scheme costs.

However, he told Personal Finance that evidence may be emerging that some healthcare providers are overcharging for PMBs, and the Council for Medical Schemes will analyse and validate any evidence to this effect that is presented to it.

Actuary Christoff Raath told the recent Board of Healthcare Funders conference that his company, Health Monitor, has evidence that anaesthetists and surgeons are charging higher rates for services that are covered by the PMBs than they are for the same services that are not PMB claims.

Raath said that providers are inflating their tariffs for PMB ser-vices, because they know that schemes are obliged by law to pay for them in full, and this is now a very real and significant problem.

Neil Nair, principal officer of Samwumed, the medical scheme for members of the South African Municipal Workers’ Union, told Personal Finance that it is irresponsible of the registrar to label as “unfounded” the claims that PMBs are making schemes unsustainable.

He says that small, low-cost schemes such as Samwumed are severely affected by having to pay PMB claims at whatever rate a provider charges. Samwumed’s ratio of contribution income to claims paid out has increased from 85 percent to 102 percent since 2011, when the registrar threatened to deregister schemes that paid PMB claims at their scheme rates rather than at the rates charged by healthcare providers, Nair says.

The increase in Samwumed’s claims ratio has resulted in its actuaries recommending that it raise contributions by CPI plus six percentage points in 2014, he says.

Samwumed fully supports the PMBs but wants the tariffs that can be charged for these services to be regulated, Nair says.

Medical schemes have been advised to contract with healthcare providers in order to reduce their PMB costs, but, Nair says, it is easier for large schemes to save costs by appointing designated service providers (DSPs) than it is for small schemes, because big schemes have more buying power.

Alex van den Heever, who holds the Chair in Social Security Studies at the University of the Witwatersrand, says that by appointing DSPs schemes can contain the cost of PMBs to a far greater extent than they are doing currently.

Although the Competition Commission’s inquiry into private healthcare needs to consider the obstacles to competition in the market, schemes can do more to reduce costs, he says. The inquiry is due to begin later this year.

Gantsho says that although schemes’ solvency ratios (see “Vital signs”, below), net results after investment income, claims-paying ability and membership growth are positive, schemes are not faring well in other areas, such as keeping contributions affordable.

Gantsho says that the tariffs charged for healthcare services are a big problem, which the Competition Commission’s inquiry must address by considering the establishment of a bargaining chamber, recommending proper studies into the costs of health care, and taking into account the economic climate and what members can afford.

Policymakers also need to implement some kind of risk-equalisation among schemes, he says.

END IS NIGH FOR MOST MEMBERS’ ABILITY TO AFFORD HEALTH COVER

The point at which most medical scheme members will not be able to afford contributions for the cover they need is approaching faster than has generally been expected.

John Anderson, managing director for research and product development at Alexander Forbes, says that when medical scheme contributions for particular needs and benefits outstrip inflation and your income does not keep pace with these increases – as has been the case for the past 12 years – within a few years you spend a much greater, and a potentially unsustainable, portion of your income on healthcare cover. (See link to graph at the end of the article.)

It is widely believed that medical scheme contributions have been increasing at the Consumer Price Index (CPI) plus three percentage points, but the Council for Medical Schemes’s latest annual report shows that, for the past 12 years, contributions have been increasing at CPI plus four percentage points.

Anderson says this means that a person who belongs to the Government Employees Medical Scheme’s Ruby option, which currently costs R1 544 a month for the main member who earns R10 000 a month, is spending 15 percent of his or her income on contributions.

If the contributions increase at CPI plus four percentage points but the member’s salary increases at only CPI (6.3 percent), in 10 years’ time this person will be spending 22 percent of his or her income on contributions; in 20 years, contributions will consume 32 percent of his or her income.

A person who earns R25 000 a month and belongs to Discovery Health Medical Scheme’s Essential Comprehensive option, is currently spending 10 percent of his or her income on contributions.

In 10 years, with contributions increasing at CPI plus four percentage points and the member’s salary increasing at CPI only, medical scheme spend will consume 14 percent of his or her income; in 20 years, it will be 21 percent.

Salary-earners do at times receive above-inflation increases, but above-inflation income increases are harder to come by for pensioners.

Anderson says that a pensioner with an income of R5 000 a month and who pays a contribution of R1 138 a month (the average contribution rate cited in the Council for Medical Schemes’s 2012/13 annual report) is spending 23 percent of his or her income on medical benefits.

Assuming that the member’s contributions have been increasing at CPI plus four percentage points each year, the pensioner would have paid 13 percent of his or her income to receive the same benefits in 2003.

SOME ADMINISTRATORS ARE DELIBERATELY SHORT-PAYING YOUR PMB CLAIMS

Some medical scheme administrators are deliberately paying claims for prescribed minimum benefits (PMBs) at scheme rates rather than in full, the Council for Medical Schemes’s annual report states.

In 2012, the council dealt with 846 complaints in which administrators incorrectly paid PMB claims at the rate at which medical schemes reimburse healthcare providers, rather than in full, the report says.

Dr Monwabisi Gantsho, Registrar of Medical Schemes, would not be drawn on which schemes’ administrators are guilty of these practices.

Medical schemes are obliged by law to pay PMB claims in full regardless of what your doctor or other healthcare provider charges.

The PMBs are benefits that your scheme must by law provide. They cover all medical emergencies, 270 conditions that if left untreated would have a significant impact on your life and 25 common chronic conditions.

A scheme may refuse to pay your PMB claim in full only if you fail to use a healthcare provider that it has appointed to provide a PMB service – a designated service provider (DSP).

The annual report says administrators that under-pay PMB claims settle the outstanding balance only when the Council for Medical Schemes investigates a member’s complaint about the short payment.

The annual report says that the council is addressing the “glaring non-compliance”, and Gantsho told Personal Finance that schemes may be threatened with deregistration.

Gantsho says it is possible that the claims of many members who do not know their rights have been short-paid as a result of deliberate under-payment.

Complaints about PMB claims made up the highest proportion of the almost 6 000 complaints that the council received from members and healthcare providers in the financial year from April 2012 to April 2013.

Of the 2 411 complaints that related to PMBs, 1 814 concerned the short payment of PMB claims and 592 the non-payment of these claims.

The other issues that led to complaints about PMBs include:

* Sub-limits within options that cap the payment of claims;

* Treatment exceeding that outlined in scheme protocols;

* Claims being denied when a medication was not on a scheme’s list of approved medication (its formulary);

* Incorrect diagnostic codes that resulted in a failure to identify a claim as one for a PMB service;

* Payments from medical savings accounts; and

* Disputes over the use of a DSP.

For the first time in the council’s 13-year history, in 2012 the number of complaints received during the year fell, by 200 to 5 915, the report says.

Gantsho says this is a result of members’ growing awareness of their rights and an improvement in schemes’ complaint-resolution processes.

The council resolved 212 complaints about suspension and termination of membership.

The annual report says that prospective members often fail to make a full disclosure about their state of health and are admitted to a scheme without the imposition of a waiting period. However, soon after joining, they claim for a condition and the failure to disclose is detected. Schemes are then entitled to terminate membership.

The annual report states that, in some cases, schemes “got it wrong” and terminated membership without any proof of the existence of conditions which justified disclosure, or proof of the diagnosis or treatment of the condition in the year before application.

GEMS TRUSTEES WERE PAID R6.5 MILLION IN 2012

The trustees of the Government Employees Medical Scheme (Gems) are the highest-paid trustees in the medical schemes industry, according to the Council for Medical Schemes’s latest annual report.

The report shows that Gems’ 12 trustees earned R6.5 million in 2012 – an average of R545 000 a trustee for the year. One Gems trustee has chosen not to be paid, so the actual amounts earned by the 11 other trustees could be higher than the average.

According to the annual report, Fedhealth Medical Scheme paid the second-highest amount to its trustees last year: R3.5 million to 11 trustees, or an average of R323 000 a trustee.

In terms of payments made per trustee, Spectramed had the second-highest average: R441 000 a trustee for each of its six trustees. In 2012, its total payment was R2.6 million.

Discovery Health Medical Scheme made the third-highest average payment: R402 000 a trustee. Its total payment to its seven trustees was R2.8 million in 2012.

Other medical schemes that were among those that paid high amounts to their trustees in 2012 are:

* Liberty Medical Scheme: R3.3 million to its board of 10 trustees, or an average of R334 000 a trustee;

* Bestmed Medical Scheme: R2.9 million to its board of 18 trustees, or an average of R163 000 a trustee;

* Medshield Medical Scheme: R2.8 million to its 17 trustees, or an average of R168 000 a trustee;

* LA Health Medical Scheme: R2.4 million to its 18 trustees, or an average of R134 000 a trustee;

* Profmed: R2 million to its 13 trustees, or an average of R160 000 a trustee; and

* Medihelp: R1.9 million to its seven-member board of trustees, or an average of R275 000 a trustee.

Dr Guni Goolab, principal officer of Gems, says that, of the scheme’s 12 trustees, four are government employees, three are pensioners and five are professional trustees.

One of the government employees has chosen not to be paid, Goolab says. The other trustees are paid R14 533 a day and are accorded 18 hours for attending meetings and for the time required to prepare for meetings. Trustees attend between 30 and 35 meetings a year, he says.

The daily rate of R14 533 was determined in a benchmarking exercise that considered the remuneration of the trustees of the 10 largest medical schemes in South Africa and the 10 highest amounts paid to trustees, Goolab says.

Mike van der Nest, chairperson of Discovery Health Medical Scheme, says that the fees paid to the scheme’s trustees are determined by a remuneration committee, benchmarked by auditors and put to members at the scheme’s annual general meeting.

The fees include a meeting component and a basic component for holding discussions with other trustees, he says. Trustees serve on various sub-committees and attend multiple meetings throughout the year.

Van der Nest says that being a trustee of a large and complex scheme such as Discovery Health is a demanding task, with some trustees attending to scheme business daily.

Dr Monwabisi Gantsho, Registrar of Medical Schemes, says the Council for Medical Schemes has decided to engage experts over the next financial year to study the factors that affect the remuneration of trustees.

The experts will be asked to draft guidelines for schemes on how they should determine trustee remuneration, and schemes that do not abide by these guidelines will be expected to explain to the council why they have deviated from them.

The Council for Medical Schemes is also scrutinising the remuneration of principal officers, because some are earning “extremely high” salaries – in some cases, in excess of R4 million a year. Bonitas’s principal officer earned R4.8 million in 2012, Bestmed’s earned R4.3 million and Discovery Health’s earned R4 million.

Gantsho says that principal officers should not earn salaries that are on a par with those of chief executives of listed companies, because medical schemes are non-profit organisations.

VITAL SIGNS

* Medical schemes’ operating surpluses bolstered their solvency ratios by a slim 0.3 percent in 2012, to an overall average of 32.6 percent. Schemes are required by law to hold reserves equal to 25 percent of member contributions – these reserves are referred to as their solvency ratio.

* The average solvency ratio of the country’s 25 open schemes increased by 1.4 percent in 2012, to 29.1 percent.

* The average solvency ratio of the 67 restricted schemes decreased from 38.3 percent in 2011 to 37.4 percent in 2012.

* There were 11 schemes with solvency ratios below 25 percent at the end of 2012.

* One of the largest schemes with a solvency ratio well below 25 percent is the Government Employees Medical Scheme. Its solvency ratio declined from 8.6 percent at the end of 2011 to 7.9 percent at the end of last year. The scheme has 1.8 million members, and its rapid growth has affected its solvency ratio.

* A large open scheme with a very low solvency ratio is Resolution Health (76 000 beneficiaries at the end of last year). Its solvency ratio declined from 9.1 percent at the end of 2011 to 6.1 percent at the end of last year.

* Medical scheme beneficiaries increased by 1.8 percent, to 8.6 million at the end of 2012.

WHERE ALL THE MONEY GOES

Medical schemes spent R103.7 billion of your contributions (totalling R117.5 billion) on your healthcare benefits last year.

Spending on healthcare benefits increased by 10.7 percent, up from R93.6 billion in 2011. The breakdown of the major spending is as follows:

* R37.9 billion (36.7 percent) on private hospital services – an increase of 11.1 percent on 2011 expenditure;

* R24 billion (23.3 percent) on medical specialists – an increase of 12.9 percent on what was spent in 2011;

* R16.3 billion (15.8 percent) on medicines – 7.8 percent more than 2011;

* R7.9 billion, (7.7 percent) on supplementary and allied health professionals – an increase of 3.8 percent on 2011 expenditure.

* R7.5 billion (7.2 percent) on general practitioners – 9.2 percent more than 2011; and

* R2.8 billion (2.7 percent) on dentists (excluding dental specialists) – an increase of 10.1 percent on 2011.

In addition to spending your contributions on healthcare benefits, medical schemes spent R13.1 billion on non-healthcare expenses. This was an increase of 8.1 percent, or R1 billion, on the amount spent in 2011.

The main components of non-healthcare expenses were:

* Administration: R8.8 billion, which was 7.5 percent more than was spent in 2011;

* Managed healthcare fees: R2.7 billion, which was 9.6 percent more than 2011;

* Brokers’ fees: R1.4 billion, up 4.3 percent from 2011; and

* Bad debts: R189.7 million, up 81.2 percent from 2011.

The annual report notes that since 2005, when the Council for Medical Schemes started to apply more pressure on medical schemes to reduce their non-healthcare expenditure, there has been a gradual decline in non-healthcare costs in real terms (after adjusting for inflation).

Graph: Increase in medical scheme contributions relative to income