There are a lot of common misconceptions regarding pregnancy, and just as many practices that have become outdated.

Between listening to baby books, mothers and mother-in-laws, doctors, and old wives' tales, it’s hard to filter the truth from the misconceptions surrounding pregnancy. Being told what you can and can’t eat or drink is one of the biggest gray areas, especially when new research is released every year revealing more advice or forewarning. Hopefully these five dismayed myths can help mommies-to-be with their diets throughout their pregnancy. Mental Floss did the research and came up with a list 10 pregnancy misconceptions and explained the truth with supported studies. Along with those, there are a few more you should keep in mind before you take your next sip or bite with that belly.

6 Pregnancy Food & Drink Myths:

1. Eating Sushi is Safe

Most doctors actually recommend avoiding uncooked fish, and definitely uncooked meats, such as chicken. By eating them, your child runs the risk of developing a foodborne allergy. There are many sushi options featuring cooked foods or vegetables, which don’t pose a threat to the mother or baby’s health.

2. Eating Fish is Okay

Mercury levels in shark, king mackerel, swordfish, tilefish, marlin, and certain types of tuna are dangerously high for pregnant women. However, salmon is low enough in mercury levels that it’s safe to eat. Plus, it’s full of healthy omega-3 fatty acid DHA and EPA, which have been shown to improve a baby’s cognitive function.

3. Coffee Can Cause Miscarriage or Preterm Birth

Until four years ago, your gynecologist or obstetrician would warn you of the health risks of drinking coffee while pregnant. Now, it’s safe so long as it’s within moderation. They found 200 milligrams of caffeine won’t cause miscarriage or preterm birth, which is about one 12-ounce cup of coffee a day.

4. Double Your Calories, You’re Eating For Two

A pregnant woman eats for two, but not two adults. The National Institute of Medicine recommends eating 340 extra calories in the second trimester and an additional 452 in the third trimester.

5. You Can Drink Some Alcohol:

No, you can’t. A handful of doctors will say it’s okay to have a drink every once in a while. But there isn’t enough research to definitively back that claim up, so why risk your baby’s long-term health if it isn’t proven safe? Most doctors recommend completely avoiding alcohol while there’s still a developing baby inside of you. Because there are still so many unknowns, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Surgeon General, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and the American Academy of Pediatrics advise pregnant women not to drink alcohol at all — not one sip.

6. No More Cheese:

Unpasteurized cheese products, such as Brie, feta, and goat cheese should be avoided because they can carry foodborne illnesses. But all you cheese lovera are in luck; you don’t have to cut out all cheeses from your diet. There are some safe pasteurized options, such as cheddar and Swiss cheese. Just check the labels to make sure.

7. Spicy Food Will Induce Labor:

Three years ago researchers put this old wives' tale to rest through a study with over 200 pregnant women. They tried to induce their labor by eating spicy foods in their last trimester, but doctors concluded it did nothing to change the outcome of their due date.