North America's best tree climbers went head-to-head today in Longmont, racing almost 50 feet up an Ash tree by pushing on a double rope with their feet in an inchworm style climb.

The fastest climber in the "footlock" finals was Mark Chisholm, who made it to the top to ring a bell in a mere 14.2 seconds to the cheers of an enthusiastic crowd.

"It's such a great profession," said Chisholm, a third-generation professional arborist who lives in New Jersey and started tagging along on arborist jobs at the age of 12.

Chisholm joined 42 other competitive arborists from across the United States and Canada for the two-day North American Tree Climbing Championship in Longmont's Thompson Park. Arborists use ropes and harnesses to manage the growth of tall trees in urban areas.

Jocelyn Lohse, of the mid-Atlantic region, begins her climb on Sunday. The two-day competition featured 43 competitive arborists from the across the United States and Canada climbing at Thompson Park in Longmont. For more photos, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

Chisholm, who came in third overall in the men's competition, said he competes because he loves pushing himself to stay fit and keep up with industry trends.

"To come here and do well, you have to improve and stay current," he said. "You keep learning the safest and best techniques."

Bill Conn, North American Tree Climbing Championship committee chairman, said the North American competition started in 2011. The top climbers from regional chapter competitions are invited.

"It's bringing the best climbers together for education and bragging rights," he said.

The competition started Saturday with a preliminary round of five events. Included was an aerial rescue, in which competitors safely retrieve a dummy stuck in the limbs, and a work climb, in which competitors move around the tree using a climbing line and saddle/harness.

Advertisement

Today, 12 finalists competed in a masters' challenge — maneuvering through a towering ash to hit four stations to show different skills — and the footlock climb. The winners of Sunday's masters' challenge go on to compete in the international tree-climbing championships in San Antonio, Texas, in April.

The men's winner was Miguel Pastenes of Dallas. The women's winner was Marilou Dussault of Quebec.

"You have got to be able to read the tree," said Dussault, who started working as an arborist at 18. "It has to speak to you."

Judges watch and take notes Sunday during the North American Tree Climbing Championship. The two-day competition featured 43 competitive arborists from the across the United States and Canada climbing at Thompson Park in Longmont. For more photos, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Staff Photographer)

She added that winning competitions like this — she's now a three-time North American champion — takes a bit of luck and a "competitive spirit."

Coming in second in the men's competition was Luke Glines of Greeley, representing the Rocky Mountain Chapter.

"It's a way to test my skills against the best in the country," he said. "You have to be really thoughtful and patient about how you climb and really safe. There's a lot to it."

Also representing the Rocky Mountain Chapter in the finals was Ray Rockett, who works part-time for Longmont's forestry department and freelances for various Boulder County tree-trimming companies as a professional arborist.

"The event is a way to increase awareness of what arborists do and share ideas — and it's fun," he said. "All the events simulate real world work situations. There were lots of great climbers here and great weather. It was a really well run event. It was a great weekend."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa