By David Kline

I can’t wait to sign my family up for one of the new Cover Oregon health insurance exchange plans. But even if we could sign up — and three weeks into its operation, the exchange is still not accepting applications — Cover Oregon’s confusion over how to determine income and eligibility for tax credits makes one wonder if they can ever get ObamaCare working.

Consider, for example, that under the Affordable Care Act, income for self-employed people like myself is supposed to be determined by one’s estimated 2014 MAGI, or modified adjusted gross income. Under the law, this means your net business income (gross income less ordinary business expenses, or Line 12 on IRS form 1040) minus any IRA contributions, the deductible portion of self-employment taxes, and the premiums you paid for health insurance.

But Question No. 26 of the Cover Oregon health exchange application asks you to state not your net income but your “gross income (before costs and deductions).” There is no place to enter ordinary business expenses — 30-45 percent of gross income for most small businesses — to get to your net business income, which is the starting point for determining MAGI.

Am I supposed to ignore the reference “gross income” and simply enter my net business income instead in Question No. 26? Nobody at Cover Oregon knows.

Or am I supposed to enter the 30-45 percent of gross income that goes to ordinary business expenses on Question No. 29 instead? That question asks you if you have any extra deductions for “IRA contributions,” “other taxable adjustments” (whatever that means), or “self-employment deductions,” a category that sole proprietors, small businesses, and CPAs generally take to refer to the deductible portion of self-employment taxes.

Specifically, should I include ordinary business expenses as an extra deduction under “self-employment deductions” on Question 29 along with the deductible portion of my self-employment taxes? Nobody at Cover Oregon knows.

Then there’s the not-incidental problem that one’s eligibility for tax credits — one’s estimated 2014 MAGI — is partly determined by one’s estimated health insurance costs in 2014. Which, of course, can only be determined by trying to come up with — you guessed it — your estimated 2014 MAGI.

It’s all rather circular, and impossible to be accurate about.

When my highly experienced insurance agent called Cover Oregon to ask these questions, a representative put him on hold for 10 minutes while she, quote, “researched the questions.” She finally came back on the line and said, “I’m sorry, we don’t know the answers to those questions.”



What’s more, even if Cover Oregon used an industry-standard method of determining applicant incomes, they have no reliable way to verify those incomes. Their plan, according to Cover Oregon spokespeople, is to compare your estimated 2014 MAGI against actual 2012 adjusted gross income — line 37 on IRS Form 1040 — which is a) not always the same thing as MAGI and b) in any event two years out of date and based on estimates, not demonstrable facts.



But perhaps Cover Oregon’s oddest misstep is that nowhere on the application is the term “MAGI” (or “modified adjusted gross income”) even mentioned — despite the fact that that it’s the law of the land in determining self-employed income eligibility under ObamaCare.

Again, I’d love to sign up my family for ObamaCare — it’ll save us literally hundreds of dollars a month in premiums compared to the individual coverage we now have to purchase from Regence Blue Cross. And it will give us much better coverage.



But Cover Oregon’s application doesn’t employ industry-standard accounting terms used by every small business and CPA to determine income for self-employed people. They have no effective means of verifying income. And to top it all off, the enrollment site is still not functioning three weeks past its supposed start date.

What a mess.

David Kline is a journalist and author living in northeast Portland.