A bipartisan NSW committee on the Motor Vehicle Repair Industry wants an overhaul of the smash repair industry.

CONSUMER AFFAIRS

Fresh laws governing car insurers and repairers will begin this year without the inclusion of any consumer-protection recommendations made by a bipartisan committee in June, sparking fears motorists' lives could be placed at risk.

NSW Fair Trading Minister Matthew Mason-Cox has rejected bipartisan calls for a delay to the December start of the new laws. A delay would allow the adoption of recommendations boosting transparency and curtailing dodgy repair jobs.

Mr Mason-Cox said he had until January 2 to respond to the damning findings of the committee on the motor insurance industry and that the new laws will be introduced without changes.

Advertisement

"The government will not rush consideration of the Legislative Assembly inquiry's recommendations and will seek to further consult, while forming its position," he said. "The regulations are necessary to commence the [Motor Dealers and Repairers Act 2013] and should not be delayed."

The committee's report, released after a seven-month inquiry, found shoddy repair practices were jeopardising motorists' safety and a major imbalance existed in favour of insurance companies over smash repairers.

"A significant number of vehicles are subject to poor quality repair work and are being returned to NSW roads, potentially increasing safety risks to road users," it reads.

The 21 recommendations included that Fair Trading create an online register of shonky repairers similar to the Food Authority's Name and Shame website, that motor vehicle assessors be licensed to ensure quality, rather than cost, of repairs was prioritised and smash repairers allowed access to the Small Business Commissioner.

Late last year, the state government rejected 39 amendments proposed by the Opposition, including the above three, when the Motor Dealer and Repairers Act was being debated.

Mr Mason-Cox said Opposition spokeswoman Tania Mihailuk's demand for him to guarantee all recommendations would be implemented before December was "ludicrous".

Ms Mihailuk said any delay would make a mockery of the inquiry process. "The minister must act now and immediately amend the legislation." she said.

She added insurance companies were squeezing out smash repairers by favouring some based on cost rather than quality.

"This practice not only hurts local businesses, but is seriously jeopardising road safety, with an alarming number of reports of some preferred repairers doing negligent, substandard work."

A Motor Traders' Association spokesman said he was shocked to hear Mr Mason-Cox tell him in a meeting this month that he "wouldn't be considering the recommendations until after the election [in March]".

"I don't know who would argue against the name and shame," the spokesman said.

"It's recording convictions. The biggest people to complain are the insurance companies. They have their repairers, a lot of who are dodgy."

The six-month response time was a joke when people's lives were in danger, he said.

"Why do you have to drag your feet when major problems have been identified? If we had hospitals with [problems leading to deaths] I don't think the Health Minister would be given six months to come up with a fix."

The new regulation will underpin the Motor Dealers and Repairers Act passed in November last year.

The committee expressed concern about insurers dictating prices to repairers who in turn delivered inferior services to consumers.

About 90 per cent of the $5.5 billion industry's work is supplied by motor vehicle insurers and 62 per cent of the market is controlled by IAG and Suncorp.