Geese hang out north of Longmont High School on Friday. When you see geese flying north or west, they probably are returning to their roosting place, according to a biologist with the Colorado Department of Wildlife. ( LEWIS GEYER )





Hi, Johnnie: I enjoy your column. Thanks for your work.

I did a brief Internet search and found a lot of information, but nothing to specifically answer my curiosity question.

Why do the migrating geese that fly over Longmont by the thousands, seem to be headed west or maybe northwest. Certainly they don't seem to be headed due south. -- Terry

Dear Terry: What you are seeing are geese that decided that this is as far south as they needed to go.

"They'll spend the night on a relatively large reservoir or lake where they feel safe," Jim Gammonley, a waterfowl biologist with the Colorado Division of Wildlife, told me. "... In the morning, they'll fly out to whatever feeding grounds they have. They might be flying to a local park ... or to surrounding cornfields."

Write to Johnnie St. Vrain in care of the Times-Call,

P.O. Box 299

Longmont, Colo. 80502

or email

johnnie@times-call.com

So, Terry, if the geese's feeding ground is north of their roosting area, you'll see them flying north in the morning. You might miss them heading back south that night.

Some of these winter geese fly in from neighboring states. Others fly down from the mountains to spend the season in Front Range cities.

"Geese are pretty well adapted," said Gammonley, who is in charge of the DOW's avian research group. "They will fly only as far south as they need to to make a living."

Gammonley said that historically, most Canada geese would migrate through this area, with very few sticking around. But agriculture -- specifically the grain left in farmers' fields -- has caused geese to spend winters here.

"They've got all that high carbohydrate food to help them survive the winter," he said.

It doesn't hurt that geese easily get used to living around people.

Those geese that make a north-to-south cross-country flight in the fall are less noticeable, Gammonley said, because they generally are flying much higher, a couple of thousand feet up.

And about spending the night on the water: "Large numbers of birds will sit out on a lake," he said. "Their warmth will keep the ice open. ..."

The geese might move "when we've got really cold weather and a lot of the lakes around here ice up and become unavailable. But we have enough warm days, that if there's enough geese hanging out, it will create holes they can stay in. Or they'll stay on the river, but they don't like that as much."