Reuters New York mayoral candidate Bill de Blasio embraces his daughter Chiara during a campaign rally in Brooklyn Saturday.

New York City mayoral hopeful Bill de Blasio has the support of 36% of Democrats who are likely to vote in Tuesday’s primary, a commanding lead that puts him in striking distance of winning his party’s nomination without a runoff, a Wall Street Journal-NBC 4 New York-Marist polls showed Sunday.

In a sign of his strength, Mr. de Blasio is leading among women, blacks, whites, Latinos, Jews, Catholics and in every borough in the city, the poll found. If he wins the nomination, Mr. de Blasio would be the second public advocate in city history to be the Democrats’ choice for mayor.

Christine Quinn, the City Council speaker who was the frontrunner for much of the year, is tied with Bill Thompson, a former city comptroller and the Democrats’ mayoral nominee in 2009, for second place, with both at 20% among likely primary voters. If turnout is lower than expected, Mr. Thompson would have a slight edge over Ms. Quinn, the poll showed.

Support for the other major candidates in the race – former U.S. Rep. Anthony Weiner and City Comptroller John Liu – is anemic. Mr. Weiner, who led the polls for a short period this summer before the sexting scandal that prompted his 2011 resignation from congress re-exploded, is at 7%. Mr. Liu is at 5%.

“As they say, you want to peak at the right time – de Blasio has peaked at the right time,” said Lee Miringoff, director of the Marist College Institute for Public Opinion. “He’s positioned right where he wants to be.”

But with 8% of voters still undecided – a relatively high number so close to Primary Day — and with 13% of those with a candidate preference reporting they might vote differently at the ballot box, the race still remained fluid. The poll results provided little clarity as to whether Mr. de Blasio could get to the 40% threshold of votes needed to avoid a runoff on Oct. 1; and, if he doesn’t, the poll showed the electorate is closely divided on who should advance with Mr. de Blasio into that two-person runoff.

If a runoff were held, Mr. de Blasio would defeat either Ms. Quinn or Mr. Thompson, the poll found. In a potential runoff, among registered Democrats, Mr. de Blasio leads Ms. Quinn, 56% to 34%; Mr. de Blasio leads Mr. Thompson, 50% to 38%.

The hotly contested race for city comptroller is also too close to call. Former New York Gov. Eliot Spitzer and Manhattan Borough President Scott Stringer are in a statistical tie among likely Democratic voters, with Mr. Spitzer at 47% and Mr. Stringer at 45%. Mr. Stringer has successfully closed Mr. Spitzer’s onetime double-digit lead to make the race a tossup. If turnout is lower than anticipated, Mr. Stringer’s chances improve because the Democrats most likely to vote are leaning more toward him, the poll found.

“We feel good about where the race stands. All along, we’ve said that the only poll that matters is on Election Day,” said Lis Smith, spokesman for the Spitzer campaign.

Said Audrey Gelman, Mr. Stringer’s spokeswoman, “Scott’s message of making government work for the middle class is breaking through and we have powerful momentum going into Primary Day.”

The survey of 936 registered Democrats, including 556 likely primary voters, began Tuesday night and ended Friday night. The margin of error among likely Democratic voters is 4.2 percentage points, and among registered Democrats it’s 3.2 percentage points.

The poll showed Mr. de Blasio is leading Ms. Quinn, who aspires to be the city’s first female and first openly gay mayor, among women, 34% to 21%. And he is leading Mr. Thompson, the only black candidate in the race, among black voters, 39% to 25%.

Ms. Quinn no longer leads among any group of likely Democratic voters. Strikingly, in her home base of Manhattan, Mr. de Blasio is beating her 40% to 30%.

“In the New York Democratic primary, demography may not be destiny when it comes to the voter choices, because he’s basically winning among each of his rivals’ key groups,” Mr. Miringoff said of Mr. de Blasio.

Less than a month ago, a majority of registered Democrats had a positive view of Ms. Quinn, but her favorable ratings have continued to slide. The poll showed 46% of registered Democrats have a favorable view of her; 42% now have an unfavorable opinion of Ms. Quinn, her highest of the campaign.

“It’s going to be a tight race though Election Day, but come Tuesday we are confident that voters will put Christine Quinn into the runoff because they want a mayor who doesn’t just talk like a progressive, but has a history of delivering like one,” said Ms. Quinn’s spokesman, Mike Morey.

According to the poll, Mr. de Blasio is the candidate most positively viewed. Roughly two thirds of registered Democrats have a favorable impression of him, while 21% have an unfavorable opinion. For Mr. Thompson, 59% have a positive opinion, and 21% have an unfavorable view.

One of the issues that has dogged Ms. Quinn the most in this election was her 2008 decision to overturn the city’s term-limits law, paving the way for Mayor Michael Bloomberg, herself and other elected officials to seek a third four-year term. The poll showed 36% of registered Democrats are less likely to vote for a candidate who supported extending term limits.

“As her negatives have soared, it showed that she was initially a weak front-runner, to the degree that when Weiner was doing decently, he actually went to the front of the pack against her,” Mr. Miringoff said.

More than half of the city’s registered Democrats said they do not want the next mayor to continue the NYPD’s controversial stop-and-frisk policy. When registered Democrats were asked which candidate’s position on this issue comes closest to their opinion, 37% said Mr. de Blasio, 22% said Mr. Thompson and 21% said Ms. Quinn.

In the crucial television ad wars, Mr. de Blasio is, by far, the most successful of the leading Democratic contenders. According to the poll, 51% of registered Democrats who have seen a campaign commercial for Mr. de Blasio, Ms. Quinn and Mr. Thompson believe Mr. de Blasio’s ads are the best. The poll found one in five favored Mr. Thompson’s ads, and 16% favored Ms. Quinn’s.

Mr. de Blasio’s most noticed ad featured his son, Dante, who has a large attention-getting afro. The poll showed 59% of registered Democrats who saw an ad for Mr. de Blasio said they like him more after viewing the spot.