Greg Orman (KSN File Photo)

Biographical Information:

Businessman and Entrepreneur

Greg graduated from Princeton University in 1991 with a degree in economics

No previous political experience

Personal Information:

Married. Wife: Sybil Orman.

Campaign Website: Greg Orman for Senate

How do you propose to fix the current concerns with VA medical centers across the country?

The system is clearly broken, and veterans aren’t being properly cared for by the country they served. No Kansas veteran should ever be forced to wait months for care or drive extended distances to receive medical care. We should restructure the VA rules to allow veterans in rural areas or those who have had to wait months for care to receive treatment at critical access facilities, which would benefit financially while providing critical care to those in need. Doing so would strengthen rural health care in Kansas, while at the same time aiding veterans.

Long-term, we must fundamentally change the way the Department of Veterans Affairs does business and bring accountability to the VA bureaucracy. We must ensure that all veterans receive care now and ensure that our commitment to veterans last long after the last bullet is fired.

What specific issue do you think deserves your immediate attention in Washington, and how to you plan to address it?

I decided to run for the U.S. Senate to represent Kansas as an Independent because our system of government in Washington is fundamentally broken. We keep sending the worst of both parties to Congress, and we keep getting the same extreme partisanship and political infighting that’s taken over our nation’s capital.

For too long, we’ve elected Democrats and Republicans who cater to special interests and extremists in their parties rather than candidates who represent the best values of both parties and who tell the truth about the tough choices we need to make on a whole range of issues. Throughout my business career, I’ve been a pragmatic, effective problem solver who brings people together to find common sense solutions. I’ll put party labels aside and work across the aisle in Washington to get things done for Kansas.

Please provide a one to two paragraph explanation of your stance on each of the following:

Immigration:

Our immigration policy needs to be tough, fair and practical. After we actually secure the border, Washington needs to make sure that those workers who are already here can continue working if they register with the INS, hold down a job, pay taxes and obey our laws.

Because Congress has failed to act over the last 30 years, the United States now has more than 11 million undocumented workers. Simply deporting all of those individuals is not practical, would be incredibly expensive and difficult to accomplish, and would also have a significant impact on many industries right here in Kansas.

Health Care:

We had a national crisis in health care before the Affordable Care Act passed, and that crisis still exists today. But instead of playing political games with this issue as Republicans and Democrats in Congress have done, I believe we need to focus on what Washington can actually do to ensure that health care is affordable for all Americans.

It’s clear that with the Affordable Care Act the Congress simply expanded a broken system, one that rewards providers for more tests and procedures rather than for better outcomes for individuals. We have to change that way of thinking, alter the incentives to providers to reward quality not quantity of care, and ensure that our government as the largest purchaser of health care in the country is prudent with the dollars it spends.

Economic Issues:

It’s government’s job to create an environment that is conducive to job growth, and Congress simply is not doing that. In fact, those in Washington have created such uncertainty with their inability to come together and solve problems that it’s made it difficult for businesses to choose to invest in the United States. We’ve become our own worst enemy when it comes to job creation because the dysfunction in Congress doesn’t inspire confidence in the business community.

I’m the only candidate in the race who has a real record of private sector job creation. As a businessman, I’ve been forced to deal with problems that most of the folks in Washington only talk about. From rising health care costs and balancing budgets to the impact of new regulations, running a successful business is about solving problems and using the best ideas available.

Foreign Policy:

Too often we engage in military action without fully understanding the costs. At the same time, I believe that if America makes a promise or a threat we must actually keep it. Over the last two administrations we seem to have failed at both. We must also ensure that after the last bullet is fired we don’t forget our veterans. It’s clear that Washington has not honored that sacred commitment and is jeopardizing their lives long after they leave the battlefield.

For the United States to retain its leadership in world affairs, we need to get our house in order domestically. As former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Michael Mullen has suggested the greatest threat to U.S. national security is our federal debt. We need to make hard choices to eliminate our country’s dependence on foreign creditors. We also need to reduce our dependence on foreign oil by developing domestic and renewable sources of energy for transportation purposes. Doing so will not only strengthen our domestic economy, but will also reduce our economic exposure to volatile regions of the world.