SAN JOSE -- In a strategic move expected to shake up the South Bay's hospital landscape, the Santa Clara Valley Medical Center Foundation on Tuesday kicked off a $25 million fundraising campaign to create a Women and Children's Center at VMC.

The proposal seeks to consolidate pediatric, maternity and postnatal services in an existing building at the public hospital, which has historically served the county's low-income patients.

In the new world of the Affordable Care Act, where almost all Americans must be insured or pay a penalty, VMC is now striving to attract not only Medi-Cal patients but also those with federally subsidized coverage and private market-rate insurance.

Its success in doing so may be critical to its viability in an era where many public hospitals are struggling to survive.

"In the past, there were different markets and county hospitals sort of had a built-in patient population that focused on the medically underinsured,'' said Santa Clara County Executive Jeff Smith, a physician. "Now that everyone is insured, there is competition among all the health systems.''

The new center would effectively give South Bay residents a new "children's hospital" option in a region that already has three such hospitals, although none south of Palo Alto.

But Smith said he doesn't believe this is a salvo being fired at Lucile Packard Children's Hospital Stanford or the other two hospitals that recently combined forces: UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital and Children's Hospital Oakland.

Advertisement

"The children's specialty hospitals are funded in completely different ways and they deal with ... the kinds of problems associated with genetics and malformations,'' Smith said.

In an email, Christopher Dawes, CEO and president of Lucile Packard, congratulated and welcomed VMC's expansion plans.

The new center would be located in what is currently the main hospital building in the heart of VMC's campus -- a 300,000-square-foot facility that opened in 1999.

The new facility is being made possible because some adult medical services at VMC will be relocated to the nearby John A. and Susan Sobrato Pavilion, which is now under construction.

It will house the hospital's renowned rehabilitation center as well as acute care and intensive care centers, among other facilities.

Santa Clara County is facing a wave of residents newly insured under the federal health care law and is still worried the county's medical safety net is being severely torn. So the county is considering buying O'Connor Hospital in San Jose and Saint Louise Regional Hospital in Gilroy.

The two hospitals are part of the nonprofit Daughters of Charity Health System, which in January announced it is selling all six of its California hospitals, including Seton Hospital in Daly City and Seton Coastside in Moss Beach.

This raises the question of whether the space for the Women and Children's Center would be needed for the coming boom in Medi-Cal patients if the deal with Daughters of Charity falls through.

But Smith, the county executive, insisted the new VMC proposal is "not related to that deal."

During a news conference Tuesday outside the hospital, the VMC Foundation introduced a handful of individuals and groups that already have committed nearly $6 million to the new center.

They include: FIRST 5 Santa Clara County, which has promised $4 million; John and Ann Rademakers, founders of An-Jan Feed & Pet Supply, who have pledged $1 million; the business-software company SAP and the Sharks Foundation, which have jointly offered $750,000.

Chris Wilder, the foundation's executive director, said the campaign is seeking a single $15 million "title sponsor," which would receive naming rights to the main hospital building. The new center is tentatively set to open in 2016.

Paul Lorenz, CEO of VMC, said the hospital also will contribute $15 million to $17 million in operating revenue on top of the $25 million in private donations.

Hospital consultants said Tuesday they weren't surprised by the move.

"Public hospitals are going after the same patients as private hospitals,'' said Mike Williams, president of the Abaris Group in Martinez. "They realize that these are insured patients that previously were uninsured and thus will help improve'' their finances.

Contact Tracy Seipel at 408-920-5343. Follow her at Twitter.com/taseipel.