Democrats and Obama might have to alter parts of ACA to get the GOP to budge. ACA talks: What would they discuss?

Even if President Barack Obama and Republican and Democratic leaders suddenly started talking about Obamacare, there would be a problem: They just don’t have that much to talk about.

Obama says he’s willing to talk about his health care law, after the crisis is over. “If you disagree with certain aspects of it, tell us what you disagree with, and let’s work on it,” Obama said at a press conference Tuesday afternoon.

Story Continued Below

But the kinds of piecemeal changes that wouldn’t cripple Obamacare — like repealing the medical device tax — wouldn’t satisfy tea party Republicans. And the bigger changes Republicans have suggested, like delaying the individual mandate or the whole law, would be nonstarters for the White House.

( POLITICO's full coverage of the government shutdown)

And if the attention turned from Obamacare to entitlements and health spending, the barriers are still considerable. Yes, Obama has proposed savings to Medicare and Social Security in his own budget. But he also made it clear that those would have to be part of a package with new revenues — which Republicans aren’t about to give.

Here are some of the ideas that may come up if Obamacare is on the table.

Delay the individual mandate. This idea is at the heart of the Republicans’ “fairness” argument: If the Obama administration could delay the requirement for large employers to cover their workers or pay fines, why shouldn’t regular people get a one-year break from the requirement to get health coverage or pay their own fines?

It’s an argument that could have broad appeal — 22 House Democrats voted for an individual mandate delay in July. Even Jon Stewart pressed Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius Monday night on why individuals couldn’t get the same delay as business.

( POLITICO's full coverage of the debt ceiling)

The problem for the White House is the individual mandate is linked directly to the coverage of everyone with pre-existing conditions, which starts Jan. 1. The mandate brings healthy people into the new insurance system, along with the sicker ones. That balance helps prevent the so-called insurance “death spiral” — rising insurance prices and fewer people covered if only sicker people enroll.

Republicans could also renew their push to delay the entire law for one year, including pre-existing condition coverage. But even if the White House was open to that delay — which it has rejected on principle — there’s a practical problem. People are already signing up for Obamacare health plans that start Jan. 1. The last thing the administration needs is another P.R. nightmare — telling those people they have to wait another year.

Repeal the medical device tax. This was one of the House Republicans’ last proposals before the shutdown, and the idea has won some Democratic support in the past. The idea is to get rid of the health care law’s 2.3 percent tax on the sales price of medical devices by manufacturers and importers. Striking that tax wouldn’t gut the basic workings of the health law, and it would relieve the pressure lawmakers from both parties are feeling from medical device makers.

( Understanding Obamacare: POLITICO's guide to the Affordable Care Act)

The problem, though, is that a repeal of the device tax would get rid of $30 billion in revenue that’s needed to fund Obamacare. Unless it’s replaced with another funding source, that’s just another $30 billion added to the deficit.

And tea party groups aren’t likely to be satisfied with that anyway. Their point: We went through a government shutdown to get rid of Obamacare, and all we have to show for it is a medical device tax repeal? Plus, Democrats worry that other health care sectors would start demanding rollbacks of other financing pieces of the law.

Throw Tom Harkin under the bus again. One easy concession to Republicans would be to get rid of the Prevention and Public Health Fund. The fund, authored by Sen. Tom Harkin (D-Iowa), is part of the health law, but it’s not central to its operation and Democrats have dipped into it in the past. Republicans could welcome the repeal of what they call a “slush fund” — but it’s a “so what” victory to tea party members who want to wipe out the whole law.

( PHOTOS: 25 great shutdown quotes)

Get rid of the Congress subsidies. Republicans like Sen. David Vitter (R-La.) have been flogging the issue of the subsidies members of Congress and their staffs will get to receive their health coverage through the Obamacare exchanges. They’re calling it a “special break,” and House Republicans attached a repeal of the subsidies to one of their last continuing resolution proposals — even though the real purpose is to act like the employer contributions lawmakers and their staffs have always received to get federal employees’ health coverage.

Even if Democrats agreed to that, though, it’s not clear how hard Republicans like Boehner would push — since they know it’s a sure way to lose experienced staff members who don’t want to pay the entire cost of their premiums out of pockets.