Adelfa Botello Callejo, a Dallas lawyer whose long-storied activism began as her immigrant father’s interpreter, died early this morning from a brain tumor. Callejo was 90 years old.

She had battled cancer three times but it returned again to her brain.

“She was larger than life,” said her nephew John David Gonzales, who was at the family home in the Lakewood area when his aunt died. “It was amazing over the course of this to see the positive energy she mustered.”

But her fourth bout with brain cancer was particularly difficult. Callejo tried radiation again, but had become weak. Three weeks ago, her nephew said she suffered two seizures. “The tumors weakened her. After three consecutive bouts of cancer, she was tired.”

Catholic services are pending.

Callejo leaves behind her husband Bill, no children, her two sisters Connie Gonzales and Lily Velasquez, 12 nieces and nephews and robust body of advocacy in courtrooms, government chambers and the streets.

Callejo’s crusades ranged from protests over the police shooting of a 12-year-old Mexican-American boy in 1973, to city council redistricting in the late 1980s, to private strategizing over harsh immigration policies in Farmers Branch in 2006. As a nine-year-old in Millett, Texas, she translated for her father Felix Botello who went to complain to school authorities about the treatment of Mexican-American children in that south Texas town. The sweep of her influence was such some simply called her La Madrina, the godmother. But she herself liked to call herself a “millionaire militant.”

In a 2006 address at a huge rally to protest harsh immigration policies, Callejo told the crowd, “In my family, it was un-American to not protest.”

And so she did, even in a wheelchair in 2010 in another downtown Dallas protest against federal immigration policies. By then, her thick trademark bun was gone. She wore a brown wig—a sign of her fight against colon and breast cancer.

Brain cancer hit in 2012. In September 2012, she had two tumors more than an inch in size in the left hemisphere of her brain. She pulled through the Houston surgery and poured herself into rehabilitation.

Some seven months later in April 2013, Adelfa Callejo was wheeled into an elementary school that bore her name. It was the dedication of the new Adelfa Botello Callejo Elementary School in Pleasant Grove.

“Only through education will we make the world a better place than we found it,” she told the crowd of 200 as she stood up from her wheelchair with the assistance of a nephew.

Many told her how well she looked, dressed in a black pantsuit with a pink blouse and a trademark flower in the jacket lapel.

Cheerleaders called the “cyclones” performed for her. Liz Cedillo-Pereira, a Dallas attorney who considered Adelfa Callejo her mentor, joked their name was so appropriate.

Cedillo-Pereira said she would often give other Latina attorneys this advice: “If you are a Latina lawyer in Dallas, you had to meet Mrs. Callejo and be blessed by her.”

Like Cedillo-Pereira, Marcos Ronquillo considered Callejo a “surrogate mother.”

Ronquillo, now 60, was a law partner in the early 80s at the Callejo firm. Callejo was proud of both her law degree and her wealth, built up through the investments of her husband, who also holds a law degree, he said.

When Callejo graduated from SMU law school, after several years of night school, she couldn’t find employment, Ronquillo said.

“She could only get a job after law school as a legal secretary,” he said. “She was a Mexican-American woman with a law degree from SMU.”

That was why Callejo went into private practice, he said.

Callejo was the first Hispanic woman to graduate from law school at Southern Methodist University in 1961 at the age of 37. She was one of only three women to graduate that year. She earned her undergraduate degree at SMU, as well.

She considered her law degree an essential weapon in fighting injustice, she once said. She spoke fast and forceful as though perpetually in court and well-caffeinated.

Until her September 2012 surgery, she practiced law at her low-key office with décor of another era and large oil portrait of herself in the foyer, just a few feet from the buzz of Central Expressway. She was paying office visits by the summer of 2013.

Her blunt advocacy remains her legacy, her friends said.

“She leaves a huge void,” said Jesse Diaz, a real estate agent in the low-income area of Pleasant Grove.

Over the years, Diaz said, with Callejo in the room, tense negotiations would become more efficient and respectful.

“With us men, we could cuss and get in each other’s face but with her we had to respect her. She could control us.”

Without her, the Latino community loses muscle, said Diaz and others.

“She brought about a lot of change in Dallas,” said Diana Flores, a trustee on the Dallas County Community College District who saw Callejo through fights with the Dallas ISD, the Dallas police department and over immigration issues.

Callejo had been a millionaire for many decades, was proud of her money and more than once told friends, “El dinero no habla. El dinero grita.” Money doesn’t talk. Money screams.

For Callejo, it screamed independence. It meant she could speak out without fear of retaliation, she said.

She also gave away some of the money. A decade ago, she and her husband Bill committed $1 million to SMU’s Dedman School of Law, for example.

“The Dallas community will never replace her,” Ronquillo said.

Here’s an interview with Callejo, conducted by email after her brain surgery in 2012.

More to come.

Hear Callejo’s speech at a Mega March on Immigration in Dallas, from KERA News.