Getty Images

Among Wall Street’s stock trading desks, the playing field is getting more level.

Over the past year the biggest stock brokerages on Wall Street have been losing ground to smaller competitors, according to a survey of big institutional investors from TABB Group.

The research firm’s survey of the top stock trading desks shows that the heavyweight investment banks continue to command the most business. Credit Suisse Group AG, J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., Morgan Stanley, Bank of America Merrill Lynch and Barclays PLC are the firms most cited as being a “top five” broker when it comes to overall commissions.

On average, those firms were a top five destination for commission dollars for 37.6% of respondents. In last year’s survey, the firms most commonly mentioned as a “top five” commission destination – Credit Suisse, J.P. Morgan, Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and a tie between Merrill and Liquidnet – garnered 45% of the vote.

Companies like Instinet, Jefferies Group LLC, Stifel Nicolaus & Co. and Sanford C. Bernstein & co. all captured a greater piece of the pie.

TABB derives its broker ranking from a survey of 108 U.S. asset managers. Institutional investors direct stock trades and commissions based both on issues directly related to trading – such as how well a brokerage firm is able to execute a trade – and as compensation for stock research.

One investment firm quoted in the TABB report, described as a “mid-sized account,” put it this way: “Our top tier, our top 10, losing ground to our second and third tier guys, it’s just flattened out a little bit more for us.”

The change comes at a time when overall stock trading volumes continue to decline in the U.S. That’s been a source of pain for brokerages who execute trades, because they collect revenue—and help cover the cost of other investment-banking services—through trading commissions.

As a result, the bigger banks are ceding some ground to focus their efforts on more profitable areas, said Adam Sussman, TABB’s director of research.

“The smaller firms… have a little bit more flexibility, or they can take a little bit more risk, in terms of throwing money after these businesses, whereas other firms can’t,” he said. “Firms who are providing a more niche or specific service are rising up in that ranking over the years.”