And he promoted his willingness to take "completely unscripted" questions from the public, including in the 134 town-hall-style meetings he has held in New Jersey, where he plans to hold another Thursday.

Those meetings have sometimes showcased Christie's combative style, but bombast wasn't on display Wednesday, when New Hampshire voters asked Christie about foreign policy, immigration, campaign finance, and vaccination choice, among other topics.

Christie, who skirted immigration questions from reporters last year, said Wednesday that he supported securing the border with technology but was "not somebody who believes in the concept of self-deportation" - a phrase used by 2012 Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney.

He dismissed the idea of a "path to citizenship," which he called an "argument the Democratic Party is trying to foist on us." Undocumented immigrants are more concerned about working than the right to vote, Christie said.

Asked how he would address the Islamic State group, Christie called for stronger partnerships with allies in the Middle East, investment in the military, and potentially the involvement of troops.

"We have to be willing as Americans to say, if need be, we'll also put soldiers into the fight," Christie said.

He voiced concern over negotiations on a nuclear deal with Iran, which he said could provide a pathway for the nation to develop nuclear weapons and create instability in the Middle East.

"It takes a lot of guts to reach an agreement with an enemy," Christie said. "It also takes guts to walk away from a bad deal."

On vaccination choice, Christie rejected the idea of a voluntary policy, which he said "would be the wrong step for the public health of our country." He expressed support for "narrowly tailored" religious exemptions. Earlier this year, Christie stirred controversy by saying parents should have "some measure of choice" in vaccinating their children.

While Christie has not made a decision on running - and may not until early summer - he acted like a candidate in New Hampshire, where during a packed two-day trip he announced an entitlement reform proposal; met with a newspaper editorial board; did interviews with a local radio broadcaster, two conservative national radio show hosts, and NBC's Matt Lauer; and met with voters in pizzerias and pubs.

He also repeatedly criticized President Obama's leadership on foreign affairs and the Affordable Care Act, questioned what Republican rival Jeb Bush's policy positions were, and knocked Democrat Hillary Rodham Clinton, who officially entered the race this week.

Christie said during the town-hall meeting that Clinton wants to raise large sums of money for her campaign, but "she then wants to get the corrupting money out of politics. It's classic politician speak."

He told a woman who asked how he would reduce the "corrupting" influence of money in politics that he supported disclosure within 24 hours of all campaign contributions, rejecting the suggestion that such donations automatically bought influence. "I think to be an effective politician, you need to be a professional ingrate," he said.

Brian Dooley, 57, of Nashua, said Christie demonstrated "a grasp on, I think, all the important issues." A former Romney campaign volunteer, Dooley said Christie "has a special energy and passion."

While undecided, Richard D'Agostino, 60, of Salem, said Christie "really reached me" with a story he tells often in New Jersey about his mother's last words - instructions that Christie should go to work because "there is nothing left unsaid between us."

D'Agostino, a lawyer, said the Republican Party needs a "standout" candidate who can win a general election. "I still don't completely see that person yet," he said. "But I love the way Christie speaks his mind."

David McConville, a Republican activist who asked Christie about immigration, said the governor had addressed the topic in "broad strokes, which is what he needed to do at a town hall."

"At this juncture, it's not wise for him to get too specific with his answers," he said.

Christie is scheduled to return Friday to New Hampshire, where he will hold another town-hall meeting and participate in a leadership summit featuring other prospective Republican presidential candidates.

mhanna@phillynews.com856-779-3232 @maddiehanna