Apparently, some people don’t believe Brandi when she says that she’s filming a new show. On Sunday, Brandi defended herself against the accusation that she’s lying about it.

Brandi tweeted that she has no reason to lie about filming another show. She added that details on the show will be announced soon and that she only started filming last Friday.

“Why the F*** would I be lying about doing a new show? Ive not lied before & Im not now. It will be announced soon,as I started it last friday.”

To prove her point, Brandi even posted a short video of one her sons saying that his mom doesn’t lie.

I don't lie!!! #MyBoyKnows #YouTellEm A video posted by Brandi Glanville (@thebrandiglanville) on Nov 8, 2015 at 10:28am PST

Last Friday, Brandi tweeted that she was up early because of filming.

Filming!

It seems that Brandi’s new show will not be on Bravo, but on E!. The day prior, in response to a fan who asked when they’ll be hearing more about the show on E!, Brandi promised details would be released soon.

Soon! I promise! ❤️ https://t.co/Y7eUho83Z0 — Brandi Glanville (@BrandiGlanville) November 5, 2015

While it may be a while until Brandi Glanville’s fans see her on this new show, since it just started filming, they’ll soon be watching her on The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills. On Thursday, Bravo released the trailer for the sixth season. While Brandi isn’t a starring or recurring housewife on the new season, she will be seen in at least one episode.

It seems that one storyline viewers will watch unfold in Season 6 is some of the other housewives questioning the existence and/or severity of Yolanda Foster’s Lyme disease. The trailer shows Yolanda going through some scary-looking treatments. Yolanda says that she’s willing to try anything to find a cure, even if means ripping her teeth out. In one scene with her children and mom, Yolanda tells them about her will and says that if anything happens to her, she wants her children to take care of her mom.

Lisa Rinna, in a scene with Kyle Richards and Lisa Vanderpump, reads from her phone information about Munchausen Syndrome and Kyle says that it’s confusing for a lot of people. Brandi Glanville is then shown in a scene with Yolanda Foster. Brandi tells Yolanda that she’s being preyed upon.

“They like to prey on the weak. You’re sick so let’s go after you.”

Later on in the trailer, Yolanda seemingly tells Kyle Richards that she’s “holding a lot in the vault.” To which, Kyle asks, “Are you threatening me?” In another scene, new housewife Erika Jayne accuses Lisa Rinna of talking about or participating in gossip about Yolanda.

“If you have some balls tell me you said it.”

On Friday, Yolanda tweeted that people not suffering from Lyme disease simply don’t understand it. Perhaps, Yolanda’s tweet was in reference to what was shown in the trailer in terms of others questioning her disease?

❤️You don't get it until YOU GET IT……. #LymeDiseaseAwareness #WeMustFundACure — YOLANDA (@YolandaHFoster) November 7, 2015

By the end of the fifth season, Brandi was at odds with all of the housewives with the exception of Yolanda and Kim Richards. At the reunion show, Lisa Vanderpump said that Yolanda continuously makes excuses for Brandi. Host Andy Cohen said that it seems Yolanda has taken the position as the show’s peacemaker. Yolanda replied that the other women shouldn’t be so judgmental of Brandi, and that she won’t let Brandi push her aside.

“Well I don’t think I give her a pass. I think I don’t make excuses for her. I think it’s very easy for all of us to just kick her to the curb like a bag of trash and move on with life and pretend we’re all so perfect and great. But none of us are great. I just, in my heart, feel that she needs all of us and I will not allow her to push me to the side because that’s what everybody does.”

As previously reported by the Inquisitr, Yolanda Foster, Brandi Glanville and Kim Richards, who also appeared on the Season 6 trailer, got together in September to celebrate Kim’s 51st birthday.

Birthday lunch for my friend @KimRichards11 with the strong & Amazing @YolandaHFoster #realfriends

Perhaps that birthday get together will be shown on the upcoming season? The sixth season of The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills premieres on Tuesday, December 1.

[Photo by Andrew H. Walker/Getty Images]