Buy Photo “Navigating Health Insurance: An Affordable Care Act forum” was held Wednesday evening at the Best Western Premier Waterfront Hotel. The forum was sponsored by Oshkosh Northwestern Media, along with the League of Women Voters of Winnebago County and the Winnebago County Health Department.Panelists include Kevin Kane, Wisconsin Citizen Action; Ann Kriegel, Winnebago County Department of Human Services; and Susan Stevens, JMS Brokerage. (Photo: Jim Koepnick/for Oshkosh Northwestern Media )Buy Photo

Sue Klitzke said she now has a better understanding of the Affordable Care Act and how to re-enroll in a plan on the marketplace exchange.

The 57-year-old Oshkosh resident had wanted to find out more information about how her 26-year-old daughter — who previously was covered under her parents' plan — could get coverage under the Affordable Care Act, and she was able to get the information she needed for 2015.

"I think this was very informative, especially if they haven't been on the website because the website was very confusing," she said. "I know what I'm doing now."

VIDEO REPLAY: Navigating Health Insurance Forum

Klitzke was one of about 80 people who turned out Wednesday evening for "Navigating Health Insurance: An Affordable Care Act Forum" at the Best Western Premier Waterfront Hotel in downtown Oshkosh. The free community-wide event, presented by Oshkosh Northwestern Media, the Winnebago County Health Department and the League of Women Voters of Winnebago County, offered residents the chance to learn about the health care reform law and how to enroll in marketplace plans.

The event featured a presentation about the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, by Doug Gieryn, director of the Winnebago County Health Department, as well as a question-and-answer period with a panel of experts that included Ann Kriegel of the Winnebago County Human Services Department, Susan Stevens of JMS Brokerage and Kevin Kane of Citizen Action of Wisconsin.

"It was fantastic that we had so many people come out," Kane said. "A lot of other communities aren't doing this. Hopefully, we'll get a few people coverage. ... We're getting past whether the law should be here and getting to how do we make it work."

Kane also used his own experience as an example of someone who was able to navigate the system to get affordable health care for himself.

"When I graduated from Marquette University, I couldn't find a job with benefits to save my life," he said. "I worked eight jobs in the year after I graduated. At one point, I signed up for BadgerCare and got put on the waiting list. ... The Affordable Care Act allowed me to go back on my parents' insurance."

Even if the task of signing up for a health insurance plan through the marketplace exchange might seem daunting, there are a variety of resources available for those who would like some help, said Kathy Propp, president of the League of Women Voters of Winnebago County. Open enrollment starts Nov. 15 and runs through Feb. 15.

"The League of Women Voters and others need to get the word out," Propp said. "There are places they can find help."

Nathaniel Shuda: (920) 426-6632 or nshuda@thenorthwestern.com; on Twitter @onwnshuda.

Read or Share this story: http://oshko.sh/1uotEz9