An already-packed November ballot will feature the first-ever election of board members to two Smith County Emergency Services Districts.

The races are down, down, down-ticket spots for five volunteer positions on a board that draws little public interest despite raking in almost $5.5 million from rural Smith County residents annually.

The five-member boards governing Emergency Services District No. 1 and No. 2 are volunteer positions and were appointed by county commissioners until a state law created single-member districts to represent voters equally.

Emergency Services District No. 1 includes Lindale Fire Department and levies almost 7 cents per $100 valuation, and with a collection of around $834,568.

Emergency Services District No. 2 includes Arp, Bullard, Chapel Hill, Dixie, Flint-Gresham, Jackson Heights, Noonday, Red Springs, Troup, Whitehouse and Winona volunteer fire departments and expects to collect more than $4.6 million from taxpayers based on a property tax rate of 8.46 cents per $100 valuation.

The two five-member boards would be elected to four-year terms. Members would then draw lots to decide which three members would serve four-year terms and which two would have to run again in two years to keep the terms staggered in the future.

Five candidates — Todd Froebe (District 1), Ron Bunch (District 2), Carolyn Todd (District 3), Kenneth Smith (District 4) and Robin Daugherty (District 5) — filed in ESD No. 1. They will be sworn into office Jan. 1 because they face no opponents.

Four of five ESD No. 2 board positions are opposed.

Paul Perryman will face Sandra “Sandy” Hayley for Commissioner 1; Charles Wilson will face write-in candidate Anthony Bruner for Commissioner 2; Robert Dear and Randal Melton face each other for Commissioner 4 and Theodore “Ted” Gould and Matthew “Matt” Thiessen are running in Commissioner 5.

Perryman, 40, owns a used car dealership on Texas Highway 155, and believes the district should be run like a business. He does not propose staff cuts or funding cuts, but said he expects the property tax rate could be lowered once the district’s outstanding debt is paid.

He also believes the district needs to calculate the costs of providing emergency services in other counties and create a contract that would fully reimburse the district.

Ms. Haley has not responded to repeated attempts by the Tyler Morning Telegraph to contact her about her candidacy.

Wilson is a founding member of the Red Springs Volunteer Fire Department with more than 30 years experience, including several as department chief. He is currently a firefighter for the department.

Bruner, 69, is a retired educator. He said more than three decades of his near-40-year career was spent as an administrator who oversaw bid proposals for transportation and technology purchases by two school districts. He said his top focus would be ensuring taxpayer dollars are spent responsibly.

“I could support anything that’s justifiable but at the same time I want to spend taxpayer dollars like I would my own money and I’ve always been frugal,” he said.

Bruner said he has no intention of shutting down volunteer departments but wants them to run according to state law and within procedural constraints.

Bruner’s name won’t appear on ballots but rather a piece of paper taped to voting machines, Election Administrator Karen Nelson said. The ballot will prompt voters interested in viewing write-in candidates for races including Commissioner 2, governor and U.S. Senate.

Voters have to type in the name of the candidate.

Dear, 69, retired from the Tyler Fire Department after 26 years and was appointed to the board in December 2011. He has been the lone critical voice on the board regarding district assets being used in Cherokee County.

He said he believes the district was not fully reimbursed hundreds of thousands of dollars for services provided outside Smith County.

Melton is the director of campus security at a local junior college and acting ESD board president. He said the board has addressed audit deficiencies by implementing policies and that he believes the board is on the right track.

He said his focus would be reducing debt while improving the district departments’ ability to meet the mission — protecting lives and property.

Gould, 68, has 30 years of Emergency Medical Services experience and served on various related elected and volunteer boards in Smith County. He said candidates who say they would cut the district’s taxes are speaking without a forensic look at the budget and actual costs of making emergency calls and equipping firefighters.

He said he would focus on responsible spending and reducing debt.

“It’s very much about the demands of (the departments’) services,” he said. “What does it cost to equip them and train them, for their safety and the safety of the public?”

Thiessen, 33, owns a lawn care company that has experienced rapid growth. He said his business experience would translate well as a commissioner because he has had to make budget cuts and choose between the costs of repairing versus replacing equipment.

He said controversy within the district has created a taxpayer-versus-fire department battle he believes is unnecessary and unproductive. He said he would focus on needs versus wants and make those decisions based on the best long-term value.

“The fire departments being properly funded is good for taxpayers and being properly equipped and trained is good for firefighters,” he said.

Biggers is running unopposed for Commissioner 3. The Tyler Morning Telegraph was unable to reach Biggers for comment about his background or candidacy.

Several candidates have failed to file campaign finance reports required by state election law. The reports show campaign donors, donations and expenditures.

Dear, Melton and Gould are the only candidates who have filed both the treasurer assignment and 30-day campaign finance reports.

Daugherty, Froebe, Perryman, Smith, Thiessen, Ms. Todd and Wilson have assigned treasurers. Biggers, and Ms. Haley, have not filed campaign finance paperwork with the Election Department.