5 staff have departed as a result of changes

A merger of the University of Colorado's two primary mental health offices is causing strife on the Boulder campus and has led several employees — including the director of Counseling and Psychological Services — to leave the university.

CU is combining Counseling and Psychological Services with Psychological Health and Psychiatry, a move that departed employees said could reduce access to care for some students and may mean decreased emphasis on education, prevention and outreach.

When they expressed their worries to administrators, the staff members said their perspectives weren't taken seriously.

"It's hard to begin to enumerate what I wish had been different," said Karen Raforth, who left her role as director of Counseling and Psychological Services because of the merger. "I tried to share my concerns at the time, and I was silenced. This was a very poorly managed process. From my perspective, much damage has been done that cannot be fixed. Key experts that underpinned CAPS' work have left."

Raforth and others said their discomfort with the merger stems from the need for both offices on campus — they can best serve students by coexisting and focusing on the things that make them distinct.

Counseling and Psychological Services, referred to as CAPS by people on campus, uses a community psychology model, Raforth said. That means treating the entire campus as a client and focusing heavily on outreach, education, prevention and campus climate, she said. The office lives in the Center for Community and provides students six free individual counseling sessions per year.

Psychological Health and Psychiatry, or PHP, operates within Wardenburg Health Center and uses a medical model that focuses more on treating the individual and his or her symptoms, Raforth said. Students who purchased the campus health insurance plan are eligible for up to 15 individual therapy visits per year without an additional charge. Students with other health insurance plans pay for services.

Glenda Russell, a former CAPS psychologist, said the merger could be described more accurately as PHP and Wardenburg Health Center absorbing CAPS.

"My biggest fear is that services provided will move increasingly toward the limitations imposed by a medical model that offers less room for improving campus climate, enhancing student empowerment or furthering goals of diversity and inclusion," Russell said.

Julie Yun, former assistant director of Counseling and Psychological Services, said she worries the merger will make mental health services less accessible for some students.

She said CAPS' staff members were diverse and "culturally competent," in part because they underwent diversity training several times a year. In 2014, CAPS was awarded the system-wide President's Diversity Award, which recognizes achievements in "inclusive excellence."

Yun said staff members understood how cultural, economic and other macro-level factors might affect a student's mental health.

For example, she said, a Latino first-generation student might be feeling anxious because he's surrounded by a predominately white, middle-class population. CAPS would help that student expand his support network and find ways to cope with some of the environmental stressors to make sure he finishes his degree, Yun said.

"It went beyond symptom lists and for me really focused more on optimizing functionality within the context of the lives they were living and the systems they had to navigate," she said.

Departures

By Yun's count, five people have left CU as a result of the merger.

One of the reasons Raforth said she left was because of a strained relationship with her supervisor, Donald Misch, who's senior assistant vice chancellor for health and wellness and director of Wardenburg Health Center.

Raforth, a 26-year CU veteran, said she was told she could not express a dissenting opinion about the merger to anyone and she was disciplined for her "impertinent" attitude.

"I struggled for a full year and saw no alternative except to resign, with a heavy heart," Raforth said. "I tried to support everyone however possible before I departed."

Misch acknowledged that "some people did leave," but said he couldn't talk about individual personnel decisions.

"The only thing I can tell you in terms of personnel is that like any reorganization, some people are OK with it and some people aren't," he said. "People make choices. I can't really talk about individuals. People have feelings. We had lots of meetings with sub-groups, with the entire staff, individually and together."

Better access

Misch said the merger is intended to streamline mental health services for students. Many were confused about the difference between the two offices, he said.

"Ultimately the goal is to have the best services we can," he said. "One unit that's fully integrated rather than two that are organizationally separate."

He said the merger isn't necessarily intended to save money, but will allow the two offices to combine resources.

The campus proposed a new $42.28 mental health services fee for next year. Misch said that fee is consistent with the merger, but is not directly related to it.

The fee would expand CAPS' six free visits to include services offered by what is currently PHP, he said. If approved, it could give students access to more mental health care providers, he said.

Asked about any potential drawbacks to combining the two offices, Misch said he couldn't think of any.

"Some of the merger is difficult," he said. "We have two (sets of ) electronic health records. Similarly, we have two different websites, two similar, but not identical, consent forms. It's infrastructure stuff like that."

Misch said he's confident the combined offices, along with a potential new student fee, will increase students' access to mental health care.

"We have people who are good health care professionals, but above and beyond that, they understand the subspecialty of students," he said. ". . . We want people to be healthy and happy because healthy, happy people learn better and are more likely to graduate from college, more likely to be successful."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta