Tax can be a scary and somewhat unfamiliar topic for many business executives. The complexities of the tax code, coupled with the current environment of political uncertainty, will cause even the most veteran business executive to get jumpy around tax time. So, just in time for Halloween, here are three of the tax issues keeping executives up at night as 2016 creeps closer.

The Ah!-ffordable Care Act

As if implementing the employer shared responsibility (or “pay-or-play”) regime under the Affordable Care Act wasn’t intimidating enough this year, certain large employers (i.e., 50 or more employees) are now faced with information reporting requirements. Although the first round of reports is not due until early 2016, employers should begin taking steps now to understand and prepare for this additional responsibility.

Under the new information reporting requirements, there are two sets of annual information reports that must be filed beginning with the 2015 calendar year: the 1094-B/1095-B or the 1094-C/1095-C. These information reports are issued to employees and filed with the IRS, similar to forms 1096 and 1099. Which set of reports depends on the type of health plan provided: self-insured plans or fully-insured plans.

Forms 1095-B and 1095-C must be furnished to employees no later than Jan. 31, 2016. These forms must also be filed with the IRS along with the corresponding transmittal form (forms 1094-B or 1094-C) by Feb. 28, 2016 (or March 31, 2016, if electronically filed). Those filing 250 or more forms are required to file electronically with the IRS.

In the meantime, executives can avoid getting trapped in a compliance nightmare by first planning ahead. Noncompliance penalties can be huge as a result of the Trade Preferences Extension Act of 2015. Beginning with information returns filed after Dec. 31, 2015, penalties increase from $100 to $250 per defective statement and up to $3 million per year, plus up to $3 million per year for failure to furnish participant copies.

So start the data-gathering process now by doing the following:

Trending {{item['sft-title']}}

Discuss reporting requirements with health-plan administrators and payroll vendors to identify which party will be responsible for data collection and form preparation.

Utilize a data collection system to track monthly health coverage and plan enrollment information.

Confirm mailing addresses with employees and consider mailing forms 1095-B and 1095-C with the employee’s Form W-2. See IRS publications 5215 and 5196 for more information.

The Ultimate Lurkers: Tax Extenders

This past July, the Senate Finance Committee approved a bill to renew more than 50 recently expired provisions of the tax code, commonly known as tax extenders.

The “walking dead” of the tax provisions, these tax extenders seem to stay in perpetual limbo rather than being made permanent or allowed to expire, making them one of the most persistent features of congressional tax policy discussions. For instance, just 10 months ago, Congress held a last-minute vote to renew the tax extenders until Dec. 31, 2014, and retroactively apply them to the 2014 tax year. Then, two weeks later, the tax extenders expired once again, leaving it up to Congress to renew them for 2015.

Congress’s nerve-racking moves on tax extenders have become a festering zombie bite in the necks of business executives and tax planners alike because of the looming uncertainty each year. There’s simply no telling which tax provisions are going to get the “Texas Chainsaw” treatment and which ones will survive to benefit taxpayers for another year.

Fortunately, this year’s tax extender package is practically identical to the one passed last December. It contains more than 50 miscellaneous tax provisions, all of which have been renewed at least once before. In fact, like a black cat, the research and development credit has been resurrected 16 times! A few other extenders on the list that are causing thumping heart rates include:

Bonus depreciation

Work Opportunity Tax Credit

Enhanced charitable contribution deduction for food inventory donations

Reduction in S-corporation recognition period for built-in gains tax

Look-through treatment of payments between related controlled foreign corporations under the foreign personal holding company rules

Spooky State Sales Tax

When most executives hear the words “sales tax nexus,” nothing tangible comes to mind. The meaning is elusive, no doubt, but its potential impact is haunting, nonetheless.

Generally speaking, sales tax nexus means there is a strong enough connection between a state and a nonresident taxpayer so that the state may require that the taxpayer collect and remit sales tax to the state on its taxable transactions therein. The rules on what exactly establishes a strong enough connection (i.e., nexus) between a state and a taxpayer are complex and are not entirely settled, as seen from the most recent showdowns between Amazon.com LLC v. New York State Department of Taxation and Finance and L.L. Bean Inc. v. Levin (Ohio). Moreover, some transactions may be exempt, like software-as-a-service, which is exempt in several states.

So, to avoid being spooked by a state sales tax notice or letting their company’s state sales tax ghosts frighten away potential acquisition deals, executives should understand not only with which states their company has a nexus, but also which of their transactions within that state are exempt.

An executive in any-sized business these days can feel lost in a corn maze of tax issues. At every turn, there’s a scary beast waiting to jump out.

Emily Buckles, senior tax manager at BDO USA, and Tyler Ison, tax associate at BDO USA, also contributed to this article.

Related article:

Fundamentals of the R&D Tax Credit