If you’re mad at the news the Glendale, Wisconsin-based Johnson Controls is, through its merger with Tyco International, moving its corporate headquarters to Ireland to avoid paying the higher American corporate tax rate, we’d advise you to send your anger in the right direction: Toward Congress.

The merger will save Johnson Controls an estimated $150 million on U.S. taxes, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported Jan. 30. It’s an action known as a tax inversion. The United States has the highest corporate tax rates in the world – a statutory rate of 39.1 percent and a marginal effective rate of 35.3 percent – making inversion all too popular with American companies.

In 2014, for example, Chicago-area companies AbbVie, Horizon Pharma, Medtronic, Chiquita Brands and Mylan moved their corporate headquarters across the Atlantic to take advantage of lower corporate tax rates.

“The failure to modernize the federal tax code has pushed American businesses to move overseas,” wrote Brett Healy of the free-market Wisconsin-based think tank MacIver Institute. “Our politicians have failed us, not Johnson Controls.”

We’re inclined to agree.

There’s blame to go around for the corporate tax rate staying as high as it is. During the October 2013 budget standoff between President Barack Obama and congressional Republicans, with the threat of a government shutdown looming in the air, House Speaker Paul Ryan’s effort at making tax reform part of the budget deal was thrown overboard as tea party Republicans, led by U.S Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, demanded the defunding of the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare, as part of any budget deal.

The president called Cruz’s bluff, and a budget deal was reached without any defunding of Obamacare ... but also without any serious effort to take up Ryan’s tax reform proposals.

In the spring and summer of 2014, with American companies fleeing, congressional Democrats introduced legislation to prevent companies from engaging in inversion, and to punish those that did. That legislation went nowhere, but more importantly that’s treating the symptom instead of the disease.

Then, after the Republican victories in the November 2014 midterm elections, Ryan ascended to chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee. In an interview with The Journal Times that month, Ryan said he expected tax reform to be a big issue in 2015.

We don’t recall a lot of action on tax reform taking place last year. Perhaps prospects will improve now that Ryan is speaker.