When Jeb Bush headlined his first fundraiser as an official presidential candidate in Washington last week, lobbyists who attended forked over more than $500,000 to support the former Florida governor.

It didn’t matter that just days before, Bush had slammed the lobbying industry in his announcement speech. “We will also challenge the culture that has made lobbying the premier growth industry in the nation’s capital,” he said before a crowd that included several lobbyists who had flown down from D.C. to Miami for the launch event. “The rest of the country struggles under Big Government, while comfortable, complacent interest groups in Washington have been thriving on it.”

Story Continued Below

Bush, whose closest advisers in recent months — including Mike Murphy and Al Cardenas — have worked for lobbying firms, isn’t alone in criticizing the industry. As presidential candidates look to portray themselves as Washington outsiders, the lobbying industry has emerged as a common, easy target.

Lobbying consistently ranks at the bottom of Gallup’s survey of the most honest and ethical professions, highlighting voters’ distaste for the industry. But lobbying firms rank high on the list of fundraising stops for presidential hopefuls. Earlier this year, Bush headlined fundraisers at lobby shop BGR Group and at the Washington offices of trade group National Association of Wholesaler-Distributors. In May, several lobbyists hosted a “Mojitos with Marco” fundraiser for Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker courted K Street donors at an event organized by the American Beverage Association’s Kevin Keane and BGR Group’s Bob Wood.

Despite raising millions from lobbyists, many 2016 presidential hopefuls are using a message that then-candidate Barack Obama used in 2008, decrying lobbyists and vowing not to be influenced by special interests. Obama’s campaign, however, went a step farther and rejected lobbyist contributions, and later on, the president barred lobbyists from working for the administration (eventually, the ban was lifted for several lobbyists through a waiver). None of the candidates this time around has gone that far, but that hasn’t stopped them from using the Obama-esque rhetoric — even though many have ties to lobbyists.

“Power and money and political influence have left a lot of Americans lagging behind,” said former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee in his announcement speech. Huckabee’s daughter and campaign manager, Sarah Huckabee Sanders, has worked for lobbying and consulting firm Tsamoutales Strategies.

Former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley echoed the message in his kickoff address. “Powerful, wealthy special interests here at home have used our government to create — in our own country — an economy that is leaving a majority of our people behind,” he said. “An economy that has so concentrated wealth in the hands of the very few that it has taken opportunity from the homes of the many.”

In New Hampshire, former New York Gov. George Pataki has repeatedly called for lobbying reform. “The first thing I would do is ban members of Congress from ever lobbying,” he said in May. “If you serve one day, you are banned, go home.”

Even Donald Trump singled out lobbyists in declaring his White House bid. “So I’ve watched the politicians. … They will never make America great again,” Trump said. “They don’t even have a chance. They’re controlled fully — they’re controlled fully by the lobbyists, by the donors, and by the special interests, fully.”

Trump’s main holding company, Trump Organization, had four lobbying firms on retainer from 1998 to 2001. Trump himself has given $1.4 million in political contributions since 2008.

But as voters grow increasingly frustrated with Washington, turning their backs on their wealthy D.C. friends — at least on the stump — is a calculation many candidates have been willing to make.

“Bashing lobbyists has always been very popular,” said Craig Holman, a lobbyist for Public Citizen, a reform group that works on campaign finance and government ethics issues. “It has an inherent appeal to voters, but the hypocrisy this election is breathtaking.”

Several lobbyists who have actively raised money for presidential hopefuls said they’ve become such predictable punching bags that the negative comments have no effect on their decisions about campaign donations, especially since no candidate has announced plans to shun lobbyists like the Obama campaign did.

Many of those supporting Bush said they didn’t notice the former governor’s criticisms of the industry, even though they listened to his speech. Some also stressed that they’re the “white hat” lobbyists and not the ones the candidates are calling out.

“A sound bite in a speech won’t change anything,” said Ron Kaufman, a Bush backer who is senior strategic adviser at McKenna Long & Aldridge and former senior adviser to Mitt Romney’s 2012 campaign.

Bush’s campaign, which appears to have the most K Street support among Republicans, did not respond to a request for comment.

Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton, however, has focused more on decrying political spending than lobbyists.

With her extensive Washington background, as a former first lady, senator and secretary of state, it is difficult for Clinton to position herself as a Beltway outsider without seeming disingenuous. Meanwhile, Clinton’s opponents from both parties say they are not certain she would crack down on special interests.

“I do have doubts that Hillary Clinton or any Republican out there will take on big-money special interests,” Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) said in April, citing that as one of the main reasons he was considering a White House bid. Sanders, who later announced his candidacy for the Democratic nomination, has gathered momentum in recent early-state polls.

But, having learned her lesson from her previous bid, Clinton won’t be defending lobbyists anytime soon.

In discussing her decision to accept lobbyists’ contributions at a Chicago event in 2007, Clinton was booed when she said: “A lot of those lobbyists, whether you like it or not, represent real Americans. They represent nurses, they represent social workers, yes, they represent corporations that employ a lot of people.”

Also, in going negative on lobbyists, Clinton could risk comparisons to Obama. Several Democratic lobbyists, whose political fundraising was sidetracked during the Obama era, are expected to help Clinton’s campaign and allied outside groups bring in $2 billion.

“Hillary Clinton has a long history of taking on tough fights against special interests, whether or not they’re donors to her campaigns,” Clinton spokesman Jesse Ferguson said when announcing that the campaign would accept contributions from lobbyists.

“She strongly supports campaign finance reform and has voted for tough lobbying reform, but as long as Republican groups and candidates are going to spend millions attacking Hillary, we need the resources to fight back.”