Sen. Mark Green, R-Clarksville, wants the insurance chief to testify about why premiums on the federal marketplace increased. (Photo: Submitted)

Sen. Mark Green requested insurance commissioner Julie Mix McPeak testify before a legislative committee about why insurance premiums on the federally run exchange, particularly those of BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, increased, in some cases drastically.

In a letter dated Jan. 7, Green, R-Clarksville, asked Sen. Jack Johnson, R-Franklin and chairman of the Senate Commerce and Insurance committee, to ask McPeak for a "brief explanation on how these approvals are granted."

The health insurance premium increases for 2016 on the federally run exchange for Tennesseans are among the highest in the country. BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, the state's largest insurance provider, had its 36.3 percent average increase approved.

There was variation in premium costs in the last two enrollment seasons while the increase requests brought the four insurers into comparable range for 2016.

There are 232,623 people who selected a plan as of Dec. 26, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The enrollment figure already tops the number of 2015 enrollees -- just over 231,000 -- with more than three weeks left in the season.

“Commissioner McPeak will be asked to address the statewide complaints that have dramatically increased over the last few months,” said Green in a statement. “We must be guardians of the public trust and seek the answers to this sudden change to the budgets of Tennessee families.”

Julie Mix McPeak (Photo: Submitted)

Insurers submitted rate requests in May and received approval in August. The Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance approved the increases for all the insurers, with the exception of now-defunct Community Health Alliance, which had its average rate request increased from 32.2 percent to 44.7 percent. The insurer, a co-op established under the Affordable Care Act, struggled with financial stability and was asked to shut-down in October.

The health insurers selling plans on the exchange received the following average rate increases:

BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee: 36.3 percent average increase.

Cigna: 0.4 percent average increase.

Humana: Requested 15.8 percent average increase. Received 5.8 percent average increase

Community Health Alliance: requested 32.2 percent average increase. Received 44.7 percent average increase. CHA is no longer an active insurer.

UnitedHealthcare: First year on the Tennessee exchange; requested approval for monthly premiums that range from $94.10 to $1,122.97.

"We, too, have fielded numerous complaints from insurance consumers and we absolutely understand their frustration," said Kevin Walters, TDCI spokesman. "Nobody at the (TDCI) likes to approve a significant rate increase. We would much rather reduce rates on a yearly basis, but that simply is not realistic given today’s environment."

Claims and increases

Increases, which for many buying insurance on the federal exchange are offset by increased tax credits, have been attributed to higher than expected medical claims.

The people buying on the federal exchange across the country skewed older and sicker than initial projections.

Tennessee has had among the least-expensive premiums on the benchmark plan on the exchange despite increases in the last two enrollment seasons. The state proved to be the highest users of medical services or the least healthy in the U.S. on the federal marketplace.

The TDCI evaluates rate requests on a multitude of factors, including claims data, medical trends and projected losses. BCBST lost $141 million in exchange covered plans in 2014; it paid $471 million in claims for those members.

"The approved increases have been significant, no doubt, but they have been actuarially justified, and in several cases, carriers may have been able to justify even higher increases due to the poor performance of these marketplace blocks of business," said Walters.

In Tennessee, the benchmark plan on the exchange established by the Affordable Care Act costs $250.50 in 2016, up from $203 in 2015, according to Kaiser Health Foundation. The state's benchmark plan in 2014 was $188.

McPeak will "be happy to answer any and all questions" at her presentation to the committee, which is set for Jan. 19, said Walters.

Whether Green asks BCBST to testify would largely depend on whether the committee wanted to "dig deeper" into why the rates increased after hearing from McPeak.

A spokeswoman for BCBST said the insurer has not yet received a request to talk about rate increases in the upcoming legislative session. The 2016 legislative session begins Tuesday, Jan. 12.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1OVzcXK