Margaret “Molly” Brown would be bursting with pride after Denver’s new play about her was featured on the front page of The New York Times theater section last Sunday.

Once again, the “Unsinkable” has bobbed to the surface with the Denver Center for the Performing Art’s “The Unsinkable Molly Brown.” This version, however, is oceans away from the original musical comedy, which portrays Molly as a dim-witted social climber.

Changing with the tide and times, this “Unsinkable” delivers a strong pro-feminist, pro-labor, pro-immigrant message sweetened with wonderful wit. It ends with Molly and the Statue of Liberty welcoming survivors of the Titanic to the land of liberty. The all-so-timely immigration theme is further advanced by accurately portraying Leadville’s miners as a mixture of accented newcomers — Irish, German, Italian, even Chinese — who usually get excluded.

A rousing “Belly Up to the Bar, Boys” scene is one of seven untouched surviving songs from the sickly sweet 1960 musical. This version centers on the “can’t live with ’em, can’t live without ’em” marriage of Margaret Tobin and J.J. Brown. In continual clashing over her social activism, J.J. usually gives as good as he gets in fast, funny repartee.

At one point, Molly even shouts down myths about her, such as her entertaining Mark Twain with Mississippi River skinny-dipping back in Hannibal and burning up J.J.’s fortune in her Leadville stove.

“This is not a documentary,” director Kathleen Marshall says right up front in the Applause program. It’s “historical fiction.” So don’t complain about Horace Tabor (John F. Campion) showing up as the owner of the “Louisville” (Little Jonny) Mine. Mostly true names and places are used, from the Ice Palace to The Denver Post to Louise Sneed-Hill.

Librettist/lyricist Dick Scanlon toured Denver’s Molly Brown House Museum, from which he borrowed the idea of a polar bear rug set. He used about half the original script and dug up four of Meredith Wilson’s original unpublished songs to create new material. Scanlon said, “I wanted to dispel the myth that Molly was in any way stupid.” His more admirable Molly, reconstructed as a role model for latter-day aspiring minority women, feminists and women political candidates, may be rooted in the revisionist scholarship of books by Christine Whitacre and Kristin Iverson.

Locals get a fine salute from this play with the songs “Colorado is my Home” and “Beautiful People of Denver.” Beth Malone, a Colorado native, is gloriously rambunctious, acrobatic and convincing in her portrayal of Colorado’s best-known woman. We now have a play that does her justice.

Although not covered in this production, Brown was also a hero of historic preservation. When the cottage of celebrated poet-journalist Eugene Field faced demolition, Brown bought it and moved it in 1927 to Washington Park, where it still stands, restored and recycled for park use next to the Wynken, Blynken and Nod fountain inspired by Field’s best-known poem.

After Brown died in 1932, her house was converted to a home for wayward girls, then to an even more cramped boarding house for single men. By 1970, developers eyed the site as high-rises sprung up all round Capitol Hill. Historic Denver, Inc., formed to save the house and restore it. Executive director Annie Robb Levinsky reports that HDI has since sunk more than $1 million and 250,000 hours of volunteer time into Colorado’s most popular house museum.

Tom Noel teaches Colorado history at CU-Denver and welcomes your comments at dr-colorado.com.