Action Points Self-reported unmet medical needs in adolescence predict poorer adult health, according to analysis of two large cohorts.

Overall, 19.2% of adolescents reported unmet healthcare needs, citing perceived low importance of healthcare as the most common reason.

Adolescents who did not seek medical care when they needed it were more likely to experience poor health outcomes as adults, analysis of two large cohorts in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health showed.

Dougal S. Hargreaves, MBBChir, MD, of the Institute of Child Health at University College London, and colleagues found that adolescents with "unmet healthcare needs" were more likely to experience fair or poor health in adulthood (adjusted odds ratio 1.27, 95% CI 1.00 to 1.60, P=0.046). They were also at greater risk of having functional impairment (aOR 1.52, CI 1.23 to 1.87, P<0.01), depressive symptoms (aOR 1.36, CI 1.13 to 1.64, P=0.01) and suicidal ideation (aOR 1.30, CI 1.03 to 1.68, P=0.026) compared to those who did not report unmet healthcare needs.

However, there was only a weak trend toward association between unmet healthcare needs as teens and subsequent missed time at work or school (aOR 1.13, 95% CI 0.93 to 1.36, P=0.220), the authors reported in Pediatrics.

Hargreaves and colleagues said that while, unsurprisingly, high-quality adolescent healthcare has been linked to better adult health, there has never been a study to examine this link using "individual, prospective-level data." They noted that reducing unmet healthcare needs and increasing accessibility for adolescent healthcare is "an important investment" in a country's population health.

"Adolescence is recognized as a formative period for establishing attitudes toward health and patterns of health care-seeking behavior," they wrote. "These findings reinforce the importance of early intervention and investment to improve adult health."

Analyses were adjusted for gender, age, race/ethnicity, parental education, and adolescent insurance category, household income, and health outcome. But the authors note that these associations between unmet healthcare needs and poor health outcomes persisted across a variety of sociodemographic groups and insurance categories.

Overall, 19.2% of adolescents reported unmet healthcare needs. The most common reason they cited was the perceived low importance of healthcare (37.2%), followed by access problems unrelated to cost (32.0%), and negative consequences of healthcare (22.7%). Financial affordability was well down the list, reported by 14.8% as a reason.

These factors are particularly important when treating young people with mental health needs, Hargreaves and colleagues suggested. They cited barriers to access, as well as the inability of healthcare providers to engage and communicate with patients, as being critical to successful treatment. They also noted that half of lifetime mental health disorders appear by age 14 and 75% by age 24, making early diagnosis and treatment especially critical.

"Interventions have been shown to improve the perceived quality of consultations with young people and increase [healthcare] utilization, particularly among the most vulnerable adolescents," they wrote.

Hargreaves and colleagues used a nationally representative sample from two waves of the study, with a total of 14,800 participants. Wave I was from 1994-1995, when participants were adolescents (mean age 16, SD 1.8 years), while Wave IV was from 2008 when these same participants were adults (mean age 30, SD 1.8 years). Demographic characteristics of the participants included 46.8% male, 53.3% white non-Hispanic, with 50.8% having private insurance. Data on healthcare outcomes was self-reported, with "unmet healthcare needs" defined as a "yes" response to the question, "Has there been any time over the past year when you thought you should get medical care, but you did not?"

Limitations to the study included self-reporting of data, as well as the inability to exclude unmeasured confounding from other adolescent psychosocial factors or socioeconomic status. The authors also noted that the adolescent data was collected prior to major changes in the U.S. healthcare system (such as the Affordable Care Act) and consensus national recommendations for adolescent preventive care.

They concluded that future health policy for adolescents needs to broaden its focus beyond cost. While increased insurance coverage for adolescents (as is provided under the ACA) is important, it may not be as effective as improving health engagement and broadening access to quality healthcare.

"Reducing unmet health care need among adolescents may be a highly effective investment to improve population health outcomes and reduce healthcare costs," they wrote.

Dr. Hargreaves was supported in this work by The Commonwealth Fund. The authors declared they had no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.

Reviewed by Henry A. Solomon, MD, FACP, FACC Clinical Associate Professor, Weill Cornell Medical College and Dorothy Caputo, MA, BSN, RN, Nurse Planner