Buy Photo Caleb Banks, a supporter of same-sex marriage and upholding Supreme Court rulings, makes a speech before the Rutherford County Commission on Thursday, Jan. 13, 2016. (Photo: HELEN COMER/DNJ)Buy Photo

MURFREESBORO — The Rutherford County Commission approved an amended states-rights resolution Thursday before a red-clad crowd opposed to a vote they viewed as being against same-sex marriage.

"It has no legal effect and is simply an embarrassment to the citizens of Rutherford County," Sara Mitchell told the commissioners in joining about 85 people in red who packed many of the seats in the courtroom of the Rutherford County Courthouse. "We don't need to fight the Civil War again."

The County Commission voted 15-6 for an amended resolution that deleted previous mention of the U.S. Supreme Court, which issued a ruling this past June that legalized same-sex marriage throughout the country.

Those voting against the resolution were Commissioners Joe Gourley, Rhonda Allen, Allen McAdoo, Shawn Kaplan, Phil Dodd and Chantho Sourinho.

Commissioner Robert Stevens offered the initial amended version that excluded mention of the U.S. Supreme Court. Commissioner Robert Peay Jr. then adjusted the amended version that asks the Tennessee General Assembly to defend the state's and citizens' rights "by upholding the Tennessee and United States constitutions."

Commissioner Gourley suggested that such a resolution is an insult to the lawmakers.

Buy Photo Supporters of same-sex marriage and upholding Supreme Court rulings cheer after Sara Mitchell makes a speech in favor of upholding the Supreme Court rulings in front of the County Commission, on Thursday, Jan. 13, 201. One the front row, from left, are Brittney Beard, Patrick McCarthy, Becky Scott, Colleen Fowler, Austin Dubuc, Pat Sanders and Kathy Ferris. (Photo: HELEN COMER/DNJ)

"They have already taken an oath of office," Gourley said.

Stevens said after the meeting that he modified the original resolution recommended by the County Commission Steering, Legislative & Governmental Committee because he was concerned about mentioning the U.S. Supreme Court.

"At the Steering committee, there was some concern about the original language presented," said Stevens, who is an attorney. "So after thoughtful consideration, the amendment was offered to make the proposal much broader and inclusive of all federal overreach and not just focus on one issue.

"The problem is much broader than that one case. The resolution as passed canceled out the fears and concerns that the protesters had."Stevens suggested that the amendment offered by Peay, however, was more oriented "toward states rights by including the Tennessee Constitution."

Commissioner Doug Shafer mentioned his support for the resolution is in part due to the costs associated with the Affordable Care Act that he said is costing the county government about $480,000 to provide the required benefits.

Prior to voting, the commissioners during the public comment period heard from six speakers against the resolution.

Caleb Banks told the commissioners that his marriage to his husband is not a perversion.

"Leave the LGBT community alone," said Banks, who suggested Tennessee's constitutional amendment in 2006 that defined a marriage contract being between one man and one woman was essentially a Jim Crow law. "We will not be dominated by hate and bigotry."

Buy Photo Pat Sanders, left, and Kathy Ferris, supporters of same-sex marriage and upholding Supreme Court rulings wear red to show their support. (Photo: HELEN COMER/DNJ)

Others opposed to the resolution held signs: "Don't be stupid, obey the law," and "Support human rights" and "One nation indivisible" and "Affordable health care for all."

Brendon Holloway told the commissioners that the resolution was "hatred."

"The LGBT community is one of the most vulnerable in the state of Tennessee," Holloway said. "You are denying them their basic human rights."

The LGBT community has faced being bullied in school and getting fired from jobs, said Holloway, adding that all residents should be honored.

Speaker Christie Crowell suggested that the resolution was a tool of segregation and divisiveness.

"This resolution is not patriotic disobedience," Crowell said.

Contact Scott Broden at 615-278-5158. Follow him on Twitter @ScottBroden.

Read or Share this story: http://on.dnj.com/1RoSIm0