At 3 p.m. CT today, Mike Myers appeared on the Argus Leader's daily online talk show, "100 Eyes," along with his new running mate Lora Hubbel. It was a riveting event, as Myers told long stories about his life (which often involved him getting a phone call offering him a new job), disagreed with Hubbel, occasionally broke into song and admitted to youthful indiscretions.

You should definitely watch:

Watch a replay of "100 Eyes" with Patrick Lalley speaking with Independent gubernatorial candidate Mike Myers and running mate Lora Hubbel.

Myers hasn't gotten a lot of attention because he's a long-shot independent candidate in a race most experts expect incumbent Gov. Dennis Daugaard to win in a landslide. Even Myers acknowledges he's unlikely to win. But he's also a character unlike any other. Here's a few quick facts about Myers:

He likes to do push-ups, in public. Myers is 77, but he wants everyone to know he's as fit as the next man or woman several decades younger. So on multiple occasions, Myers has interrupted news conferences to do push-ups in front of the camera. (Once, he did it to the soundtrack of Pink Floyd's "Another Brick in the Wall.") Here, he dropped and did 20 as a way to celebrate making the ballot:

Gubernatorial candidate Mike Myers does 20 pushups after hearing he's on the verge of qualifying for the ballot.

He practices "yoga and zen" and believes that he's being helped by "spirit guides." "I do a lot of communicating with my spirit guides," Myers said. "I've got spirit guides going up through my dad, my grand-dad, (his deceased wife) Mary Ellen. They've kept me out of so much trouble lately." He told one story about driving through town when "my spirit guides told me to pull over, which I did"; he found his way into a local evangelical church.

He doesn't stick to the script. Earlier this week, Myers called a news conference to announce a new running mate. When the presser started, though, he declared he actually wouldn't be announcing his lieutenant governor pick. But just a few minutes later, after reporters asked if he had picked a name before deciding not to make the announcement, he switched again, called an audible, and called his pick out of the audience. "It was kind of a roller coaster, up and down, up and down," his new running mate said afterward. "I honestly did not know where this was going." (Later, he essentially hired a new attorney during the same news conference and before it ended was conversing with his new lawyer about legal options from the podium.)

"We're going to do push-ups in the morning, we're going to do polka at night, and we're going to get outside this really carefully edited box," Myers said of his campaign.

He doesn't fit the script, either. Myers has an eclectic collection of political views. A former CEO of Mayo-St. Mary's Hospital in Rochester, Minn. and executive at other hospitals, Myers is campaigning against health care "oligopolies." He's for industrial hemp and takes a hemp nutritional supplement every day; he's against the "money-changers" he says have dominated economic development in South Dakota. Myers is pro-life and has a shooting range in his basement, and supports expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act.

And that's just himself -- Myers' first running mate, Caitlin Collier, was a liberal former Democratic lawmaker. His new running mate, Lora Hubbel, is a tea party-affiliated conservative; before she joined the ticket, Hubbel and Myers talked about seven key issues and only agreed on two. He asked her to run with him, anyway.

"I tend to get a little aggressive from time to time," said Myers, 77. "We get into these saloons, and I might arm-wrestle."

Myers is a rambling, discursive speaker. "This is a professor who's got 55 minutes to fill with nothing but himself. You see that here," Hubbel said of him. Myers has been offered four debates with Republican Gov. Dennis Daugaard and Democratic challenger Susan Wismer. Asked if he'll be able to keep his answers to the 60-second limits typically imposed in debates, Myers said, "No, absolutely not."

I mentioned Myers was a former hospital CEO. He's also a former law professor who taught, among other people, South Dakota Attorney General Marty Jackley. In the early 1960s, he was a photographer and reporter. So this isn't a random guy off the street -- he's led a long and accomplished life.

He's not afraid to sing. When the Argus Leader asked community members to come in and sing the "Star-Spangled Banner" for an Independence Day video, Myers agreed to come in too -- despite being a bit warbly and playing fast and loose with the tempo. In the "100 Eyes" interview above, Myers broke into song on several occasions.

Mike Myers sings The Star-Spangled Banner.

He believes women are going to dominate the world. "I believe we're headed for a matriarchy," Myers said at a recent news conference. "I hope that once that matriarchy is in place you will treat us males as well as we treated you all these many, many generations."

Asked in the live "100 Eyes" interview about his biggest indiscretions, Myers told a story about sneaking into alcohol stores when he was 17 to buy beer. (The drinking age was 18 at the time.)

And that's not going into the wild political history of his new running mate, Lora Hubbel, who ran unsuccessfully for governor as a Republican months before switching to run for lieutenant governor as an independent. Hubbel led an effort to pull out of Chamber of Commerce-backed legislative forums when she was chair of the Minnehaha County Republican Party, said instructing mothers to put their babies to sleep on their backs was an effort to soften skulls and thus make future voters more suggestible, suggested sheriffs could nullify federal laws in their counties and entertained suggestions about FEMA death camps in South Dakota.

These two probably won't win, but they're worth paying attention to.

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1mklOmr