Ken Rollins, the vice president of the Alabama Council of the Vietnam Veterans of America, has good instincts.

This week he told AL.com reporter Mike Cason that the state's transition to a new accounting system seemed a lot like the Obamacare rollout of Healthcare.gov.

Like a lot of organizations, Rollins' group has a specialty car tag, and when the state sells one of those specialty tags, Rollins' group gets $3.

Or that's what typically happens.

Since September, they've gotten nothing. The Alabama Finance Department is in the middle of updating its accounting software, and the upgrade has been anything but smooth.

Throughout the state, government vendors and contractors have been paid late, if at all.

Tom Layfield, director of the Alabama Road Builders Association, told the Montgomery Advertiser this week that the late payments have been hurting some of their members.

"One of my members said, 'I've begged, borrowed and stolen everything I can. I really have to get paid now,'" Layfield told the Advertiser.

The finance department has brought on extra staff to try to unstick the backlog of accounts payable.

But that's work the IT contractor should be doing.

Two years ago, the state hired CGI Technologies and Solutions to upgrade the state's systems. Under the four-year contract, the state will pay CGI $47 million.

If CGI seems familiar to you, you might have a nose as good as Rollins'.

You see, CGI has bungled another government project before — a little thing called HealthCare.gov, the online home of Obamacare. Even the president had to admit that the website's rollout was a failure.

The irony here is so thick we might have to wait until spring for it to thaw.

Alabama Gov. Robert Bentley has been no fan or friend of Obamacare.

Two years ago, the governor refused to expand Medicaid in Alabama, turning away as much as $3 billion of federal money. That funding could have provided as many as 300,000 working Alabamians caught in the healthcare gap — too rich for Medicaid, too poor for insurance — with coverage.

But Bentley refused, calling Medicaid a broken system that creates dependency on government by giving folks something for nothing. He said that Obamacare and its namesake couldn't be trusted.

But at the same time Bentley was bashing on Obama at the expense of so many Alabamians, his administration hired the same contractor that bungled Healthcare.gov to upgrade the state's accounting software.

Now the state has a whole other broken system.

And after the state handed out that no-bid contract, Bentley's campaign got a little something from CGI's PAC.

According to campaign finance reports, CGI Technologies and Solutions Inc. PAC gave the governor's campaign $2,500.

That's not crazy money by Montgomery standards, but what does a contractor from Virginia and a subsidiary of a Canadian conglomerate care about Alabama politics so much that it would write a check in the first place?

And Bentley wasn't the only one to get a campaign contribution. Other beneficiaries included Lt. Gov. Kay Ivey, State Senate Pro Tem Del Marsh, Sen. Vivian Davis Figures, Sen. Arthur Orr, Sen. Jimmy Holley, Sen. Phil Williams, Rep. Craig Ford, Rep. Napoleon Bracy and Rep. Alan Boothe.

They don't have a problem with a flawed, broken system. Not so long as the money coming back to Alabama goes into their campaign accounts.