Read Part One

From the little research I’ve done into Obamacare — the Affordable Care Act — a better designation for the controversial program would be the “Unaffordable Care Act.” The program has failed in basically every way it could possibly fail.

As of the beginning of 2016, six years into the program, fewer than half of America’s uninsured residents have gained coverage, and underinsurance remains ubiquitous.

Employers seeking to restrain their health benefit costs have tripled deductibles since 2006, and many of the estimated 11 million Americans who have purchased plans on the ACA’s exchanges face punishingly high co-payments and deductibles, which average more than $5300 in Bronze plans. Such underinsurance often compromises access to care and financial well-being. In 2014, more than half of all overdue debts on credit reports were related to medical care.

One of the key cost-containment strategies built into ACA — the so-called “Accountable Care Organization” strategy — has encouraged the consolidation of hospitals and physicians’ practices into giant systems with the market leverage to demand higher prices, driving up costs for privately insured Americans.

There had been considerable hope (or hype) that by simply changing how providers get paid, the ACA would lower health spending and improve quality. In reality, any payment method creates perverse incentives in a market-based system, when increased corporate profit is the central goal, and an ethos of public service is lacking.

Maybe President Obama, and the Democrats in Congress who supported ACA in 2010, meant well. (Or maybe they didn’t.) But one thing is pretty darned clear: the American people had little chance to influence the way Obamacare was structured.

Meanwhile, the medical industry, the pharmaceutical industry and the insurance industry had a great deal of influence, from what I’ve read about the way Washington DC operates.

Something very different is going on here in Colorado in 2016. A consortium of doctors, nurses, public health professionals and grassroots organizers have petitioned a proposed constitutional amendment onto the November ballot. This citizens’ initiative — ColoradoCare, Amendment 69 — seems to have attracted limited support, so far, from big name Colorado politicians.

The opposition, calling itself “Coloradans for Coloradans,” has attracted some huge donations from corporate America, according to the latest campaign finance report filed with the state. In addition to a $500,000 contribution from Anthem (based in Ohio), the opposition has been bankrolled by other industry interests including SCL Health, ($100,000), Washington-based Davita, ($75,000), and Pennsylvania-based Cigna Health and Life Insurance ($40,000).

One is tempted to wonder about the name, “Coloradans for Coloradans.” Perhaps “Corporations for Corporations” would be a more accurate name?

From a recent press release from pro-Amendment 69 group ColoradoCareYES:

By contrast, 99.75% of ColoradoCareYES’s contributions were from individuals, with 94% of the money raised coming from within Colorado. While the opposition may crow about a 7-to-1 advantage in fundraising, ColoradoCareYES is proud to have 40 times as many donations as Coloradans for Coloradans, and an 80-to-1 advantage in contributions from individuals.

But here’s the point I want to make. Amendment 69 could never happen in Washington DC. for the simple reason that our federal government has no “citizens initiative” process. Practically speaking: at the federal level, only well-funded, full-time corporate lobbyists have dedicated access to our President and Congressional leaders.

Last week, a petition appeared on the website of the Physicians for a National Health Program, arguing that ACA is a failure, and that only a national single-payer program will be able to solve the social and financial problems inherent in America’s current healthcare system.

As of last week, the petition had been signed by about 2,300 physicians. The program proposed by the physicians looks remarkably similar to the program that Colorado voters will be voting on in November. You can review the PNHP petition (and sign it, if you wish) at this website.

A short excerpt:

We propose to replace the ACA with a publicly financed National Health Program (NHP) that would fully cover medical care for all Americans, while lowering costs by eliminating the profit-driven private insurance industry with its massive overhead. Hospitals, nursing homes, and other provider facilities would be nonprofit, and paid global operating budgets rather than fees for each service. Physicians could opt to be paid on a fee-for-service basis, but with fees adjusted to better reward primary care providers, or by salaries in facilities paid by global budgets. The initial increase in government costs would be offset by savings in premiums and out-of-pocket costs, and the rate of medical inflation would slow, freeing up resources for unmet medical and public health needs.

This is actually not rocket science. Every major industrialized nation — except the U.S. — has instituted a universal healthcare system for its citizens, and although every system has its own quirks and problems, every major industrialized nation spends a smaller portion of its GDP on healthcare, while also producing a greater life expectancy than in the U.S. In many cases, per capita healthcare costs are half what we now spend here in America.

Following his presentation to the Archuleta Board of County Commissioners last Tuesday, I buttonholed Pagosa Springs Medical Center CEO Brad Cochennet in the parking lot, to ask if he had any sense how ColoradoCare might affect the operations of our local hospital, if the voters were to pass it.

Mr. Cochennet admitted that he was no an expert on the topic, but he was able to offer a few comments.

“You understand the rotation to Medicaid that has happened, from private pay to Medicaid? We went from 8 percent Medicaid to over 20 percent. And we’re better off because of it… just as a medical provider, in general. If ColoradoCare would pass, and there would be more people with coverage, then in theory we’d be even better off.

“It’s so expensive, the way they’ve approached it, I don’t see how it can pass. But it’s getting the idea out there — that if more people had coverage, and the payments were spread out all across the population, then we’d have enough money to cover people…”

We discussed a number of the interesting issues raised by Amendment 69, and finally, Brad cocked his head slightly and asked, “Do you think this has a chance of passing?”

I admitted that I think it has a chance.

The Republic of Colorado has already blazed a voter-approved trail towards sensible, public control of marijuana.

We could do the same thing with sensible, public control of healthcare costs. If the voters agree.