Assemblyman Rocky Chávez declared his candidacy Thursday for California's open U.S. Senate seat in 2016, becoming the first prominent Republican to enter the race.

Chávez, R-Oceanside, faces an uphill battle. He lacks the statewide name recognition of the only other major declared candidate, California Attorney General Kamala Harris, a Democrat. And the "R" after his name could be a burden in the high-turnout election that the strongly Democratic state expects next year.

Assemblyman Rocky Chavez, R-Oceanside, foreground, leaves the state Assembly at the Capitol in Sacramento, Calif., Thursday, March 5, 2015. (Rich Pedroncelli / AP)

And even if he remains the only Latino in the field, Chávez's surname won't automatically attract Latino voters, said Carlos Muñoz Jr., a UC Berkeley professor emeritus and Latino politics expert. Nor, he added, are most Latino voters likely to look past his party affiliation to see his moderate stance on immigration and Chávez's stand against repealing the Affordable Care Act -- positions that have some conservatives questioning his partisan bona fides.

"The Republican Party, in the minds of a majority of Latinos in the state of California, stinks," Muñoz said. "And I don't think that Rocky has that much of a statewide notoriety, so I don't consider him a serious candidate."

Advertisement

Chávez, a retired Marine Corps colonel, said he plans to focus on strengthening national security, creating more education opportunities for children and improving the economy.

"Our national security is a major concern, with ISIS growing bolder every day," he said in a news release. "If things get worse overseas, who would Californians want representing them in the Senate? A lawyer from San Francisco, or a Marine colonel who knows how lives can be protected and understands the importance of keeping America and her allies safe and secure?"

Californians "want to take their state back" and "are looking for someone who shares their story," Chávez said. "My father taught me the value of hard work in the grape fields with my uncles and cousins, which led to my success in the military and desire to give back through public service."

Chávez, 63, is in his second term representing the 76th Assembly District in northern San Diego County. Earlier, he was acting secretary of the California Department of Veterans Affairs and an Oceanside city councilman.

Harris "welcomes Assemblyman Chavez to the race and believes anyone should run for office if that's how he or she believes California can be best-served," Brian Brokaw, Harris' spokesman, said Thursday.

Assemblyman Rocky Chavez, R-Oceanside, right, talks with the leaders of the gay GOP organization Log Cabin Republicans of California, Charles Moran, center, and John Musella, left. (Christopher Cadelago/Sacramento Bee)

The attorney general declared her candidacy in January for the seat that U.S. Sen. Barbara Boxer will vacate next year. Probably due in part to her statewide name recognition, Harris polls strongest among those who have expressed interest in the race. A Field Poll last month found 46 percent of likely voters would be inclined to vote for her, while 20 percent would be inclined to vote for Chávez.

The survey also found that 49 percent would be inclined to vote for former U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, a Republican, but she said she has no plans to run.

Two little-known Republicans, John Estrada of Fresno and Mark Hardie of Whittier, also have declared their candidacies, though Hardie has yet to form a campaign committee. In addition, former California Republican Party Chairman Tom Del Beccaro, of Lafayette, has formed an exploratory committee.

Two Democrats who were thought to be potential rivals to Harris -- hedge fund billionaire and environmentalist Tom Steyer, of San Francisco, and former Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa -- chose not to run. Other Democrats still pondering the contest include House members Loretta Sanchez, D-Garden Grove; Xavier Becerra, D-Los Angeles; and Adam Schiff, D-Burbank.

Chávez could play an important role just by showing that both parties want Latino votes, said Louis DeSipio, a UC Irvine professor and Latino politics expert. "He shows that today's California Republican Party isn't the Republican Party of the Pete Wilson era."

DeSipio said being an assemblyman is a fine policy foundation on which to run for higher office, "but it maybe doesn't let you raise the $5 million, $10 million, $20 million you need for a U.S. Senate race." Yet if a Latino Republican like Chávez makes it into the top two in the primary, DeSipio said, he could pressure a Democratic rival into doing more to appeal to Latino voters in the general election.

"The Democrats in California very often take Latinos for granted," he said, "and they could win more if they had a mobilization effort."

Josh Richman covers politics. Follow him at Twitter.com/Josh_Richman. Read the Political Blotter at IBAbuzz.com/politics.