People who enter active-duty military service in 2018 could be paying out of pocket for their Tricare health care services for themselves and their families, under a draft proposal for the National Defense Authorization Act released Monday by the House Armed Services Committee.

The military health system section of the legistlation, which is passed annually to authorize the fiscal year military budget, would allow the secretary of defense to establish annual enrollment fees and fixed dollar co-payments for Tricare Preferred and Tricare Prime for active-duty members and their families, according to the bill.

According to www.mytricare.com, Tricare is the military health insurance provided by Humana Inc., a for-profit health care provider based in Louisville, Ky. Active-duty military, their families, retirees and their families enrolled in the Defense Enrollment Eligibility Reporting System are eligible for Tricare programs.

Active-duty members enlisting after Jan. 1, 2018, would pay an annual fee of $180 for an individual or $360 for a family for Tricare Prime. Those opting for Tricare Preferred, a combination of what is currently Tricare Standard and Tricare Extra, would pay $425 annually for an individual or $850 for a family plan.

These new users would also be required to pay set amounts for primary and specialty care under Tricare Preferred, which allows patients to see network providers at a lower cost and out-of-network providers without a referral.

Corry Scheirmeyer, spokeswoman for U.S. Rep. John R. Carter, R-Round Rock — one of two congressmen whose districts include Fort Hood — said the congressman’s main focus for the troops is readiness.

“In a time when our nation faces a more diverse array of threats than ever before, Rep. Carter’s top priority is readiness within our force,” she said. “In meeting with senior health officials within the Pentagon, their main concern is medical readiness of the force — which the NDAA addresses in a multitude of ways by expanding trauma centers across the country, opening up partnerships in the private sector and mandating that urgent care facilities stay open longer.

“Unfortunately, tough decisions have to be made after President (Barack) Obama has slashed our defense budgets by more than $1 trillion since he took office. Rep. Carter will continue to work with his colleagues to ensure our military service men and women and civilians receive access to world-class medical care,” she added.

Vince Zito, spokesman for U.S. Rep. Roger Williams, R-Austin, said Williams believes “first and foremost that we owe our nation’s brave men and women the best quality care at the most affordable price.”

While Williams does not serve on the Armed Services Committee, he is a strong believer of competition in health care as that would increase quality, service and affordability, Zito added.

The draft still needs to be approved by the House before reconciling with the Senate version to become law. The Senate is expected to release its version of the act in early May.