Contribution

Molli Nickell is the author of "Uncle Scam Want$ Your Money & Your Country," a collection of Politically Incorrect Fables. Her daily rants and fables also are available at her blog where she writes as a Granny Guerrilla to entertain and enlighten low-information voters, amuse patriots, and piss off progressives.

Montel Williams, talk show host, TV personality and former Marine, recently appeared on The Glenn Beck Program to share a common-sense solution to the Department of Veterans Affairs health care debacle.

Williams commented:

“There are 50,000 children (to date) that came across the border illegally. We’re opening up DOD [Department of Defense] facilities to triage them. They are refugees. We should help them. But, how dare we let them go to a DOD facility before we let our own people – our veterans who fight for our lives – do the same thing?”

Does Williams have a point? Is America obligated to care for and absorb 80 to 90,000 illegal alien children into our culture at the expense of our own?

Every single one of our heroic veterans waiting for medical care is somebody’s child.

Every single one of our heroic veterans has put his/her life at risk for us.

Williams urges Americans to support a straightforward plan that could clear the backlog of veterans waiting for care:

“President Obama can act, without Congress, and order each branch of the service that has allowed corpsmen to go off active duty and into the reserve, to bring them back on temporary active duty. They could man every VA hospital, and the hospitals on military bases, with the mission of clearing the entire backlog in 90 days.”

Williams explained how Obama, as commander in chief, could make the call “today” and tap into the skills of thousands of off-duty corpsmen (“corpsemen” in Obama-speak). In 90 days, we would have gained understanding about the actual cost (present and future) of fulfilling our promises and debt to our veterans.

He added, “We have to do this.”

Is anyone in Washington listening? Does America’s procrastinating and feckless commander in chief have a clue about the need to take immediate action to treat our sick and wounded veterans?

Who knows?

Obama seems to be terribly, terribly, terribly busy ignoring America’s failing economy, Iraq’s disintegration, and escalating Middle East chaos.

But, he’s not too busy to spew tons of carbon (from Air Force One and support aircraft) as he flits hither and yon to promote the dangers of climate change.

What about Congressional action? Anything happening on that front? Yes and no.

The Senate has spawned an unlikely alliance between lib-tard Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) and Republican Progressive Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.), who have cobbled together a bill for veteran assistance that doesn’t really help our vets.

The Congressional Budget Office estimated an initial expenditure of $500 million for the construction of additional VA facilities and to support vouchers called “choice cards.” This program allows vets to seek medical care outside of the VA system.

Just in case you forgot, these are the same Congressional Budget Office bean counters who assured us that Obama’s Affordable Care Act would save money, and become a blessing for America. Same deal here, just different players. When presented with additional specifics, the CBO revised the estimate to $35 BILLION dollars by 2016.

Does this ballooning expenditure actually help our veterans? Probably not. Based on prior experience ($700 BILLION dollars siphoned from Medicare to pay for Obamacare), the money allocated for veteran medical care will be diverted to illegal aliens or some other Obama pet project.

Will the re-distribution of $35 billion of our tax dollars become a blessing for America? Certainly so, if you’re referring to Central America.

Whoopsie! Elephant-in-the-room alert! The Sanders/McCain program holds down costs by limiting the use of choice cards to Medicare providers, the Department of Defense, Indian Health Services, and federally qualified health centers (code words for overcrowded facilities that provide preventive care to uninsured and low-income patients).

Say what? Will this help our veterans obtain quality medical services? NO!

Increasing numbers of doctors are turning away Medicare patients because they can’t afford to accept the low reimbursement rates. Therefore, in order to accommodate thousands of VA patients, doctors who continue to accept Medicare will be forced to diminish patient time, or will turn VA escapees’ evaluations over to physician assistants.

Unfortunately, before a choice-card-carrying veteran spends three-and-a-half minutes with a doctor, they‘ll wait long hours in overcrowded hospitals and/or waiting rooms overflowing with seniors, the poor, and of course, illegal aliens infected with highly contagious diseases like scabies, lice, measles, chicken pox, and tuberculosis.

Take a number. Sit down. Shut up. Wait your turn. Do our vets deserve the McSanders’ program? NO, they deserve better.

Uh oh! Another elephant in the room. Rules and regulations haven’t been developed… yet. Like everything undertaken by our government, the McSanders’ bill seems destined to evolve via Uncle Scam’s four-step program.

ONE: Lie about the cost.

TWO: Establish convoluted and disingenuous rules (or write them as you go along).

THREE: Promise more, but deliver less.

FOUR: Assign overpaid and under-skilled bureaucrats to perform their usual piss-poor implementation.

Haven’t we already been here with Obamacare? How’s that working out for millions of We-the-People? Lost our doctors. Lost our insurance plans. Lost premiums we could afford. Lost our full-time jobs. Lost quality medical care for our families. Lost trust in the government, especially in Obama.

So, what can you do to help America’s veterans in their time of need?

Fire up your passion (instead of your anger) by watching physician assistants’ emotional appearance on The Glenn Beck Program.

Send Williams a tweet of support @Montel_Williams

Appeal to Obama’s giant ego and desperate quest for a meaningful legacy. Tell him that he can regain popularity points by launching a VA surge. Then sign the petition.

Or, if you think it’s more effective, demand Obama get his fanny off Air Force One and call up off-duty corpsmen to launch a VA Surge. Then, sign the petition.

Regardless, enlist your friends and neighbors to support America’s brave warriors. Talk and tweet it out across the land. Do it now! OORAH!

Listen TheBlaze’s Mike Opelka talk with Montel Williams about the importance of the #VASurge.

P.S. Additional columns and an “almost daily rant” are available on Molli’s website, along with a FREE download of her book,“Uncle SCAM Wants Your Money and Your Country.” Use her snarky humor to initiate conversations with the less-aware people in your universe. Entertain first, then enlighten them with the truth about our need to wake up, wise up, stand up, speak out, and push back to restore and retain freedom in America.

–

TheBlaze contributor channel supports an open discourse on a range of views. The opinions expressed in this channel are solely those of each individual author.