“The greatest part of the President’s job is to make decisions — big ones and small ones, dozens of them almost every day,” President Harry S. Truman said. “The papers may circulate around the Government for a while but they finally reach this desk. And then, there’s no place else for them to go. The President — whoever he is — has to decide. He can’t pass the buck to anybody. No one else can do the deciding for him. That’s his job.”

Truman made that statement during his farewell address on Jan. 15, 1953. During most of his presidency, Truman had a sign on his desk that read “The Buck Stops Here.”

Truman recognized that ultimately the decisions made by his administration rested with him, and that he was ultimately responsible for them.

Apparently President Barack Obama is not aware of what his job actually entails. Just a hint, it is not playing golf.

Throughout the course of his administration, Obama has passed the buck when scandal and problems rock his administration rather than standing up and taking responsibility for what happened.

Either Obama is lying and he does know what is going on within his administration or he has abdicated his responsibilities and is an absentee president.

Either way, this is a problem. The president should not be chronically and blatantly lying to the American people, nor should he abdicate his responsibilities as president of the United States.

Furthermore, Obama is the chief executive of his administration. He needs to step up and be a leader. There is no excuse and no justification that absolves Obama from being unaware of what is happening within his administration.

During Obama’s reign, he claimed ignorance when it was revealed that the IRS had been targeting conservative groups since 2010.

Furthermore, he claimed that the first time he heard about it was when the media first started reporting on the issue.

When the media broke the news that the Department of Justice was spying on reporters and the media, a blatant violation of the First Amendment right of the freedom of the press, Obama claimed to know nothing.

When the Obamacare website crashed on day one of the health insurance exchange sign-up, Obama claimed he was “unaware” that there were problems.

Mexican drug lords receive guns from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives and Obama claims he was unaware that this was occurring.

The NSA is spying on at least 35 world leaders, including German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and Obama is clueless.

When Americans started receiving notices that their insurance policy was being canceled because of Obamacare, Obama was ignorant.

Obama needs to be held accountable. Americans need to stop refusing to take action because they feel their actions are fruitless. We need to stand up across this country and demand that Obama be held accountable for the problems in his administration.

The number of issues and scandals that have rocked the Obama administration would have brought down any previous president.

Obama should be held to the same standard as every previous president. He has failed to defend and protect the Constitution of the United States as he swore an oath to do on Jan. 20, 2009, and Jan. 20 and 21, 2013.

It is time that America cleans house throughout the entire Obama administration beginning at the top and going all the way down to the lowest levels of the executive branch until the most corrupt and scandalous administration has been cleaned up and brought to justice.