Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 13 VIDEO HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2015 #BLUEGRASSDEBATE FOR KENTUCKY GOVERNOR Video | Bevin hammers Conway with series of questions | 2:16 Bluegrass Debate: Bevin hammers Conway with series of questions 1 of 13 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 13 VIDEO HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2015 #BLUEGRASSDEBATE FOR KENTUCKY GOVERNOR Kim Davis, marriage license controversy | 2:14 Bluegrass Debate: Kim Davis, marriage license controversy 2 of 13 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 13 VIDEO HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2015 #BLUEGRASSDEBATE FOR KENTUCKY GOVERNOR Solutions for budget cuts in schools | 2:16 Bluegrass Debate: Solutions for budget cuts in schools 3 of 13 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 13 VIDEO HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2015 #BLUEGRASSDEBATE FOR KENTUCKY GOVERNOR Video | Does coal have a future in Kentucky? | 2:25 Bluegrass Debate: Does coal have a future in Kentucky? 4 of 13 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 13 VIDEO HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2015 #BLUEGRASSDEBATE FOR KENTUCKY GOVERNOR Candidates outlines on an education plans | 2:22 Bluegrass Debate: Outlines on an education plan 5 of 13 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 13 VIDEO HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2015 #BLUEGRASSDEBATE FOR KENTUCKY GOVERNOR Video : Why hasn't Kim Davis been charged with official misconduct | 2:37 Bluegrass Debate: Why hasn't Kim Davis been charged with official misconduct 6 of 13 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 13 VIDEO HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2015 #BLUEGRASSDEBATE FOR KENTUCKY GOVERNOR Video | How would you fund pensions and changes for future workers? | 2:14 Bluegrass Debate: How would you fund pensions and changes for future workers? 7 of 13 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 13 VIDEO HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2015 #BLUEGRASSDEBATE FOR KENTUCKY GOVERNOR Do you support private partners, tolls to finish projects quicker | 2:35 Bluegrass Debate: Do you support private partners, tolls to finish projects quicker 8 of 13 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 13 VIDEO HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2015 #BLUEGRASSDEBATE FOR KENTUCKY GOVERNOR Video | Stance on Kentucky's Medicaid | 2:08 Bluegrass Debate: Stance on Kentucky's Medicaid 9 of 13 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 13 VIDEO HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2015 #BLUEGRASSDEBATE FOR KENTUCKY GOVERNOR Plans to help curb gun violence | 2:20 Bluegrass Debate: Plans to help curb gun violence 10 of 13 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 13 VIDEO HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2015 #BLUEGRASSDEBATE FOR KENTUCKY GOVERNOR Video | What would you do to reverse budget cuts and where to find money? | 2:12 Bluegrass Debate: What would you do to reverse budget cuts and where to find money? 11 of 13 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 13 VIDEO HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2015 #BLUEGRASSDEBATE FOR KENTUCKY GOVERNOR Candidates discuss pension plans | 1:55 Bluegrass Debate: Discuss pension plans 12 of 13 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share 13 VIDEO HIGHLIGHTS FROM 2015 #BLUEGRASSDEBATE FOR KENTUCKY GOVERNOR Video | Candidates discuss their tax returns | 1:54 Bluegrass Debates: Candidates discuss their tax returns 13 of 13 Last VideoNext Video Video | Bevin hammers Conway with series of questions

Kim Davis, marriage license controversy

Solutions for budget cuts in schools

Video | Does coal have a future in Kentucky?

Candidates outlines on an education plans

Video : Why hasn't Kim Davis been charged with official misconduct

Video | How would you fund pensions and changes for future workers?

Do you support private partners, tolls to finish projects quicker

Video | Stance on Kentucky's Medicaid

Plans to help curb gun violence

Video | What would you do to reverse budget cuts and where to find money?

Candidates discuss pension plans

Video | Candidates discuss their tax returns

The Bluegrass Poll Debate at Bellarmine University includes Kentucky gubernatorial candidates Jack Conway, Drew Curtis and Matt Bevin. Sept. 15, 2015 (Photo: By Michael Clevenger/The Courier)

Democratic Attorney General Jack Conway and Republican Matt Bevin traded more barbs in a bitter debate Tuesday over same-sex marriage, state pensions and the racial makeup of trustees at the University of Louisville.

But the rivalry was put at ease at times by independent candidate Drew Curtis, a digital entrepreneur who touted his technology background as a unique qualification to move the state forward.

The debate — sponsored by The Courier-Journal and its Bluegrass Poll partners, the Lexington Herald-Leader, WHAS-TV and WKYT-TV in Lexington — was held at Bellarmine University and was the first televised debate of the campaign.

Throughout the hourlong event, Bevin sought to draw blood as he accused Conway of failing to defend the state’s ban on same-sex marriage or challenge racial inequalities on the U of L Board.

Conway, who was visibly sweating, responded with attacks over Bevin’s refusal to release his tax returns and called his approach to Medicaid expansion “callous,” saying Bevin plans to kick half a million people off the program.

“You’ve never worked in the real world,” Bevin told Conway in one tense moment. “You’ve hidden behind false promises and hidden behind your political jobs over the years. You saying you will do your job once you're governor, but you won’t do it as attorney general, is unacceptable.”

The charge came as Bevin took aim at Conway over his decision not to appeal a U.S. District Court opinion striking down Kentucky's ban on same-sex marriage.

But Conway sought to make his case, saying that good-paying jobs will only come to Kentucky if the state embraces an inclusive atmosphere.

“What I didn’t want to do was waste hundreds of thousands of dollars defending a case that ultimately we weren’t going to win,” he said.

Conway argued that Rowan County Clerk Kim Davis went to jail because she defied a court order to issue marriage licenses following the Supreme Court's subsequent ruling for gay marriage. “I have sympathy for her, but we are a nation of laws,” he said.

On the issue of how to address Kentucky’s multibillion dollar pension liabilities, Bevin said he supports moving teachers onto a defined contribution plan, but Conway disagreed, saying it would be unfair to teachers, who are not eligible for Social Security benefits.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Jack Conway speaks to media after Bluegrass Poll debate at Bellarmine University.

Conway noted that it will take many years to dig out of more than $30 billion in unfunded liabilities in all the pension systems combined. He said he looked forward to recommendations of a task force appointed by Gov. Steve Beshear to address the liabilities of the Kentucky Teachers Retirement System.

Curtis proposed using bonds that would serve as a line of credit for KTRS if there is a bad year with investments.

Asked about how he would fund his education platform that calls for more investment in early childhood education, Conway gave only a general answer and threw a jab at Bevin. “If we’re fiscally responsible we can certainly make it happen,” Conway said. “…But we have an opponent in this race who said that early childhood education serves no purpose, that kids forget it all by the age of nine.”

That was a reference to Bevin’s comments on the issue in a debate during the Republican primary. But Bevin said in Tuesday night’s debate, “To assume that I am not a proponent of early childhood education is nonsense. I have nine children for crying out loud. … This is critical, we have got to spend the money there, but let’s be good stewards of those dollars.”

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Drew Curtis, creator of Fark.com speaks to the media after Bluegrass Poll debate at Bellarmine University.

Curtis said he’s a strong proponent of early childhood education and other worthy programs. “The problem is you’ve got to actually have the money that comes from somewhere,” Curtis said. “… But we just don’t have the money.”

Bevin jabbed at Conway, saying he didn't act as attorney general to challenge Beshear’s failure to comply with a law requiring appointment of at least one African American to the current University of Louisville Board of Trustees.

Conway’s reply was that he will appoint African Americans to the U of L Board — an answer Bevin called “a cop-out” because it did not answer his question.

The two also tangled over the sexual harassment complaints filed in 2013 by legislative staffers against former state Rep. John Arnold, D-Sturgis, which this summer ended in the legislative branch paying a $400,000 civil settlement to the staffers.

“That really didn’t have to do with the office of the attorney general," Conway said. “... I can tell you this, when I became attorney general I think half of my directors were women.”

Bevin said the settlement, paid by taxpayers, “for the absolute shenanigans that went on, the sexual harassment that went on in Frankfort" was unacceptable. He added that Conway’s running mate Rep. Sannie Overly, Paris, resisted a deposition in the civil suit and did not speak up for the female staffers.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Matt Bevin speaks to media after Bluegrass Poll debate at Bellarmine University Tuesday night. Matt Stone, The Courier-Journal

Conway, meanwhile, targeted Bevin’s position on Medicaid expansion.

Bevin was asked about his contrasting statements on Medicaid, which have varied from reversing expansion of the program to tweaking it.

Bevin said Kentucky cannot continue to have up to 30 percent of the state enrolled in Medicaid and that he wants to apply for federal waivers, using the money to customize a solution specifically for Kentucky.

“We want to have as many Kentuckians as we possibly can covered with as much health care as possible at the most affordable price,” he said.

But Conway seized on Bevin’s contradictory comments, charging that Bevin would kick half a million people off health insurance.

“If we can’t afford something in 2021, we can always scale back but I think the action that Mr. Bevin proposes is callous,” Conway said, explaining that he would instead build on the work of Beshear.

Curtis argued that since Kentucky has already transitioned so many people onto the program, he would leave it alone.

Beshear chose to expand Medicaid under the federal Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare.

The plan calls on the federal government to pay the full cost of Medicaid expansion in the first years of the ACA, but beginning in 2016-17, the expansion is estimated to require $74 million in state allocations. That tab will increase each year until 2021 as states pay a larger percentage of the cost of Medicaid expansion.

The Beshear administration says other impacts of the policy will reduce state costs elsewhere and increase state revenues and that expansion overall will have a net positive impact to the state budget until 2021.

Though Conway and Bevin have appeared together on several occasions, including Fancy Farm in Western Kentucky earlier this year, Tuesday’s showdown at Bellarmine University provided many voters with the first chance to compare the candidates side by side.

In one of the most notable responses of the night, Conway noted that he "even has a female dog" while listing strong women in his family and who have worked with him. The response came after he was asked about making Kentucky safer for women.

After Bevin replied to a question about releasing his tax returns by calling the issue a "smokescreen," Curtis, who was next, said, "I'll actually answer this question." After laughter from the audience, Curtis went on to say that he would release his returns and even have people over to his house for tours.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1Fe79V9