AFP

By Paul Craig Roberts —

The consequence of Washington’s reckless and irresponsible political and military interventions in Iraq, Libya and Syria has been to unleash evil. The various sects that lived in peace under the rule of Saddam Hussein, Qadaffi and Assad are butchering one another, and a new group, ISIS, is in the process of creating a new state out of parts of Iraq and Syria.

The reality in the Middle East stands in vast contradiction to the stage-managed landing of George W. Bush on the U.S. aircraft carrier Abraham Lincoln, where Bush declared, “Mission accomplished,” on May 1, 2003. The mission that Washington accomplished was to wreck the Middle East and the lives of millions of people and to destroy America’s reputation in the process. Thanks to the demonic neoconservative Bush regime, today America is regarded by the rest of the world as the greatest threat to world peace.

The Clinton regime’s attack on Serbia in 1998 set the pattern. Bush upped the ante with Washington’s naked aggression against Afghanistan, which Washington clothed in Orwellian language-–“Operation Enduring Freedom.”







Washington brought ruin, not freedom, to Afghanistan. After 13 years of blowing up the country, Washington is now withdrawing, the “superpower” having been defeated by a few thousand lightly armed Taliban, but leaving a wasteland behind for which Washington will accept no responsibility.

Another source of endless Middle East turmoil is Israel, whose theft of Palestine is Washington-enabled. In the middle of Israel’s latest attack on civilians in Gaza, the U.S. Congress passed resolutions in support of Israel’s war crimes and voted hundreds of millions of dollars to pay for Israel’s ammunition. Here we witness Great Moral America 100% in support of unambiguous war crimes against essentially defenseless people.

When Israel murders women and children, Washington calls it “Israel’s right to defend their own country”—a country that Israel stole from Palestinians—but when Palestinians retaliate Washington calls it “terrorism.” By supporting Israel, declared to be a terrorist state by a few moral governments that still exist and accused of war crimes by the UN general secretary, Washington is in violation of its own laws against supporting terrorist states.

Russia

As horrific as Washington’s recklessness toward the Middle East is, Washington’s recklessness toward Russia is many orders of magnitude greater. Washington has convinced nuclear-armed Russia that Washington is planning a nuclear first strike. In response, Russia is beefing up its nuclear forces and testing U.S. air defense reactions.

It is difficult to imagine a more irresponsible act than to convince Russia that Washington intends to hit Russia with a preemptive first strike.

One of Russian President Vladimir Putin’s advisers has explained to the Russian media Washington’s first strike intentions, and a member of the Russian Duma has made a documented presentation of Washington’s first strike intentions.

China

The Chinese are fully aware that their nation faces the same threat from Washington, D.C. warmongers. China’s response to Washington’s war plans against China was to try to demonstrate how China’s nuclear forces would be used in response to Washington’s attack on China, and that America should beware.

China made this public, hoping to create opposition among Americans to Washington’s war plans against China. Like Russia, China is a rising country that does not need war in order to succeed.

U.S. Needs War

The only country on Earth that needs war is Washington, and that is because Washington’s goal is the neoconservative one of exercising hegemony over the world.

Prior to the Bush and Obama regimes, every previous U.S. president went to great efforts to avoid telegraphing any nuclear threat. U.S. war doctrine was careful to keep nuclear weapons limited to retaliation in the event the U.S. suffered a nuclear attack. The purpose of nuclear forces was to prevent the use of such weapons. The reckless George W. Bush regime elevated nuclear weapons to preemptive first use, thus destroying the constraint placed on the use of nuclear weapons.

The overriding purpose of the Reagan administration was to end the Cold War and, thereby, the threat of nuclear war. The George W. Bush regime, together with the Obama regime’s demonization of Russia, have overturned Reagan’s unique achievement and made nuclear war likely.









Incompetent Regime

When the incompetent Obama regime decided to overthrow the democratically elected government in Ukraine and install a puppet government of Washington’s choosing, the Obama State Department, run by neoconservative ideologues, forgot that the eastern and southern portions of Ukraine consist of former Russian provinces that were attached to the Ukraine Soviet Socialist Republic by Communist Party leaders when Ukraine and Russia were part of the same country—the Soviet Union.

When the Russophobic stooges that Washington installed in Kiev demonstrated in word and deed their hostility to Ukraine’s Russian population, the former Russian provinces declared their desire to return to mother Russia. This is not surprising, nor is it something that can be blamed on Russia.

Crimea succeeded in returning to Russia, where Crimea resided since the 1700s, but Putin, hoping to defuse the propaganda war that Washington was mounting against him, did not accept the pleas from the other former Russian provinces. Consequently, Washington’s stooges in Kiev felt free to attack the protesting provinces and have been following the Israeli policy of attacking civilian populations, civilian

residences and civilian infrastructure.

The presstitute Western media ignored the facts and accused Russia of invading and annexing parts of Ukraine. This lie is comparable to the lies that Secretary of State Colin Powell told the UN about Iraqi weapons of mass destruction in behalf of the criminal Bush regime, lies that Powell later apologized for to no avail, as Iraq had been destroyed by his lies.

U.S. and NATO military dignitaries and the Pentagon chief are issuing Russia threat warnings based on alleged but non-existent Russian troop buildups on Ukraine’s border. According to the Western ministry of propaganda, if Russia defends the Russian populations in Ukraine from military attack from Washington’s stooge government in Kiev, it is proof that Russia is the villain.

Washington’s propaganda campaign has succeeded in turning Russia into a threat. Polls show that 69% of Americans now regard Russia as a threat, and that the confidence of Russians in American leadership has vanished.

Russians and their government observe the identical demonization of their country and their leader as they observed of Iraq and Saddam, of Libya and Qaddafi, of Syria and Assad, and of Afghanistan and the Taliban just prior to military assaults on these countries by the West. For a Russian, the safest conclusion from the evidence is that Washington intends war on Russia.

Without Precedent

It is my opinion that the irresponsibility and recklessness of the Obama regime is without precedent. Never before has the U.S. government or the government of any nuclear power gone to such great efforts to convince another nuclear power that that power was being set up for attack. It is difficult to imagine a more provocative act that more endangers life on Earth. Indeed, the White House fool has doubled up, convincing both Russia and China that Washington is planning a preemptive first strike on both.

Republicans want to sue or to impeach Obama over relatively inconsequential issues, such as Obamacare. Why don’t Republicans want to impeach Obama over such a critical issue as subjecting the world to the risk of nuclear Armageddon?

The answer is that the Republicans are as crazed as the Democrats. Their leaders, such as Sens. John McCain (R-Ariz.) and Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), are determined that “we stand up to the Russians!” Wherever one looks in American politics one sees crazed people, psychopaths and sociopaths who should not be in political office.

Greatest Threat

Washington long ago gave up diplomacy. Washington relies on force and intimidation. The U.S. government is utterly devoid of judgment. This is why polls show that the rest of the world regards the U.S. government as the greatest threat to world peace. On Aug. 8, Handelsblatt, Germany’s Wall Street Journal wrote in a signed editorial by the publisher:

The American tendency to move from verbal escalation to military escalation—the isolation, demonization, and attacking of enemies—has not proven effective. The last successful major military action the U.S. conducted was the Normandy landing [in 1944]. Everything else—Korea, Vietnam, Iraq and Afghanistan—was a clear failure. Moving NATO units toward the Polish border with Russia and thinking about arming Ukraine is a continuation of relying on military means in the absence of diplomacy.

Washington’s puppet states—all of Europe, Japan, Canada and Australia—enable Washington’s unrivaled danger to the world by their support of Washington’s agenda of exercising hegemony over the entire world.

The 100th anniversary of World War I is upon us and the folly that caused this war is being repeated. WWI destroyed a civilized Western world, and it was the work of a mere handful of scheming people.

As Stephen Starr has pointed out on my website, if merely 10% of the nuclear weapons in the U.S. and Russian arsenals are used, life on Earth terminates.

When has Washington told you anything that was not a lie? Washington’s lies have caused millions of casualties. Do you want to be a casualty of Washington’s lies?

Do you believe that Washington’s lies and propaganda about the Malaysian airliner and Ukraine are worth risking life on Earth? Who is so gullible that he cannot recognize that Washington’s lies about Ukraine are like Washington’s lies about Hussein’s weapons of mass destruction, Iranian nukes and Assad’s use of chemical weapons?

Do you think that the neoconservative influence that prevails in Washington, regardless of the political party in office, is too dangerous to be tolerated?

Dr. Paul Craig Roberts was Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Economic Policy and associate editor of The Wall Street Journal. He was columnist for BusinessWeek, Scripps Howard News Service, and Creators Syndicate. He has had many university appointments. His Internet columns have attracted a worldwide following. Roberts’ latest books are The Failure of Laissez Faire Capitalism and Economic Dissolution of the West and How America Was Lost: From 9/11 to the Police/Warfare State.