This week, HRC staff delivered 13,398 public comments from our members and supporters in response to proposed rule making by The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) implementing a critical non-discrimination provision of the Affordable Care Act -- Section 1557. Section 1557 prohibits discrimination in healthcare on the basis of a number of protected classes, including sex. The proposed regulations codify existing informal guidance from HHS interpreting this provision to include protections from discrimination on the basis of gender identity and sex stereotyping. HRC and its members applaud HHS for taking this important step towards ending health disparities facing the transgender community and increasing access to vital services and care.

However, HRC and its members voiced concern that the rulemaking falls short of protecting all LGBT people from discrimination. As proposed, these provisions do not provide explicit protections from discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. The proposed rules’ absence of these explicit protections not only ignores the health crisis facing lesbian, gay and bisexual people, but is inconsistent with broader policies within the Obama administration as described by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and fails to reflect current legal doctrine concerning sexual orientation discrimination.

HRC and its members also weighed in on the Department's invitation for comments regarding the inclusion of a religious exemption. HRC believes that no such exceptions should be added, either for sex discrimination or any other ground covered by Section 1557. Nothing in the text of the ACA authorizes an addition of a religious exemption – and adding such exemptions have the potential to cause great harm to members of the vulnerable populations that Section 1557 is intended to protect, including LGBT people.

HRC and its members are committed to working with HHS to improve the health of LGBT people across the country and we urge HHS to take the necessary steps to ensure that the vision and promise of the ACA and Section 1557 is realized for all people including the LGBT community. Click here to learn more about this rule making visit HRC's public comment and click here to read the Leadership Conference for Civil and Human Rights public comment.