Allegations that Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts was blackmailed by the National Security Agency (NSA) to give the okay and approve Obamacare was reported by Larry Klayman, the attorney who has come to be known as “the NSA slayer” for his successful legal battles against the National Security Agency was reported by WND on Sunday.

Larry Klayman, founder of Judicial Watch and now heads Freedom Watch appeared on the nationally known weekend radio talk show host, author, and staffer for WorldNetDaily (WND) and columnist for The Jewish Press, Aaron Klein’s radio show 970 on Sunday and when a caller asked Klayman of the possibility of blackmail of Justice Roberts, Klayman said that it is a possibility.

In the interview, Klayman said, “But let’s take this possibility… why did Chief Justice Roberts at the eleventh hour change his decision? He was going to side with the other justices and find that Obamacare was unconstitutional. Is it something that was dug up on him by the NSA or the CIA? Was that used against him to blackmail him?”

“These are the kinds of things the government is doing, and that’s why it’s so scary what’s going on with the NSA and the CIA,” said Klayman. “It can happen in a democracy. So that may help explain it, and perhaps we can reach these issues through the NSA cases that we brought, the NSA/CIA cases. I intend to get the truth on this.”

“This is actually a staggering response to believe the government could have spied on a Supreme Court justice … and that information is somehow utilized against him to pass Obamacare. This is huge,” Klein said.

“If the government wants to destroy you, it has to access the information that it can use to do it, and that’s why this is so frightening,” Klayman said. “It has a greater capability than King George III had in 1776. The tyranny is greater today than it was at the time of the American Revolution.”

Ever since the controversial Obamacare ruling by Chief Justice John Roberts, many have wondered why he went against the other conservative Supreme Court justices, who believed the law was unconstitutional, why Roberts changed his mind and switched his opinion.

Klayman’s answers may lend some credibility based on the allegations by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden who broke the news of the NSA’s domestic spying that included members of Congress, other government officials, and world leaders, which would leave no doubt that none of the U.S. Supreme Court Justices were immune from such spying activities.

In January 2014, Judge Andrew P. Napolitano reported on Fox News that The Guardian newspaper reported that the NSA shares raw, unfiltered information it has gathered with some foreign nations, including England and Israel. It also reported that the NSA shares this raw data with its boss who happens to be, President Obama.

Napolitano said, “The lawlessness continues. The president’s NSA spies remain out of control. They are spying on Congress and the courts; the military and the press; the CIA and other spies; friends, foes and the pope.”

The radio show interview between Klayman and Klein can be heard here.