Attacking presidential candidate Marco Rubio for missing Senate votes as become modus operandi for his opponents on both sides of the aisle, but after Rubio’s impressive debate performance, that may well change.

Wednesday’s debate became particularly heated when Jeb Bush used the democrat narrative that Rubio should consider resigning as Senator.

In an otherwise unifying night for the Republican candidates, Bush broke ranks to slam Rubio for his voting record. “Marco, when you signed up for this, this was a six-year term and you should be showing up to work,” Bush said. “What is this, like a French work week?”

Then he tried to finish Rubio off.

“Just resign and let someone else take the job,” Bush said.

Big mistake.

Twitter lit up with praise for Rubio’s handling of the attack. And some thought the senator’s response was a game-changer.

“@JebBush’s attack on @marcorubio was both a tactical and strategic failure. His campaign is cooked” https://t.co/sI2qtTIq66 #CNBCGOPDebate — The Weekly Standard (@weeklystandard) October 29, 2015

Here was predictable Jeb attack on Rubio. Backfired as Rubio calls him out for exactly what he’s doing and double standard. #CNBCGOPDebate — AG (@AG_Conservative) October 29, 2015

Duuuude. Rubio just ripped off Jeb’s head and spat down his neck. #CNBCGOPDebate — Leon Wolf (@LeonHWolf) October 29, 2015

If Jeb’s last jab sounds familiar, it’s because it echoes a Florida Sun-Sentinel editorial hit piece on Tuesday. The Sentinel accused Rubio of “hating his job”, and asking for his resignation was the mantra.



“If you hate your job, senator, follow the honorable lead of House Speaker John Boehner and resign it,” the editorial stated.



“You are paid $174,000 per year to represent us, to fight for us, to solve our problems. Plus you take a $10,000 federal subsidy — declined by some in the Senate — to participate in one of the Obamacare health plans, though you are a big critic of Obamacare.”

The editorial simply concludes, “Either do your job, Sen. Rubio, or resign it.”

Rubio, was clearly prepared for Jeb’s attack and turned the tables on him, quickly pointing out how Bush is proudly modeling his campaign after John McCain – another senator who missed votes while on the campaign trail.



“The only reason you’re doing it now is because we’re running for the same position and someone has convinced you that attacking me is going to help you,” Rubio said. The audience didn’t miss a beat and let out a collective chuckle at the truth behind the statement.

Rubio’s voting record was also a hot topic on social media where senior advisor to President Obama, Dan Pfeiffer, went so far to accuse Rubio of “quitting.”

@michaelscherer Probably not, but most of the field in 08 was senators. Also difference between missing votes and quitting, which Rubio did — Dan Pfeiffer (@danpfeiffer) October 28, 2015

Of course, McCain and Rubio are not the only Senators to miss votes as they worked towards their presidential aspirations. President Obama leads the charge in that position.

Comparing missed Senate votes: Obama 2007: 38% Hillary 2007: 23% Rubio 2015: 34% Cruz 2015: 24% (h/t @LPDonovan) #CNBCGOPDebate — AG (@AG_Conservative) October 29, 2015

Even Pfeiffer had to backtrack his earlier tweet:

@JRubinBlogger @michaelscherer I don’t think it is a big deal, but harder to navigate for Rubio than Obama/Clinton — Dan Pfeiffer (@danpfeiffer) October 28, 2015

Rubio seems to be “navigating” just fine.

Written by Nicole Haas and Frieda Powers.