Today’s Democrats are liars & they go for the throat.

By Lynn Woolley

Texas Insider Report: AUSTIN, Texas – Something has gone wrong with the Democratic Party. There was a day when Democrats and Republicans held out the same goals for our country, but disagreed on how to reach them. There was a day – as recently as the administration of President John F. Kennedy – when the two parties could unite against a common enemy like Communism. Those days are over.

Maybe it was Vietnam. Maybe it was Watergate. Maybe it was the left-wing candidacy of George McGovern. But whatever the tipping point was, today’s Democratic Party has turned mean and evil. Today’s Democrats don’t just just want to defeat their political opponents; they want to destroy them. They smear conservatives, take them to court, get them indicted, and allege that they are conducting “wars” on every conceivable group of people.

Today’s Democrats are liars.

This is not to say that the Party’s rank-and-file are all bad people. We are talking about the Democrats that are in charge – the ones you see as talking heads on TV and the ones that create a lot of the policies such as Obamacare that have caused the American people so much grief and heartache.

If you’re one of those folks who think it’s the other way around, you may be astonished to read this. Here’s the truth: You’ve been had! Democrats practice something called “misdirection.” It works like a magician who focuses your attention where he wants it to be while he pulls off his magic trick elsewhere. Similarly, Democrats call attention away from the fact they are harming this country by focusing on the lies they tell about others.

Bill Clinton was a master at political misdirection; Obama is even better.

Take the case of Mitt Romney who is a quintessential American success story. Yes, Romney has become very wealthy off of the free market system. He had some good ideas for this country – certainly better ideas than Obama had. But as the election drew closer, and President Obama’s policies were failing, Democrats attacked Romney.

They told many lies about him that were never challenged in any major way by the mainstream media or by the Romney campaign. So while the “recovery” was plodding along, unemployment was up, the national debt was out of control, more people were on welfare, and the new Affordable Healthcare Act was massively unpopular, Obama was reelected because – “Mitt Romney was out of touch with the American people.”

Romney was well-off, but Democrats made him seem like a space alien who came here to take away their money and give it to the rich.

They even accused him of cruelty to his dog for taking the dog on vacation in a crate atop the family car, and for the death of a woman whose husband had been laid off. They assassinated the character of a man who had created thousands of jobs through entrepreneurism, while their own record of job creation was a total disaster.

This is unethical and it is mean. But today, we simply call it “politics.”

The Democrats get away with it because Republicans can’t or won’t or don’t know how to fight back, and because the Democrats have near total support in the mainstream media. They also have their own “Hate TV” network, MSNBC, which is a 24-hour anti-conservative propaganda channel. FOX News Channel, while leaning conservative, is nothing like MSNBC.

Obama, who has never held a real job in the private sector, goes by the bible of political hatred: “Rules For Radicals” by Saul Alinksy. The book, also revered by Hillary Clinton, is a guide to revving up hatred against political opponents. It explains how to isolate an issue, use it against your opponent, accuse him of being the devil, and get people agitated against him.

The name for this is “community organizing.”

The Democrats used these tactics to pass the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), even though most of the American people did not want it and they had no Republican support in Congress. They did it by telling us over and over that 30 million people did not have insurance and that was not fair. The implication was that Republicans wanted people to die with no health care. They said as much, and ran a TV commercial showing a Republican dumping an elderly person out of a wheelchair and over a cliff.

Video: The infamous “Granny off the cliff” TV commercial

The Democrats lied because they did not want a serious discussion of how to improve a free market system; they wanted total control. They got what they wanted, and now we are seeing the fruits of socialism – less affordable healthcare, higher deductibles, a major doctor shortage – all the things other countries have suffered with government takeovers.

To make it work, Democrats installed subsidies – income redistribution. But government-run healthcare based on redistribution and fairness will never work. We’ve already seen that, and it will get worse. Government-run healthcare is socialism and it is evil.

So is the idea of Climate Change.

Heavily pushed by media and the Associated Press’s Seth Borenstein, Climate Change is another government takeover. This time the target is energy. Using Climate Change scare tactics, the Democrats want to move away from fossil fuels that drive the economic engine of the world – and move to an alternative energy model. Of course, this doesn’t work, and it leads to cronyism as we learned from the Solyndra debacle. But Democrats keep trying to fool you.

Forget that Democrats had to change the name of this crisis from Global Warming, because none of their computer models ever came true. Forget the fact that Al Gore became rich like Mitt Romney off of scaring people about this nonsense. Forget that nothing they have ever predicted about Climate Change has actually occurred – nothing matters except the fear.

Democrats love the concept of fear.

They tell us: If we don’t stop Global Warming, the oceans will swallow up the coastlines. Polar bears will die out. The Arctic icecap will melt away. Life as we know it will be over. We may, in fact, all die.

They tell us: Republicans hate the poor and want to take from them and give to the rich.

They tell us: Rich Republican men don’t want women to have birth control.

In each case, the answer is bigger and more controlling government. No serious person believes that government can change the climate, but that doesn’t matter to a party of liars.

Democrats do not tell you how much poorer the poor have become under Obama, and how Lyndon Johnson’s War On Poverty has created so much more of it. They don’t tell women that birth control is inexpensive and readily available.

Facts don’t matter; only emotions do.

Democrats are liars and they are mean.

They did not like Tom Delay. They made sure that the politics he engaged in was criminalized and they got him indicted, convicted, and sent to prison. But Bill Clinton never went to prison –and he sold pardons and transferred American secrets to the Chinese. He abused women in the Oval Office and committed perjury. Republicans impeached him but did not have the stomach to convict him and remove him from office.

Republicans always play nice.

The Democratic way is to go for the throat.

The same “Public Integrity Unit” that went after DeLay has now gotten an indictment against Texas Gov. Rick Perry. Perry engaged in politics, telling a drunken Travis County DA to resign or he would veto her funding. Being a Democrat, she refused. Following the veto, liberal scalp-hunters pounced. A left-wing “watchdog” group with a reputation for attacking Republicans and conservatives found a (Republican) judge in San Antonio who could be

persuaded to appoint a so-called bipartisan special prosecutor.

Rick Perry vetoed funding for the “Public Integrity Unit” run by a convicted drunk named Rosemary Lehmberg who was caught behind the wheel with an open bottle of vodka in her Lexus and a blood alcohol level nearly three times the legal limit. But she is a liberal Democrat. There were no major calls from her party for her to resign – not even after she became belligerent during the booking process and acted in a totally disgusting manner to officers.

[We googled “Democrats call for Lehmberg to resign.” Nothing. No hits.]

Democrats do not go after Democrats except when they are forced to in the media. And even then, it takes a lot. In the case of the sexting Congressman Anthony Weiner, they threw him under the bus – but his wife was Huma Abedin, a practicing Muslim who worked for Hillary Clinton. So what else could they do? Dollar Bill Jefferson was caught with his freezer money and former Illinois Gov. Rod Blagojevich was so corrupt that Democrats did not consider him worth a fight. In the case of John Edwards, it took the National Enquirer to expose what the mainstream media refused to do.

Now they are after Rick Perry and will not stop until he is imprisoned, even though their case is virtually non-existent. They are also going after Gov. Scott Walker in Wisconsin, charging that he coordinated too closely during an election with outside conservative groups. The Perry and Walker cases are purely political with not as much meat to them as, say the “Bridgegate” case of Gov. Chris Christie in New Jersey. But even there, the media took it way beyond its national importance with MSNBC leading the charge.

Democrats don’t just hate conservatives in office. They hate them in the media, too.

Democrats practice a virulent form of, to use a word coined by Rush Limbaugh, getevenism. When Limbaugh went too far in his criticism of Sandra Fluke, they didn’t want an apology – they wanted his head on a platter. When Dr. Laura Schlessigner used the N-word to make a point, liberals ended her career on terrestrial radio. They are mean like that.

In fact, David Brock makes a career of vindictiveness with the website “Media Matters.” The George Soros-funded site monitors conservative talk and organizes email campaigns and boycotts if Rush or Sean Hannity or any other conservative annoys them. That’s why you never hear big advertisers like Wal-Mart on national talk radio. Mean and evil Democrats will punish any business that supports a point-of-view that they don’t like. Even conservative writer and filmmaker Dinesh D’Souza, who stupidly violated a campaign finance law on behalf of a minor candidate, was vigorously prosecuted.

Democrats go after Republicans, but not so much the other way around. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, the late Congressman John Murtha, Congressman Charlie Rangel, Hillary Rodham Clinton and so many other Democrats seem to get away with shady business deals and under-the-table relationships with lobbyists. Republican lobbyist Jack Abramoff was prosecuted and went to jail when he was involved in a scandal while Hillary got a free pass on her cattle futures insider trading.

Worst of all, Democrats are evil because of their policies.

Unlike President Kennedy, today’s Democrats have turned into socialists. They now promote such things as income redistribution, takeovers of entire segments of our lives like healthcare and energy, social justice leading to a Green Utopia, and they want a giant government that can take care of the people while controlling everything they do.

Video: Obama lies about the Affordable healthcare Act

But look at their record with big government programs. Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid always are on the edge of bankruptcy. (Yes, we know that President George W. Bush added the pharmaceutical benefit.) President Carter signed the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) and it eventually caused poor people to lose their homes. Democrats never seemed to consider the fact that some people cannot afford to buy homes –and that passing legislation to force banks to provide them with mortgages only made them worse off.

Obama’s big government Stimulus Act, his “Cash for Clunkers” program, and now Obamacare – all failures. The former benefited mostly public unions and political cronies and the latter only time-shifted the purchase of new cars. Now, he’s taken control of student loans (which cause the huge tuition inflation we’ve seen), and he wants to control the climate.

There is no Green Utopia in our future.

Climate Change is a lie; perhaps the biggest lie of all. But it is just one of many.

The Republicans do not wage war against the poor, or blacks, or immigrants, or women. The Democrats’ takeover of healthcare is a disaster and their social policies will eventually create a nation of misery. Abortion on demand, homosexual marriage, and open borders are recipes for national failure. Democrats promote every type of perversion known to man – and a country can only take so much.

America’s future lies in the traditional vales of hard work and self-reliance in a free market – and in the nuclear family with mothers and fathers raising kids and teaching them how to be productive members of society. America had better wake up. Conservatives are not perfect. But unlike Democrats, they are not taking us down a path of total destruction.

That’s what Democrats are doing. And that’s what makes them evil.