VIERA, Fla. — Bryce Harper homered for the second consecutive day and Jose Lobaton hit a three-run home run in the eighth inning, one of seven home runs on a windy afternoon, as the Washington Nationals beat the Miami Marlins, 11-7, on Sunday.

“Balls were hit, but it’s difficult for both sides to have control in wind like that,” Nationals manager Matt Williams said. “The ball gets up in the wind and it helps push it a little bit, too.”

Michael Taylor homered off Ted Koehler leading off the bottom of the first, Yunel Escobar singled and Harper followed with his third home run of spring training.

Wilson Ramos hit a solo homer in the third off Koehler, who gave up six runs and 10 hits in four innings. Lobaton connected against Nick Masset.

Miami had consecutive home runs in the third against Doug Fister, with Marcell Ozuna hitting a two-run drive followed by Jarrod Saltalamacchia’s homer. Giancarlo Stanton hit a two-run homer in the third, his third home run of spring training.

After the game, Stanton declared he was ready for the regular season.

“Yeah, this is the point where it’s time to get the kinks out the last couple of days and let ‘er rip,” he said.

Fister gave up six runs and eight hits in four innings, and has allowed five homers in his past two starts. He said he was actually starting to feel “a lot more like myself” and blamed himself for not keeping the ball down.

“I left the ball up and that’s what definitely allowed them to get good contact on the ball,” he said.

Koehler was not happy with his outing, but like Fister, he put more of the onus on himself for not keeping the ball down.

“Have them hit the ball on the ground and they can’t hit a home run,” Koehler said. “I just [need] to do a better job of sticking the fastball down on both sides of the plate.”

Taylor Jordan will get the start for the Nationals on the road on Monday against St. Louis and Michael Wacha, while Dan Haren takes the mound as the Marlins visit the Mets. Rafael Montero is scheduled to throw for New York.