As the holiday weekend kicks off, people are already celebrating out on the water.

'It's only July 3rd and it's very busy! When we came down to the boat landing this morning, all the spaces were already filled and we got down here at 9:00 a.m," Vacationer Becca Gilbert said.

Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission officials say it's the busiest boating weekend of the year.

"The boat ramp at the State Park is probably the busiest because it's the closest to the pass. It's the shortest ride to the pass, so that's probably why it gets so busy in here," FWC Officer Nicole Basford said.

Locals said they tried to launch their boats in other areas like Carl Gray Park but couldn't, so they came to Saint Andrews State Park instead.

"Well, you can launch the boat number one and they used to launch boats over there [Carl Gray Park] but it's too shallow now," Panama City Beach Resident Betty Corley said. "It looks like the city has not taken care of it, I'm sorry to say, but you can't really put a boat in over there because there's not really a boat ramp anymore, it's too shallow."

With only two in and out points at Saint Andrews State Park, FWC Law Enforcement Officers say that the main issue already is boating traffic and it's just the start of the 4th of July weekend.

"Some people hold it up, some people just put their jet skis in and then go and park and leave the jet skis in the water. That holds up the boat ramp so people get aggravated, they just wanna get in," Basford said.

Boaters say with so many boats in one area at one time, big boats can cause the biggest headaches.They also say it could always be worse.

"Big as in 30-foot plus. So, because of that, then yes, it does feel like there are a lot more boats. However, I have been in places where it's been worse," Gilbert said. "I think we're still early on in the weekend and as the day goes on, traffic will get busier and busier."

FWC officials say they will all be on-call throughout the holiday weekend to make sure everyone is staying safe.