Mile after mile they stand — or move — between us and the pavement, absorbing tremendous force and impact. Yet often it’s not until runners suffer from blisters, pain, swelling or, worse yet, stress fractures that we start paying attention to our Herculean workhorses: our feet.

To keep our feet healthy, foot and ankle specialists say, we need to give them a little attention before they become a problem.

“Foot and ankle injuries are often a result of training errors: too much, too soon,” says Stephen Palmer, a podiatrist with Foot and Ankle Specialists of the Mid-Atlantic.

Too much, too soon can lead to conditions such as stress fractures, which can sideline you for up to two months; plantar fasciitis, the pain and inflammation of soft tissue that runs across the bottom of the foot; metatarsalgia, an inflammation in the ball of the foot; and Achilles’ tendinitis, an overuse injury of the Achilles’ tendon, Palmer says.

Lee Firestone, another podiatrist, agrees that runners, in trying to “get the miles in,” can overdo it.

“The ratio of the long run — the weekend run — should never be more than half of the total mileage for the week,” Firestone says. This means if your mileage goal for the week is 20, you should do no more than 10 on the weekend.

And in terms of upping the weekly distance and workload, that should be done over time, Firestone says: no more than a 10 percent increase in total distance per week.

“The bones get stronger when we walk and run, as do muscles and tendons,” Firestone says. “But we have to let them adapt gradually.”

Another important factor in keeping our running feet happy and healthy is to pick the right shoe, says Brian Neville, a physical therapist in Washington.

“I recommend that people go to specialty running shoe stores where the staff not only is knowledgeable about running shoes but many of them are runners themselves and can even field questions about injuries and injury prevention,” Neville says. “They have a runner’s mind-set.”

The minimalist running shoe has gotten very popular in recent years. And while foot and ankle specialists are not against them, they say that these shoes can take a while to get used to and that they are not for everyone.

“If you are going to switch from a shoe that allows for heel-striking to one that promotes running on the forefoot, you have to make an adjustment in your mileage,” Neville says. “You have to dial back during that transition.”

Neville says he saw many patients with foot and ankle injuries when the minimalist shoe trend started, but those visits have leveled off as people either have gotten used to the shoe and adjusted their technique or have gone back to a more supportive running shoe.

Finally, don’t overuse your running shoes. They are done somewhere between 300 and 500 miles, Firestone says. That means roughly three months if you run 30 to 50 miles per week, assuming you are using the shoes only for running. Otherwise, their life span is shorter.

Cross-training is another way to help keep feet healthy, the experts agree. The better your posture and the more muscle groups recruited in your running, the safer for your feet, Neville says. One weak link can create instability, leading to compensations from the feet up, and possibly to injury. Stretching should be part of that crosstraining, he says. Typically, runners have tight calves, hip flexors and hamstrings. These muscle groups should be stretched thoroughly after running, Neville says.

Breaks are also important, he says.

“When you’re overtired, your form tends to go, and that can lead to injuries,” Neville says.