Instead of staying in Prince George's County last night, Provi Ortiz, 54, traveled to Glen Burnie to hear remarks from a fellow Puerto Rican.

She had never attended the Anne Arundel Lincoln-Reagan Day before, but Luis Fortuño the former Republican governor of Puerto Rico was listed as the guest speaker and she said she didn't want to miss it.

"To make that ride all the way out here when you just got out of work, it is tough, but this is a good reason to come," said Ortiz, who lives in Bowie. "It's an honor to see him come here, take the time from whatever he's doing, to come all the way out to little Maryland. It's pretty neat."

Fortuño spoke about his experience with a devastated economy in Puerto Rico and gave advice to the over 200 Republican attendees on how to make comprehensive changes in the state.

"When you entice people to do that and excel and actually risk their own capital, great things can happen," Fortuño said at the annual fundraiser for the Anne Arundel County Republican party, which was held at Bleues on the Water in Glen Burnie this year.

Fortuño was elected in 2008, served one term and took an active role in Republican candidate Mitt Romney's 2012 presidential campaign. He is now a partner with the Washington law firm Steptoe & Johnson.

Some notable attendees included County Executive Steve Schuh, Councilman John Grasso, R-Glen Burnie, County Circuit Court Judge Cathy Vitale and House of Delegates Minority Leader Nic Kipke, R-Pasadena, among others.

Although there are more registered Democrats than Republicans in the county, Republicans outnumber Democrats in county executive and county council seats held, and Kipke said he wanted to celebrate the success the party has experienced.

"There are a lot of reasons to be excited about being a republican in Maryland," Kipke said. "We have a republican governor and elected republicans who are really interesting in reforming government here in our state."

Kipke said the party's primary goals are to reduce taxes and create jobs. Attendee Jaime Vasquez, 48 of College Park, also said these reforms are needed, but he also said the party needs to increase its outreach to the Hispanic community.

"Outreach to the minority communities in paramount in order to become a presence," Vasquez said. "The party itself is doing a great job in mobilizing Baltimore city itself but more can be done."

Ortiz said she speaks to Hispanics in church and throughout her community to educate others about the goals of the Republican party. This is the kind of grass roots efforts chairman of the Anne Arundel County Republican Central Committee Nathan Volke said helps people see "the right face of the Republican Party."

"We can not lose women voters anymore. We can not lose young voters anymore," Fortuño said. "We should not lose Asian Americans and Hispanic Americans any more."

And Fortuño said the party must make sure a Republican is sitting in the White House in 2017, as he expressed his dislike of current foreign and domestic policies such as the Iran nuclear negotiations and the Affordable Care Act.

"We all work hard and we deserve much better as a nation," Fortuño said. "We cannot allow anymore people in Washington, actual try to change our values or dictating what we ought to be doing in our homes, in our businesses, in our communities in our states."

Joe Cluster, Maryland Republican Party executive director said Fortuño is a unique speaker and could help bring a new perspective to the county's Republicans by sharing his personal experience as governor and his views on American politics.

"The party is more relevant than it's ever been in the state," Cluster said. "We need to make sure that every citizen of Maryland hears our message."