Published Jan. 5, 2014 at 11:08 a.m. Tweet

Kidd O'Shea, regular host of the 99.1 Morning Mix show, was on vacation recently and so I had the opportunity to sit in with the lovely Elizabeth Kay twice in one week.

Elizabeth came to WMYX in 2009 after a four-year stint on a morning show in Green Bay. Read more about her in this interview by OnMilwaukee.com publisher, Andy Tarnoff.

This was the fourth or fifth time I have been a guest on the show, and whenever it happens, Elizabeth and I have a great time chatting both on and off the air. This time, I made a point to ask her five pointed questions that OnMilwaukee.com readers might appreciate as well.

OnMilwaukee.com: We have a lot in common, and yet, you are about 100 times more of a sports enthusiast than I am. Particularly when it comes to football. (Sorry, guys.) But tell me, where is your favorite place to watch a Packers game and do you have any football traditions / rituals / etc.?

Elizabeth Kay: My favorite place is definitely at Lambeau Field. I've probably spent more money on Packer tickets than what I would've spent on five trips to Europe.

If I can't watch it at Lambeau, my couch is the best place. I can make my own food, regulate the temperature and not overpay for a beer.

I'm a little superstitious when it comes to my Packer gear that I wear. I have a pair of green and gold striped "game day bibs" that I just can't wear anymore. I wore them when the Packers lost the NFC Championship to the Giants and when Brett Favre returned to Lambeau Field as a Viking and the Vikings won. So those bibs are now collecting dust in my closet.

OMC: Have you ever binged watched a television series and if so, which one(s)?

EK: I'm binging as we speak on AMC's "Breaking Bad." I realize I'm late to the party, but after years of friends talking to me about that series, I finally took the time to get into it. I absolutely love the partnership between Walt and Jesse and I'm fascinated with the storyline and how far Walt will go to give his family financial security before he dies.

OMC: Burning question I've always wanted to ask you: do you shower before coming into work?

EK: If I have to do full hair and makeup for TV or an appearance, yes. If not, then I shower the night before. Sleep is valuable to me and I hate how long it takes me to dry my hair. I know, "girl" problems. Ha.

OMC: This is a big, abstract question, but what have you learned from being a radio personality?

EK: I've learned how to tell a story. That sounds really easy, but honestly, we have such time limits with how much we can talk, we have to get to the point in a few minutes, sometimes seconds and only tell the parts of the story that matter and move it along.

Think about those people you know who aren't good storytellers. You want to look at them and say, "OK, what's your point?!" And if that person doesn't get to the point, what happens? You tune out, which is what we don't want when it comes to a radio show. That's a challenge we face every day when we begin to dive into a story on air and I continue to work on it daily.

OMC: Do you have any New Year's resolutions?

EK: Yes. To swear less – I say that every year by the way so I might need to find a new way of achieving that goal – and to save money.