With no drop-off in coverage, and without any public complaint from those who are being covered, Community Consolidated Elementary District 21 says it's going to cut more than $600,000 out of its annual insurance costs.

At their last meeting, the School Board unanimously voted to end its full-insurance policy with Blue Cross Blue Shield and set up an independent operation for the medical, dental and mental-health needs of its employees and their families.

Becoming a self-insured district relieves it of the $626,000 Affordable Care Act fee it would owe the federal government every fiscal year, school officials said.

Mary Werling, District 21's assistant superintendent for finance, said their educators would maintain identical plans and benefits, but without the extra costs.

"It's seamless for them," Werling said. "We're very pleased."

In Werling's memo to the board before their vote, she wrote that she had sat down with union leaders to go over the changes with them.

In a traditional, fully-insured system, the district paid Blue Cross a flat rate, and Blue Cross assumed the risk of paying for major expenses as they arose. That risk now belongs to the district — up to a point, Werling said.

Werling said she is currently shopping through quotes for a second, stop-loss insurance policy, which will activate when expenses from a catastrophic claim become too much for the district to handle independently. She said the fail-safe policy will be contractually obligated to cover everything the employees' day-to-day policy handles.

Besides maintaining the funding to bankroll its employees' average amount of claims, Werling said the district will maintain a reserve fund of between 9 and 12 percent specifically for health insurance. But, with a stop-loss policy in place, she said there should be no possibility of a worst-case scenario breaking the district's bank.

During the meeting, board member Arlen Gould praised the move, especially because it maintains the district's coverage of mental health. On Monday, he said the most important change was simple: up-front savings.

"What this does is allow us to escape that fee," Gould said.

Werling's memo notes that Blue Cross remains the district's partner, serving only in the role of claims administrator.

rwachter@pioneerlocal.com

Twitter: @RonnieAtPioneer