Topics: cdC, Center for Disease Control, ebola, Scientific American, The Scientific American, WHO, World Health Organization, News

This article was originally published by Scientific American

More than 500 health care workers have contracted Ebola since the outbreak began in December 2013, and 269 have died, according to WHO statistics through the end of October. Some of the deaths resulted from faulty or nonexistent personal protective equipment (PPE)—gloves, masks and other barriers used to block Ebola transmission. Yet more recent cases in well-equipped U.S. hospitals and in Spain have uncovered a broader PPE-related problem: the guidelines for how to use the gear were insufficient.

Two workers who tended to Liberian patient Thomas Eric Duncan in a Dallas hospital before his death last month tested positive for Ebola despite their use of protective gear. Meanwhile, the Spanish nurse’s aide who tested positive after treating patients in Madrid is thought to have become infected with the Ebola virus after touching her face with a glove while removing her protective gear. She was released from the hospital on Wednesday after a month-long battle with the disease and was the first person known to have contracted the Ebola virus outside Africa.

In the past few weeks both the World Health Organization and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have updated their PPE guidelines. In addition to encouraging health care workers to better cover their mucous membranes and skin when treating Ebola patients, the CDC in particular is advising greater caution and a strict adherence to the buddy system when removing coveralls and gloves potentially exposed to the virus.

The WHO has for the first time developed and released, on October 31, formal guidelines for choosing facial protection, gloves and other PPE when caring for Ebola patients and others infected with viruses in the same family (filoviruses). The WHO’s foremost recommendation is that all health workers completely cover the mucous membranes of their eyes, mouth and nose to guard against contaminated droplets and fluids. More specifically, the agency strongly recommends the use of either a face shield or goggles as well as a fluid-resistant medical mask with a structured design that does not collapse against the mouth. Health care workers should also wear a fluid-resistant, particulate-filtering respirator during procedures that generate aerosols of body fluids.

In addition, the WHO advises wearing two nitrile gloves—as opposed to less reliable latex—on each hand when working with Ebola patients. The agency discourages the use of three or more gloves per hand because this can interfere with a health care worker’s manual dexterity. The new guidelines also reiterate the WHO’s earlier recommendations that gowns, aprons and other coverings be disposable and disposed of properly—which means they should be incinerated or sterilized. Reusable equipment such as boots should be disinfected with a chlorine solution.

The revised WHO guidelines are the direct result of efforts to combat and contain what has become by far the biggest outbreak of hemorrhagic fever ever, says Edward Kelley, director of WHO Service Delivery and Safety.