We are nagged to save more and to save younger. The wisdom of this is hard to dispute when you look at the sums (see the chart above and the details explained below). The reality is that most under-30s are struggling to pay their rent.

Others who can afford to save are put off by the perceived complexity: “What do I invest in? How do I invest in it?” I, for one, would like to hand my 21-year-old self a savings plan. The relevance extends to any first-time investor. Even if you’re a novice at 31 or 41, this is what I would suggest... (and please post your own savings plans in reader comments)

There is a bewildering array of funds to invest in – most of them managed by average and overpaid mangers, will fall behind the market. To avoid this disappointment, you can buy a “tracker” fund, which aims to replicate an index such as the FTSE 100.

Your best bet is to go for a global tracker, so you can get some benefit from other parts of the world if Britain’s fortunes falter. One of the cheapest options is Fidelity’s Index World fund , which charges 0.3pc a year, or £30 on a £10,000 Isa fund.

The Vanguard LifeStrategy100pc Equity fund is slightly cheaper at £24 a year but also charges a one-off 0.1pc, or £10 for every £10,000 of money you put in. These are essentially ready-built, faff-free portfolios. There are lots of other weird and wonderful funds you can dabble in once you have some core money in trackers, and in later life you may want to pick your own shares. For now, trackers keep it simple.

ISA Investing made simple from Telegraph Investor >>

2. Pick the cheapest Isa seller

When I was 21 there were plenty of stockbrokers but few options for holding your different investments in one place. Today the range of “investment shops” is huge. Here, you can open an account and each year use your £15,000 Isa allowance, buying shares or funds, be it in lump sums or “drip feeding” at say £100 a month.

This is where you buy that tracker fund. You already face a 0.2pc to 0.3pc charge taken out of the fund so you want to pay as little as possible to the middleman.

In terms of these costs, Isa shops broadly fall into two groups – those that charge a percentage fee (good if you have smaller amounts) and those that charge a flat fee (good for larger sums).

A wise strategy for the novice investor is to start with an Isa shop with a low percentage fee, ideally less than 0.3pc. These include Charles Stanley Direct or Cavendish Online (both 0.25pc). Then, once your savings have reached a reasonable size – around £30,000 – move them to a rival that charges a low flat fee such as Alliance Trust Savings (£75 a year) or Interactive Investor (£80 a year).

An option if you don’t want to move is to consider Trustnet Direct at the start; it charges 0.25pc but with a £200 cap. Or the no-frills iWeb service charges £25 to set up an account and £5 to buy and sell funds but no other fees.

3. Maximise a company pension

Your employer should offer some sort of “matching”. You want to take full advantage, even before getting an Isa. Commonly, you put in 5pc, your company puts in 5pc as its default rate. But if you raise your amount to 6pc, they might put in 6pc. It’s money for nothing. Call your HR department and ask them to explain how you can get the company to make the maximum contribution at the least cost to you. When you move jobs, move your money to your own private pension . . .

4. Get a Sipp

Self-invested personal pensions are offered by most of the investment shops and attract similar tax breaks to company pensions. Once you’ve optimised your works pension and are paying a bit into Isas, think about a Sipp to mop up those old pensions. It doesn’t mean lots of complicated decisions if you just follow all of the above advice – start with a simple, low-cost fund and worry about the fancy stuff later down the line.

Why you urgently need a savings plan

Earnings will peak when you’re 35

The age at which pay peaks is getting earlier – and this has huge implications for the way you save. Three charts published here, using data from the Office for National Statistics, suggest a shift is under way.

Rather than looking at overall earnings, this data drills into the situation of people at a particular age. It follows those who were 21 in 1975, 1985 and 1995 and charts what they went on to earn throughout their careers, also factoring in inflation.

The conclusion? The peak earning age has moved from 53 (for those born in 1958) to 46 (for those born in 1968).

For those born in 1978, the Thatcher generation, the pattern is obviously yet to be concluded but the figures open the possibility that the peak may already have occurred – possibly at age 35.

The crunch of the last few years, when overall wages have grown at a slower pace than inflation, may have effectively robbed that generation, the tail-end of “Generation X”, of their peak earnings.

Possibly they’ll have a second wind and challenge that 35-year-old peak – of £14.50 an hour or £29,500 annually – if the economy and wages improve in the coming years.

One bright spot for this wave of workers is that overall they have had higher salaries than those born in the Fifties or the Sixties, measuring in today’s money.

As ever with statistics, these conclusions are not foolproof (there are many ways to carve up the numbers), but the suggested trend may resonate with many in the workplace, especially in London’s booming jobs market, where employees in dynamic industries often fear they must make hay while their skills remain relevant and in demand.

How to alter your saving plans

If you are aged less than 30 today and wondering if your salary will rise much further, you’d be wise to alter your savings plan. What savings plan, today’s twentysomethings may cry.

Putting aside the numerous financial challenges faced by younger Britons – the comparable battle to buy property, as the data (above) shows – it’s crucial that plans are made for long-term savings given that state pension could be woefully inadequate for today’s younger generation.

And despite efforts to increase the take-up of pensions through auto-enrolment, through which workers are all put into a pension plan and must ask to opt out, a gulf between what needs to be saved and what has been saved already exists.

Even in the auto-enrolment scheme the contributions are pitifully low.

The bottom line is that you must act yourself. “The Government is not going to help you do this, or your company,” said John Blowers, head of Trustnet Direct, the investment shop. “You have to do it yourself and you have to start as young as possible.”

A flatlining in wages earlier in life matters much to your retirement plans, especially when you consider that pension statements that project your retirement income assume that your wages will keep rising.

Even over a modest period, this effect can have noticeable consequences for your pension. If you save £100 a month for 20 years, with 6pc investment growth factored in, you would end up with £46,791.

But factor in modest rises of 3pc in the contributions, because your salary increases each year, and the figure grows to £59,403.

That’s a very noticeable £12,600 difference. But the bigger point is that saving early has the most dramatic effect on your final pot.

£207,000 bonus for saving early on

Save £100 a month from 40 to 65 and you will end up with £69,300, with the assumption of the same 6pc annual growth after charges.

But start at age 30 and you would accumulate £142,500. Start at 21 and the figure is £276,000. The effects of compound interest, where gains are added to last year’s gains, miraculously grow your money faster than seems imaginable.

Finding that money as a twentysomething may not feel achievable, but there are ways and means. To the right we set out an exact action plan. You should also sign up for our weekly newsletter for more investment ideas, but also for tips on how to spend less. Visit telegraph.co.uk/newsletter and enter your email details.

There is good news in that the Government, with its pensions and Isa overhaul, is finally showing a willingness to tackle the crisis.

The Savings & Investments Policy Project (TSIP), a group of 50 financial companies that aims to persuade policymakers to make it more appealing to save, has identified those in their mid-30s as being at risk of seeing falling retirement incomes.

“We think 2035 will be the tipping point in society where a generation retires less well off than their parents – a phenomenon not seen for 100 years,” said Tony Stenning, a senior executive at the fund manager BlackRock who also chairs TSIP.

“Not only are this group failing to save as much as earlier generations, they can expect to get less support with retirement income from their employer and the Government,” he added. “Furthermore, while longevity may seem like a good thing, for this group it compounds the lack of savings, resulting in living much longer on lower incomes.

“This group also needs to take into consideration that reaching salary ceilings earlier means their savings need to be drip-fed in at an earlier age across their lifetimes rather than simply a big boost at the end.”

The group’s research suggests that those aged 35-44 would ideally like, on average, £38,640 a year in retirement. Achieving that would require a savings pot of around £760,000.

What savings advice would you give yourself? Email andrew.oxlade@telegraph.co.uk or comment on this story.

– Find us on Facebook and Twitter