“Care today is better than what it was in August of 2005, there’s absolutely no question,” said Calvin Johnson, a retired criminal court judge who was involved in the suit to reopen Charity. “People would go to the Charity E.R. and literally stay there for days waiting to see a doctor. So when we talk about how much we miss Charity Hospital, we sometimes forget what the reality of that was.”

Unlike Charity, where many a New Orleanian was born, University Medical Center will not deliver babies — another hospital run by its private operator, Touro Infirmary, offers that service. And it will have far fewer beds for psychiatric patients than Charity, which had nearly 100 inpatient beds plus a 40-bed crisis intervention unit. The new hospital will have 60 psychiatric inpatient beds but will use only 38 to start, transferring patients from a facility that had been housing them since the storm.

“I think it’s grossly inadequate,” said Janet Hays, a community activist whose group, Healing Minds NOLA, has put in a bid to repurpose the old Charity building as a mental health care and research center. “You see people in psychosis on the streets of New Orleans all the time, especially since Charity was closed, and the jails have become the repository.”

Photo

Other proposals for the landmark Huey Long-era building include apartments and retail space. The state and L.S.U. insisted that the building was unusable and unsafe after the storm, even after doctors, nurses and military personnel cleaned it and pumped out the floodwater.

Charity was part of Louisiana’s unique system of state-run public hospitals for the poor and uninsured, many of whom relied exclusively on its emergency department for health care. In 2005, more than 60 percent of the patients at Charity and a much smaller sister hospital were uninsured. This year at Interim L.S.U. Hospital, the temporary replacement for Charity, the number of uninsured has been 37 percent and the number on Medicaid has risen to 36 percent, partly because the private operator has carefully screened patients for eligibility.

Mr. Jindal, a Republican running for president, has refused to expand Medicaid to cover more low-income adults under the Affordable Care Act.

Under its contract with the state, LCMC Health, the private nonprofit operator of University Medical Center, is obligated to provide free or reduced-cost care to all indigent and uninsured patients, “subject to the receipt of the required funding.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Some question whether University Medical Center will be sufficiently focused on that requirement while it is trying to build what its leaders call destination programs to draw more privately insured patients. Even more, they question whether the hospital — whose chief executive, Cindy Nuesslein, resigned last week to take a new job — can succeed in drawing in more affluent patients.

“Obviously they’re going to try to rebrand it, but many people will still look upon it as the charity hospital and I’m sure its competitors will remind people of that,” said John Kennedy, the state treasurer, a Republican. “We’ve got to make it work. We don’t have a choice. Is it going to be easy? No.”

Photo

But Dr. Peter DeBlieux, the hospital’s interim chief medical officer, said diversifying the patient mix was crucial to being able to carry on the mission of caring for the indigent. With the Affordable Care Act soon to decrease federal funding for uncompensated care, he said, finding new sources of revenue is imperative.

“The core of this hospital will remain the same,” said Dr. DeBlieux, who was among those protesting Charity’s closing. “But to do it fiscally responsibly, then what you should add to that is destination services. We’ll be able to compete, and everybody wins.”

Charity traced its origins to a grant from a French sailor and shipbuilder, Jean Louis, who died in New Orleans in 1735 and left money in his will to finance a hospital for the indigent of the city, then a colony. Charity opened a year later and carried on that mission in a number of different buildings, the last one of which opened in 1939. The new hospital was built with about $642 million in federal emergency management funds, $279 million from the state and $143 million from LCMC. Greg Feirn, LCMC’s president and chief executive, said he expected to fill about 250 of the new hospital’s 446 beds at first, and to gradually increase the patient population as it develops new lines of specialty care.

Officials at LCMC say it will cost $525 million a year to run the new hospital — up from $430 million for Interim L.S.U. — and with no Medicaid expansion here and a precarious state budget, funding will be an annual concern, Mr. Feirn said. The state faced a significant budget shortfall this year, and it initially provided $113 million less than LCMC said it needed to open the new hospital.

The money came through in the final budget passed by the Legislature in June, but problems remain elsewhere in the system, including a bitter contract dispute between L.S.U. and the private operator running two state hospitals in northern Louisiana. A bigger problem, Mr. Kennedy said, is that the agreements between the private operators and the state rely too heavily on the federal uncompensated care funds that will soon be cut.

“I’m very worried about the costs,” he said.

Mr. Kennedy and others here still regret that Charity’s huge Art Deco building was not quickly reopened after its basement flooded in the days after the hurricane to at least temporarily serve traumatized residents. Dr. DeBlieux said it was “despicable” that people had to seek care in tents long after the storm. But with the new hospital, he said, “we have an opportunity now to do it infinitely better” than at Charity.

“Is this worth the price our patients had to pay?” he said. “That’s far too complex a question for me to answer.”