Thanks to her state’s special gift for making headlines of the Can you believe what they did this time? variety, Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer has been in and out of the national spotlight since she assumed office in 2009—most recently just last week when she vetoed a bill that would have allowed business owners to refuse to serve gays on religious grounds. “I have not heard one example in Arizona where a business owner’s religious liberty has been violated,” she said in a blunt statement dismissing the bill. On gay rights, guns and illegal immigration, Brewer’s decisions have made national news.

Yet in a way, the most emblematic moment of her career remains one in which she said nothing at all. On Sept. 1, 2010, shortly into her opening statement at a gubernatorial debate, Brewer went blank. She lost her train of thought and froze. For 10 seconds, which is a very long time on live television, Brewer stared silently at her desk before laughing awkwardly. She then let another painful second or two pass before finally managing this sentence: “We have did what was right for Arizona.”

Story Continued Below

For the rest of the country, it was yet another chance to poke fun at a state that, politically, seems to offer a Grand Canyon-sized opportunity for ridicule. (Another recent opportunity came with the news that aging action star Steven Seagal might run for governor, though everyone here knew better than to take it seriously.) Within Arizona, her debate performance was greeted with a mixture of mortification and sympathy–most of us can imagine stage fright. It didn’t hurt her at all in the election, which she won easily. Yet the moment lingers, not just because it was excruciating, but because it captures the odd nature of Brewer’s political identity.

Despite being in the news as much as any governor short of Chris Christie, she remains a strangely blank slate, a tabula rasa on which Arizonans and other Americans have drawn a set of contradictory caricatures. Who is Jan Brewer? Is she the Tea Party heroine, the sun-bleached Sarah Palin of the Desert who signed SB 1070, the “show your papers” anti-illegal immigrant bill, and waved her finger in President Obama’s face on an airport tarmac? Is she the traitor to conservative causes who accepted Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion and battled her Republican legislature to get it implemented? Is she the seemingly overwhelmed, unelected governor of her first term who struggled to articulate basic positions? Or is she the woman who strode to the podium last week and not only slapped down a veto of a bill dear to the religious right, but did it with a brief, blunt statement the New Yorker’s Hendrick Hertzberg called “a damn good speech”? On that, no one can seem to agree.

***

In our polarized political times, no one seems to bedevil the electorate quite like someone who refuses to hew to a clear ideological line. The confusion Brewer produces is best captured by a headline on the liberal political site Wonkette that sardonically referred to last week’s veto as “Brewer being uncrazy again.”

Until that veto, her identity nationally was closely tied to her support of SB 1070 and her confrontation with Obama on the tarmac. But in Arizona, the glow from those moments had long since faded for many Republicans. “With Governor Brewer, the finger in the face of Obama scored a huge perception that here was a legitimate conservative,” says Chris Rossiter, president of the Greater Phoenix Tea Party Patriots. “That image is very powerful. The further you get out of Arizona, the more, if you ask people in the Tea party if she’s a conservative, they will still say yes. But as you get local, they will say, no … Honestly, no.”

That might seem hard to square with much of Brewer’s record, particularly her passionate defense of SB 1070, which included inflammatory and inaccurate claims about Arizonans finding “beheaded” bodies in the desert. She even signed a bill granting the Tea Party’s favorite “Don’t Tread on Me” Gadsden Purchase flag the same protections as the Stars and Stripes in Arizona.

But Brewer disappointed some conservatives in 2011 when she vetoed a bill to allow guns on college campuses. Another veto that same year, of legislation that would have required presidential candidates to submit their birth certificates to get on the ballot, let down the “birther” crowd. And her decision to accept the Medicare expansion, which she announced without warning in her 2013 State of the State Address, truly infuriated much of her party. For some conservatives, that was the last straw.

Not only did she support expansion; she informed the legislature she would veto every bill that came her way until they passed her Medicaid plan and a state budget. When they ignored her orders, Brewer vetoed five bills in a single day. Enough Republican lawmakers eventually joined with Democrats to give Brewer a hard-fought victory. She defended her decision as both a moral and practical choice; her office pointed out that the expansion extended Medicaid to 300,000 low-income Arizonans at no cost to the state.

Nonetheless, many Republicans saw it as a betrayal. Right-wing bloggers began referring to “Obrewercare.” Frank Antenori, a former state Senate Republican whip, described Brewer contemptuously as “George Bush in a dress.” But it was A.J. LaFargo, the Republican head of Maricopa County, which includes Phoenix, who seemed most enraged. “I hate to say this. Jesus had Judas, Republicans have Governor Brewer,” LaFaro said.

***