Video

Bobby Moreno studied birds once he was cast as Odysseus Rex, the title bird of Eric Dufault’s dark cockfighting comedy “Year of the Rooster.” He researched how they walk (sharp and jerky), look (his hair becomes a punk cockscomb in the show) and kiss (more on that later). But he also got into their heads.

“Roosters have only two goals in life,” Mr. Moreno said. “They want to kill every other rooster” and mate with every hen.

A rooster with issues is the latest physically demanding stage role for Mr. Moreno, a lanky 30-year-old with a playful grin and mischievous brown eyes that reflect his Panamanian and Irish lineage. An Army brat who grew up in New York and Texas, Mr. Moreno has gained acclaim for an array of boldly oddball roles. He played a troubled military veteran in Ethan Lipton’s “Luther” and a teenage miscreant in Robert Askins’s “Hand to God.” He got naked and took a bath in Jen Silverman’s “Phoebe in Winter.” He was part of a terrifying coup de théâtre in Jonas Hassen Khemiri’s “Invasion!” that nearly caused violent reactions from theatergoers who were unaware that he was part of the show.

Starting Jan. 9, Mr. Moreno brings his rooster back to Ensemble Studio Theater, which is remounting its production of “Year of the Rooster” after a well-received run last fall. In his review for The New York Times, Neil Genzlinger called the play “astonishingly entertaining,” and Mr. Moreno “utterly convincing.” The actor recently spoke with Erik Piepenburg about cockfighting and cultural identity. Following are excerpts from their conversation.

Photo

Q. Have you ever been to a cockfight?

A. [Laughs.] No. But I know people like that. I’ve got family members that are pretty country.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

What kind of research did you do to play a rooster?

I watched a lot of bird documentaries. David Attenborough has this series called “The Life of Birds.” Birds’ eyes focus in a very funny way. My performance is based on their movements that are jittery. But I don’t want it to be too much. I’m probably onstage for 25 minutes. The trick is what quick stories can I tell. There’s a kiss in the show that’s now a bird kiss because of something I saw in a documentary.

What’s a bird kiss?

We lean in like we’re about to kiss, me and another bird, and at the last moment we kind of peck at each other.

You seem to be attracted to physically harrowing roles. Odysseus Rex is an aggressive chicken.

Another part of my research was watching all the great angry performances: Ben Kingsley in “Sexy Beast,” “Raging Bull,” Ed Norton in “American History X.” A lot of what I learned is about the power that comes from stillness. Once you make a move, that’s it. People know what you’re going to do. Until that moment, while that tension is building, that’s when you really get people leaning on their seats. Birds have that too. They’ll just stare off at something.

Does your look affect your roles?

My college professor was like, you know, you’re going to get cast in a lot of Latino roles. I was like, you’re crazy. But as soon as I got up here, I did. It’s opened up a whole new community for me, which is great. But there’s an issue with that in the New York theater, of how they deal with people that don’t look a certain way. With me, it’s my name more than anything else. They see the head shot and the name, and it automatically puts me in a box. I thought about changing my name when I first moved up, to Bobby Monroe, which is an anagram of Moreno. But then I was like, nah, this is my name.