Topics: anti-science, anti-vaxxers, California, measles, vaccines, Sustainability News, Life News, News

California’s considering a bill that would remove its “personal belief” exemption for parents who just don’t want to vaccinate their kids, instead making school vaccinations mandatory unless students have a legitimate medical excuse. The legislation is a direct response to the measles outbreak that began at Disneyland earlier this year and has since infected some 150 people.

Opponents of the new measure, on the other hand, are all over the place.

The Guardian reports on anti-vaxxers’ attacks on California state legislators: they’ve “bombarded them with emails and phone calls, heckled them at public meetings, harassed their staff, organized noisy marches and vilified them on social media,” demonstrating the power of a small, but vehemently vocal minority, to control the terms of the debate. It was similar activism, reporter Andrew Gumbel points out, that ultimately defeated efforts to eliminate personal belief exemptions in three other states.

Comments made within and outside a health committee meeting in Sacramento Wednesday illustrate the alarmism that’s taken hold of vaccine opponents. One activist told the committee she believed vaccines were responsible for her child’s death, and argued that if the exemption is removed, “innocent children will be killed.” A protestor outside the meeting told NPR she fears the effect vaccines may have on her child: “I am afraid that her big beautiful blue eyes will not focus on me anymore,” she said, “and she won’t be the kid that she is.”

The most extreme statement, though, may have come from Robert F. Kennedy Jr., who at a Tuesday night film screening compared vaccinations to the Holocaust. “They get the shot, that night they have a fever of a hundred and three, they go to sleep, and three months later their brain is gone,” he told a captive audience.

An immediate frustration with the protestors is how far their accusations diverge from the science, which has found no evidence that vaccines cause autism or are otherwise unsafe.

“The danger I feel as a policymaker is that when assertions are made in public comment that aren’t fact-based, that’s irresponsible,” state senator Holly Mitchell told the Guardian.