For more information on Red Hawk Elementary's movement program and a free teacher toolkit, go to http://rhes.stvrain.k12.co.us/movement.html" .

Boulder Valley teachers enthusiastically pretended to jump rope, juggled scarves, hopped and skipped, and played an active version of rock, paper scissors — all with a goal of learning quick ways to get their students moving.

About 95 teachers from eight Boulder Valley schools this week attended training sessions on classroom movement.

Emerald Elementary teacher Stefanie Stoddard, at front, participates with other teachers in an exercise during a Boulder Valley School District training session on Tuesday, Oct. 28, in Boulder. The training was hosted by Spark, a research-based public health organization. For more photos and a video, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera)

"Kids need to move," said Diana Sorbo, a music teacher at Broomfield's Emerald Elementary. "It gets their focus back."

The sessions were paid for through a $100,000 Thriving Schools grant from Kaiser Permanente and led by Spark, a research-based public health organization that has developed programs to promote lifelong wellness.

Boulder Valley Fine Arts Director Roy Holloway, who wrote the Kaiser Permanente grant, said each of the eight participating schools appointed a school movement coordinator. The coordinators plan to meet four times a year to share ideas.

"Over time, I hope we can build a bank of tips and strategies we can use all over the district," he said. "I'm just so excited about this."

In nearby Adams 12 school district, a new health and wellness team was created just last year, with the goal of getting kids to be active physically and mentally.

Adams 12 received a $200,000 grant from Kaiser Permanente to put physical education programs in Broomfield schools, such as Coyote Ridge and Centennial elementary schools.

"We want students to be moving for more minutes, and moving more vigorously to bring up their heart rate," said Karina Delaney, a coordinated school health manager with the district.

In September, Adams 12 also received $170,000 in grant funding from RMC Health, an organization that helps coach and train teachers and staff so they can help improve the mental, physical, social, and emotional health of children in the district, she said.

That grant, which is being applied at Meridian Elementary and Legacy High schools in Broomfield, helps teachers come up with physical and mental activities to help students be more productive, as well as physically and mentally stimulated.

For example, classrooms can use "brain break" software that leads students in physical and mental exercises as a break from sitting at their desk throughout class, she said.

"We just started these programs, so we're interested to see the outcomes in the coming years," she said.

In nearby St. Vrain Valley School District, a $1.4 million physical activity grant from the Colorado Health Foundation is covering professional development and supplies for classroom movement; recess equipment. such as balls, hula hoops and flying discs; and supervisor stipends, entry fees for low-income students and incentives for school running clubs.

This fall, half of the district's elementary and K-8 schools added classroom movement programs and 100 Mile running clubs, while the other half will add programs next school year. The clubs encourage students to walk or run 100 miles during the school year.

The district's classroom movement initiative started at Red Hawk Elementary School in Erie, which has scheduled student movement sessions each morning since the school opened in August 2011.

Red Hawk Principal Cyrus Weinberger said the benefits of integrating movement in the school day — higher academic performance, better retention of information and focus, and fewer behavior issues — is backed by about 20 years of research.

"You get a lot more out of your students when you introduce physical activity breaks throughout the day rather than just expecting them to sit still," he said. "Classroom movement programs are really starting to catch on, not just in St. Vrain, but all over the country."

In Boulder Valley, Holloway said, many elementary school already include some movement, from walking clubs to movement Fridays. The goal of the grant is to encourage more and give teachers new tools, he said.

Along with training, the grant covers classroom equipment such as scarves and bean bags and online access to materials.

Spark trainer Joan Gilliam recommends teachers target getting kids moving for at least 30 minutes during the school day using a five-minute movement break, a 10-minute academic physical activity, such as telling a story using movement, and a 15-minute active recess.

Teachers at Lafayette's Ryan Elementary said they signed up for the movement training to expand on what they're already doing, including dance breaks and giving students Popsicle sticks with different exercises written on them, like jumping jacks or lunges.

"Movement helps the kids be better learners," said Ryan first-grade teacher Melia Syed. "They're more focused after a movement break."

Enterprise staff writer Megan Quinn contributed to this report.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa