COLUMBIA - House Speaker Bobby Harrell plans to resign from the Legislature Thursday and plead guilty to charges related to ethics and misconduct allegations, sources close to the investigation told The Post and Courier.

It was not immediately clear whether Harrell would plead guilty to all or some of the nine misdemeanor charges he faces, or what specific agreement he has worked out with 1st Circuit Solicitor David Pascoe.

Last month, Harrell was indicted over allegations the Charleston Republican used his campaign account for personal gain.

Pascoe's office said he would provide no further information about Thursday's hearing. Bart Daniel, Harrell's attorney, could not immediately be reached for comment.

The move could spell turmoil for Republicans days before November's election, as well as mark a troubled end to Harrell's decades-long career. Harrell was first elected in 1993 and gained the speaker's position - perhaps the most powerful in South Carolina's government - in 2005.

For several days, Harrell's campaign has been slow to confirm any appearances in Harrell's House District 114 race in West Ashley.

Harrell was released on bond in late September after facing allegations that he doctored flight records, reimbursed himself for flights that he didn't take and unlawfully paid himself tens of thousands of dollars from his campaign account. The speaker is a licensed pilot and often flew between Charleston and Columbia.

Pascoe was handed the case after months of contentious legal wrangling with S.C. Attorney General Alan Wilson, a dispute that climbed as high as the state's Supreme Court. However, after the Supreme Court's ruling paved the way for Wilson to take on the case, the attorney general handed it off to Pascoe without explanation.

Harrell's conduct has been the subject of scrutiny for more than a year. Initial questions about Harrell's campaign account were raised by a 2012 Post and Courier report and then by the South Carolina Policy Council in a February 2013 complaint, who long pushed for Attorney General Wilson to take the case.

Harrell has long maintained his innocence and has said Wilson was pursuing the charges for political reasons.

He softened his stance somewhat after the indictments, saying, "I have said all along that I have never intentionally violated any law, and I still strongly believe that statement to be accurate....In no way have I ever benefited personally or financially from travel reimbursements from my campaign account. In fact, I have regularly used the privately raised funds from my campaign account to pay for official state travel instead of passing that cost along to taxpayers.

"If over the course of four years, I mistakenly wrote down the wrong date on a handful of items, that is something that can easily be addressed."

The resolution of Harrell's case may be just the beginning for the Legislature, as state and federal authorities are investigating members for allegations of similar misdeeds, sources have told the Post and Courier. It is unclear where the investigations stand.

As of Thursday, Election Day is just 12 days away.

John Crangle, an attorney and director of the advocacy group S.C. Common Cause, said that South Carolina's precedent is to force the resignation of those accused of crimes similar to Harrell. He said former Lt. Gov. Ken Ard, who pleaded guilty to campaign finance misdeeds, had to resign his post as part of a plea deal and he expects similar terms for Harrell.

He said prosecutors likely realize that critics would disparage any deal that doesn't force Harrell from office.

"Politically, (prosecutors) can't agree to anything less than a resignation," Crangle said.

Schuyler Kropf contributed to this report. Reach Jeremy Borden at 708-5837.