Skydivers are seen making their approach to the landing area on Friday at Vance Brand Municipal Airport. Go to timescall.com for more photos. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

Coming Monday A controversy around airport noise complaints boiled over when it came out via discovery for a lawsuit against Mile Hi Skydiving that the airport advisory board chairman has been running complaints through statistical analysis that singles out frequent complainers as "invalid." The city has denounced the analysis.

While researching questions last week related to the noise complaints about planes flying out of Longmont's Vance Brand Municipal Airport, city staff discovered a lack of something.

Council Member Jeff Moore asked Assistant City Manager and Interim Airport Manager Shawn Lewis for the backlogs of annual airport reports as he sought to research the manner in which airport staff presented a noise complaint log. The fifth of seven board duties is "To present to city council an annual report concerning the status of the airport," according to the city ordinance that outlines the powers and responsibilities of the seven-member volunteer board.

But Lewis said when he went looking for the reports, he came up largely empty-handed.

"The city council hasn't seen an annual report since 2008, which is concerning," said Lewis.

Lewis has served as the interim airport manager since Tim Barth, who held the position for almost 19 years, left for an aviation director job in Cheyenne Wyoming in January. Barth's replacement, David Slayter, is set to start in March.

Lewis went on to say that it appears the advisory board has been faithfully reviewing and approving annual reports but that Barth failed to forward those approved reports on to the city council or to city staff.

Barth could not be reached for comment on this story.

A twin engine plane operated by Mile-Hi Skydiving takes off Friday at Vance Brand Municipal Airport. (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer)

Council Member Gabe Santos, who serves as the council liaison for the advisory board since the end of 2013, said when he began serving on the board was "no indication that those annual reports were supposed to come through to the city council."

Santos theorized that the requirement to forward the annual reports might have gotten lost in the shuffle of presentations to the council in the years leading up to the adoption of the Airport Master Plan in 2010.

"I know that took Tim a lot of time, but I don't know if he just spaced it or what," said Santos, who has served on the city council since 2008. "It's the responsibility of the airport manager to inform the Airport Advisory Board and the board members themselves of what their responsibilities are. I don't want to bad-mouth Tim or anything like that, but that wouldn't excuse not sending a report to council."

Board Chairman Don Dolce said he remembers presenting a summary of airport activities, including noise complaints, to the council with Barth on several occasions.

"I'm sure it's attached to the minutes of the city council meeting," Dolce said. "They were typically done in January or maybe February. ... It would be in their packet, and then Tim Barth would present it. I recall being there a number of times to present the noise part of that."

A search through the city's online archive of city council minutes and documents doesn't reveal any annual airport or summary presented to council in recent years beyond the Master Plan updates or the airport business plan being attached and discussed every five or 10 years.

Santos said he has been assured by city staff that the annual report will be coming to council this year, albeit late.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci