Brentwood business owner Steve Gawrys is a Republican contender for the District 61 state House seat. He says he's a fiscal and constitutional conservative. (Photo: Submitted)

Brentwood business owner Steve Gawrys will once again challenge longtime incumbent Rep. Charles Sargent for the District 61 state House seat.

Gawrys narrowly lost to Sargent in the 2014 election. The constitutional conservative says he's running a grass-roots campaign, going door to door to share what he says is a disconnect between Sargent's platform and his voting record.

With the recent dropout of a Democratic contender, this year's ballot for the state House seat could be another Republican faceoff between Gawrys and Sargent. Sargent heads the state House Finance, Ways and Means Committee.

Gawrys, 48, is a partner in several Sonic restaurants in the county. He says he bases everything he does in life on his Christian faith and belief in the Constitution.

"As a lawmaker, I'd look to the Constitution. I believe the men who created the Constitution were inspired by God. Our country was established based on Judeo-Christian values," he said. "I don't believe we should, for any reason, forfeit our God given rights."

Gawrys often refers to the Bill of Rights when asked about his position on issues. When asked about gun control, for example, Gawrys referred to the Second Amendment.

"I believe in the Second Amendment. Period," he said. "All this discussion about safe zones, my response to you is, I believe in the Second Amendment 100 percent of the time. Not 80 percent, not in only certain circumstances, not some of the time, all the time," he said.

"The Bill of Rights to me is sacred. I don't ever want to make exceptions or special circumstances or anything," he said.

Gawrys said he opposes big government, illegal immigration and raising taxes. He said he's for the repeal of the Hall Income Tax.

At the local level, Gawrys said he's concerned about traffic.

"We have a serious, serious traffic issue that's building. And we need somebody at the state level who will represent us and address these difficult issues so we can protect our way of life here in the Brentwood, Franklin area," Gawrys said.

Gawrys said Sargent's campaign does not match his voting record.

"In every case he presents himself as a conservative, but he governs as a Democrat," he said. "I think voters want a representative who votes the same way he campaigns."

Sargent disagreed with Gawrys' statement.

"I vote the way my constituents want me to vote. I'm in contact with my constituents and elected officials all the time. They know my voting record," Sargent said.

In this year's legislative session, Gawrys criticized Sargent's vote for a resolution that honored Casa Azafrán Community Center founder and community activist Renata Soto.

State lawmakers pass dozens of similar resolutions each year. But like some lawmakers, Gawrys was critical of the resolution because of Soto's position as chairwoman of the National Council of La Raza.

Gawrys said in a news release the organization was a "radical voice of immigrants already in the U.S. illegally."

Citing a Breitbart article in which Gawrys is quoted, Gawrys also said Sargent has delayed a resolution that opposes the federal government's refugee settlement plan by sending the resolution to a finance subcommittee because of an attached fiscal note.

"If a bill has a fiscal note it goes to the finance committee. It doesn't matter what it is," Sargent said. "I am not holding the bill up at all. I don't make up the fiscal notes."

Sargent said he supports the refugee resolution.

Gawrys also said Sargent has supported national health care and in-state tuition for undocumented students, which Sargent also disputes.

"When Obama came out with the Affordable Health Care Act, we did not know if it'd be mandatory for every state or how it was going to work," Sargent said. "I filed a bill saying that if the federal government mandated it, we'd be able to have state rights. When the federal government did not mandate it, I pulled the bill."

Records show Sargent voted against the tuition bill on a final vote on the House floor.

Gawrys has lived in Brentwood since 1990. He's involved in Boy Scouts of America, a church youth program and lacrosse. He has four children and a wife who is a Brentwood native.

Gawrys first became involved in politics in 2012 when he was concerned about the impact of the Affordable Care Act on businesses.

"I started going to Legislative Plaza and volunteering as an advocate for limited government, 10th Amendment issues, Tennessee state sovereignty. I met a bunch of people, good people," he said.

Gawrys said he'll meet as many residents as possible this summer. He said he's already knocked on 2,300 doors, and aims to hit at least 5,000 doors.

College student Steven Culbertson had plans to run as a Democrat for the state House seat, but recently announced plans to drop out.

Gawrys said he'd like to debate Sargent this summer.

Reach Melanie Balakit at 615-926-1638 and on Twitter @MelanieBalakit.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1MHRwJa