Congress: House Republican leaders on Wednesday will decide who will chair the powerful Ways and Means Committee — the perch vacated by Paul Ryan when he became Speaker. We have our preference.

Ways and Means is vested with awesome legislative authority over the $3.5 trillion tax system, our multi-trillion-dollar trade laws, the 14% of our economy devoted to health care and the millions of Americans on welfare.

If Republicans intend to modernize the tax code, revamp welfare and repeal or at least fix ObamaCare, they better get the right man for this job. Under the Constitution, all tax bills must start in the House, and Ways and Means is where the major changes in the code are first written.

Two men are vying to take over the chairmanship: Pat Tiberi, a seven-term congressman representing Columbus, Ohio, and Kevin Brady, an eight-termer from north of Houston. Both are qualified.

Brady’s next in line in seniority, but that isn’t the reason he’s the right pick here. He is first and foremost a warrior for tax reform and tells us he wants to bring the corporate rate “well below 25%.”

“American companies can’t compete on a global scale with rates so high,” he adds.

His first choice, Brady says, would be to convert America away from an income tax and toward a consumption-based tax. He is also a free-trader, a proponent of the restoration of a strong dollar and the author of free-market health reforms.

On trade, he’s a staunch supporter of the Trans-Pacific Partnership pact and says the U.S. will thrive under a free-trade regime around the world with lower tariffs and barriers.

One of his passions is to revamp the big three budget drivers: Medicare, Medicaid and ObamaCare. “I want to give consumers way more choices in health care” is how he explains his approach. “Choice and competition always drive down costs better than central control.”

This race for the gavel takes on heightened importance, given the possibility of a Republican House, Senate and president in 2016. Does Brady think under that scenario, game-changing free-market reforms in government can pass in 2017?

“Absolutely, yes. I really believe we can run the table and get back to rapid growth immediately.”

The only rub against Brady is that there are already seven Texans who run congressional committees. But “since when is the GOP a party of quotas?” he asks. He’s right that the way to prevent one state from having outsized power is through term limits on chairmanships.

Tiberi is said to be the first pick of the Wall Street lobbyists — all the more reason why he shouldn’t get the job this time around.

Speaker Ryan, who controls this selection process, declared last week that in order to win, Republicans have to be the party of big and bold solutions. He’s right, of course, and that begins with putting reformers in positions of influence to make that change happen.

Wednesday’s decision by Ryan will be the first indication of how committed he is to free-market reforms and a desperately needed growth agenda.