Nolan Arenado blasted his way into Rockies history Saturday night at Coors Field.

The San Francisco Giants, however, blasted erratic Colorado pitching for 15 hits en route to a 7-3 victory in front of 37,672 fans. The Giants ended their seven-game losing streak, while the Rockies’ three-game winning streak came to a halt.

Arenado launched a two-out, two-run homer to left off San Francisco veteran right-hander Jake Peavy in the sixth inning, getting the Rockies back into the game, at least temporarily, by closing the gap to 5-3.

It was Arenado’s 36th homer of the year, tying him with teammate Carlos Gonzalez for the National League lead. Arenado now has 105 RBIs, still the most in the NL.

For history’s sake, it was Arenado’s sixth consecutive game with a home run, setting a franchise record. He bypassed the five hit by former Rockies stars Dante Bichette (Aug. 1-5, 1995) and Larry Walker (June 18-23, 1999).

“He’s getting the barrel to the ball,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said. “It’s funny, he’s kind of been in CarGo’s shadow. CarGo has been on such a tear, and with all of that attention I didn’t realize that Nolan had hit a home run in six straight games. They have been playing cat and mouse with each other. It’s just another accomplishment for Nolan.”

Arenado became the first player to hit a home run in six consecutive games since Baltimore’s Chris Davis did it from Sept. 26 to Oct. 2, 2012.

Arenado also etched his name into the San Francisco record book. His homer was his ninth against the Giants this season, the most against them in a single season since Atlanta’s Dale Murphy hit 11 in 1983. With a game against the Giants on Sunday, and three games at San Francisco to finish the season, Arenado has a chance to surpass Murphy.

Toss out Arenado’s two-run homer and Peavy had a terrific night. The 34-year-old tossed 5 innings, giving up three runs on four hits. He also hit two doubles, scored a run and drove in a run. It was the 12th multihit game of his career, but his first since April 19, 2007, when he pitched for San Diego. It was the first time in Peavy’s career that he rapped out two doubles.

Rockies starter Chad Bettis had a brief night, just 4 innings. In fact, it was his second-shortest start of the season, topped only by his July 7 game against the Angels when he was knocked around for eight runs on 10 hits in 2 innings.

“He got into some difficult counts, a lot of three-ball counts early on,” Weiss said. “He wasn’t feeling great, he was under the weather (with a sore throat and congestion). My leash was probably a little bit shorter on him tonight.”

When Angel Pagan led off the third with a solo homer down the right-field line, it was apparent that Bettis was not at his best. Pagan had gone 697 at-bats without a homer, the longest active streak in the NL. To be fair to Bettis, Pagan’s liner did get caught up in the Coors Field jet stream to right.

Bettis (6-5, 4.95 ERA) gave up four runs on eight hits, striking out one and walking one.

“My throat had nothing to do with my game,” Bettis said. “I felt like I had pretty decent command of my fastball, but my off-speed stuff was lacking. My changeup was harder than normal.

“I didn’t do my job today. It was pretty frustrating. We had a chance to take a series in the third game here and I should have been better.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp