Le Capitaine (Photo: Photo supplied)

Brown County taxpayers will be surprised to learn they own an asphalt plant that is costing them tons of money they didn't budget for.

Worse, this is a classic case of government unfairly competing with the private sector. That's right, there are private companies in the region that offer the same services as the Brown County plant, but at a much lower cost.

Here's the story Brown County politicians don't want you to know.

In 2014, the County Board got into the asphalt business, thinking they could reduce asphalt material cost and improve asphalt quality.

The plant in Howard was supposed to lower material cost for asphalt by about 20 percent. It was going to improve mix quality and extend the life of asphalt pavement between 20 to 25 percent. They thought payback from the plant, expected to be in operation 20 years, was estimated to be 2.5 years.

Things haven't worked out as planned.

An independent analysis by a Wisconsin-based accounting firm found the county's estimated savings for 2014 and 2015 were way off when compared with actual costs.

Buy Photo Brown County Highway Department workers prepare the roadbed for paving during reconstruction of Waube Lane in Ashwaubenon on Oct. 1, 2008. (Photo: File/Press-Gazette Media)

The county projected $1.87 million in savings. Wrong. There are no savings.

In fact, based on information from the county, the plant has cost county taxpayers an additional $1.7 million for Brown County to own and operate its own asphalt plant.

That's a massive budget shortfall totaling $3.5 million.

The main reason for this $3.5 million inconsistency is the county failed to include critical cost inputs into their projections like materials, labor, utilities, equipment, testing, maintenance and trucking.

It's pretty darn clear Brown County Executive Troy Streckenbach and the County Board have expanded government and then spent more taxpayer money than expected. These politicians who promise efficient government have used the power of government to compete with private businesses that provide the same service at a lower cost to taxpayers.

The playing field is not level.

Get this: Not only is local government exempt from the many taxes private companies pay, it also is exempt from the many federal and state labor compliance requirements that businesses are required to follow.

Unfortunately, if private companies don't do things efficiently, they lose money and go out of business. Bankrupt. If government doesn't do things efficiently, they just ask taxpayers for more money to bail out its incompetence.

That's what is happening here in Brown County: We taxpayers are bailing out Brown County for its incompetence.

The Construction Business Group has asked Streckenbach and the board to right this wrong.

It doesn't appear that the politicians have responded. I guess I'm not surprised.

It's about time Brown County taxpayers know what's going on, and it's about time the politicians heard from all of us.

Luke Le Capitaine of Eaton has been in the construction business for more than a decade.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1YbHznp