Washington County public health officials are planning to close two low-income clinics amid rising concern that thousands of low-income patients could be left stranded without care.

Last month, county Health and Human Services Director Marni Kuyl recommended shuttering the Hillsboro and Beaverton offices, which have long provided low-cost birth control and family planning services for women. She cited the significant decline in visits and the larger goal of connecting more residents with primary care providers during her presentation before the Board of Commissioners.

The clinics operate at an annual cost of about $2.6 million, including $1.3 million from the county's general fund. Instead, the county would outsource services to federally qualified health centers and fund several new public health positions.

But some worry the closures would leave nearly 9,000 patients without access to care.

Already, an influx of newly insured patients under Oregon's Medicaid expansion is straining health care providers and creating long wait times at clinics in Washington County. Unloading thousands more into the system — many of whom are undocumented and therefore ineligible for Medicaid — could make matters worse, critics say.

"This dumping of Washington County services is going to have, I think, a well known and well understood consequence on a health delivery service that is already taxed," said Alberto Moreno, executive director of the Oregon Latino Health Coalition. "I don't know whose needs this dumping practice would meet, other than the health department's financial bottom line."

The proposal will likely come before the Washington County Board of Commissioners in December.

"My concern is there's always been a clinic where you could go if you just couldn't figure out anything else," Commissioner Greg Malinowski said in an interview this week.

Virginia Garcia Memorial Health Center, the largest federally qualified health center in Washington County with 36,000 patients, is already facing an influx of about 7,000 newly insured patients under the Affordable Care Act. Any additional ones must wait until the backlog is cleared.

There's also one smaller federally qualified health clinic in Beaverton run by Neighborhood Health Center, which also has two other medical clinics in Clackamas County.

Virginia Garcia officials aren't sure whether the system could accommodate another influx.

"We're concerned that there would be a gap in services, so I think it's important we come up with some sort of transition plan," said Gil Muñoz, Virginia Garcia's executive director. "We've seen a big spike in the number of patients who need primary care...we have the capacity, it's just the aspect of getting everybody through the door."

Health and Human Services officials are scheduled to meet with Virginia Garcia, Neighborhood Health Center and Latino health advocates on Nov. 7 to discuss ways to expand services to accommodate the new patients.

"It makes more sense to take our limited funding and support a system that's really designed to provide primary care," Kuyl said. "I believe it's better than the hit and miss services we're able to provide with limited resources."

In the early 2000s, the two public clinics each received 10,000-12,000 visits a year, according to county data. By 2013, they had fewer than 12,000 combined, the result of Oregon's Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act. A third clinic in Tigard also closed that year.

Beth Doyle, who until recently was a nurse practitioner in the county's Hillsboro clinic, estimated between 50 and 70 percent of the remaining patients are undocumented and rely on the clinics for birth control and family planning services. The clinics do not require patients to provide a social security number — most choose not to — and foot their bills with funding from Title X of the federal Social Security Act, she said.

Washington County data show 25 percent of the clinics' patients were uninsured and not charged. However, that only accounts for teens and young adults. Kuyl said she's still trying to get more complete data from the state.

Virginia Garcia's structure is similar. As a federally qualified health center, it accepts all patients and charges based on their ability to pay.

Muñoz said Virginia Garcia could receive Title X funding in place of the county clinics. However, he said, the program is "rather onerous" to administer, and it's not clear whether the clinic could meet the federal government's requirements.

Some fear it might be impossible for another clinic to accommodate the patients, who would no longer receive discounted or free prescriptions.

"I'm honestly worried that a lot of women who have been coming for us for years as a sole source of care will not understand where they will be able to go, or they won't be able to pay," said Doyle, who left Washington County for a new job shortly before the plan was announced. "They will drop off the radar."

Similar changes in another metro-area county illustrate the challenge.

Officials in Clark County, Washington, contracted with Sea Mar Community Health Centers in 2008, although it's unclear whether other metro-area counties have done so. The state doesn't track that information, according to Jonathan Modie, a spokesman for the state's Public Health Division.

In response, the clinics in Vancouver had to double the number of health care workers, stay open later and take steps to aggressively reduce the number of no-show patients, said Carrie VanZant, Sea Mar's regional vice president of medical operations.

That proved harder than anticipated. Like Washington County's proposal, Clark County diminished Sea Mar's funding over the next four years. Afterward, it was left to treat patients on its own.

It's possible the same could happen in Washington County, VanZant said.

"The population of that area is huge and the need is huge," she said. "Virginia Garcia, they're great folks who do great work, but they're going to need help."

Otherwise, patients could find themselves out of options.

"Delays will happen," VanZant said. "They will have nowhere to go but the emergency room."

-- Ian K. Kullgren

Editor's note: This article has been changed from its original version to correct the number of patients who visited Washington County public health clinics in 2013, as well as the clinics' total operating budget.