By Jason Hart | Ohio Watchdog

Jaw-dropping bills for routine medical care will be a thing of the past for Ohioans if a new state law works as intended.

The idea is simple: hospitals and doctors’ offices will have to provide a cost estimate before any non-emergency procedure, so patients know the price up front instead of being surprised by an insurance company letter weeks later.

“What you typically see in a declaration of benefits 30 days after you get care, you’re going to see before you get care so you can decide whether to go forward or not,” State Rep. Jim Butler told Ohio Watchdog.

“It’s so important for the patient to be able to make that decision for themselves, because the alternative is the government making the decision,” he added.

Butler, an Oakwood Republican, sees price transparency as a critical ingredient to fighting “the unrelenting inflation of medical costs” without government rationing.

Insurance policies requiring co-pays for routine medical procedures give Ohioans an incentive to take more control of their care; price transparency could provide the information to make that possible.

Requiring price transparency will make Ohio’s private insurance market function closer to the way an insurance market should, Butler said.

“If there’s a catastrophic event you’re covered, but for day-to-day stuff we really need to have skin in the game,” he asserted.

Butler hopes price transparency will have a big impact on Medicaid spending, too, when coupled with his Healthy Ohio Program to incorporate private health savings account features into Medicaid.

Based on the Healthy Indiana Plan, HOP will put Medicaid funding into individual HSAs enrollees can use to pay for medical costs. Each enrollee will be required to contribute the lesser of $99 a year or 2 percent of their income to their HSA.

“With Healthy Ohio, we’re able to have Medicaid patients — just like commercial insurance patients now — have an element of cost-sharing so they care what they’re spending, as well,” Butler said.

HOP and health care price transparency were introduced in April as part of a package of health care reforms bundled in House Bill 157, but both proposals were enacted in separate bills at the end of June.

RELATED: Ohio House bill could save billions in medical costs each year

Butler told Ohio Watchdog he was pleased to see two of HB 157’s major provisions adopted through the state’s 2016-17 budget negotiations.

“I think they’re the most significant things that are in the budget,” he said.

HOP passed in House Bill 64, the general operating budget. Butler’s price transparency proposal passed as part of House Bill 52, the Ohio Bureau of Workers’ Compensation budget.

Butler and several other House conservatives voted for HB 64 — which included billions in Obamacare Medicaid expansion spending — to ensure health care price transparency and HOP became law.

Starting Jan. 1, 2017, Ohio health care providers will be required to give each patient an estimate of the amount their insurance company will be billed, the amount their insurance company will pay and their out-of-pocket cost for each service.

Between now and then, the Ohio Department of Medicaid will develop detailed rules and guidelines in an effort to ensure the law works effectively without adding unreasonable overhead for insurers and providers.

HOP, meanwhile, will require approval of a Medicaid waiver from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Republican Gov. John Kasich’s administration has already expressed skepticism that a waiver request will be granted.

Butler anticipates support from House leadership for medical malpractice reform and the other remaining measures in HB 157, which is sponsored by Republican State Rep. Terry Johnson and 22 Republican cosponsors.