Buy Photo Spalding president Tori Murden gets her first close up look after the official unveiling of a public statue honoring her institution's namesake. Mother Catherine Spalding becomes the first woman to be honored with a statue in Louisville with its installation along Sixth Street at the foot of the Cathedral of the Assumption. 7/26/15 (Photo: Marty Pearl/Special to The C-J)Buy Photo

Several hundred people, many of them Catholic Sisters of Charity of Nazareth, gathered Sunday outside the Cathedral of Assumption to dedicate the first statue of a historic woman on public space in Louisville.

Mother Catherine Spalding, bronze and standing a little over five-feet tall, with two orphan children in tow, took her spot outside the Cathedral where she taught students, cared for children whose parents had died, and worked to heal people with cholera in the early 19th century.

“I can imagine that Catherine is delighted to be back on the streets of Louisville where she found so much need and so many collaborators … and to be portrayed with her beloved orphans must give her great joy,” said Susan Gatz, president of the Sisters of Charity of Nazareth.

Gatz said the unveiling was particularly special because a number of the order’s sisters from India and Belize were in town for meetings and were able to attend.

Spalding plays an important, yet often overlooked, role in Louisville’s history.

She co-founded the Sisters of Charity of Nazareth outside Bardstown — a religious order that has taught thousands and thousands of children in many of Louisville’s parochial schools going back 200 years.

She founded schools that eventually became Presentation Academy and Spalding University. She also started St. Joseph’s Infirmary as well as the St. Vincent orphanage. Her order started and founded and staffed numerous other hospitals and schools throughout Kentucky and beyond.

The religious order’s mission is now worldwide with missions in Central America, Asia and Africa.

Mary Margaret Mulvihill, a member of the church, a 1960 Presentation Academy graduate, and chairwoman of the statue steering committee, said the statue stands for more than just Spalding’s contributions, which she said are many.

“This statue is to honor all women who are truly the backbone of the church,” Mulvihill said.

The statue, created by Louisville sculptor Raymond Graf, has been nearly 10 years in the making. It was originally proposed in 2006 by the church’s former pastor, and was put on hold after the economy crashed in 2008.

It was revived a few years later and finally became a reality Sunday with the official unveiling. Archbishop Joseph Kurtz was on hand to bless the statue.

Gatz said the Sisters of Charity were allowed input on the statue such as suggesting minor changes to ensure Spalding’s habit and bonnet were historically correct.

Eleanor Jordan, executive director of the Kentucky Commission on Women, praised the placement of the statue and said there need to be more statues honoring the accomplishments of women in Kentucky, which are often forgotten.

“I don’t want my granddaughter and I don’t want your granddaughter to have to wait until she’s enrolled in a women’s studies program to know that she has dozens of models to emulate,” Jordan said.

Reporter Joseph Gerth can be reached at (502) 582-4702. Follow him on Twitter at @Joe_Gerth.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1S4SKjW