The plans include new hospital towers and clinics in Phoenix and Tucson, and a new, $179 million emergency department at Banner-University Medical Center Phoenix

Construction continues on the new emergency room, March 22, 2016, at Banner-University Medical Center Phoenix, 1111 E. McDowell Road, Phoenix. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic) Story Highlights Banner plans to spend nearly $1 billion at teaching hospitals in Phoenix and Tucson

Banner projects two former UA Health Network hospitals in Tucson will break even next year

The former Good Samaritan Hospital in Phoenix will get a new emergency department, patient tower

A year after Banner Health bought the financially troubled University of Arizona Health Network, the Phoenix-based hospital system plans to spend big to bolster its academic medicine efforts.

Banner will invest nearly $1 billion in clinics and new teaching-hospital towers in Tucson and Phoenix, and offices for managers and department leaders at the Tucson hospital tower, officials said.

The Banner-UA deal, completed in March 2015, requires the Phoenix-based health system spend $500 million over five years on capital improvements in the Tucson area.

That will include a $400 million, nine-story tower at Banner-University Medical Center Tucson. The tower will be equipped with modern medical equipment and operating rooms that are more than twice as large as current rooms, said Kathy Bollinger, executive vice president of Banner’s University Medicine division.

Banner also will also spend about $100 million on a 250,000-square-foot building next to the Arizona Cancer Center on its Tucson North campus. The multi-specialty clinic will include services such as imaging so cancer patients will no longer need to travel to another site, according to Bollinger.

Construction won’t be limited to Tucson.

The Phoenix health system plans to spend nearly as much on a trio of major projects at or near Banner-University Medical Center Phoenix, formerly known as Good Samaritan Medical Center.

Banner-University Medical Center Phoenix is under renovation. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

Those projects include a $179 million emergency department scheduled to open in July 2017, a $239 million patient tower set to open in late 2018 and a $50 million clinical space near the hospital, located at 12th Street and McDowell Road.

Banner's investment is a big bet that modernizing its aging teaching hospitals in Tucson and Phoenix will attract patients while providing adequate space for modern medical operations.

Teaching hospitals provide medical care, but also are used to instruct and train medical students and residents, as well as to conduct research, such as drug trials. These hospitals offer advanced medical care — organ transplants, for example — that typically is not available at community hospitals.

Teaching hospitals traditionally have relied on revenue from hospital care to offset the cost of medical-student training and cutting-edge research, said Scott Cain, CEO of Cain and Associates, a Phoenix-based health-management consulting company.

But Cain said teaching hospitals nationwide are facing a financial crunch as health insurers and consumers scrutinize costs in the Affordable Care Act era. Insurers are increasingly relying on smaller networks of doctors and hospitals to reduce expenses and at times are eliminating teaching hospitals from these networks. And more patients are covered by high-deductible health insurance plans that require them to pay $1,000 or more out-of-pocket before coverage begins, which has led to more unpaid bills.

"The real challenge is the environment we are working in," Cain said. "They (teaching hospitals) need to do things like modernize. That's where this (investment) comes into play."

Banner is still seeking to shore up the finances of its newly acquired Tucson hospitals. Those two facilities — the former University Medical Center and Kino hospitals — lost more than $50 million in 2014. They also reported nearly $25 million in losses through February 2015.

Those losses sharply declined after Banner acquired UA Health Network's hospitals, a physician's practice and a health-insurance plan as part of a $1.2 billion deal that included a 30-year alliance with the University of Arizona College of Medicine.

Banner Health projects that it will take another year to halt the flow of red ink at the two Tucson hospitals, renamed Banner-University Medical Center Tucson and Banner-University Medical Center South.

Banner Health CEO Peter Fine said the Phoenix health system did not pursue the merger more than a year ago simply to provide financial stability for the Tucson hospitals. The goal was to support University of Arizona’s medical education mission, promote research and supply a steady stream of new doctors for the state. Banner must finance a $20 million fund that subsidizes key hires and research at UA's medical school campuses in Phoenix and Tucson.

“Nobody would do this to be opportunistic,” Fine said, explaining the Tucson acquisitions. “It is very risky from a stabilization perspective. You have to do it very well for it not to be a giant drag and impact the whole organization.”

Banner, the state's largest private employer and largest hospital system in metro Phoenix, has been able to absorb the financial losses of the UA Health Network and still turn a profit, albeit at smaller margins, bond documents show.

“This whole issue of reinventing a business — it is not easy and it is not for the timid.” Peter Fine, Banner Health CEO

Fine said Banner has tried to reduce administrative and overhead expenses, and to perform better in areas such as scheduling appointments and seeing patients in a more timely manner.

By fall 2017, Banner will replace the Epic electronic health-records system used by the two Tucson hospitals with Cerner system used by Banner hospitals. The Tucson hospitals switched to Epic in 2013 but reportedly lost $115 million in training, education and other costs related to the new system.

Switching electronic health-records systems will provide "significant savings" to the Tucson hospitals, Fine said.

Beyond the administrative changes, Fine said, Banner is still working to meld the cultures of the two organizations.

"This whole issue of reinventing a business — it is not easy and it is not for the timid," Fine said. "You've got to be relatively strong in making people move down a particular path, adapting to a new environment and new processes that may exist."

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1MuPEDv