Transcript for 'This Week': Jay Carney

Now the state of the union address. President Obama's chance to sell you on his agenda for the rest of the second term. What will he reveal on Tuesday and how does he plan to get out of his plump? The roundtable will break it out shortly. But now the new poll this morning, some alarming Numbers for the president. We took it straight to a top Obama adviser who shapes the white house message every day, white house press secretary, jay carney. Thank you very much. The state of the union is perhaps president Obama's biggest and best chance to get the mojo back. There is much progress to report. A make or break moment for a white house struggling. Just look at the stunner from the latest ABC news/washington post poll, only 37% of the public think the president has the ability to make the right decisions for the country. How can the president lead when barely a third trust his ability to make the right decisions? Jon, I think what we saw last year in 2013 was a Washington that did not deliver for the American people. And the president sees this as a year of action. To work with congress where he can, and to bypass congress where necessary. To lift folks who want to come up into the middle class. If you look at last year's state of the union address, the president made specific promises, raise the minimum wage -- Raise the federal minimum wage to $9 an hour. Immigration reform. The time has come to pass comprehensive immigration reform. Background checks for gun purchases -- Background checks to make it harder for criminals to get their hands on a gun. None of that happened. Isn't this year going to be harder? Those were calls for action that involved congress. The president's very disappointed that the senate failed to heed the will of the vast majority of the American people when it came to expanding background checks. On immigration reform, we're actually optimistic that 2014 will be the year that congress delivers to the president's desk a bipartisan compromise immigration reform bill that meets the principles he laid out and can sign into law. But it's what the president has already signed into law -- We are done. His signature achievement, health care reform, that's shaping up to be the biggest headache for democrats in 2014. Our poll shows 59% disapprove of how obamacare has been implemented. And conservative groups are blasting democratic candidates over obamacare. Obamacare doesn't work. Will it be worth it if you lose the senate? You already lost the house because of the law. I'll tell you -- Worth it politically? Expanding health insurance to millions of Americans, reducing the growth in health care costs which is happening at a rate -- Would it have been worth it if you lose the senate? This is not about politics. The answer is it is absolutely worth it no matter what. And I just disagree that republicans are going to have a winning issue on this if they decide to run on it. They have to explain what repeal means. In the state of the union Tuesday, a key focus for the president, income inequality. Many republicans say the president is to blame for rising poverty. Senator Tim Scott told my colleague. 7 million more Americans are living in poverty today that were not in poverty when bush was leaving office. I assume senator Scott didn't note is that a lot of people were thrown into poverty by the worst recession since the great depression that was in full bloom when president Obama was sworn into office. But the president's had five years. The economic crisis is in the rearview mirror, the bush years are in the rearview mirror. Doesn't the president bear some responsibility -- his policies for the fact that the poverty rate has gone up? The gap between the rich and the poor is only greater. What I can tell you, the problem and the challenge that the president has identified has been in the making for over 30 years. Then the criticism of the executive editor of the New York time who is called the Obama white house the most secretive white house I have ever been involved in covering. You covered white houses as a reporter for time magazine. Would jay carney, correspondent for time magazine be satisfied with the level of openness and transparency of this white house? Jay carney reporter would never be satisfied with the amount of information that any white house or any congressional -- So jay carney would fight with jay carney? What I would tell you, you and all of my former colleagues in the press have to be beating on us and others around Washington to get as much information as you can. I strongly disagree with the statement. Yp from experience it's wrong. We provide an extraordinary amount of information and access to reporters and work every day to provide more.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.