ASHE COUNTY — Music is life to a group of four Ashe County musicians whose passions brought them all together to form the metalcore band, The Worshiper.

The band, comprised of Wesley Moore, Nathaniel Steelman, Josh Reavis and Dalton Miller, formed about six months ago and have been working hard ever since.

“We came together having the same interest in music,” said Moore. “We’re learning more that we all shared the same passion for music.

The band has performed at several well-known music venues across the state, including Ziggy’s in Winston-Salem, The Upper Room in Statesville and Black Cat Burrito in Boone.

When they’re not performing live or practicing their music, The Worshiper is spending their time in studio working on their first EP, expecting it to be five or six tracks.

“We are currently working on that with well-known producer, Jamie King, in Winston-Salem,” said Moore. “Jamie has also recorded albums for well know bands such as For Today and Between the Buried and Me.”

King, whose production company The Basement Recording, has been producing music for musicians since 1996.

To this group of artists, the desire to play goes way beyond the music, way beyond the live shows and way beyond the fun of coming together to play music.

“The reason we love music is because it allows us an opportunity to tell of an everlasting unconditional love, and if it wasn’t for that then we wouldn’t write music or be on stage.,” said Moore. “The purpose for us writing music is to be a light into the dark world. To share hope and tell people no matter where they are in their life, they are loved. They are never alone and have a purpose.”

Be sure to check out the band on Facebook at www.facebook.com/TheWorshiperOfficial, on Instagram @theworshiperband and on their website at www.reverbnation.com/theworshiperband .

Nathan Ham can be reached at 336-846-7164 or followed on Twitter @NathanHam87

Courtesy photo – The Worshiper, made up of Nathaniel Steelman, Wesley Moore (front row) Josh Reavis and Dalton Miller (back row) are working on their first studio EP that will be released this summer. http://jeffersonpost.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/web1_Band-photo.jpgCourtesy photo – The Worshiper, made up of Nathaniel Steelman, Wesley Moore (front row) Josh Reavis and Dalton Miller (back row) are working on their first studio EP that will be released this summer. Courtesy photo – The band has performed at several well-known venues, including Ziggy’s in Winston-Salem. This stage shot was taken at The Upper Room venue in Statesville. http://jeffersonpost.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/web1_Band-on-stage.jpgCourtesy photo – The band has performed at several well-known venues, including Ziggy’s in Winston-Salem. This stage shot was taken at The Upper Room venue in Statesville.

Local metal band working on debut album