My column yesterday joined the crowded debate over the cultural significance (if any) of the Santa Barbara killer’s radioactive, misogynistic, sexually-frustrated rage. That debate has gone in any number of directions, but it’s often slipped into some well-worn right-left grooves, with writers on the feminist left tilting at capital-p Patriarchy and “traditional masculinity” and conservative commentators dismissing their arguments as victimology and ideological overreach. And as in another recent controversy, on rape and campus life, I’m a little dissatisfied with my own side’s approach: In their haste to critique too-sweeping indictments of masculinity/male privilege/”rape culture”/etc., it seems to me, some conservatives risk foreclosing the possibility that misogyny might be a real cultural problem, to which a certain amount of moral outrage and a certain kind of structural critique might both be healthy, legitimate responses.

I should emphasize that I understand the desire not to make too much of a single disturbed individual’s worldview. And as my column’s beginning suggested, I also understand the case that — for reasons of deterrence — we shouldn’t give a mass murderer any attention whatsoever.

But once the debate has been joined and carried on for a while, it seems insufficient to say, “well, this guy was just crazy” in a case where it’s very, very easy to pick out the thick cultural veins that his madness battened on. And when those veins carry a toxic flow of, well, woman-hatred, it seems important for conservatives to acknowledge as much without worrying that they’re somehow surrendering crucial territory to left-wing scolds.

Especially when that territory actually supplies a modest amount of what could be moral common ground. That is, it should be possible, in these debates, for the right to offer a nuanced analysis of cultural liberalism’s contradictions — pointing out, for instance, that certain expressions of the male grotesque are just what the left’s longed-for liberation actually looks like — without denying that when it passes judgment on particular grotesqueries, a “strident” and “scolding” feminism is often straightforwardly correct. And it should be possible, too, for cultural conservatives to qualify and critique certain left-wing conceits without denying their partial validity. I’m thinking, for instance, of a phrase like “rape culture,” which when applied to the entirety of American society does, indeed, risk, becoming an impossibly broad indictment that minimizes the evil of actual rapists … but which if applied more narrowly, to particular institutions and atmospheres, starts to look like an idea that conservatives should actively embrace.

This point holds particularly strongly in contexts, like Silicon Valley or many college campuses, where cultural conservatism has no real footprint, and certain kinds of feminism are often the only moralistic game in town. I would rather not have to choose, as you might imagine, between a society run by the “bros” of Snapchat and RapGenius and a society run by the editors of Jezebel, between a culture dominated by a corporate, “party culture is good for our bottom line” neoliberalism and a culture whose norms are policed by the Javerts and DeFarges of the campus left. But when such non-conservative forces clash, it’s a mistake for conservatives to always treat feminists as their clear ideological enemy, and feminism’s targets as clear victims in need of right-wing solidarity and support.

Where the feminist left abuses power or abets injustice in these controversies, of course criticism is warranted. But it stills needs to be qualified, nuanced criticism, rather than a blanket denunciation that leaves the right effectively carrying water for the not-so-wonderful, not-even-remotely-conservative culture of masculinity embodied by an Evan Spiegel, a Seth MacFarlane, or a Tucker Max.