JAMESTOWN -- David Mans first moved to the small mountain community of Jamestown with his parents in 1972, a few years after it had experienced a damaging flood in 1969.

The house he lives in on the banks of Little James Creek was then owned by his grandmother and suffered foundation damage in the 1969 flood that had to be repaired. Mans credits those repairs as a reason his house is still standing after the devastating flooding that ravaged the town earlier this month, wiping out infrastructure, damaging and destroying numerous homes, and taking the life of beloved former Jamestown Mercantile owner Joey Howlett.

"When they rebuilt the foundation they rebuilt it considerably better, so I think that's why we have a house," Mans said.

Southern Baptist Disaster Relief volunteer Barb Headrick throws damaged drywall into a pile while cleaning a flood damaged in Jamestown on Saturday, Sept. 28. Jeremy Papasso/ Camera (JEREMY PAPASSO)

A rental home Mans said he had poured his savings into was not so lucky. It was completely lost in the calamity.

"It's down the creek," he said. "We fared well with our own house, but we lost a lot."

Mans, a volunteer Jamestown firefighter, was in the town Saturday helping coordinate volunteers who had come from across the state and the country to help clean up the community that lost so much.

Thick layers of sand and rocks cover areas that were formerly the front lawns of houses that have been rendered uninhabitable. There are the skeletons of cars still semi-buried in the sediment, and debris ranging from the trunks of large trees to the guts of waterlogged homes lining the streets.

And that is after the cleanup effort got underway.

"We've done a ton, but there is so much more to do," Mans said as he checked out bunker gear recovered from the town's fire station after a foot of mud was cleared for the building earlier in the day.

Mans estimated as many as 80 volunteers had traveled to the town to help with its cleanup efforts, and he hopes to work with many other volunteers to get Jamestown ready for residents again.

Donate Boulder volunteers Addy Sage, at right, and Theo Merrin work to remove mud and sand from a home in Jamestown on Saturday, Sept. 28. Jeremy Papasso/ Camera (JEREMY PAPASSO)

"It's really great to have all these folks here," he said. "It feels great to make things happen.

Eight volunteers that stood out in the town Saturday because of their yellow hats and T-shirts was a contingent from Tennessee Baptist Disaster Relief. The group, working with Pastor Larry Drammann of East Boulder Baptist Church, brought their own mini-backhoe from Tennessee, which they used to clear mud and debris from yards and even build a small bridge across the re-routed stream to reach inaccessible houses on Main Street.

Many volunteers in town this weekend are Jamestown residents who did not suffer losses as great as those suffered by some of their neighbors. Many said that type of community support is what they expect in the town of about 280 people.

"We have neighbors up here who need a lot, neighbors who need a little and neighbors who can give," resident David Lindquist said, noting his house on Mesa Street was OK after the flood. "I'm in a position where I can help, so that's what I'm doing. This town is awesome. It's always been that way."

Sen. Mark Udall, D-Colorado, and Boulder County commissioners Deb Gardner and Elise Jones toured the town with Jamestown Mayor Tara Schoedinger. Schoedinger detailed the damage and outlined the town's deep needs for assistance.

The town, in partnership with the Community Foundation of Boulder County, last week launched a fundraising campaign called "Rebuild Jamestown," seeking assistance in order to rebuild the town's wiped-out infrastructure. The town has an annual budget of $56,000, officials said.

Udall had seen the town from the air, but said seeing the flood's effects up close demonstrated the "sheer power of Mother Nature." He said he plans to push for a hardship exemption for Jamestown so it would not be required to match funds with FEMA to pay for the town's rebuilding.

"I'm going to work as hard as possible to provide for that exemption so they can get these dollars as soon as possible," Udall said. "We're gonna stand together and rebuild and rebuild better."

Jennifer O'Brien's home was in better shape than she expected it to be after the raging creek essentially made it an island at the height of the flood. The garage had 4 feet of mud and rocks in it, deep mud buried the front porch and back patio before volunteers helped clear it, and there was silt on the living room floor that could only be cleared with a paint scraper. But O'Brien said she is committed to cleaning it up and returning home to Jamestown with her family.

"Now I get it," she said. "When Katrina happened I was like, 'Why would those people want to go back?' But after this I can't imagine living anywhere else."