An official, right, assists a voter at a polling station inside Fort Garrison Elementary School in Pikesville, Md., on Primary Day, June 24, 2014. (AP Photo/Patrick Semansky) AP

With voter turnout in midterm elections on track to be at a record low, a new report finds that Republicans may have an advantage come November.

Since 2010, the percentage of eligible citizens who voted Democratic has declined by nearly 30%, while the percentage who voted Republican has fallen about 14%, a report from the nonpartisan Center for the Study of the American Electorate found.

A string of contentious primaries this election cycle likely helped the GOP numbers, boosting turnout among tea-party insurgents who vowed to oust incumbents viewed as too liberal or out of touch with their constituents.

Overall, national turnout in the 25 states that held statewide primaries declined 18% since 2010. Nearly 15% of eligible citizens voted in those states’ primaries for U.S. Senate and governor this year—down from 18% in 2010, according to the center’s report.

Of those states, 15 saw turnout reach record lows this year, compared with just three states that had higher turnout this year than in 2010, the report states. The GOP base has a disproportionate number of older voters, a group that is more likely to cast ballots.

Democratic turnout, by contrast, dropped to record lows in 15 of the 25 states with statewide primaries. The GOP reached record lows in three states, but also saw record highs in four states. Among the four was Mississippi, which held one of the most contentious Republican primaries this election cycle, pitting incumbent Sen. Thad Cochran against tea-party challenger Chris McDaniel, who lost the runoff election.

Among the states that saw the lowest turnout this year were Iowa, where 9.7% of eligible voters went to the polls, as well as Ohio (11.2%), Texas (11.4%) and South Carolina (12.1%).

The report drew some worrying conclusions, most notably the potential for “narrow ideology” to dominate political parties in the absence of any unity. “Political parties in theory provide a degree of cohesion to American politics,” the report stated. “That cohesion is being lost. High levels of involvement lessen the chances that both parties and politics will be dominated by narrow ideology and interest. Low levels make that result probable.”

Democrats say turnout is their top priority this cycle, and a spokesman for the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee said it has launched “the most aggressive national field effort ever.” Given the relative lack of close Democratic primaries, turnout might not be a reliable gauge of participation this fall when many incumbent Democrats will face tough re-election bids.

The report also offered some recommendations, highlighting the whopping 61 million Americans who are eligible to vote but are not registered. Creating a biometric national identification system would allow those 61 million to vote and get rid of the potential for fraud, the report argues.