The FAA does not expect ito deliver a set or rules that would legalize drones in the U.S. by its 2015 deadline. Robert MacPherson/AFP/Getty Images

The government has not yet legalized commercial drone flight, but it just granted six film production companies permission to shoot movie magic with such devices, signaling that other businesses will have the chance to use flying robots – if they can ensure their aircraft won’t be a danger to public crowds or low flying-planes.

The Federal Aviation Administration has warned they are going to be late for a 2015 deadline set by Congress to write rules that would legalize unmanned aircraft systems in U.S. skies, but on Thursday the agency made exceptions for six film companies. The FAA is considering 40 requests from other companies that want to use the low-cost convenience of drones, including farmers who want to use them to monitor livestock and media businesses that want to film news video.

“Today’s announcement is a significant milestone in broadening commercial UAS use while ensuring we maintain our world-class safety record in all forms of flight,” said Secretary of Transportation Anthony Foxx in the press release.

The announcement from the FAA encouraged companies to send more proposals to safely operate such devices, so the agency will likely grant more exemptions on a case-by-case basis, says David Kirstein, a partner at the law firm of Kirstein & Young, based in Washington, D.C.

“The issue for the FAA at this point is whether the work is going to be done in a controlled area that would not pose a safety risk to aircraft or the public in general,” says Kirstein, a former majority counsel on aviation for the Senate Commerce Committee.

The FAA is taking its time on broad regulations to allow drone use out of concern for the safety of other craft flying in America’s skies, and is waiting for results from its six sites where it is testing the flying robots as part of that process.​ Oil company BP in June became the first business granted permission to use drones in U.S. skies to monitor its pipeline in Alaska. Similar exemptions may be granted for energy or agriculture companies, which would fly the craft in isolated environments like oil rigs or farms and away from crowds, he says.

“The key thing is that there is not much going on around there that you need to be worried about other flights,” he says.

The FAA may not grant the same exemptions to companies in the media that want to monitor traffic or fly around a city to track breaking news, says Greg Cirillo, a partner at the law firm of Wiley Rein who specializes in aviation rules.

“The hardest case is if you want to do something urgently- emergency response or immediate uses,” Cirillo says.

That desire for flights in a preset, controlled area might also rule out exemptions for businesses considering using unmanned aircraft systems for cross-city package delivery, like Amazon.

Businesses stand the best chance of approval if they ensure they will lay out a flight area in advance and get permission from people in the area, like actors in the film shoot, Cirillo warns.

Safety rules in the exemptions granted to film companies state that the drones can’t fly higher than 400 feet in a controlled area, the operators must be licensed pilots, the devices have to be inspected and fly within line of sight of the operator, and flights in different areas need to be approved by the FAA.

Protecting privacy from drone surveillance is a major concern among advocacy groups like the Electronic Frontier Foundation and lawmakers including Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-California, but “the FAA’s decisions so far have not been privacy driven,” Cirillo says.

“The FAA’s decision not to have drones flying over people’s heads have to do with safety,” he says.

President Barack Obama is expected to issue an executive order in the coming months to help create privacy guidelines for the use of unmanned aircraft. That process would likely involve the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, which is coordinating with groups and companies to draft privacy guidelines for facial recognition products .