Skygen USA is the new brand name for a family of companies started by Craig Kasten (left) and Greg Borca. Wonderbox Technologes is just one of several companies that are part of the Skygen brand. Credit: Angela Peterson

By of the

More than 1,000 people in the Milwaukee area work at companies started by Craig Kasten and Greg Borca — and the number of people could increase in coming years.

Skygen USA — the new brand name for a family of companies started by Kasten and Borca — has roughly doubled in size in the past two years. Skygen companies now employ about 500 people, up from 241 in 2013. And revenue increased to $77 million last year, up from $35.6 million in 2011. This year, it's projected to reach $95 million.

Borca and Kasten did all this once before: The two sold Doral Dental, which administered dental benefits for state Medicaid programs, to DentaQuest Ventures in 2004 for $108 million.

DentaQuest, based in Boston, employs 557 people in Mequon.

There were some setbacks along the way. They include Doral Dental's payments to a corrupt politician in Tennessee after the company won a state contract. The payments entangled Borca and Kasten in a mess that raised more than a few questions. But they were never charged with any wrongdoing, and the controversy didn't deter them from setting out to build another company.

The core of that company was Wonderbox Technologies.

When Borca and Kasten sold Doral Dental, they kept the underlying software for administering insurance claims. The software, which Wonderbox Technologies licenses to insurance companies, is designed to be flexible and easily customized — features that became more important with the Affordable Care Act.

For instance, the law requires health plans to cover pediatric dental care, a benefit typically not included in commercial plans. Insurers' computer systems were not designed for the benefit, but insurers could stitch Wonderbox Technologies' software into their systems.

The Affordable Care Act also has spurred experiments — still in the earliest stages — with new ways of paying doctors and hospitals, and that, too, could create new markets for the software.

"The technology has explosive potential," Borca said.

Wonderbox is just one of several companies that are part of the Skygen brand.

When their five-year noncompete agreements with DentaQuest expired in 2009, Kasten and Borca decided to get back into the business of administering dental claims.

"One of our rules is wherever there is a Coke, there is room for a Pepsi," Kasten said.

They knew the business, but, more importantly, they had the technology.

Scion Dental, the company they started, contracts with insurance companies to manage dental plans. Borca describes it as "the largest dental benefits company that you've never heard of."

They later started Ocular Benefits to do the same for vision benefits.

Hylis Pharmacy Solutions, their newest company, plans to help large employers and unions monitor the cost of prescription drugs.

Two other companies founded in the 1990s also operate under the Skygen brand name: American Therapy Administrators, which manages physical therapy and chiropractic claims, and Vestica Healthcare, which manages claims for health insurers and so-called third-party administrators, who oversee health plans for employers.

The companies, based in Mequon and Menomonee Falls, are separate corporate entities but are owned by Kasten and his family, Borca and Ronald Brummeyer, the former president of Doral Dental.

The Skygen brand name was introduced this spring to draw attention to the connection among the companies.

In some ways, the nexus for the companies is the software as much as their ownership.

Kasten designed the basic system in the early 1990s when he struck out on his own, leaving his job as chief operating officer and chief financial officer of CareNetwork Inc., the parent company of Wisconsin Health Organization Insurance Corp., one of the health maintenance organizations that emerged in the 1980s.

Kasten had gone to work for Wisconsin Health Organization after losing his job at Miller Brewing Co. in a downsizing.

"A lot of things you think are bad turn out to be good," he said. "One of the biggest breaks of my career was leaving Miller."

Kasten, who grew up in West Allis, had gone to work for Miller Brewing after earning a business degree in accounting from Marquette University. To save money, he lived at home, taking the bus from West Allis for his first three years. He has since given more than $2.5 million to the university.

(This year, Kasten and his family also gave $250,000 for improvements to what is now Allison Kasten Field at a park in Cedarburg. The gift was made in memory of his daughter who died in 2011.)

While working on the system, Kasten set up a company that contracted with Wisconsin Health Organization to manage chiropractic costs. Borca and several partners had a competing company.

The two hit it off when they met. Kasten was around 40 at the time. Borca was in his mid-20s.

They had similar ambitions but different strengths. Kasten, who also has a master's in business administration from the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, understood information systems and had worked for large companies; Borca was an inveterate entrepreneur, someone who was thinking about how to make money in his teens, if not earlier, and who knew how to sell.

The two saw a niche in managing dental benefits for Medicaid programs. The business grew rapidly. It also brought them into a world in which political connections can help. Consultants hired by Doral Dental or its subsidiaries would later bring Kasten and Borca several years of headlines and grief.

A Pennsylvania consulting firm hired by a Doral Dental subsidiary reportedly paid $1.2 million to Managed Care Services, a Tennessee consulting firm in which a state senator had a stake, after Doral Dental won a state contract.

John Ford, the Tennessee state senator, who was later convicted of bribery in an unrelated case, received $400,000 from Managed Care Services.

Borca and Kasten were never charged with any wrongdoing, and their ties to the political scandal by all appearances haven't hurt their new ventures.

Nor did they give any thought to simply living on the money from the sale of Doral Dental.

"People were meant to work," Kasten said.

Borca echoed that.

"It's important that my kids see me go to work in the morning," he said.

The five-year noncompete agreement as part of the sale of Doral Dental gave Wonderbox Technologies time to work on its software.

Phil Kaufman, president of UnitedHealthcare Specialty Benefits, praises the software for its flexibility.

"It gives us a much broader range of configurability," he said. "It's a huge help."

UnitedHealthcare uses the software for commercial, Medicare Advantage and Medicaid health plans.

Kaufman has equally strong praise for Wonderbox employees.

"Their people are amazing," he said. "The people they have — their team — really is a differentiator for them."

The software enables health insurers to add new functions without the chore of retrofitting older computer systems, said Darrin Haehle, chief information officer for Wonderbox Technologies, who has worked for the company and predecessors for more than 18 years.

"We can do it faster," he said.

Those functions include customized analytical tools and so-called edits to flag claims that look suspicious.

The software also can handle new ways of paying for medical care, such as so-called bundled payments, in which a hospital, doctors and other health care providers are paid a fixed amount for a complete episode of care, such as a knee replacement. The new forms of payment are expected to become more common in the next few years.

Skygen also could provide turnkey systems for new health insurance and accountable care organizations, in which hospitals and doctors are paid to oversee the care for a specific group of patients.

"There are so many market opportunities that we are perfect for," Borca said.

Kasten and Borca have no interest in selling Wonderbox Technologies or their other companies.

"A lot of people here have given up their careers to work for us," Kasten said. Nor do they have any interest in going public. "I'd rather drink battery acid," Kasten said.

But Borca and Kasten also believe their companies have some opportunities ahead, and they acknowledge that the next few years could be busy.

"We've spent 20 years to get into the position we are in," Borca said.