Boulder campus contributing $183,000 in deal's first year

The Regional Transportation District unveiled the new Flatiron Flyer bus in June. The University of Colorado's Boulder campus will get 68-inch by 220-inch ad displays on each of the 59 Flatiron Flyer buses that will run between Denver and Boulder starting Jan. 17. ( Kathryn Scott Osler / The Denver Post )

A $5 million, five-year deal inked by the University of Colorado system with the Regional Transportation District gets the Boulder campus "dominant advertising position" on the new Flatiron Flyer rapid transit buses coming to U.S. 36 in January.

The agreement, approved last week by the RTD Board of Directors, will cost the CU system about $905,000 this year with a 5 percent increase each year for the next four years.

Under the terms of the deal, the university also now has naming rights to the "A Line" train, which, when finished, will take passengers between Denver International Airport and downtown Denver.

The deal coincides with a $3 million systemwide marketing initiative the university plans to launch next month.

"It's going to have 10 million annual riders. These are Coloradans who are heading to and from DIA; these are national and international visitors," said Ken McConnellogue, CU spokesman. "We believe that the A Line is the crown jewel of the FasTracks lines."

McConnellogue said $557,000 of the first-year costs are coming from CU President Bruce Benson's special initiative fund, which is made up of interest earnings from CU investments to be used at the president's discretion.

CU-Boulder is contributing $183,000, with $83,000 coming from the downtown Denver campus and $83,000 from the Anschutz Medical Campus, he said.

McConnellogue said state funds and tuition money are not being used for the deal.

Advertisement

For its money, CU-Boulder will get 68-inch by 220-inch advertising displays on each of the 59 Flatiron Flyer buses that will run between Denver and Boulder starting Jan. 17. The campus hopes to advertise to the expected 3 million riders on the bus service, McConnellogue said.

The rapid transit service comes with more frequent buses, new stations and road improvements to U.S. 36. The buses will also be allowed to drive on the shoulder to provide reliable transit times, according to RTD.

The university is preparing for state funding cuts in the immediate future, and McConnellogue said CU hopes to appeal to donors, prospective students and other constituents with the RTD initiative.

"As Bruce (Benson) says, when times are hard, that's when you need to invest in marketing, and times are going to get hard for us," he said.

In response to recent criticism about the deal and its price tag, McConnellogue said the university is in a competitive marketplace for students, donors, faculty members and research dollars.

He understands the argument that the money could be spent elsewhere, but he believes the RTD deal will garner CU "millions" in publicity value. By comparison, other naming deals range from $1 million to $6 million a year, McConnellogue said.

"Those arguments are always out there, and when I look at the scheme of our $3.5 billion annual budget, we spend considerably less than some of our competition in marketing, so I think this is a reasonable expense and certainly we expect a substantial return on our investment," he said.

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta