Design changes, 'community benefit' discussion, sought in 2015

Nacho Bermudos, of Scorpion Construction, mixes concrete while doing masonry to the exterior of a building at the Apex 5510 apartment complex on Spine Road in Gunbarrel. ( Jeremy Papasso )

With public concern over development running high, the dilemma before the council at this year's retreat was how to make substantive changes to the city's rules for new development in time to still influence the current wave of building.

City Council members said that defining "community benefit" — what new projects should be doing to meet other city goals in exchange for exemptions to certain rules — and improving the city's design guidelines need to be top priorities this year.

Why Housing Matters Boulder is hosting a public forum on housing challenges Monday night at eTown Hall. The goal of the forum is to initiate "constructive conversations" about meeting the city's housing goals in ways consistent with community values. Participants will choose a housing goal and break into small groups to discuss solutions. Members of several working groups on housing issues will be there to here the ideas of the public. The forum will conclude with a presentation by Michael Pyatok, an award-winning architect who works on affordable housing and neighborhood design issues. The city is also hosting an inform "Pastries with Pyatok" discussion in Alfalfa's Market Community Room, 1651 Broadway, from 8:30 a.m. to 11 a.m. Tuesday. Advertisement

If you go What: Why Housing Matters! When: 6 p.m. to 8 p.m. Monday Where: eTown Hall, 1535 Spruce St. More info: www.HousingBoulder.net

The Boulder City Council's annual retreat is when the council sets its priorities for the year to come and tries to fit substantial new work items into an already overly full schedule for the city's employees, who have to research, analyze and hold public outreach on every new policy proposal.

David Driskell, the city's director of planning and community development, said a move toward a "form-based code," in which the city would give much more specific guidance about what buildings should look like and approve buildings that met those standards, would address design concerns and leave the community benefit question somewhat moot, as far fewer projects would be asking for exemptions through the site review process.

The city plans to do a pilot on form-based zoning in the Boulder Junction area, though developing that code probably will require the help of an outside consultant and a $100,000 addition to the planning department's budget.

City Council members support that initiative, but they said the community cannot wait for form-based codes to be put in place throughout the city.

"We're in the middle of a building boom," Councilman Tim Plass said. "We need to give the planning board some guidance."

'There are people who are really angry'

Developing form-based code just for Boulder Junction will take roughly six months, and form-based codes are considered appropriate only where the city has an area plan in place laying out an agreed-upon vision for the area. Without that, it's hard to know what kinds of designs the code should include.

Boulder only has a few area plans, and a suggestion to develop neighborhood plans throughout the city failed to gain traction because it would be too time-consuming.

City planners have set aside an ambitious Envision East Arapahoe area planning process for east Boulder as community disagreement over the scope of the plan indicated it would be a lengthy and contentious process.

"There are people who are really angry that we're being too timid about what we're considering, and there are people who are just as angry that we're looking at it at all," Driskell said.

The only near-term change the City Council will consider is a zoning change to allow medical offices near the Boulder Community Health Foothills campus.

Also in 2015, the city hopes to complete a comprehensive housing strategy that would identify ways to provide a diversity of housing options for different income levels, preserve middle-income housing and allow seniors to age in place.

The housing strategy process started last year as a top council priority, but at this year's retreat, several council members wondered if the housing strategy should be scaled back or tabled until after the completion of the Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan update. The recommendations could include code changes to allow for more density and accessory dwelling units like in-law apartments and converted garages that could be controversial.

Driskell said the recommendations from the housing strategy will help inform the comprehensive plan update and stressed that adopting the strategy does not, by itself, make any land use code changes.

Difficult public conversations envisioned for year ahead

In the end, the City Council decided to stay the course on the housing strategy. When it is complete, planners may look for neighborhoods that are willing to host pilot projects on several of the new ideas.

"To me, affordability of living here is one of the big things we need to figure out," Councilwoman Suzanne Jones said.

As part of a focus on code enforcement issues, City Attorney Tom Carr said he would work on ways to simplify the city's occupancy rules and tie it to rental licensing. In most of the city, no more than three or four unrelated people can share a house or apartment, depending on the zoning. However, when the city tries to enforce the occupancy limit, many landlords claim grandfathered rights to house more people under previous zoning codes.

Carr said showing that the city can effectively enforce its occupancy limit could create the political space for the City Council to consider raising the occupancy limit in some areas or in some circumstances, such as to allow for cooperative housing and accessory dwelling units.

The City Council also wants the planning department to consider area planning around the Broadway and Mapleton buildings owned by Boulder Community Health. Though Driskell said hospital officials have indicated they are unlikely to sell the buildings for a few years, council members said they cannot wait until a sale is imminent to consider what they want for those locations.

"Whether we buy it or someone else buys it, we're already behind the curve," Boulder Mayor Matt Appelbaum said. "My fear is that someone buys it and proposes something that is allowed in the code but isn't what we want."

Councilwoman Mary Young said the City Council needs to be prepared for the difficult public conversations in the year to come.

"We have to remember that in Boulder, land use planning is a contact sport," she said.

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere