As they have since 2010, Planned Parenthood sites will go without state funding this budget after Gov. Chris Christie vetoed the latest effort to restore state funding, according to state Sen. Loretta Weinberg (D-Bergen).

Phoebe Pollinger

Weinberg, who has led efforts to restore state funding for the program since it was first cut in 2010, said that this year's efforts ended in the same manner as they have in years past - with the governor's veto.

Of the $7.4 million formerly allocated to Planned Parenthood operations in the state, Planned Parenthood of Metropolitan New Jersey, which services Essex, Passaic and Hudson counties, received $1.2 million, according to PPMNJ President and CEO Roslyn Rogers Collins.

Montclair's Planned Parenthood branch, which is at 29 North Fullerton Ave., is one of five PPMNJ locations, Collins said.

The total of $6 million in state funding that the local branches have not received through the past five years represents about 18 percent of PPMNJ's operating budget over the time, Collins said.

As a result, area Planned Parenthood locations have reduced clinic hours and have either cut back on or eliminated counseling and educational programs, Collins said. In 2010, PPMNJ was servicing about 20,000 patients per year. That number has been reduced to about 18,000 since the state budgetary cuts were made, according to Collins.

In December, PPMNJ had to shut its location in Pompton Lakes, leaving just one clinic remaining in Passaic County, she said.

Despite a diminished budget, PPMNJ has attempted to remain viable in the area, Collins said, as the healthcare industry has experience broad changes in recent years. PPMNJ recently converted to electronic health records in an effort to receive funding from Medicaid. The Planned Parenthood clinics have also provided services to men and are considering providing primary-care services to women in an effort to provide patients with a more comprehensive experience, Collins said.

As 58 percent of PPMNJ patients are uninsured, Collins said, certified application counselors have been brought on through state and federal funding to help enroll patients into insurance through the Affordable Care Act.

Collins said that PPMNJ has been active in urging local legislators to restore state funding.

Phoebe Pollinger, a Montclair resident and reproductive health advocate, told The Montclair Times that the state has lost six clinics since 2010, equating to about 30,000 fewer visits to health centers.

A member of Planned Parenthood, Pollinger claimed that a third of women in New Jersey use Planned Parenthood or similar clinics for primary healthcare and that the loss in clinics means fewer screenings for sexually transmitted diseases and illnesses such as cervical cancer.

"We know that this kind of healthcare is desperately needed in the state," Pollinger said. "It's not fair to the citizens of this state and it does not benefit the citizens of this state."

Pollinger and Weinberg were critical of the governor, claiming that Christie has cited budgetary reasons for the cuts, but then has claimed that the cuts are for philosophical reasons while on the national campaign trail.

Weinberg told The Montclair Times that she believed Planned Parenthood would not be re-funded in New Jersey until Christie leaves office: "We'll have a new governor in two years, thankfully, and hopefully that governor will do everything possible to make up for the services that have been diminished for women's health."