Topics: Cable News, chuck todd, Editor's Picks, Hillary, Hillary Clinton, meet the press, Obama, The Stranger, Media News

In his new book, “The Stranger: Barack Obama in the White House,” Chuck Todd digs into the day-by-day of President Obama’s White House and finds the chief executive at times disengaged with Republicans in Congress (both when he didn’t need them in 2009 and 2010 and when he did in the four years since) and often inept when he did engage with them.

“They were terrible negotiators,” Todd said of the White House team that pushed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act through Congress in 2009. “They didn’t know how to play hardball.”

The NBC News political director and moderator of “Meet the Press” sat down with Salon to discuss the book, the present and future Obama, the public’s fascination with celebrity journalists, and his plan to retool and revive NBC’s franchise Sunday show.

Did you go into “Meet the Press” with the attitude that the format was broken and you needed to do something different?

I didn’t think the format was necessarily broken, but I thought it couldn’t be just a better-produced cable show. I think people are worn out of the daily news cycle. Monthly magazines are having a bit of a revival, and I’d like to think the Sunday news shows could be that for politics. I want to do healthcare in multiple segments, do a status update, try to be less political and less Washington about it, and I think Sunday shows have that luxury again.

Do you think you’re already doing that, or is that a direction you want to go?

It’s a direction I’m trying to go. When we did an Ebola show, we brought in experts and the politicians were secondary. We had doctors — specialists in the field. I want to do that more on big issues.

What do you think ratings for a Sunday show correlate to: the better interviews, the better host, the topics?

I think it’s habitual. If you look at the history of all of television news, it’s habitual. People are NBC families or ABC families or CBS families. Tim Russert was in third place, and it took him four or five years to catch David Brinkley. I’m really trying to keep our P.R. people from trumpeting short-term rating success. It’s more like building a football program; it’s a three-year plan. In three years, I’d better be in the top spot or they should think about a new head coach.

Do you think delivering ratings are part of your job?

Yeah, whether I like it or not.

If a year from now you’re happy with the quality of the journalism and the news division is happy with what’s going on the air but you don’t have the ratings, then what do you have?

I assume if the quality is there that the ratings will follow. They have followed quickly in D.C. That to me is an important metric; if Washington cares about the show, that’s a start. If you look at the rings of opinion leaders, that’s ring No. 1. If you’re doing a quality show, then the ratings will follow.

My beef with media writers is that they only cover the ratings. I hope we have the guests and are asking the questions that make news. If we have more clips that are generated by what people are saying on the show, that tells me we’re doing our job.

The show’s iPhone app got folded into the NBC News app. Is the digital strategy for the show to be more a part of NBC News?

We’re trying to meld the “Meet the Press” and our politics into one brand, which is easier to do now because I have both titles — moderator and political director — so we’re trying to meld those two worlds together. The gold standard in politics is the “Meet the Press” brand, so we should be embracing the “Meet the Press” brand.

Isn’t it a little icky that corporate media companies are polling on how much viewers like you?

Let me say this: I don’t like it when journalists become part of a story. We have a culture in social media that wants to make journalists as big a part of the story as politicians themselves. That’s not good. People say, “Oh, you’re trying to insert yourself into a story.” I’m not. I’m trying to be a conduit, to be a challenge or a devil’s advocate for the public. I wish there wasn’t as much focus on the individual personalities of journalists. The people we cover should be the focus.