You guys, it's Jan. 17, 2016, we still haven't seen pictures of Saint West, and I am not even a little bit fine. But Keeping Up With the Kardashians and time move forward, and all we can do is move along too, and keep living on the thin edge of hope and despair. Let's get down to last night's episode.

Acing the Test: When I saw the preview for last night's episode, I was a little annoyed because it seemed like maybe Kris was encouraging the girls to get the genetic cancer screening done just for the sake of drama, but actually, given their family history (both MJ and her mother have had cancer), it does make sense for them to at least consider the getting the screening done. Was it milked for drama too? Sure, but this is Keeping Up With the Kardashians we're talking about. That said, I really wish that Kris had framed it not as a test that was only available for the privileged, but as something that's actually covered as preventive care (if you have a family history or are otherwise high risk) under the Affordable Care Act. Raising awareness is nice but empowering viewers to do something would've been even better.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Khloé was reluctant to have the testing done, which I totally get, even if it's not logical. Also, it cracked me RIGHT UP when Kris gravely said, "Khloé has always been resistant to getting tests done," given that the only thing that could possibly make we, the viewer, think of is the time Khloé refused to get a DNA test for the sake of ratings. Uh, any sane person would be resistant to that.

Kris and Kim play the "Grandma will worry so much if you don't do this!" card on Khloé and she backs down, but I love that her initial response when the genetic testers came around during their photo shoot was, when asked if she'd do a blood draw, "I'm not in the mood." Role model. Also, it is sort of fascinating that I've seen so much of the Kardashians' lives that I watched them getting their blood drawn (like, watched actual blood flowing out of their actual bodies) and it didn't even strike me as odd. What did strike me as odd: Why didn't Kris want Kylie and Kendall to get the tests done too?

"Are All Your Bruce Things Gone?" One of the things I'd hoped I Am Cait would spend a little more time digging into was how Caitlyn's relationships with her children changed post-transition — not just the anger and fear and grief and acceptance that happened immediately, but the longer-term changes. And so it was really interesting (and a little sad) to watch Kendall struggling with her place in Caitlyn's new life — she doesn't have the obsession with clothes and makeup that rebounded Kylie and Caitlyn. I'm glad they were able to talk openly about Kendall's desire to do more "tomboy" things together, and I'm also glad that Kendall asked what we've all been wondering: Does Caitlyn ever fly her helicopters anymore? No, but only because she's been very busy. Someday I want to write the preeminent academic work regarding the role of helicopters across the life of Caitlyn.

Crossover of the Week: I'm not complaining, but man, KUWTK has really been going deep with the Real Housewives of Beverly Hills crossovers lately, huh? Last week it was Faye Resnick and Bella Hadid, this week, I guess Paul Nassif is also a genetic counselor when he's not busy getting cement out of people on Botched? Again: This is not a complaint, and I'd further like to suggest an extended subplot where Kris babysits one of Lisa Vanderpump's swans.

Kourtroom Drama: The side of the Kourtney and Scott split that's focused on Kourtney is great to see. When Kylie says, "Kourtney is FOR SURE my favorite sister right now," you can absolutely see why. For me, it's not about the "revenge body" (which I think is sort of gross as an overall concept) or the nude photo shoot she did, even though if that made her feel empowered, that's amazing, and the photos were amazing too. I just like the fact that she seems more relaxed. She smiles more. She travels away from her two older kids, when before she seemed to want all of her children in her sight line at all times.

Scott's side of the split, on the other hand, is just incredibly sad. "My life is officially over, I just want it over," he told Khloé over the phone.

Reality TV Is Fake: As I said, the genetic testing process the girls underwent was clearly real and warranted, but the DRAMA of it was clearly milked for television. When Khloé was all, "I feel like Paul is really dragging out these test results," she was speaking for us all.

Reality TV Can Be Real: Sure, producers probably told Kris to read the poem Kylie wrote as an elementary schooler on camera (actually, Kris is probably enough of a producer herself to know it would be a cute moment to get on camera). But there was nothing scripted about Kim's reaction: first, annoyance that Kris was getting teary over what was, with apologies to Kylie, a pretty basic poem; and second, barely contained glee over how embarrassed Kylie was going to be when her doughy, freckle-faced portrait was shown on national television.

Last Words: "She's North West. She'll be fine." —Kim, describing her expectations for North after the baby Saint came, and also telling the most truth ever

Follow Lauren on Twitter.