It’s no secret Ted Cruz isn’t the most popular senator in Washington, something he often boasts about on the campaign trail. But, as the Texas lawmaker is increasingly seen as his party’s the best chance to block Donald Trump’s path to the nomination, his Senate colleagues are facing the tough decision of whether to line up behind him.

So far, none of them have endorsed Cruz’s bid for the White House. Only 23 of the 54 Republican senators have endorsed at all, and only 16 are backing a candidate still in the race, with 14 behind Sen. Marco Rubio and one each for Ohio Gov. John Kasich and Trump.

“I think right now a lot of our members are keeping their powder dry,” said Sen. John Thune, the third-ranking Republican. “For the most part, everybody’s kind of waiting to see how the voters weigh in."

The lack of support from his colleagues stems from the fact that Cruz has presented himself as an outsider since he was elected in 2012. He pushed his party to shut down the government over funding the Affordable Care Act in 2013, then criticized his fellow lawmakers for not standing firm, something that frustrated many of his colleagues. Last year, he took to the Senate floor to call Majority Leader Mitch McConnell a liar, and he often rails against the “Washington cartel” on the campaign trail.

Yet Senate Republicans are split on whether to rally behind Cruz, with some ready to support his bid and others either sticking with Rubio or declining to pick sides at all.

“It’s surely significant that not a single Republican senator has endorsed him, including very conservative senators,” said Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, who had endorsed Jeb Bush.

When asked why Cruz didn’t have more support from his colleagues, Sen. Lamar Alexander, R-Tenn., who has endorsed Rubio, said: “I’m going to let you speculate about that.”

“Well, that is a question, isn’t it?” Sen. Pat Roberts, R-Kan., who also has endorsed Rubio, said to a similar question.

“You know, I think I’m going to invoke the McConnell rule and not talk about the presidential primary,” said Sen. John Cornyn, the Republican whip and Cruz’s fellow senator from Texas.

Others, however, are ready to rally around the candidate if he continues to string together primary victories. Sen. Lindsey Graham, who dropped out of the presidential race late last year and has been one of Cruz’s most outspoken critics, told RealClearPolitics Monday that he would “swallow my pride” and admit his colleague has the best chance to defeat Trump.

Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La., who has not endorsed anyone in the race, said some of his colleagues simply haven’t adjusted to Cruz’s surging candidacy.

“People obviously were going for Rubio,” Cassidy told reporters Tuesday. “I have found that sometimes it just takes a while for folks to adjust to a new reality. I think the new reality is Ted Cruz is -- if you don’t like Trump -- Cruz is the guy. That’s the new reality and just sometimes people’s emotional experience takes a little longer for that to adjust, or they may be hoping that Rubio can pull it out in Florida."

Asked if Cruz would be able to repair relationships with his fellow senators if he does become the nominee, Cassidy said, “Of course, we’re professionals.” He likened the relationship between GOP senators and Cruz to his marriage of 26 years.

“Occasionally my wife and I have said things that we regret. We’re still happily married,” Cassidy said. “In any long-term relationship there are times of stress. The overarching goal, though, hopefully dominates. And in this case, that is taking care of the American people.”

Thune said he hasn’t worked closely with Cruz in the Senate, adding that the Texas Republican has mostly staked himself on being a “disrupter” and had long been eyeing a national run. But he believes Cruz would ultimately be effective in working with his colleagues if he becomes the nominee and then president.

“I don’t think he’ll have any choice,” Thune told reporters. “If he were to become the nominee, obviously to get anything done around here, not only to win the election and but then also to ultimately govern the country, you’ve got to be able to work with the Congress."

“A President Ted Cruz would probably be very different than Sen. Ted Cruz when it comes to funding the government,” Thune added later.

Democrats, who have also had their fair share of clashes with Cruz in the upper chamber, didn’t fully take the bait on the potential of Cruz being the nominee.

“The fact that Sen. Cruz hasn’t gotten a Republican endorsement from people who are the most conservative to the most liberal I think says something about what people think he’d be as president,” said Sen. Chuck Schumer.

Sen. Harry Reid, the minority leader, said the Republican primary is “going to be a nasty affair.”

RealClearPolitics intern Ellie Potter contributed to this report.