By Bruce Parker | Vermont Watchdog

SOUTH BURLINGTON, Vt. — As health care officials from Gov. Peter Shumlin’s administration fight a never-ending battle with overpriced insurance-based health systems, a quiet physician-patient revolution is under way to bypass health-care middlemen and pass the savings on to consumers.

The change is called patient-driven health care, and a group of physicians active in the movement are leading a day-long conference in South Burlington to explain how it works.

On Saturday, physicians from New Jersey, Maine, Vermont, Kansas and elsewhere will share how they deliver top-quality, hassle-free health care direct to patients without the expense and red tape of the Affordable Care Act.

The message is likely to resonate with anyone fed up with broken health care exchanges, skyrocketing premiums, long wait lines, indecipherable medical prices and wasted taxpayer dollars. In other words, most Vermonters.

Alieta Eck, a private practice physician from Piscataway, New Jersey, and the conference’s keynote speaker, told Vermont Watchdog that care based on the doctor-patient relationship delivers the ultimate in health care service.

“The goal is to offer patients the most choice possible so that they can choose their doctor, health plan, deductible, and what’s covered — just give them the highest degree of choices. Then doctors become the coaches, and the patient feels in control, and that changes the whole dynamic,” Eck said.

Eck, a past president of the Association of American Physicians and Surgeons, and an internist who runs the Zarephath Health Center for the poor and uninsured, said direct primary care is a model for how health care should work.

With direct primary care, patients pay a monthly fee of about $50 to receive personalized health care services from doctors. For that fee, they get same-day office visits for acute illnesses, managed care for chronic medical issues, minor surgical procedures, blood and urine tests, generic medications, EKGs and more. Patients and doctors stay connected through social media as well.

“There are doctors across the country now who are saying, ‘Look, buy a membership into my practice. For between $50 and $100 a month, you will be accessible to me by visits, email, phone and we’ll figure out the best way to care for you.’ That’s leaving the insurance company out of everything. Now it’s between you and your doctor,” Eck said.

For Vermonters who can’t get or update their health insurance through the glitch-ridden Vermont Health Connect, imagine the personal care of Marcus Welby, M.D., the constant contact of social media, and the straightforward affordable pricing of cable TV — all rolled up into one no-hassle experience.

Michael Ciampi, a family medicine doctor from South Portland, Maine, quit working with insurers and Medicare in 2013 and now works directly with patients. Ciampi’s service charges $50 per month for individuals and $140 for families.

“The direct primary care model has been very successful around the country, so we decided to transition to that,” Ciampi told Vermont Watchdog.

He said eliminating the middleman in health care could transform medicine all across New England states.

“It will stabilize the income of practices so they are financially viable, it will allow physicians to spend more time with patients and do less tests, and it will increase patient satisfaction,” Ciampi said. “It also saves doctors from getting burned out.”

Ciampi said he was burned out. His overhead costs were soaring due to Affordable Care Act regulations, and he increasingly found private doctors were not given a level playing field.

“We were finding that there’s a lot of unfair competition with hospital practices,” Ciampi said.

“When I was taking insurance, I was allowed to bill a patient for professional services. But a doctor who works at a hospital would bill for that as well as a facility fee of about the same amount. So hospital practices were making twice what we could, and hospital practices are nonprofit, so they weren’t paying taxes. That puts private practices at a really unfair disadvantage in the revenues we could bring in,” he said.

Eliminating insurance allows Ciampi to provide patients personal care at an affordable price.

Direct primary care advocates are quick to point out their patients still need insurance for big-ticket medical concerns like major surgeries and hospitalization. Such individuals may wish to purchase the highest deductible plan they can afford, to protect against medical catastrophes.

However, the direct-pay model could transform big-ticket medicine as well.

Surgery Center of Oklahoma, a physician-owned state-of-the-art medical center in Oklahoma City, takes pay directly from patients and employers. The center’s surgery menu ranges from ankles and spines to cardiovascular, urology and gynecology. According to the center’s online pricing, most surgeries range between $1,000 and $6,000. The center’s most expensive surgeries, including spines and full knee and hip replacements, can cost as much as $25,000. In contrast, hospitals conceal their prices and often charge elevated and disparate amounts for the same procedures.

Eck said direct-pay health care works because the insurance-based health care is broken.

“They’ve gotten the insurance companies and the government involved in the decision-making, even for the very smallest of health care needs. You have to ask permission for this antibiotic and that medication. We doctors need prior authorization for medicine that costs $10 — why in the world is the insurance company bothering us with that? It’s very odd the way insurance is overreaching and trying to make all the decisions,” she said.

She said insurance companies and governments don’t work with patients but with financial modeling and therefore can’t be the ones to decide what’s best for individual patients.

“The insurance companies are in the business to make money, so they’ll cut corners where they can, and not necessarily in the best interest of the patient,” Eck said.

“We don’t do any insurance because I don’t want that third-party getting between my patient and me. Patients are willing to pay a very reasonable fee to come to us. We just bypass the insurance. We’re primary care. I’m an internist and my husband is a family doctor. We don’t charge more than Jiffy Lube.”

Contact Bruce Parker at bparker@watchdog.org