Jake Hansen, 14, sells original designs through his website

Bricktree Customs bricktreecustoms.com

The living room of Jake Hansen's Longmont house is covered with plastic tubs full of colorful Lego pieces.

Strewn about the room, on top of the bins, and in shelves are dozens of Lego sets, some half put together, some falling apart, some pristinely displayed.

Hansen, 14 and homeschooled, is in the middle of explaining the model pizza parlour he designed. He is clearly obsessed with details, pointing out the paper towel holder he built in the bathroom and the iconic green, red, and white color-scheme he used throughout. He's answering questions in half-sentences, more focused on showing off his creations.

For Hansen, Legos aren't just a hobby, they are his business.

In March, Hansen turned his love for designing his own Lego models into Bricktree Customs, an online site he created that sells his design kits.

Right now there are just four small sets for sale (popcorn machine, cotton candy machine, air hockey table and water race) all of which are carnival-themed. The kits come with all the parts needed, along with the design plans, to complete the project and range from $17 to $25.

"What I do is I design it, I build the model," Hansen said. "Then I refine it and at some point I put it into the computer using a Lego digital designer software and I keep changing it, then I get to this eventually. Sometimes I still don't have all the right colors for me, but the digital model is complete."

The process in full takes a few months. The hardest part is not the design, but tracking down all the specific parts he wants. It's a little more complicated than just buying a set and repurposing the pieces.

"To get all the parts I have to buy from five or six different sellers," he said. He splits his purchases between thrift stores and various online sellers.

Lego minifigures with carnival food are seen on a shelf at Jake Hansen's home on Thursday. These are two of the designs he sells through Bricktree Customs. Go to timescall.com for more photos and video. (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer)

Hansen has a love for carnivals, which is why he's been designing carnival themed-sets. He's also working on a few rides, including one called the Red Baron, which has a wheel-locking mechanism he custom designed and all folds up so it can attach to a Lego truck he built, just like a real carnival ride would.

Hansen said all his designs are original, and he isn't trying to "copy anything exactly."

"Usually I have all the designs in my head," he said. "I'm better at doing it from my head than looking at a picture."

The business, which is only a few months old, has sold just a few sets thus far, but Hansen recently got an order for 10 of one of them. He usually makes a little under 50 percent profit-wise.

He also has a blog, called "Adventures of Hot Dog Suit Guy" where he designs Lego situations for a Lego man in a hot dog suit. He said the blog is "just marketing" for his business.

Customizing Legos and selling original designs is legal — it's the same as customizing a car with various car parts — as long as the seller isn't advertising it as a Lego original and as long as none of the designs are exactly like Lego designs, which Hansen's are not.

A garbage truck he has on display in his dining room is supposed to be "like the ones Longmont has."

"It's just like the Longmont trash trucks," he said. "Lego hasn't made any like this."

Hansen said he plans to keep working at expanding the business and finishing some of his larger designs, like the rides, and, as always, to keep building.

"This one I've very recently redone," he said, pointing to an elaborate carnival ride called the Crow's Nest. "They can always be redone."

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones