State lawmakers are focused on reducing sentences for nonviolent crimes

Colorado's prison population growth, which far outpaced the national average for more than a decade, is now dropping at a rate among the fastest in the country.

In the "tough on crime" decade of the 1980s, the state legislature doubled the maximum prison sentence for felonies, and states across the country enacted "enhanced sentencing" laws that sent criminals behind bars longer if they had sold drugs near a school or shoplifted for the third time.

In the early 1990s, the percentage of Coloradans in prison began growing faster than the national average. The state's incarceration rate was 23 percent below the national average in 1990, according to the University of Denver Institute for Public Policy Studies. By 2006, it was 5 percent above.

"I don't think it improved public safety; it just cost a lot more," said Sen. Pat Steadman, a Denver Democrat who heads the legislature's powerful budget committee.

In 1993, lawmakers made a decision that would send parole numbers skyrocketing as well: they passed a law requiring all released prisoners to serve time on parole. Colorado's parole population tripled from 1995 to 2006.

But soon, Colorado was backtracking, starting with a 25 percent reduction in sentences for most felonies.

Even now, lawmakers are focused on reducing sentences for nonviolent crimes; they passed legislation last spring aimed at cutting drug sentences and putting the money toward rehab programs.

It wasn't until 2010 that Colorado's prison population started to decline for the first time, according to the Colorado Division of Criminal Justice. The downward trend, which continued for the next three years, was due to lower population growth for the 19-39 age group, a decline in the state's crime rate and legislation that decreased prison sentences.

Among 26 states where prison population declined in 2010 and 2011, Colorado's 3.7 percent decrease was the sixth-highest. Colorado now has the 21st-highest incarceration rate in America, at 430 inmates per 100,000 citizens, higher than California, according to the latest statistics from the U.S. Department of Justice.