SHARE No Relief State laws and court rulings have combined to erect roadblocks at the doors of Wisconsin courthouses, placing strict limits on who can sue for medical malpractice, how much money they can collect and where the money will come from. Go to section

By of the

The $1.15 billion state medical malpractice fund came under fire from two Milwaukee County judges who questioned the need for such a large cushion to protect doctors and hospitals.

The fund was placed under the judicial microscope during separate hearings on the validity of the state's $750,000 cap on noneconomic damages for such things as pain and suffering that can be awarded in medical malpractice cases. In one case, a jury in July awarded a woman — who lost all four of her limbs as the result of an undetected Strep A infection — $15 million for her pain and suffering and another $1.5 million to her husband for the loss of her companionship.

Jury awards exceeding $750,000 for noneconomic damages trigger defense motions to lower the award, which in turn prompt the plaintiffs' lawyers to challenge the cap. The Injured Patients and Families Compensation Fund is a key player in the cases because it pays malpractice awards exceeding $1 million.

"The amount of money that is presently in the fund is an obscene amount," Circuit Court Judge David Hansher said during a Friday hearing in a case involving a man who won $1.5 million for pain and suffering in a malpractice case. Money flows into the fund from doctors, hospitals and some other health care providers and is managed by the state.

"Are not the doctors...being ripped off?" Hansher asked, wondering later: "Why hasn't the medical society spoken up and said enough is enough?"

A few hours later, in the courtroom next door to Hansher's, Judge Jeffrey Conen raised a similar question while listening to arguments over whether he should slash the $16.5 million pain and suffering awards in the case he was hearing to $750,000. During the discussion, it was noted that the premiums paid by doctors to the state fund were lowered by 10% this year.

"Big deal — the state is sitting on $1 billion that the doctors are paying in," Conen said. "What are the chances of the billion dollars being exhausted in...ever?

The fund currently has more money on hand than it has paid out during its nearly 40 years of existence. It has more than doubled in size since 1999 while the number of medical malpractice suits filed in Wisconsin have plummeted by more than 50% during that time, the Journal Sentinel reported in a June series of stories about the difficulty to win a malpractice case in Wisconsin.

On Saturday, Mark Grapentine, lobbyist for the Wisconsin Medical Society, defended the size of the fund.

"It's like any other kind of insurance fund that has to maintain a certain balance to handle the potential outlays," Grapentine said. "The other option is not having enough money in the fund to pay injured parties, which would be immoral."

Both Milwaukee County cases that were argued Friday appear to be headed to the state Supreme Court and are being closely watched by the medical and legal communities.

"This is the last showdown," said Charles Stierman, a former malpractice plaintiff's attorney. Stierman said the drop in medical malpractice cases has resulted in a dearth of verdicts that could be used to challenge the cap.

"This is the perfect storm for the plaintiffs, other than the fact that they have four conservative justices on the Supreme Court," said Stierman, who now works as a mediator. The court has seven justices.

Stierman noted it would likely take a couple of years for the cases to make it to the high court, and the makeup of the body could change before then.

The two cases at issue involve:

■A $25.3 million award to Ascaris Mayo, a 53-year-old mother of four who had her limbs amputated in 2011. The award included nearly $10 million for economic damages, such as past and future medical costs, that are not impacted by the caps.

Before the three-week trial began, Conen ruled the cap was constitutional. Now, he is being asked to decide whether it is constitutional as applied specifically to the Mayo case. Conen said he would issue a ruling in October.

■Tyree Roberts, 23, who was awarded $2.2 million in June after a jury agreed that nurses failed to recognize the symptoms of compartment syndrome in his left leg. Failure to notify doctors of the condition, which occurs when pressure builds within the muscles following an injury, resulted in Roberts later undergoing repeated surgeries and a loss of sensation in his lower left leg. The jury award included $1.5 million for pain and suffering, a sum Hansher on Friday said he had to "reluctantly" reduce to $750,000.

Hansher said that as a trial judge it would not have been proper to declare the statute setting the cap unconstitutional, though he noted, "I have no problem being reversed."

Daniel Rottier, Mayo's attorney, argued the caps hurt those with greatest injuries the most. Slashing the noneconomic awards to $750,000 in the Mayo case means that she would receive about $682,000 for her pain and suffering, or 4.54% of the jury's award for those. Her husband, Antonio Mayo, would collect about $68,000, instead of the $1.5 million awarded by the jury. Meanwhile, Roberts would receive 50% of his pain and suffering award, despite having a less serious injury.

"It is absurd, if not obscene," Rottier said, adding later, "The court has to ask itself, 'Is there a rational basis in this individual case to treat Mrs. Mayo in the manner in which this cap treats her and is there a reason to treat Mr. Mayo in the manner this cap treats him that can be justified...against the backdrop of a fund with $1.1 billion?'"

Naikang Tsao, attorney for ProAssurance Corp., the medical malpractice insurance company that will pay the first $1 million of the award in both cases, argued before Conen that the cap, which took affect in 2006, is doing exactly what lawmakers intended. The cap was instituted one year after the state Supreme Court threw out the previous cap of $350,000, plus an adjustment for inflation.

"What the(current) cap is aimed at doing is to prevent outliers — the large and unpredictable awards — which we submit is exactly this case," Tsao said. "The cap will, by nature, cut down (awards to) some people and not cut down others."

Facebook: fb.me/cary.spivak

Twitter: twitter.com/cspivak