. (Photo: Getty Images)

The goal of K-12 education is to prepare students for their future. It's important that our educational efforts succeed because our graduates are your future neighbors and co-workers.

The school board of the Appleton Area School District encourages the community to hold us accountable for results.

The governor and a joint committee established a single measure of school effectiveness for use in the annual school report card. School districts expended significant time and expense to comply. Now, elected officials in Madison are proposing changes and several elements of these changes are a concern to the AASD School Board.

Since we are elected by the residents of our school district, we owe you our recommendation on how your schools can be accountable.

1. Retain the school report card rating scale.

The report card displays a school's rating. That rating emphasizes student scores on a single test in math and reading. The rating places little weight or ignores learning in science, social studies, technical education, the arts, foreign language, leadership and interpersonal skills.

The current scale uses five ratings to describe the extent to which a school meets expectations. The scale does not imply that all subjects are measured.

A proposal in Madison would assign an emotion-laden letter grade (A, B, C, D or F) to each school. Since the letter grade implies a global assessment, the grade misleads the public.

The current rating scale displays clear, accurate and useful information and it should be retained.

2. Use one test to compare K-12 schools.

The Green Bay Packers and their weekly opponent are compared by the same measure. Touchdowns yield 6 points and field goals 3. If an opponent with a superior field goal kicker were permitted to increase the points awarded for field goals, the playing field would no longer be level. If professional football permitted each team to select the measure of success, you would be unable to determine the winners on Sunday afternoons.

A proposal in Madison calls for private schools to select the test by which they are evaluated. They would not be required to use the same test as public schools. A side-by-side comparison would be invalid.

3. Retain local control of schools.

You elected a school board. In the Appleton Area School District, the 7 members oversee 22 traditional schools and 15 charters. We are accountable to you for achieving our objective: preparing 16,000 children for their future.

To drive improvement, the school board sets goals in reading, writing and math. Each school reviews its progress toward goals on an annual basis and develops an improvement plan. Resources outside the district provide assistance as needed. This data-based improvement process is working.

A proposal in Madison calls for a new state board to replace struggling public schools with independent for-profit charter schools. We disagree. We believe that the challenges of a struggling school can be defined and acted upon more effectively by a locally-controlled school board with assistance from the Department of Public Instruction.

We have one more recommendation: recognize the need for teaching skills in the classroom.

Public schools welcome all students. One student speaks English fluently but for another it's a second language. Their teacher must adapt her instruction to each of them. Similarly, she works with children who learn easily and those who struggle, with parents who have resources to support activities that enhance learning and those who struggle to provide food, shelter and other basic needs.

An effective math teacher has two skill sets. First, she knows math. Second, she has critical teaching skills that enable her to reach children who like math and those who fear it. She understands child development, learning standards, assessments, classroom management and how to engage a difficult student.

A proposal in Madison would allow people with a bachelor's degree who demonstrate proficiency in a subject to receive a teacher's license for grades 6 through 12. They would know the subject but not necessarily know how to teach it.

The AASD school board believes that both skill sets, real-world subject knowledge and teaching competence, are needed. The Board does not advocate placing people in classrooms who have not mastered critical teaching skills.

The AASD school board is grateful to our community. Your support of K-12 education has enabled tens of thousands of children to gain knowledge, graduate more self-reliant and become contributing members of our community. Your schools have improved the community's quality of life and have helped to attract businesses and families.

— Submitted by members of the Appleton school board: Julie Baker, Diane Barkmeier, Jim Bowman, Kay Eggert, Sharon Fenlon, John Mielke and Barry O'Connor.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1ba5wtR