By Marisa Meltzer

Head to toe, every muscle in our bodies can be toned, stretched and massaged.

Even the face.

“Come see us once a week and in between do exercises at home,” said Rachel Lang, an aesthetician who owns Face Love Fitness in New York's financial district. The promised result for the committed, she said, is better circulation, which will temporarily soften lines, even tone and skin that glows.

A session at Face Love Fitness may involve a massage to activate the muscles, a forehead lift to tone the eye area, chin presses with a Pilates ring that rests under the chin, cooling jade rollers and a generous spritz of an orange mist at the end.

There are gadgets to buy, like a mouth exerciser from Japan, and instruments that promise to help slim the face or sharpen the chin and jaw muscles, all with the daunting look of torture devices in a horror movie.

“We buy everything from Asia,” Lang said. Face fitness is already a big enough market in Asia that soccer star Cristiano Ronaldo endorses an oddly shaped Japanese product called the Facial Fitness Pao; its tagline is “Shape up, Face up!”

Facial exercises and face massage are being touted by aestheticians, beauty gurus and even doctors as a vital addition to skin care regimens to tone skin, reduce puffiness and accentuate bone structure. Michelle R. Yagoda, a plastic surgeon on the Upper East Side, often recommends exercises as an alternative, or a supplement, to more invasive procedures.

She compared face exercises to abdominal crunches. “Body muscles have to be exercised,” Yagoda said.

Yagoda's recommended exercises include closing the eyes and looking (cross-eyed) toward the nose, then squinting — eyelids still closed — and holding for a few seconds. Another exercise involves opening the lips while clenching the teeth and pulling the corners of the mouth sideways with the index fingers to make the bottom teeth visible. This improves the tone of the mouth and chin, she said.

The biggest problem is compliance. “Two minutes every day is the minimum, and five to six minutes is ideal,” Yagoda said. “But it will feel like forever. It takes an iron will to stick to it.”

Are these ministrations truly effective?

“Both face massage and facial exercises can improve circulation,” said Jessica Weiser, a dermatologist at New York Dermatology Group. “You will have more of a glow, appear more awake. The key is not overdoing it and doing it properly.”