Ben Carson before the CNN Republican debate at the Reagan Library in Simi Valley, Calif., in September.

Over the past two years I have been photographing the presidential candidates as they lead rallies, meet with voters and plead for their votes. I started just before the government shutdown in 2013 at a tea party rally at the U.S. Capitol. Politicians railed against the president and the Affordable Care Act — a show to get a sound bite into the next news cycle.



Former U.S. secretary of state and Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton hosted a town hall in Derry, N.H., in January.

Since then I have followed the political spin as it tilts its way to November. Donald Trump’s entrance into the race, taking control of TV talking heads, making the media his press agent, is true Political Theater.



American businessman Donald Trump at the Conservative Political Action Conference in National Harbor, Md., in February 2015.

After a Trump rally in Lowell, Mass., a father said to his sons, “Now that was entertaining.” His sons agreed, chiming in with their favorite lines from Trump’s speech. In New Hampshire after Bernie Sanders gave a speech, he walked down the stage stairs, and when he saw photographers there he stopped and raised an arm in a power salute.



Republican Sen. Ted Cruz at the RedState Gathering in Atlanta in August.



Democratic presidential candidate Sen. Bernie Sanders at the 2016 New Hampshire Primary Student Convention in New Hampshire in January.

I want to pull back the curtain and show these politicians as they really are. Even though they are in plain sight, they can hide behind words and carefully arranged imagery to project their vision of America. I am using my camera to cut through the staging of these moments and reveal the cold, naked ambition for power.



Republican presidential hopeful Jeb Bush attends a “Politics and Pie” event in Concord, N.H., in April.



Carly Fiorina is interviewed by Fox News at the RedState Gathering in Atlanta in August.



New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie (R) speaks at the RedState Gathering in Atlanta in August.



A cutout of Republican Sen. Marco Rubio at the New Hampshire Primary Student Convention in New Hampshire in January.

Mark Peterson is an award winning photographer and regular contributor to Time, MSNBC, New York Magazine and Politico. @markpetersonpixs

RELATED CONTENT: