SOUTH BERWICK

Attend class in 1850s school

A historical interpreter from the Washburn-Norlands Living History Center in Livermore will portray a schoolmarm during a one-room schoolhouse re-enactment Wednesday at the South Berwick Senior Center on Norton Street. Photo courtesy Wendy Pirsig Maine Poet Laureate Wesley McNair will present a poetry reading as part of The Maine Writers & Publishers Alliance 40th anniversary celebration on Saturday at York Public Library. Photo courtesy Stephen Bracciotti

The Old Berwick Historical Society will host a portrayal of a day in the life of an 1850 one-room schoolhouse at 10:45 a.m. Wednesday at the South Berwick Community Center on Norton Street.

Renee Bonin and Kathy Cutter, historical interpreters at the Washburn-Norlands Living History Center in Livermore, will depict two schoolmarms from the 1850s.

The program is one of three historical presentations being organized this year by the Old Berwick Historical Society under a grant from Maine Community Foundation. The public is welcome to attend.

For more information, call 384-0000 or email [email protected]

BRUNSWICK & BANGOR

Bowl for Special Olympics

Special Olympics Maine will sponsor two fundraising bowling competitions this week.

The 10-pin contests will be held from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. Monday at Yankee Lanes in Brunswick and from 9 to 11:30 a.m. Wednesday for ages 21 and younger and 11:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. Wednesday for ages 22 and older at Family Fun Lanes in Bangor.

Both contests will include singles and singles ramp bowling (no bumpers). Proceeds will directly benefit Special Olympics Maine.

For more details, call 879-0489 or go to somaine.org.

WELLS

Talk on migration research

York County Audubon will sponsor a talk by Biodiversity Research Institute outreach program director Patrick Keenan at 7 p.m. Tuesday at Mather Auditorium at the Wells Reserve, 342 Laudholm Farm Road.

Keenan will talk about monitoring systems that track migration patterns of birds such as saw-whet owls and veeries.

Doors open for a social time at 6:30 p.m. The program is free and open to all. No reservations are needed.

For more details, call Bob Watson at 251-1135 or go to yorkcountyaudubon.org.

YORK

Artist talk, poet at library

York Public Library will host the following events this week at 15 Long Sands Road:

An artist talk and reception for “Travels, Inside and Out” with Jan Roy will be held at 5 p.m. Tuesday.

Maine Poet Laureate Wesley McNair will present “An Evening of Thanks” at 7 p.m. Saturday.

Both events are free and open to the public. For more details, call 363-2818 or go to [email protected]

TOPSHAM

Discussion of roads, traffic

This week’s session in the series of public workshops called “Back to the Future” will focus on town roads and traffic.

A panel discussion on transportation advances that will help people move around town more efficiently and with less risk will be held at 6:30 p.m. Wednesday at the Topsham Public Library, 25 Foreside Road.

The goal of the series is to provide background and information about the town’s cultural and natural heritage while considering the challenges its residents face. The workshops are sponsored by the town’s Planning and Economic & Community Development departments and the library.

The programs are free and open to the public. For more details, call the library at 725-1727 or go to topshamlibrary.org.

PORTLAND

Mad tea party for teens

Portland Public Library’s Teen Library and Dobra Tea will present a “Wake Up Alice!” mad tea party from 4 to 5 p.m. Wednesday in the Teen Library at 5 Monument Square.

Learn about and sample teas from around the world with experts from Portland’s Dobra Tea. Pair your tea with scones and cookies and make Alice in Wonderland-inspired crafts.

The event is free and open to ages 12-19. For more details, call Rachael Harkness at 871-1700, ext. 723.

YARMOUTH

“Water Wars” film

Yarmouth Historical Society and Royal River Conservation Trust will screen the film “Blue Gold: World Water Wars” at 7 p.m. Thursday at the Yarmouth History Center at 118 East Elm St.

The award-winning documentary examines the environmental and political dimensions of the planet’s water supply and highlights ways communities are taking action to improve access to drinking water.

For more details, go to yarmouthmehistory.org.

SCARBOROUGH

Concert by African drummer

Scarborough Public Library will host a concert by master African drummer Jordan Messan Benissan at 7 p.m. Friday at 48 Gorham Road.

Benissan, a native of Togo, was introduced to music and dance through ceremonies and rituals and received his traditional music training from several West African master drummers. He teaches music at Colby College and has performed traditional African drumming and music around the world.

The concert is free to attend; however, reservations are required by calling 883-4723, ext. 4, or email [email protected]

Advance care planning

Southern Maine Agency on Aging will host an Advance Care Planning Seminar from 1 to 2:20 p.m. Thursday at its headquarters at 136 Route 1.

Attendees of this introductory seminar may also schedule a one-on-one appointment with an advance care planning facilitator to assist them in selecting an agent to make decisions for them when they can’t communicate their health-care wishes.

Preregistration is required by phone at 396-6549 or email at [email protected]

BRUNSWICK

Talk about health insurance

“Ask the Expert: Understanding Health Insurance Options,” a conversation with Midcoast Maine Community Action about the Affordable Care Act and insurance options for 2016, will be offered at 6 p.m. Thursday in the Seminar Room of the Curtis Memorial Library, 23 Pleasant St.

For more details, go to curtismoney.com.

Get your game on at library

Curtis Memorial Library will host an International Games Day from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Saturday in its Morrell Meeting Room, 23 Pleasant St.

People of all ages are invited to come play a variety of table-top games and bring snacks. Registration is not required. The games aren’t competitive and there are no prizes.

For more details, call Melissa Orth at 725-5242, ext. 227.

SACO

Holiday Gala at museum

The 11th annual Festival of Trees kicks off this week with a Holiday Gala from 6 to 9 p.m. Saturday at the Saco Museum, 371 Main St.

This year’s festival, themed “Home for the Holidays,” will feature dozens of decorated trees and wreaths on display in the museum’s galleries.

Upcoming related events include a raffle of designer trees and wreaths concluding on Dec. 18; a drawing contest for schoolchildren on view at the Dyer Library; visits with Santa and Mrs. Claus; and a Children’s Crafts Day.

The festival officially begins at 5 p.m. Nov. 27 with a tree lighting and ribbon cutting ceremony and hot chocolate.

For more details, call 283-3861, press 2 for the museum, and then press 0.