jackson@sanduskyregister.com

Ohio Gov. John Kasich's decision to expand Medicaid has brought health care coverage to more than 400,000 Ohioans.

A decision on whether to continue with the expansion is looming next year. Funding for the expansion must be approved by lawmakers in the Republican-controlled Ohio General Assembly, and they've been decidedly lukewarm on the expansion, a key part of Obama Care.

Kasich aides say they are working with lawmakers to make sure the governor's program continues.

Medicaid provides government medical coverage for low income Americans.

Before the passage of the Affordable Care Act, Medicaid coverage was limited to families that have minor children.

The expansion funded by Congress also extended Medicaid to adults without children and adults with grown children and raised the maximum family income to 138 percent of the federal poverty level, new rules that made more people eligible. Congress also agreed to additional federal funds that would cover almost all of the cost of expansion.

But a court ruling made the expansion optional, with some states agreeing to participate and others turning it down.

Kasich, a Republican who has just won re-election to a four-year term by a wide margin, decided to push for expansion but could not get approval from the Ohio General Assembly.

Instead, he won approval for the release of the necessary funds from the seven-member Ohio Controlling Board, which makes many decisions on state spending and which is mostly made up of state lawmakers from both parties. The board voted 5-2 to approve the move. State Rep. Chris Redfern, D-Catawba Island, is one of the members of the Controlling Board and voted to approve Medicaid expansion.

The state's current two year budget expires at the end of June, so all of the state's Medicaid expenditures will need to be reauthorized, including funding to continue the expansion effort, said Wendy Patton, senior project director for the State Fiscal Project at Policy Matters Ohio, a progressive think tank with offices in Cleveland and Columbus.

As of Sept. 14, 401,307 Ohioans have health care coverage as a result of Kasich's move, she said.

Patton said her group applauded Kasich's move and hopes the Ohio General Assembly will support him next year.

"The governor did a good job and did a good thing for Ohio in expanding Medicaid the first time," she said.

Redfern was defeated for re-election and will leave the Controlling Board at the end of 2014.

Redfern said this week he's proud of his efforts to expand Medicaid.

"400,000 Ohioans have access to health care because of the expansion of Medicaid," he said. "Barring legislative action, the expansion is due to sunset June 30."

Steve Kraus, the Republican who defeated Redfern and will represent Erie and Ottawa counties in the Ohio House next year, said this week he needs to study Medicaid expansion and has taken no position on it yet.

Sam Rossi, communications director for the Ohio Department of Medicaid, said the department has been working for months with the Joint Medicaid Oversight Committee, a bipartisan panel of state senators and representatives.

"We are fully engaged with our partners in the Legislature," Rossi said. "We look forward to working with them."

The new speaker of the Ohio House next year will be state Rep. Cliff Rosenberg, R-Clarksville.

Rosenberger formerly was a member of the Ohio Controlling Board, but shortly before the Medicaid vote, the current speaker, William Batchelder, replaced him on the board with Rep. Ross McGregor, R-Springfield. McGregor voted in favor of Medicaid expansion.

Rosenberger could not be reached for comment Wednesday.