President Obama and Democrat Sen. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts have been at odds over the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade deal that would include the U.S. and 11 other nations.

Warren, other Democrats and unions have slammed the deal as being secretive, helping wealthy corporations and hurting U.S. workers, reported CNN.

Warren also opposes giving the TPP "fast track" status, which would not allow Congress to make any changes before voting on it, noted USA Today.

However, President Obama went on the offensive on MSNBC on Tuesday night (video below):

I love Elizabeth. We’re allies on a whole host of issues, but she’s wrong on this. Chris, think about it. I’ve spent the last six and half years yanking this economy out of the worst recession since the great depression. Every single thing I’ve done from the Affordable Care Act to pushing to raise the minimum wage to making sure that young people are able to go to college and get good job training to what we’re pushing now in terms of sick paid leave. Everything I do has been focused on how do we make sure the middle class is getting a fair deal. Now I would not be doing this trade deal if I did not think it was good for the middle class. And when you hear folks make a lot of suggestions about how bad this trade deal is, when you dig into the facts, they are wrong.

Warren fired back on Wednesday and challenged President Obama to reveal those facts to the American public.

Warren tweeted, "The Obama Admin says I'm wrong - we shouldn't worry about TPP. So why can’t the American people read the deal?"

Warren also wrote on her blog:

The Administration says I’m wrong – that there’s nothing to worry about. They say the deal is nearly done, and they are making a lot of promises about how the deal will affect workers, the environment, and human rights. Promises – but people like you can’t see the actual deal.



For more than two years now, giant corporations have had an enormous amount of access to see the parts of the deal that might affect them and to give their views as negotiations progressed. But the doors stayed locked for the regular people whose jobs are on the line.



If most of the trade deal is good for the American economy, but there’s a provision hidden in the fine print that could help multinational corporations ship American jobs overseas or allow for watering down of environmental or labor rules, fast track would mean that Congress couldn’t write an amendment to fix it. It’s all or nothing.



Before we sign on to rush through a deal like that – no amendments, no delays, no ability to block a bad bill – the American people should get to see what’s in it.

Sources: USA Today, MSNBC, Twitter, ElizabethWarren.com, CNN

Image Credit: Tim Pierce