Workers from Recreational Engineering and Planning work on a section of Boulder Creek at 17th Street damaged by September's flooding.

Jeff Ursoy, left, and Al Johnson remove guardrail from Boulder Creek near the mouth of Boulder Canyon in early May. (Courtesy photo)

As president of a company tapped to repair Boulder Creek after September's historic flooding, Gary Lacy turned to his crew for the heavy lifting — restructuring damaged structures, removing sediment and clearing out downed trees, boulders and even the mangled pedestrian bridge at 19th Street.

As a kayaker for 54 years, Lacy looked to the local paddling community for help getting the creek boat-ready.

"I had two jobs after the flood," Lacy said, "working for the city of Boulder and helping organize the paddler community to do cleanup."

Groups of about 20 to 30 boaters showed up on half a dozen Saturdays in the fall, cutting back low-hanging limbs, discarding trash and hauling away debris — everything from gas grills to guardrails. In the spring, before the snowmelt raised the creek to a roar, they were at it again.

"The paddlers got together and said, 'Hey, we're going to try to do what we can,'" said Al Johnson, who went out numerous times with Lacy in the fall and again by himself in the spring. In early May, Johnson spent an afternoon clearing low-lying limbs, fence posts and guardrail out of the class-4 rapids near Elephant Buttress at the mouth of Boulder Canyon, even taking a chainsaw to cut and remove a river-wide tree.

To Beth McVay, the process of cleaning up Boulder Creek is constant and ongoing.

"Every time I'm out there, if I see debris, I'll put it in my boat," McVay said. "We spend so much time there, we're so in love with being on the river ... we want it to be safe and pristine, as beautiful as it can possibly be."

Advertisement

McVay — a boater for nine years — helped Johnson clear guardrail and trees from the Buttress rapids and took part in a cleanup organized by Lacy, floating from Eben G. Fine to 75th Street. It was efforts like theirs, put forth by dozens of boaters, that helped make the creek even cleaner than before the flood, according to Lacy.

"The creek is quite clean compared to a lot of years," Lacy said. "When you look at other communities, we're just so far ahead and so fortunate to have our creek back and ready to go."

Though most of the work was to undo damage caused by the flood, the raging waters also helped improve how the creek runs, according to many boaters.

Johnson, a kayaker since 1997, said the creek is "better than before," with a "more natural" flow.

"It just feels different," Lacy agreed. "Not just drops but the flow of it, where it flows and eddies. It just feels more natural because nature, water and the flood recontoured the creek more naturally than any of us can. Water designed it, not us."

Water also brought down "big furniture," as Dave Frank puts it, in the form of massive rocks and trees. Frank was part of a five-man crew that took chainsaws to a big tree blocking the creek at Ninth Street during a Lacy-organized outing, and he has been out several times to cut trees and limbs on his own.

Frank learned to kayak on Boulder Creek and has been paddling it for 20 years. He says the creek is "rowdier" than it was pre-flood, something that can be a danger to all recreational users of the water, not just boaters.

"There's been a slight redirection of channels into trees," he said. "There are a few places where the current is going right into trees, and that is a fairly significant hazard for tubers."

Frank is keeping an eye out for trees being pulled into the creek by the swift spring currents, and he plans to continue minor cleanup of the corridor on an as-needed basis.

"Somebody's gotta do it," he said.

Lacy has a few spots in mind still in need of rehab, including limbs in a side channel below 30th Street and some downed trees near Scott Carpenter Park that, while not blocking flow, will need to be removed before the creek is reopened to tubers.

Lacy helped bring kayakers to Boulder Creek in the '80s through the restructuring of the creek corridor and the design of a whitewater park. His company, Recreational Engineering and Planning, rebuilt many of the features they created decades ago.

If a feature was structurally intact, Lacy didn't touch it, even if its design was outdated. His crew did a complete reconstruction of the entrance to the kids fishing pond, a wave near the pedestrian bridge by Mustard's Last Stand on Broadway and a drop above the whitewater course known as Little Niagara.

"The structures we replaced are more natural-appearing and moving," Lacy said. "We brought them to 2014 standards — wider openings, gentler slopes, more able to boat.

"We've a lot more knowledge now than in the mid-'80s when we first started."

Many boaters said they noticed improved waves and fewer drops, resulting in a friendlier, more fun creek.

"The features are more fun for surfing, more friendly," McVay said. "They're not as sticky" — boater-speak for a feature that traps you in its current and makes extrication difficult — "so you can stay and play."

Still, there are plenty of risk for paddlers, particularly when the water is flowing at high levels.

"It's an extremely strong, powerful river — very fast, very cold," Lacy said. "It can't be overstated. We don't have debris blockage, but you still have to respect the powerful water."

"You definitely have to be on your game," McVay added. "There's not a ton of eddies to rest in; it's pretty continuous. People need to know they are not going to get a break when it's this swift."

Contact Shay Castle at 303-473-1626 or castles@dailycamera.com.