Experts will discuss the health coverage gap for Brevard's poor.

Yolanda Diaz, of Palm Bay, is uninsured and cannot afford to get the CAT Scan her doctor said was necessary to check for a brain tumor or other neurological abnormality that could explain her chronic blackouts, and she has struggled to find a part-time job to pay for the procedure. (Photo: Photo provided by Yolanda Diaz)

When Yolanda Diaz of Palm Bay turned 26 in September 2014, she lost her health coverage, which is a serious matter for anyone, but particularly for her, since she frequently loses consciousness without warning.

Because she is uninsured, Diaz said that she cannot afford to get the CAT Scan her doctor said was necessary to check for a brain tumor or other neurological abnormality that could explain her chronic blackouts, and she has struggled to find a part-time job to pay for the procedure.

Diaz, a single mother of two, already works 40 hours a week as a pantry manager and volunteer coordinator at the South Brevard Sharing Center.

"It's not like I'm not trying," Diaz said. "I have a full-time job and I'm doing everything I'm supposed to do. It's just not working."

Diaz's age makes her ineligible to be a dependent on her mother's insurance plan, which is how she got health care in the past, and now she is one of approximately 17,500 Brevard County residents who are living below the federal poverty level but who fail to qualify for either Florida's Medicaid program or Affordable Care Act insurance subsidies.

Because Florida's Medicaid program was not expanded as supporters of the federal Affordable Care Act had intended, and national health reform was imposed with the presumption that all 50 states would expand Medicaid, many of Brevard's poorest residents have found themselves in a coverage gap.

This gap will be the subject of a meeting this morning hosted by the Space Coast Health Foundation, which is intended to raise awareness.

"We really feel like not everyone understands the critical nature of this," said Johnette Grindling, executive director of the Space Coast Health Foundation, a local charity dedicated to health and wellness.

Among today's discussion points: a bipartisan proposal spearheaded by a coalition of business leaders and health industry groups, which is called "Healthy Florida Works."

The Healthy Florida Works plan would involve increased privatization of the Medicaid program and state acceptance of $50 billion worth of federal funding for Medicaid expansion over the next decade. It also would include job training mandates for non-disabled beneficiaries, and some wellness programs aimed at encouraging preventative care and reducing long-term health costs.

This proposal has garnered some support, but Florida House Speaker Steve Crisafulli, R- Merritt Island, is one of the skeptics.

"Thus far, the federal government has been inflexible on cost control, service providers, quality control, and eligibility," Crisafulli said in a written statement two weeks ago. "If this is just another attempt to expand the failed Obamacare plan, I would predict it would garner very few votes in the Florida House of Representatives."

Charlotte Cassel, a fellow for Florida Legal Services who will be giving a presentation at the Space Coast Health Foundation event, said that the coverage gap requires an urgent political remedy

"Our office has been meeting with elected officials to explain why this is so important," she said.

Cassel continued, "All of these problems would be significantly diminished if the legislature accepted funding to expand the Medicaid program."

As it stands now, a person can literally be too poor to qualify for health subsidies, a counterintuitive dilemma.

Keith Heinly, the lead health insurance navigator at the United Way of Brevard, said that he has encountered many local residents who earn too little to qualify for subsidized insurance on the federal health exchange but who would be able to obtain it if they earned just a little more money.

"Anyone under 100 percent of the Federal Poverty Line is not able to sign up," he said. "If they don't hit that income level, then they are out of luck."

Adding to the concern, $2 billion of annual federal revenue for Florida charity hospitals is expiring on June 30, and the consequence of this is that nonprofit health care providers, like the Parrish Medical Centers of Titusville and Port St. John, will have fewer financial resources to help the needy. Charity hospitals like Parrish have historically been a safety net for the uninsured.

If you go

The Space Coast Health Foundation, a local health charity, is sponsoring a meeting today about the health care coverage gap. The coverage gap affects Brevard residents who live below the poverty line but who fail to qualify for either the Florida Medicaid program or the Affordable Care Act insurance subsidies.

Today's event, which is called "A Community Conversation on Health: Healthcare Coverage for Brevard's Most Vulnerable," will be held at 10 a.m. at 6605 N. Wickham Road.

A subsequent meeting of the Space Coast Health Foundation will spotlight policy proposals aimed at closing the health coverage gap. That meeting is currently being arranged.

Contact Kowarski at 321-242-3640 or ikowarski@floridatoday.com. Follow her on Twitter @IlanaKowarski

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1BY6p26