By Arthur Kane | Watchdog.org

In April, Oklahoma Attorney General Scott Pruitt issued an opinion paper, saying states’ rights trump federal Clean Air Act regulations.

Nebraska Attorney General Jon Bruning has spoken for state rights on a number of issues, including limiting federal enforcement of environmental laws in his state.

But when it comes to another type of brown cloud, the two state officials want the federal government to intervene and thwart the will of voters in a neighboring state.

Pruitt and Bruning filed a lawsuit in the U.S. Supreme Court last month against Colorado, attempting to reverse Amendment 64 that allows sales of recreational marijuana in the state.

Michael Elliott, an attorney and executive director of the Marijuana Industry Group, said it’s hypocritical for Pruitt and Bruning to invoke states’ rights for federal laws they don’t like, but use federal supremacy to try to impose their will on Colorado residents.

“I refer to it as fair-weather federalism,” said Elliott after Watchdog.org informed him of Bruning and Pruitt’s previous statements. “Whether we’re trying to prohibit alcohol, fireworks, or in Nevada prostitution, or guns, states should not be in the position of making policy for other states.”

Bruning, who leaves office this month, and Pruitt filed the lawsuit claiming increased enforcement costs because Colorado’s legal pot is trafficked into their states.

“In our constitutional system, the federal government has preeminent authority to regulate interstate and foreign commerce, including commerce involving legal and illegal trafficking in drugs such as marijuana,” the lawsuit states. “The Constitution and the federal anti-drug laws do not permit the development of a patchwork of state and local pro-drug policies and licensed distribution schemes throughout the country which conflict with federal laws.”

Less than a year before filing the lawsuit, Pruitt issued a position paper arguing the Environmental Protection Agency cannot enforce environmental regulations based on federal law, specifically the Clean Air Act.

“(T)he federalist system of government, as set forth in the CAA, requires that EPA recognize the rights and prerogatives of States,” says The Oklahoma Attorney General’s Plan: The Clean Air Act Section 111(d) Framework that Preserves States’ Rights. “The OKAG Plan, led by States ‘inside the fence’ rather than EPA in the form of an artificially created CO2 budget, recognizes those State rights.”

Bruning, while not issuing a paper, has repeated cited states’ rights to attempt to block or criticize federal laws, including CAA, the Clean Water Act and the Affordable Care Act, according to news reports.

“The lower court decision allowed the Endangered Species Act to override Congress’ desire for local control,” Bruning was quoted by U.S. States News in 2007 about a U.S. Supreme Court decision balancing CWA requirement on states with the Endangered Species Act. “We could not accept that threat to state rights.”

In 2012, during an abandoned attempt to win a U.S. Senate seat, Bruning told the Grand Island Independent: “I believe in the Constitution. The states are supposed to be equal partners with the federal government.”

In December, Pruitt joined a lawsuit against President Barack Obama’s order to stop deportations of illegal immigrants, and the Associated Press reported Pruitt’s strong support for states’ rights.

“Pruitt campaigned on states’ rights and has created a federalism unit in his office to push back against what he has described as ‘government overreach,'” according to the AP story.

Pruitt spokesman Aaron Cooper didn’t return repeated calls and emails over two weeks to discuss the lawsuit.

Bruning spokeswoman Liz Eberle responded to an inquiry about the costs of the lawsuit, saying Nebraska is not using outside counsel so the only costs are staff salaries and about $3,000 for printing. Eberle said she wasn’t prepared to answer any other questions about the lawsuit and didn’t return subsequent calls and emails asking to find someone who could talk about the lawsuit.

Colorado Attorney General spokeswoman Carolyn Tyler said current costs are negligible, but could increase if the Supreme Court takes up the case. She declined to comment on whether there is any hypocrisy by the plaintiffs.

“We are preparing a response to the litigation and will respond with 60 days,” she said. “We will have no discussions about the matter until then.”