WASHINGTON (MarketWatch)—Note to former Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke: Be careful about starting flame wars with people who buy ink by the barrel—or who have bigger servers than you do.

Editorial writers at The Wall Street Journal fired back at Bernanke after the ex-central banker on Thursday accused them of consistently being wrong about their predictions of higher inflation since 2006.

Au contraire, WSJ writers say. “We’re not always right. But we’ve been careful not to join some of our friends in predicting inflation from the Fed’s postcrisis policies,” they write in a Friday editorial called Bernanke’s Rebuttal.

A free-market champion critical of the Fed’s hyper-easy monetary policy, the journal’s editorial page mocks Bernanke as being thin-skinned and says he should “stop blaming everyone else” for the Fed’s failure to restore U.S. growth and employment to historical levels.

Instead, the Journal editorial calls for somewhat higher interest rates—the key fed funds rate is now near zero—that returns monetary policy to normal and “lets markets set rates and allocate capital.”

The editorial page has repeatedly argued that ultralow rate makes it harder for individuals and businesses to determine the true cost of spending and investment and that is can lead to excessive risk- taking or speculation. You know, the same things that caused the Great Recession in the first place.

The page also took issue with Bernanke’s insistence that the Fed’s easy-money approach is largely responsible for pushing the U.S. unemployment rate down to 5.5% from a postrecession peak of 10%. Bernanke noted that “job creation in the United States has outstripped that of other industrial countries by a wide margin.” Read Bernanke’s Blog

The editorial page points out that the steep drop in unemployment has occurred at the same time that millions of Americans have stopped looking for work, reducing the so-called labor-force participation rate to a 37-year low.

“The jobless rate would still be close to 8%” if the participation rate had remained steady, the editorial argued.

Who’s right? Who knows? History will ultimately be the judge, though a verdict is probably years away.

More from MarketWatch