PORTSMOUTH — State Sen. Thomas K. "Tommy" Norment, R-James City, won re-election Thursday to one of the most powerful positions in state government, Senate majority leader.

But in the face of criticism about a potential concentration of power in one lawmaker, the caucus decided that Norment should share the chairmanship of the budget-writing Senate Finance Committee with state Sen. Emmett Hanger, R-Mount Solon.

"I agree with it," Norment said, after the Senate Republican caucus meeting ended.

"I'm getting a little long in the tooth," he said, adding, "I have always recognized my limitations."

As the senior Republican member of the Senate Finance Committee, Norment was on track to assume the chairmanship, even as he sought re-election as majority leader.

But earlier this month, state Sen. Tom Garrett, R-Lynchburg, challenged that, saying it would give Norment too much power.

"Half a loaf is better than none," Garrett said of Thursday's compromise, although he said it wasn't exactly what he wanted.

Garrett, who is among the more conservative members of the GOP caucus, said he believed having co-chairmen of the Finance Committee would be an important check on power.

Hanger said he had heard the criticism, but didn't agree with it.

Hanger was one of three Republicans, two of whom did not seek re-election this year, who supported using Affordable Care Act funds to expand coverage for Virginia's poor, as an alternative to the Medicaid expansion urged unsuccessfully by Democratic Gov. Terry McAuliffe.

"So it doesn't look like the decision was ideological," said John McGlennon, a political scientist at the College of William and Mary, adding that the decision to have co-chairmen "might reflect a sense that Norment can't do both jobs by himself."

The last time one senator served as majority leader and finance committee chair was when Hampton Sen. Hunter Andrews filled both posts for the last decade of his 32 years in the state Senate.

Norment has said Andrews, though of a different political party, was his mentor.

"When he died, his wife gave me some of his books and papers," Norment said. "I have them in my office, and I consult them when I need guidance."

Norment faces challenges that Andrews, who served in the Senate from 1964 to 1996, never did, political scientists say. What that means for the Peninsula is uncertain.

"I never thought there'd be another Hunter Andrews," said Ed Lynch, a political scientist at Hollins University.

"Norment is going to have a very difficult time reconciling his responsibilities to his district with his responsibilities to his party and his responsibilities to the commonwealth," Lynch said. "I can't imagine why anyone would want both jobs."

State budgets weren't as tight as they are these days, and Andrews usually had a bigger majority than the 21 Republicans Norment leads, Lynch said.

"Norment, by contrast, is going to have to justify any spending increases for the Peninsula to an increasingly skeptical group of fellow Republicans, and then try to get those increases through an even more skeptical House of Delegates," he said.

The politics of senators have changed, too, McGlennon said.

"We have a legislature where rural Republicans have outsized influence … for Norment, the more rural, conservative cast to his party caucus restrains his power in a way that didn't apply to Hunter," he said.

The 21-19 Republican-Democratic split in the state Senate limits Norment's room for maneuver to form bipartisan coalitions, one of Andrews' trademarks. A narrow majority and strongly partisan caucus make such coalitions difficult, McGlennon said.

"If my recollection is right, there is a 1995 letter floating somewhere out there where Senator Norment was quoted as saying that one person should in fact not be allowed to hold both positions, apparently because of the enormous power both offices wield," said Olusoji Akomolafe, a political scientist at Norfolk State University.

"Given how powerful both positions are, it is a no-brainer that no one person, Democrat or Republican, should be allowed to hold both positions at the same time. That is just too much power in the hands of one person, period," he said.

Ress can be reached by telephone at 757-247-4535