Relationships, even good ones, go through times of challenge and even turmoil. That's true of personal relationships, and it's true of relationships between and among countries. But one would expect that diplomats and world leaders would be able to approach their relationship disputes with a little more reason and a bit less petulance.

That has not been the case, unfortunately, in the very painful negotiations between Greece and the rest of the European Union (or, really, Germany, which cast itself as the tough-love, verging on abusive parent in this little European family drama). Deeply indebted Greece, its banking system on the verge of collapse, has taken the first steps in adopting a brutal austerity package to appease the rest of the EU (well, mostly Germany), and avoid expulsion from the eurozone. It's still not clear that Greece will complete the process – there's a real threat that the nation's leftist prime minister, Alexis Tsipris, might not get his own parliament to okay the deal, and Tsipris might end up losing his job over it. But even if the package is given final approval, the process reveals predictable fissures within Europe and highlights the inherent problems of creating one unit from the 19-country eurozone (those sharing the common currency of the euro).



[READ: Editorial Cartoons on the Greek Default Crisis]

Greece surely bears some responsibility for its fiscal problems. Many Greeks are able to retire at age 50, and according to the Greek government itself, nearly three-fourths of Greek pensioners are trying to secure early retirement through legal provisions that would let them cease working before age 61. This is not a sustainable system in a world where people live into their 80s and longer, and Greece needs to address that, and some other antiquated policies, for its own fiscal health. But what happened in the heated talks between Greece and the EU is less like family members stepping up to help a malingering and troubled sibling and more like angry parents trying to punish a struggling child for its own sake.

The EU negotiators put Greece in a position where it had no choice but to take whatever medicine the union insisted it accept. The Greek economy was already in trouble, but things got much worse when the European Central Bank declined a request for an emergency influx of cash into Greek banks. This was understandable, since the EU was losing patience with Greece, and since the shortfall came as people, in a panic, took money out ahead of a referendum on an austerity package. But from a practical perspective, it simply made things more dire for the Greek economy. People could only withdraw 60 euros a day, making it very difficult for small businesses to operate and bringing the consumer economy to a virtual halt. This is not the same as parents telling a 20-something he or she has two months to find a job and four months to move out of the basement and watch "Star Trek" reruns elsewhere. This is like parents throwing a kid onto the street, and then blaming the hungry, disheveled and unshowered progeny for being unable to impress a potential employer at an interview.

The package includes a demand for pension reform, which is reasonable, as well as a streamlining and broadening of the tax base. This, too, makes sense, since the rest of Europe understandably doesn't want to have to prop up a nation that declines to take on the same lifestyle burdens as much of the rest of the union. But some of the provisions seem punitive for their own sake, such as a requirement that Greece put up 50 billion euros worth of state assets. One gets a chilling image of the EU seizing Greek antiquities and selling them off or licensing them out to investors. (Will visitors to the Acropolis see the word "Trump" emblazoned in glitter across the Parthenon's frieze?) This isn't asking a kid to start a savings account. This is forcing him to sell a kidney if he doesn't shape up.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

The deal also calls for Greece to introduce "quasi-automatic spending cuts" if the government misses its budget targets. Has anyone from the EU taken a close look at how badly sequestration has worked in the U.S.?

The beauty of the EU and the eurozone (aside form the ability of foreign tourists to avoid carrying 10 kinds of currency and incurring the currency exchange fees associated with same) is that it brings together a rich, diverse group of cultures, languages and perspectives into one gorgeous union. But that means there is still diversity and a difference in approaches that does not go away with the EU designate. Greece does not want to be Germany, much as Germany seems to think everyone should be like Germany. Most countries want to keep their own way of doing things, and that should be accommodated. That may mean some countries are richer than others – and those countries may well be places where people make work a bigger part of their lives than residents of other nations. And no, the rest of Europe should not have to be put in the position of being lifetime supporters of struggling nations. But the very adoption of the euro as a common currency is by definition a burden for smaller economies during times of financial difficulty (such as the global recession). Eurozone countries can no longer mess with their own currency's exchange rate to stabilize their economies. That's not a good long-term strategy for fiscal health, of course, but smaller economies feel the hit harder by their allegiance to the pan-European currency.