So there you are, watching the Democratic debate, cheering on your favorite candidate, booing the one you can't stand, or just learning all you can about the Democratic candidates. And then Bernie Sanders or Hillary Clinton brings up a word or phrase never heard of or have only a vague notion of.

"Wait, what the heck are they talking about?" you say.

We hear you--most people who aren't constantly immersed in American politics run into moments like this during these primary debates, and last night's #DemDebate, the 6th one so far this season, is no different.

Sure, you could immediately rush to Google and look it up, but who has time to press pause and start researching every time the candidates reference something you've never heard of before?

To help save you some time, we're rounding up several references made by the candidates during last night's #DemDebate--references to specific donors, insurance systems, policies, and former politicians that miiiight have gone over many people's heads. Oh, and don't worry about memorizing these things either--just bookmark this for the next debate.

1. Single-payer healthcare

In this debate, as he often does, Senator Sanders talked about how he hopes to instate a single-payer healthcare system if he gets elected to the White House.

What they said:

He said,

"Our Medicare-for-all, single-payer proposal will save the average middle class family $5,000 a year."

Hillary Clinton retorted that a single-payer system would be worse than the current system, a.k.a. the Affordable Care Act (ACA), or Obamacare. She said,

"So if you're having Medicare for all, single-payer, you need to level with people about what they will have at the end of the process you are proposing. And based on every analysis that I can find by people who are sympathetic to the goal, the numbers don't add up, and many people will actually be worse off than they are right now."

turns-out single payer health care just got bought by Hillary Clinton but what is it? do i care? — Lisa Figge (@2lef1) February 12, 2016

What it means:

Right now, under the ACA, the government subsidizes (or helps Americans pay for) medical insurance from private companies. This makes quality health insurance available to poor people and people with pre-existing medical conditions (who would otherwise have to pay astronomical prices for medical insurance).

Sanders says the ACA is clunky and inefficient and should be replaced by a single-payer system, or a health-care system completely run and funded by the government without the involvement of private insurance companies.

All US citizens would immediately be covered by a single-payer system. This is the type of system used by most European countries (and Canada), though the exact structure differs in different countries.

The government already has a policy like this in place, called Medicare, for people who are disabled or over 65 years-old. That's why Sanders calls his single-payer plan "Medicare for all."

But Clinton, who has a long history of fighting for universal healthcare, says that switching to a new system now could undo all the progress made by the ACA. She said,

"We are not England. We are not France. ... What President Obama succeeded in doing was to build on the health care system we have, get us to 90% coverage... I far prefer that and the chances we have to be successful there, than trying to start all over again, gridlocking our system, and trying to get from zero to 100%."

The lowdown on single-payer::

It would replace the healthcare system we currently have, with private insurance companies. It would cover everyone. This is a Sanders proposal. It's a difference between him and Clinton, and between him and the Republicans.

2. The Koch brothers

The debate moderators, Judy Woodruff and Gwen Ifill, asked the candidates about wealthy Republican donors like the Koch (pronounced "Coke") brothers.

What they said:

Clinton criticized them:

"The Koch brothers have a very clear political agenda. It is an agenda, in my view, that would do great harm to our country. We're going to fight it as hard as we can, and we're going to fight whoever the Republicans nominate who will depend on the Koch brothers, and others."

Clearly, Clinton doesn't like these guys. But who are they?

#DemDebate who are the Coke brothers? — red moe (@LMBMassage) February 12, 2016

Who are the Koch Brothers?? — Tech Wizard Solution (@techwizardsolut) February 2, 2016

What it means:

The Koch brothers, particularly David and Charles Koch, are hugely wealthy and influential conservative activists who donate large amounts of money to Republican campaigns. They want a free market, where trade between businesses isn't restricted by the government at all. Most Democrats don't want a free market system, arguing that it would make the vast gap between the poor and the wealthy even worse. Instead, they favor more government regulation.

The lowdown on the Kochs::

Clinton is saying that the Koch brothers have a political agenda, and when they donate to Republican campaigns, they hope to influence politicians. But she's also saying that though she herself receives large donations, she doesn't collaborate with her donors and they have no influence over her political decisions. Sanders, on the other hand, says that gigantic donations to political campaigns shouldn't be allowed at all, and that by definition they corrupt the political process.

3. Dodd-Frank

Both candidates spoke about the Dodd-Frank Act last night, as they usually do. (So do the Republicans when they debate.)

What they said:

Clinton used it as an example of one of President Obama's successes:

"Now, when it mattered, he stood up and took on Wall Street. He pushed through, and he passed the Dodd-Frank regulation, the toughest regulations since the 1930’s. So, let’s not in anyway imply here that either President Obama or myself, would in anyway not take on any vested interested, whether it’s Wall Street, or drug companies, or insurance companies, or frankly, the gun lobby to stand up to do what’s best for the American people."

Sanders said that while he voted for the act, he didn't think it went far enough.

What it means:

But what is Dodd-Frank, exactly?

#Demdebate Does anyone really know what is in Dodd-Frank? — Michael Ruggiero (@takegovernment) January 18, 2016

Back in 2010, Obama passed the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, or Dodd-Frank for short, to prevent another financial crisis such as the one in 2008. (It's named after the bill's two main sponsors, Chris Dodd and Barney Frank. Both are Democrats and neither is in Congress anymore.)

Dodd-Frank is huge and complicated, but basically it attempts to protect everyday Americans from risky decisions that are sometimes made by banks and Wall Street. It also says the government won't bail out banks again, and that banks can't invest its customers' money for the bank's own profits.

The lowdown on Dodd-Frank:

This has to do with reining in the banks and Wall Street. The Republicans advocate freedom for banking and business. Clinton thinks Dodd-Frank is a good start and wants to build on it, while Sanders wants to overhaul it more comprehensively. Which brings us to ...

4. The Glass-Steagall Act

In last night's debate, Sanders voiced his support of reinstating the now-defunct Glass-Steagall Act.

What they said:

Sanders said,

"I think [Teddy Roosevelt] would have said, 'Bring back a 21st-century Glass-Steagall legislation.'"

But what is the Glass-Steagall Act?

"Didn't Bill Clinton end Glass Steagal?" "No that was Bush" "ehh I think you're wrong" "Well what is Glass Steagal?" LOL love it — Hailey Snow (@snaileyho) February 12, 2016

What it means:

The Glass-Steagall Act was actually instated all the way back in 1933. This act separated commercial banks from investment banks. That means it separated the banks that regular people use to hold their money and the banks doing huge stock and bond trading for gigantic companies. Think of it as separating Wall Street from your hometown Main Street.

The Act was partially repealed in 1999 by former President Bill Clinton, a.k.a. Hillary Clinton's husband, because banks thought it limited their growth and competitiveness. But many people also blamed the 2008 financial disaster on the Act's partial repeal.

The lowdown on Glass-Steagall:

Sanders wants to reinstate Glass-Steagall and Clinton doesn't--she says she wants to instate a "more comprehensive" law than Glass-Steagall.

5. Henry Kissinger, Former Secretary of State

You may have heard Henry Kissinger's name in history class, but you may not remember exactly who he was and what he did--or know why Bernie Sanders hates him.

What they said:

In the Milwaukee #DemDebate, Sanders brought up that Hillary Clinton was mentored by Kissinger (they both were Secretaries of State, after all), and said,

"I happen to believe that Henry Kissinger was one of the most destructive secretaries of state in the modern history of this country. I am proud to say that Henry Kissinger is not my friend. I will not take advice from Henry Kissinger."

Whoa, where did that come from? Who even is this guy?

@UICProfWatch No, who is Henry Kissinger, but I am Feelin' the Bern! — Shirley ? (@StandingDreamer) February 12, 2016

ffs who is Henry Kissinger #DemDebate — Front Foot (@militarymedium) February 12, 2016

What it means:

Let's break it down: Henry Kissinger was Secretary of State when Richard Nixon was president in the 1970s. (Richard Nixon is widely disliked--he left office due to a major political scandal.) Kissinger is most famous for negotiating the Paris Peace Accords, which ended the Vietnam War. He even won the Nobel Peace Prize for that.

But ... Kissinger was also kind of shady. He did a lot of things in secret or semi-secrecy, including the secret bombings in Cambodia that Sanders mentioned in the debate. These bombings were deadly and actually helped bring to power the Khmer Rouge, a genocidal communist group that killed 2 million people during its regime.

(FWIW, Kissinger's defenders say the bombing's secrecy was to avoid complicating peace talks with the Vietnamese--Kissinger's principal accomplishment.)

And despite the fact that he brokered the Vietnam peace talks, many blame him for dragging out the war in the first place with his "Peace and Honor" stategy.

So yeah, it's pretty controversial that Clinton, who was Secretary of State herself under President Obama, has taken some advice from Kissinger. But Clinton explained that you don't have to agree with someone all the time in order to learn something important from them. She said,

"People we may disagree with on a number of things may have some insight, may have some relationships that are important for the president to understand in order to best protect the United States."

The lowdown on Kissinger:

He's a controversial historical and political figure. But ultimately what these candidates think of Kissinger probably isn't going to affect our votes as much as their policies do.

Hope that helped! Any other terms or ideas you'd like us to translate into plain English for you? Let us know in the comments or tweet us at @goKicker.





Images used under Creative Commons licensing.