Buy Photo Gov. Andrew Cuomo signs the SAFE Act in a ceremony in Rochester in January 2013. (Photo: SHAWN DOWD/@sdowdphoto/2013 FILE PHOTO)Buy Photo

It's hard to figure out what's more disturbing — that there are 2,201 registered assault-style weapons in Monroe County, or that we don't know how many more are out there.

According to State Police records released this week, those guns are part of the 44,500 or so assault weapons registered across New York state since the SAFE Act went into effect in 2013.

The Shooters Committee on Public Education, a gun-rights group, won access to the data after it sued state officials to release it. The committee, along with gun-control advocates, rightly argued that the information was public and vital to understanding the impact of the law.

But the data release also begs the question: How many New Yorkers are actually complying with the registration requirements?

If partisans like the National Shooting Sports Foundation are to be believed, hardly any. The trade group for the firearms industry claims there are at least 1 million assault weapons in the Empire State. That number would be a comfort should the Zombie Apocalypse arrive, but should strike most law-abiding citizens as, well, overkill.

A 4 percent response rate would be disturbing, if true. But given the nature of many firearms transactions, legal or otherwise, we truly have no way of knowing how many of these weapons are available.

Stephen Aldstadt, president of the shooters committee, cites the figures as proof that the law is a farce. "The majority of gun owners and sportsmen in New York have absolutely no respect for this law," he said.

Why he might view this attitude with approval is unclear. How would Aldstadt respond to anyone who says, "I have absolutely no respect for the Second Amendment?" The answer, most likely, would be, the law is the law, whether you agree with it or not.

There is absolutely nothing in the Constitution's right to bear arms that precludes a registry of military-style weapons. Gov. Andrew Cuomo says the SAFE Act has helped limit the availability of illegal weapons and required mental-health officials to report any suspicious activity of gun owners in their care.

The number of guns registered "is only evidence of how long overdue the SAFE Act was," said Leah Gunn Barrett, executive director of New Yorkers Against Gun Violence. "... The law does not require individuals to surrender their assault weapons, merely to register them."

Support for the SAFE Act remains strong statewide, according to the latest Siena College poll, although slightly more voters in upstate New York oppose the law than favor it.

Americans are rightly appalled by the ready availability of deadly weapons. There have been 279 mass killings — four or more slain in one incident — in the United States since 2006, according to USA Today.

Thankfully, a Republican attempt to weaken the SAFE Act failed this legislative session. Like the federal Affordable Care Act, it appears the SAFE Act is here to stay. It's time for gun owners to be the good citizens they aspire to be and make sure every weapon is registered.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1Lv9JHM