FEMA Administrator Craig Fugate told a Senate committee Wednesday that massive increases in flood insurance rates are unfair to middle class and low-income homeowners. But he said he doesn't have a way to stop the increases under the Biggert-Waters Flood Insurance Reform Act passed by Congress last year.

If Mr. Fugate and his agency's lawyers are right, only Congress can stop the ridiculous increases some coastal homeowners are being told they're going to have to pay.

"I read the legislation," Mr. Fugate said during a meeting of the Senate Banking Committee's Economic Policy Subcommittee. "My attorneys read the legislation. Our staff looked at it. If I had a way based upon the legislation, the technical implementation, I don't see it." Perhaps Congress' lawyers should talk to Mr. Fugate's lawyers.

FEMA has delayed implementation of parts of the act, including a levee accreditation task force and a narrow affordability study. In addition, President Obama delayed the implementation of parts of his health care reform act. If he can do that, why not delay flood rate increases?

Congress could solve the problem, too. Louisiana's congressional delegation -- along with senators and representatives from New York and New Jersey -- has been pushing for months for a delay in the implementation of Biggert-Waters.

Several legislative proposals have been slowly working their way through Congress, but nothing has passed. Time is very tight, with some Biggert-Waters provisions set to go into effect Oct. 1.

California Rep. Maxine Waters, whose name is on the flood insurance reform act, told Mr. Fugate in a July letter signed by two dozen colleagues that Congress never intended for homeowners to face such exorbitant flood insurance rate increases.

Senators representing Louisiana, New York, Oregon, New Jersey, Nevada and Massachusetts said Wednesday that constituents are receiving notices of planned rate hikes of 100 percent, 500 percent, even 3,000 percent.

"They don't have $9,000 when they were paying $1,000," said Sen. Charles Schumer, D-NY.

Congress did set this mess in motion, though. The flood insurance act was approved without any consideration for whether it would be generally affordable as market-driven rates were phased in. The aim was to make the program self-sustaining by reducing federal subsidies and raising rates over time. But that is playing out in a far different way than expected.

Southeast Louisiana residents started getting the dire news about potentially astronomical increases last spring. Then earlier this month, FEMA finally released details on the new rates for communities that are at high-risk of flooding.

The numbers are scary. The owners of a home that is 4 feet below base flood elevation in FEMA's flood maps would pay an estimated $9,500 per year for coverage under new unsubsidized rates. Insurance agents are telling some Southeast Louisiana residents that their flood insurance will cost $20,000 or more per year when the new rates go into effect.

The positive outcome of Wednesday's subcommittee meeting is that Mr. Fugate acknowledged those kinds of rate increases aren't appropriate for many homeowners. "Should people who lived all their lives in a home who are middle class be priced out of their homes?" he said. "I don't agree."

Sen. David Vitter asked whether FEMA could gain revenue by more aggressively enrolling the estimated 2 million homeowners who are mandated to have flood insurance but don't. He also questioned the 30 percent fee insurance companies get for administering flood insurance policies for FEMA.

Those are important questions. Mr. Fugate argued that flood policies are complicated, so the administrative fees are generally in line. That seems like a thin excuse.

Mr. Fugate also said that homeowners could minimize insurance costs if they elevate their homes. It's not that simple, though. The cost of raising a house can be pricey, and tens of thousands of people in coastal Louisiana and Mississippi rebuilt their homes post-Katrina to standards set by FEMA. Now the standards are changing, and the grandfather clause that would have shielded them from exorbitant increases is being nullified by Biggert-Waters. That isn't fair.

Sen. Mary Landrieu warned fellow members of Congress last summer that the new rates could put a burden on some families. She didn't make any headway, though.

She pressed Wednesday for Congress to fix its mistake. If FEMA can't or won't delay Biggert-Waters until there is a solution to the rate problem, she argued, then Congress must do so.

She's right: Someone in Washington needs to act. If FEMA won't, then it's up to Congress.