Or, to be more precise, keeping people from having to go back into the hospital. Hospital readmissions were a big target of Obamacare because they signal two things—improper care and spending way too much. So the law set out to reduce them by reducing Medicare reimbursements when hospitals have high readmission rates for some key conditions and providing incentives for improving the quality of care. It appears to be working.

The Department of Health and Human Services on Wednesday announced that the rate of hospital readmission -- that is, the number of patients returning to the hospital within 30 days of discharge -- has dropped dramatically since 2010, when President Barack Obama signed the health care law. That’s a big deal, because reducing readmissions is one of Obamacare’s explicit goals. […] Sure enough, the readmission rate began to drop following the law’s enactment, with a sharper decline among the three conditions that the penalties targeted. And in the five years that followed, HHS announced on Wednesday, there were 565,000 fewer admissions overall. “That’s 565,000 times that a patient didn’t have to experience an extra hospital stay,” Rachel Zuckerman, an HHS economist, wrote in a blog post that appeared on the agency’s website Wednesday.

There are always lots of caveats about attributing big changes in health statistics to any one factor. But it's hard to ignore those trend lines. In fact, to rule out one potential fuzzy factor, HHH economists decided to see if hospitals were using a gimmick to reduce readmission rates—listing patients as under "observation" as opposed to readmitting. It's like an accounting status for patients—if they're in observation they aren't actually admitted. But it turns out that the rate of patients returning to observation status hasn't significantly increased.

So, yeah, that nightmare law Republicans remain so committed to repealing is continuing to do some pretty good stuff, and saving the country some money to boot. That probably won't come up in any Republican debate anytime soon, though.