More than half a decade ago states were asked to expand medicaid.

Nearly a quarter of them chose not to and missed the deadline for expansion but some members of congress are trying to figure out how to help the states that didn't.

It's one fight after another, the Affordable Care Act is still making waves on Capitol Hill.

When medicaid expanded a few years ago, 19 states chose not to do so, opting out of federal benefits.

And now, if they change their minds, it's too late. The deadline passed.

Senator Mark Warner, whose home state of Virginia is one of those states, is hoping to extend that deadline so if his state does expand- it can get those federal benefits too.

"If that is a law and Virginians are paying taxes to help pay for that law, its crazy for us not to expand medicaid. We've paid those tax dollars. Our tax dollars are going to states like Maryland Indiana Ohio", said Mark Warner.

Tom Miller a resident fellow at the american enterprise institute says that argument isn't just about medicaid.

"They were doing that before the expansion and after the expansion. They pay for a lot of things they don't receive", said Miller.

He says Warner's legislation, nick-named the same act is nothing new.

"It should really be called same old same old", said Miller.

And when I asked Warner why the states which chose not to meet the deadline shouldn't be penalized, he said it would only hurt constituents.

"I wish states would have all expanded but the idea that were gonna hold millions of taxpayers because the legislature didn't do the right thing, I think that's time to correct that", said, Warner

Warner only has democrats signed on to the bill and when I reached out to the republican senators on the finance committee I was either denied an interview or ignored completely. Miller says this is just simply not worth a discussion for these members.

"These are marginal messaging points for democrats and there's no reason to fan the flames further", said Miller.

Both agree changes need to be made to health care and are looking to see where this year's elections will change congress.