UAW meets today with Volkswagen — NLRB faults Macy’s for failing to bargain with micro-unit

With help from Marianne LeVine and Timothy Noah

UAW MEETS TODAY WITH VOLKSWAGEN — Michael Cantrell, the president of United Auto Workers Local 42 at the Volkswagen of America plant in Chattanooga, said at yesterday’s AFL-CIO wage summit in Washington that his local will meet with company executives this afternoon. That marks the first time the union has conferred formally with executives under Volkswagen’s new “engagement” policy modeled on European-style works councils. An auditor recently confirmed that Local 42 had the support of at least 45 percent of the plant’s workforce. (In early 2014, you may recall, Local 42 lost a closely-watched union representation vote.)

Story Continued Below

Cantrell also said Local 42 will hold a bargaining committee election this Sunday. “We will eventually get recognition, and we will eventually bargain a contract,” Cantrell said.

NLRB FAULTS MACY’S FOR FAILING TO BARGAIN WITH MICRO-UNIT — The National Labor Relations Board ruled that Macy’s can’t re-litigate its opposition to bargaining with a so-called “micro” bargaining unit of fragrance department workers at a company store in Massachusetts.

In July, the NLRB, in a 3-1 decision, certified the unit of 41 Macy’s employees organized by Local 1445 of the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union. That decision extended a standard it had previously applied to the healthcare industry, allowing smaller units within retail stores to organize. Macy’s and business groups hated the decision. The company told Reuters at the time that "organizing a selected portion of a store's selling associates into multiple collective bargaining units is impractical and an impediment to providing a consistent level of customer service.”

After July’s decision, however, Macy’s wouldn’t bargain with the unit and eventually faced unfair labor practices charges. In those proceedings, the company acknowledged its failure to bargain but, in so doing, contested the validity of the micro unit. But the board found yesterday that the company is barred from re-litigating that issue, ordering Macy’s to bargain in good faith with the unit.

“All representation issues raised by the respondent were or could have been litigated in the prior representation proceeding,” the opinion said. Read the full decision here: http://1.usa.gov/1xGMW4x

GOOD MORNING and welcome to Morning Shift, POLITICO's daily tipsheet on labor and employment policy. Send tips, corrections, exclusives, and dry firewood to bmahoney@politico.com, tnoah@politico.com, melk@politico.com, andmlevine@politico.com. Follow us on Twitter at @ politicomahoney, @ TimothyNoah1, @ MikeElk, @ marianne_levine, @ ProMorningShift and @ POLITICOPro.

AFL-CIO LAUNCHES WAGE CAMPAIGN IN KEY PRIMARY STATES — AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka said at yesterday’s wage summit that the AFL-CIO will host four additional wage summits in the first four presidential primary states of Iowa, New Hampshire, Nevada and South Carolina. “Each Summit will bring together diverse voices, just as we did today, to lay out the entire Raising Wages platform and establish state-based standards of accountability,” Trumka said. The first will be in Iowa this spring.

Other wage summit highlights:

Warren blasts both parties: “Pretty much the whole Republican Party and — if we’re going to be honest — too many Democrats are overly cozy with the financial industry, and make decisions that benefit the wealthiest 10 percent of Americans while leaving others to struggle,” Sen. Elizabeth Warren told the audience. “We know that democracy does not work when congressmen and regulators bow down to Wall Street’s political power,” she said. “And that means it’s time to break up the Wall Street banks and remind politicians they don’t work for the big banks; they work for us.” Read more from POLITICO’s Kyle Cheney: http://politi.co/1yBOnCX

Walmart worker speaks: “Somebody’s going to have to take a risk,” said Colby Harris, a former Walmart worker fired for participating in a strike against the company. “And I feel like me losing my job was just part of that process … there are several people from several different demographics, several different jobs, Walmart and Papa John’s and low wage jobs, who were all suffering just like I was. But somebody had to take the sacrifice, just like in the 60’s in the civil rights movement.”

MORE NLRB: An NLRB administrative law judge ruled yesterday that the Detroit-based utility company DTE Energy did not violate federal labor law in interrogating an employee about an alleged harassment. Separately, another NLRB administrative law judge found that Longy School of Music of Bard College violated federal labor law when it notified some employees that their employment was “at will” even though a governing union contact said otherwise.

VOTE TODAY OVER ACA AND THE WORK WEEK: The House today will vote on a bill ( Save American Workers Act of 2015,) re-defining full-time employment as 40 hours per week under the Affordable Care Act. The healthcare law currently defines a full-time employer as any worker employed for 30 hours or more. That definition was designed by Democrats to expand coverage and discourage employers from reducing worker hours to avoid the law’s health insurance mandate. But it drew the wrath of businesses and Republicans like Congressman Todd Young of Indiana, who introduced the legislation, with some Democratic support, claiming the shortened work-week definition puts workers “at risk for seeing lost hours and wages at work. “

SEIU International President Mary Kay Henry spoke out against the legislation. In a statement, Henry said the bill would put 6.5 million workers at risk for part-timing and “would make it easier for bad actor employers to manipulate the work hours of working women and men, depriving them of both benefits and wages.”

FAIRPOINT IN MEDIATION WITH STRIKERS: The International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW), the Communication Workers of America (CWA) and FairPoint Communications Inc. have yet to reach a compromise following intervention from the U.S. Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service (FMCS). The FMCS announced Jan. 3 that it would mediate the dispute.

Neither side may provide public comment about the process during mediation, which, ideally, will settle a contract dispute that began last year and resulted in more than 1,700 workers walking off the job in October. The two sides began negotiating a new contract in April but reached an impasse in August, according to FairPoint. The contract dispute centers around freezing pensions, reducing health care benefits, and hiring contractors. This is not the first time the FMCS has entered the mediation dispute; in November it requested a meeting between the two sides. No compromise was reached then. http://goo.gl/A7sCAz

BIZ GROUPS ASK COURT FOR ANOTHER DELAY OF HOME HEALTH RULE — The Home Care Association of America asked a Washington, D.C. federal judge last night to delay another key portion of the Labor department’s overtime and minimum wage rules for home health workers. The same court last month nixed a major portion of the law, allowing certain third party providers of home health workers to continue to avoid paying workers minimum wage and overtime. If successful, this latest challenge would deal another blow to the Labor department’s bid to extend greater overtime protections to the home health care industry.

The portion of the rule under attack is complicated, but essentially it narrows the definition of “companionship services” (which are exempt) in such a way as to extend minimum wage protection to many workers not previously not covered who feed and clean the elderly or disabled. DOL says Congress intended to limit the companionship exemption to less active workers (“eldersitters”).

The HCAA isn’t buying it. “Congress did not express any intent to restrict the companionship exemption to those few workers who only ‘incidentally’ care for the elderly and infirm,” the HCAA told the court last night. The court has temporarily delayed implementation of the rule until Jan. 15, but it’s considering a longer stay. The DOL, at any rate, already stalled enforcement of the rule until July. Pros can read the full brief here: http://politico.pro/1AtnWgR

FACULTY ORGANIZING: THE BIG PICTURE — “College faculty at dozens of campuses nationwide are organizing into labor unions to demand better pay — and to challenge the American higher education model, which increasingly relies on itinerant part-timers to teach students at even the most prestigious universities,” POLITICO’s Stephanie Simon writes.

“Sensing an opportunity to bolster their declining ranks, national unions are pouring resources into the movement. In the past two years, they collectively have added thousands of contingent faculty to their membership rolls. Their efforts may get a boost from a recent National Labor Relations Board ruling that creates the most favorable conditions for faculty organizing in three decades.” http://politico.pro/1tMMpJc

COFFEE BREAK

— Senate Democrats in Indiana propose $10.10 minimum wage, from the A.P.: http://bit.ly/1DzJQ2S

— Kentucky Senate puts right-to-work bill on fast track, from Kentucky.com: http://bit.ly/1Itw2I8

— Obama sells success in Detroit trip, from POLITICO: http://politi.co/1AHcOhF

— Republicans in Wisconsin slow down right-to-work push, from La Crosse Tribune: http://bit.ly/1FpCqnF

— State courts may offer workers better chance at litigating pay for security checks, from Bloomberg Businessweek: http://buswk.co/1Atp97O

— Door opens for Teamsters to organize Southern California port drivers, from San Jose Mercury-News: http://bit.ly/1BJtZxc

— Teen retailer laying off 3,700, from the Wall Street Journal: http://on.wsj.com/14qC3bg

— Showdown looms between business and labor, from Al-Jazeera: http://alj.am/14wOpj0

— United Attendants protest firing after they refused to board “menacing” jet, from Bloomberg: http://bloom.bg/1AtpE4i

— “The $140,000-a-year welding job,” from the Wall Street Journal: http://on.wsj.com/1BNL6Oz

THAT’S ALL FOR MORNING SHIFT. Enjoy the day.