Buy Photo The Register’s Editorial (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

When the Voting Rights Act was passed by Congress in 1965, it was intended to outlaw poll taxes, literacy tests and other attempts by state governments to discourage minorities from voting.

Over the past five decades, the law has been almost universally praised as an essential tool to not only ensure fair elections, but also to thwart the marginalization of minorities in America. In recent years, however, the law has come under attack as various state legislatures have chipped away at key provisions.

“In theory, everybody’s in favor of the right to vote,” President Obama said recently. “But in practice, we have state legislatures that are deliberately trying to make it harder for people to vote.”

The president is calling on Congress to approve an updated version of the law that would neutralize some of these state efforts. Republicans, for the most part, are not receptive. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell argues that a strengthened law is unnecessary. “America’s come a long way,” he says, “and the Voting Rights Act is intact.”

In fact, the law was gutted in 2013 when the U.S. Supreme Court wiped out a crucial provision that required states with a history of racial discrimination to obtain advance federal approval before changing their election laws. That element of the law recognized that some states have a well documented history of racial discrimination, and it enabled the federal government to effectively pre-empt any further attempts at limiting the voting rights of minorities.

When the Supreme Court struck down that provision of the law, it did so by ruling that it was based on “40-year-old facts having no logical relationship to the present day.” The court, apparently, was under the impression that racial discrimination was a thing of the past.

So, as it stands now, the Justice Department can take action on voting-rights violations only after the fact. The trouble is, state laws that restrict voting rights are approved by elected officials who, collectively, are more likely to win re-election — and remain in control of their states’ elections — as a direct result of the laws’ passage. Rigged elections beget more rigged elections, which is why pre-emptive enforcement was such a valuable component of the Voting Rights Act.

While literacy tests are no longer used, voter-identification laws, such as those advocated by Iowa’s former secretary of state, Matt Schultz, have now been enacted in at least 34 states. While the intent isn’t always to discriminate against eligible minority voters, that is the unavoidable outcome.

Just two weeks ago, a panel of federal judges ruled against the voter-ID law in Texas. The three judges upheld an earlier ruling by U.S. District Judge Nelva Gonzalez Ramos, who said the 2011 law amounted to “an unconstitutional poll tax” and was “imposed with an unconstitutional discriminatory purpose” to make it harder for Hispanics and blacks to vote.

If Congress, or the Supreme Court, needs evidence that racial discrimination at the polls remains a threat even today, they need look no further than Texas.

The Voting Rights Advancement Act of 2015, sponsored by Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont, would restore the federal government’s ability to pre-empt election-law changes in states with 15 or more voting-rights violations over the past 25 years. Currently, 13 states would be subject to this federal oversight, but all would be able to graduate from the group if they incurred no additional violations over the next 10 years.

Leahy’s bill is a common-sense approach to protecting the voting rights of minorities. It deserves the support of everyone in Congress.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1TMxobT