Officially, the Mets sold 20,484 tickets for Thursday's game. Maybe a fifth of them were used.

There apparently aren't too many people out there who A) have nothing else to do on a Thursday afternoon in September and B) are willing to subject themselves to the torture that is watching the Mets these days.

It was so quiet at Citi Field during the Mets' 7-2 loss to the Washington Nationals that you could hear just about everything anybody in the stands decided to blurt out as it went along. In fact, listening to the angry diatribes, ridiculous outbursts and nonsensical rants was probably more entertaining than anything that happened during the game itself.

ENLARGE Lucas Duda was 1-for-4 in the Mets loss to Washington. Getty Images

So with that in mind, here are some of the (family-friendly) highlights, courtesy of real-life Mets fans who probably can't wait for this miserable season to finally end:

Top 2nd: In a matter of minutes, the sky at Citi Field went from blue to white to gray to practically black. The sound of thunder rumbled through the ballpark, while lightning flashed over the left-field seats. Naturally, this prompted the grounds-crew to bring out the tarp before the second inning.

One fan, however, was confused: "What are they doing?" he shouted. "It's not even raining!"

About 10 seconds later, a monsoon of biblical proportions crashed down onto the field, resulting in a 56-minute delay. "Never mind!" the fan yelled.

Bottom 1st, 4th, 6th, 8th: Every single time Mets first baseman Lucas Duda came to bat, a fan started singing "Camptown Races." He must have thought it was funny that the lyric "Doo-dah" sounds a lot like Duda's surname.

He also must have thought he was the first person to make that joke. He wasn't.

Top 5th: The Mets don't have any lowercase letters to accommodate the spelling of catcher Travis d'Arnaud's last name on his uniform. Instead, equipment manager Kevin Kierst came up with the idea of taking an uppercase "P" and flipping it upside-down.

This approach left one Mets fan mystified.

"Is that an upside-down 'P'? I think that's an upside-down 'P'," he said. "Hey Travis, did you know there's an upside-down 'P' on your jersey?"

Yes, he is aware.

Top 5th: Making his first start for the Mets, pitcher Aaron Harang allowed three home runs Thursday. Immediately after Nationals catcher Wilson Ramos hit the third one, this happened:

"Boom! Harang!" a fan yelled. "Oh my God, that sounds just like 'boomerang!'" Indeed.

Bottom 7th: During shortstop Ruben Tejada's at-bat, a fan down the left-field line stood up from his seat and started shouting, "Let's go Mets! Let's go Mets!" He said this over and over again, trying desperately to start a stadium-wide chant.

After about 30 seconds of yelling at the top of his lungs and waving his arms like a lunatic, nobody else joined in. The fan sat down and was never heard from again.

Top 8th: Mets reliever Frank Francisco hit Nationals outfielder Jayson Werth with a pitch. Werth took exception to it and stared at Francisco, even taking a step or two toward the mound.

One Mets fan wouldn't have it: "Walk to first base! Walk to first base! Stop crying! You make millions of dollars! Be a professional, you baby! Walk to first base!"

Eventually, Werth walked to first base.

Bottom 9th: Later, perhaps inspired by the first attempt at a chant, a different fan tried to start a chant of his own: "J-E-T-S, Jets! Jets! Jets!"

This one received considerably more traction.

Postgame: As the few fans who stayed through the entire game shuffled out of the ballpark, one of them looked around and said to no one in particular: "You know, I think we might have two major-league players on our whole team right now."

Considering how the Mets have played lately, the negativity is understandable.

Write to Jared Diamond at Jared.Diamond@wsj.com