Jan. 20 -- 57 calls for service

Officers checked the welfare of a male party in the 100 block of Wild Rose Drive after receiving a call from coworkers who were unable to contact him. Everything was OK.

Officers took a report of a two-vehicle non-injury accident in the area of Central and Orchard.

A female party reported a protection order violation that occurred in the 900 block of Greenwood. The crime was unfounded.

A male party reported shoplifting that occurred in the 100 block of 16th Street. Information was taken for a report.

A female party in the 500 block of Yale reported that she had received a suspicious phone call.

Officers took a runaway report from the 700 block of Four Mile Parkway.

A car dealership in the 1000 block of U.S. 50 reported that someone had taken a vehicle for a test drive and had not returned it. The vehicle was returned several hours later.

Jan. 21 -- 56 calls for service

A party reported seeing a vehicle running for a long period of time in the area of 10th/Royal Gorge Boulevard. The party was OK; they were just getting off the slick roads.

A party in the 1300 block of College reported multiple vehicles sliding and said one vehicle hit a pole and left the scene.

A party in the 2200 block of Elizabeth reported a suspicious person around their home.

Officers responded to a two-car accident in the intersection of Field/Pear. No injuries were reported.

Advertisement

Officers responded to a two-car accident in the intersection of Fifth/Harrison. No injuries were reported.

Officers responded to a one-vehicle accident in the 3300 block of U.S. 50.

A party reported harassment that occurred in the 400 block of Myrtle.

Jan. 22 -- 58 calls for service

Jonathon Fischer, 25, of Cañon City, was taken into custody in the area of Ninth/Raintree for outstanding warrants. Fischer was transported to the Fremont County Detention Center.

A welfare check was requested on a party in the 1000 block of Rudd.

Carol Morrow, 44, of Cañon City, was taken into custody in the 200 block of Greenwood on outstanding warrants. Morrow was transported to the Fremont County Detention Center.

Officers responded to the area of Coburn/Riverside on a report of a vehicle that slid off the road.

Officers responded to the 100 block of Justice Center Road on a report of a vehicle vs. private property accident. Information was gathered for a report.

A party came into the CCPD to report a possible burglary that occurred within the past two to three weeks. Information was gathered for a report.

Officers responded to the 100 block of Greenwood on a report of an assault that happened one to two weeks ago. Upon officer arrival, the party decided not to file a report.

Officers assisted another agency with locating a party. Officers were unable to locate the subject.

An officer checked the area by Colo. 115/Grant on a report of a disorderly party. The officer was unable to locate the subject.

An officer returned a phone call to a party who had questions about driving a vehicle with mechanical defects. Information was given.

Officers were out with a vehicle in the area of 15th/Harding. The vehicle was unoccupied and secured.

Officers were out checking the area at Mountain View Park. Everything was OK.