Rep. Paul Ryan says he understands people’s frustration with Congress right now. He’s frustrated, too.

But there’s really nothing to be done, said the Republican lawmaker from Janesville. His party just doesn’t have the votes to push priority bills through the Senate. And some of the bills they have managed to pass — like the Keystone pipeline measure — are then vetoed by President Barack Obama.

Ryan said there are plenty of measures that pass the House of Representatives but stall in the Senate beacuse Republicans don’t have the 60-vote supermajority needed to break a filibuster.

“People think we have more tools than we actually have,” he said. “They think we have more authority than the Constitution actually gives us. They look at it as if we could, but we aren’t.”

He spoke about his feelings in response to questions from frustrated constituents at a listening session at Snap-on, 2801 80th St., Monday afternoon.

Big to-do list

The list of things Ryan wishes Congress could tackle is long: Immigration, Planned Parenthood funding, the tax code, foreign policy, environmental regulations and overturning the Affordable Care Act, to name a few.

“The only real substitute for fixing an abuse of power or bad decisions is to win an election,” Ryan said. “Elections have consequences. If you can’t win an election, you can’t fix these things.”

Ryan said it is difficult for people watching the political process from home to understand what is going on.

“People are really frustrated. They say, ‘You guys can’t pass anything, you won’t pass anything,’” he said. “We pass things all the time in the House, but they need six Democrats to get things out of the Senate and to the president’s desk.”

Awaiting 2016

Ryan said he is staying neutral on the 2016 Republican presidential field, but said this is the kind of election where people need to pay attention.

“This is the challenge,” he said. “This is why I think 2016 will be a clarifying election, and it should be a clarifying election.”

Like some of the people at the listening session, Ryan said, he is worried.

“I ran against this president in 2012,” he said.

Ryan said the problems he saw then haven’t gone away.

Republicans need to bring voters a plan, he said. And that’s his goal for this election cycle — to get his party to be able to say what it will do to balance the budget, to replace the Affordable Care Act, to fix the tax code.

“That’s what I want to do in 2016, to bring it to the voters so they can choose which plan they want,” he said. “Then, if we win, we have the obligation of the mandate to put that in place.”