Michigan by the numbers Total enrollees: 341,183 New enrollees: 42 percent Total re-enrollees: 58 percent Active re-enrollees: 24 percent Automatic re-enrollees: 34 percent Plans with financial assistance: 88 percent Avg. monthly premium (after tax credit): $130 – U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

Nearly half of Michiganders signing up for health care plans through the Affordable Care Act marketplace who are eligible for tax credits are doing so at a cost of less than $100 per month, according to a study released by the U.S. Department Health and Human Services.

In all, 341,183 Michigan residents either enrolled or were automatically re-enrolled in health insurance coverage through the Health Insurance Marketplace as of Feb. 22.

Nearly 90 percent of Michigan enrollees were eligible for financial assistance and more than 300,000 were eligible for the equivalent of $236 per month in tax incentives, according to the report.

“The figures released today tell a story of health coverage consumers rely on for financial and health security – and of coverage they don’t want to lose,” Department of Health and Human Services secretary Sylvia M. Burwell said in a statement. “People who come to the marketplace for coverage are actively engaged and shopping for the product that’s best for them and their families. The Affordable Care Act is working.”

Advertisement

The study also found 87 percent of the almost 300,000 individuals choosing a plan eligible for tax credits had the option of doing so for $100 or less per month with the incentive factored in, according to the report. Forty-eight percent of those went with the eligible plan.

Those not enrolled in a health insurance plan face a fine.

The penalty for the current tax season (2014) is either $95 or one percent of household income, whichever is greater. The filing deadline for federal income tax returns is April 15.

The penalty increases to $325 or two percent of household income for the 2015 tax season next year.

The largest sector of Michigan residents opting for coverage was age 55-64, with 28 percent of state residents’ plans coming from that age group.

Nationwide, nearly 11.7 million Americans enrolled or were automatically enrolled in coverage on the Health Insurance Marketplace, more than 4.1 million of those under the age of 35.

The study includes data from each state either participating in the federal insurance marketplace or providing its own, but does not factor individuals who may have registered but had yet to pay their first month’s premium as of Feb. 22.

Marketplace open enrollment ended Feb. 15. The next open enrollment period begins Nov. 1, and runs through Jan. 31, 2016.

Those who missed this year’s deadline may have to wait until November to register for coverage, unless they meet certain factors for a special enrollment period, such as experiencing a life-changing event, like marriage.

Enrollment in Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program is also open year-round, the department noted.

A previous estimate said more than 46,000 Oakland County residents had registered on the insurance marketplace, but county-specific numbers were not available in this latest report.

Visit HealthCare.gov/marketplace for more information.