“‘What’s going on?’ I asked,” Ben Carson wrote in “Gifted Hands,” a memoir he published in 1990. “ ‘A hoax,’ the teacher said.” This was the climax of a scene at Yale, where he enrolled as an undergraduate in 1969, in which Carson described having seen a notice that the exam papers for Perceptions 310, a psychology class he was taking, had been accidentally burned, and that there would be a makeup. When the makeup proved to be impossibly—almost comically—hard, every student but Carson walked out. (He heard some students saying that they’d claim they never saw the notice about the makeup.) Then, when Carson was alone, an instructor and a photographer for the Yale Daily News, who snapped his picture, told him that he’d been tricked—but he had also demonstrated that he was the most honest student in the class. Then, Carson remembered, they handed him a ten-dollar bill.

Last week, the Wall Street Journal cited this episode as a problem with Carson’s biography, one that went to his credibility and—because he is largely running on his inspirational life story—to the heart of his campaign. Reporters at the Journal couldn’t find a photo of him in the Yale Daily News; they couldn’t find a course with the name Perceptions 310. But there was, in fact, a problem with the exposé itself, which became clear in the next few days: Carson’s story held up a lot better than the Journal had implied.

There may not have been a captioned photo in the Daily News, but there was an article that described just such a prank having been pulled off by the Yale Record, a humor publication, in January, 1970. It involved a parody edition of the News. The title of the class was Psychology 10, a mistake that Carson blamed on his ghostwriter—not the most gracious move but fair enough. It’s hardly material, and he was writing decades after the fact. BuzzFeed found a Record staff member who recalled helping with the prank, and was “99% certain the way Carson remembers it is correct,” including the difficulty of the makeup questions and how, “at the end, what few students remained — it may have just been one or two, I wasn’t there — received a small cash prize.” Some of the commentary that followed suggested that the story still reflected poorly on Carson, because he couldn’t tell the difference between the Record and the Daily News, and because he fell for the stunt, as, presumably, no sophisticated Eli should. This line of attack, with its undertones of élitism, is not likely to do him any damage with his supporters.

Another exposé, by Politico, about whether Carson was offered admission to West Point—he never seems to have formally applied—fell flat for what are, at root, similar reasons. “Gifted Hands” can be a confusing book, because the narrative jumps back and forth in the timeline. Carson presents a series of vignettes related to his high-school career, during which he was active in R.O.T.C., and to his college-admissions decisions. There is a Memorial Day parade “at the end of my twelfth grade,” which would have been May, 1969, in Detroit, which he marched in; “afterward,” an encounter with General William Westmoreland at a banquet that celebrated Medal of Honor winners; and, “later,” an offer of “a full scholarship to West Point,” which he “didn’t refuse … outright,” and is mainly presented as important because it gives him confidence going into the college-admissions process—which happens at the beginning of twelfth grade, not the end—and the faith, in “the fall of 1968,” to apply only to a single college, Yale.

The jumbled way that the book is written can suggest that we are in a time loop. This happens a lot when Carson tells stories or lays out plans, and it is a real point of criticism. (Similarly, if you diagram the hoax-exam story, it sounds like it happened when he was a junior, not a freshman.) But the individual parts are not only plausible but have some real backup. Politico notes that Westmoreland was not in Detroit that Memorial Day, but he was in Detroit in February, 1969, for a banquet a lot like the one Carson describes. Much has been made of Carson’s saying that he was offered a West Point scholarship, given that there is no cost for attending, but in that sense everybody who goes gets a scholarship. And it is more than likely that an Army general would have explained it in those terms to a teen-ager from inner-city Detroit whom he wanted to recruit. The nomination process for West Point does work in a more personal way than, say, the common app. As my colleague Hendrik Hertzberg wrote on Twitter, “If it’s true that Westmoreland told Carson he could have a West Point appointment for the asking, Carson’s garbled version is forgivable.” Again, the fact that Carson doesn’t talk about it in the way that someone more savvy might is not going to hurt him.

Besides—and this may be the real reason that the West Point story is weak—it hasn’t been disputed that Carson grew up the child of an impoverished, functionally illiterate single mother. Nevertheless, he was accepted to Yale and succeeded there. He went on to the University of Michigan Medical School and became first a resident, then a distinguished surgeon, at Johns Hopkins. There is every reason to believe that he could have gone to West Point if he had pursued it. These facts also point to a weakness in another line of debunking, about whether Carson was really as angry as he remembered being as a fourteen-year-old; he had plenty of things to be angry about. Saying that he was actually always happy-go-lucky, and never needed, as he writes, a religious experience to put aside his hostility and his violent tendencies is also not likely to be a campaign killer, though it does point to how very strange this political season has been. It clearly plays into evangelical Christians’ love of a redemption story—but arguing that people shouldn’t be moved by it because it feels saccharine is, in the absence of real evidence that he has fabricated the basic narrative, more of an aesthetic response than a political one. Ben Carson was a fine student and an exceptional doctor. He is just a very bad candidate for President.

The odd thing is that the Carson campaign is what might be called a target-rich environment for journalists—or it should be. He has been utterly dismissive of climate change, and he has fostered the idea that vaccines cause autism. The numbers for his tax plan, insofar as there are any, don’t add up. He has said that Joseph, of the coat of many colors, built the pyramids in order to store the grain of the seven fat years—a statement that, as I’ve written, was troubling not because we expect our Presidents to be up on the distinction between Early and Middle Kingdom dynasties but because Carson presented it as an example of why one should reject the theories of experts and scientists and turn, instead, to the Bible. Similarly, his claim that none of the signers of the Declaration of Independence had experience in elective office, when a great number of them did, is significant not only because it is false but because it speaks to a particular view of history and politics. (Carson later amended the statement to say that none had federal experience. Of course, they couldn’t have, because there was no federal government when the Declaration was signed.) He has suggested that President Obama might declare martial law, and that the 2016 elections might be cancelled amid scenes of untenable civil disorder. He has compared Obamacare to slavery and to Nazism. He has also made what PolitiFact judged to be outright false statements in the last Republican debate about his ties to a nutritional-supplement company. (In contrast, PolitiFact rated Carson’s description of West Point’s “scholarships” as mostly true.)

Perhaps the problem isn’t that the media is too partisan but that, in looking at Carson, there was a hope that there might be a non-partisan way to address a campaign whose success is hard for observers of American politics to understand. There is a sense that we are going to wake up one day and Carson and Donald Trump will have departed, and then we can get back to differentiating among the traditional politicians. But what is the mechanism for that? If Carson were onstage only because of his life story, and Trump only because of his celebrity, the two of them would not, together, be getting half of the support of Republicans in every poll. This campaign is not actually a prank being pulled on the public, which will have a moment when the photographer comes out and explains the joke. Would that it were.