Drew Klein (Photo: special)

The high cost of prescription drugs has been a frequent topic of conversation recently, with a bombastic case of price gouging making the rounds online. It centered on Daraprim, treatment for a parasitic infection frequently afflicting those with weakened immune systems, like HIV or cancer patients. The story gained serious traction because it had a classic villain attached: Martin Shkreli, a pharmaceutical executive who’d jacked up the price of Daraprim to $75,000, simply because he felt the cost was too low and he could get more.

That conversation about prescription drug costs has made its way to Iowa with an event at Drake University last month, hosted by the Campaign for Sustainable Rx Pricing. The Register wrote an editorial putting pressure on presidential candidates to address this issue.

But what John Rother, the campaign's director, and others may have overlooked was the less-heralded denouement to this tale: an Associated Press article reporting that a competitor will begin selling Daraprim at a rate of $99 for 100 pills. Yes, just 99 cents a pill. It’s a perfect example of free markets sweeping in and correcting an imbalance. Daraprim isn’t worth $75,000, it turns out, and nobody will get away with selling it at that cost for long.

While many individual drug costs may reach extraordinary levels for various reasons, every Iowan is more broadly affected by serious jumps in the cost of buying health insurance. This year alone they’re facing premium increases of up to 24 percent. That’s not just one extraordinary tale; that’s not over a decade or rising due to inflation; that’s just one year of price spikes for keeping yourself and your family covered.

At Americans for Prosperity, we know these untenable jumps in cost are because most parts of the health care sector have become partly or wholly insulated from price signals in the marketplace. In other words, the invisible hand of supply and demand is not around to call shenanigans like in the Daraprim case. Government waste and over-regulation alone have gone a long way toward putting that invisible hand to rest and allowing costs to creep up and up, then jump through the roof.

Yet Rother’s Campaign for Sustainable Rx Pricing is steered by a group that includes organizations with a history of supporting more government intervention in health care. AARP and the AFL-CIO, for example, were key supporters of Obamacare.

Many Iowans are paying astronomical prices for some of these live-saving drugs, and working on a solution for prescription drugs prices is admirable — but not if it’s going to apply the same methods that have been disastrous for every other part of the health care sector.

Let’s take a look at the landscape:

Insurance premiums and out-of-pocket costs: Skyrocketing even more after Obamacare’s implementation

Costs for routine tests: Too high, due in part to pricing set by mismanaged government programs like Medicare and Medicaid.

Costs of doing business for physicians: Continuing to grow to comply with government mandates.

With that track record, how can we expect government interference in the pharmaceutical industry to go any better?

Where we agree with Rother’s campaign is that every Iowan deserves to see their health care costs become more manageable, but it shouldn’t be limited to drugs. We need to make insurers and private-sector providers respond to the marketplace again, no matter if they’re on a new drug, or they need an MRI, or they just want to see their trusted doctor of choice. Increasingly, it’s clear that more government is not going to be the Rx.

Drew Klein directs the Iowa chapter of Americans for Prosperity. Contact: DKlein@afphq.org

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1iSIIC2