LONDON, United Kingdom – Footage of the Islamic State terrorist Mohammed Emwazi (aka Jihad John) has emerged in a British newspaper. The Mail On Sunday claims to have a short extract of a longer video that depicts Emwazi boasting he will return to the UK to behead more victims.

Emwazi is already one of the world's most wanted men as a result of the brutal murders of at least seven hostages in Syria. Each of the killings were recorded for propaganda purposes and involved the victims being beheaded by Emwazi, who used a small knife to prolong the suffering. He is also believed to have beheaded at least 17 Syrian soldiers.

The Mail claim to have eight seconds of the video which was shot two months ago on a mobile phone, it is said to have been passed to them by the Free Syrian Army. Although the video itself contains no audio the paper says it has been shown a version in which Emwazi says: “I will carry on cutting heads.”

A fuller version was also shown to another FSA-linked activist in Istanbul. He said of Emwazi: “He looks at the camera and says, 'I am Mohammed Emwazi. I will soon go back to Britain with the Khalifa" [the leader of Islamic State].

The activist continued:” He said something more about cutting heads off, 'We will kill the kuffar.' Then the camera shows two masked men that looked like bodyguards.”

Emwazi was born in Kuwait, but the family were granted asylum in the UK in the 1990s after they claimed their lives were in danger. Neither of his parents worked during their time in Britain, instead the family lived off welfare checks.

The Emwazi's were also housed by the taxpayer at a cost of at least $600k, including the rent of a $2.2m apartment in the upmarket neighborhood of Maida Vale in West London. But after being handed $60k a year, his parents finally returned to Kuwait, were they have lived safely despite their earlier UK asylum claim.

Emwazi himself was educated by the British taxpayer and attended the notorious hotbed for Islamic fundamentalism: Westminster University.

Mr Emwazi was last seen in a sickening Islamic State video at the end of January, in which is beheaded the Japanese hostage Kenji Goto. Since then rumors have emerged of him being injured by an American air strike in March. Last month it was even suggested he was on the run from the Islamic State because other terrorists wanted to kill him.

The British Army's Special Air Service (SAS) are now said to be in the Middle East ready to catch or kill Emwazi, and he has a bounty on his head of $6m. He is not the first Islamic State fighter to talk about entering Europe to kill, and attacks are expected to increase as more European Jihadi's return home.

There has also been a huge influx of immigrants to the European Union via people traffickers in the Mediterranean. Hundreds of thousands of Syrian, Libyans and Somalians have now landed in Italy despite authorities having no idea what percentage have come to fight Jihad.