Capmark Financial Group reached a settlement with its former head honcho over the nearly $17 million he received when he left the commercial real estate lender the year before its bankruptcy, but one key detail is under wraps—how much the individual will pay.

The proposed settlement would end Capmark’s effort to claw back the $16.7 million paid to former Chief Executive William F. Aldinger III and a family trust on his way out the door. Mr. Aldinger, who is also a former chairman and chief executive officer of HSBC Finance Corp., left Capmark in December 2008. The company filed for bankruptcy protection in October 2009, joining a long list of real-estate lenders toppled by the global financial crisis.

However, the deal aims to keep secret the amount of money Mr. Aldinger will return to Capmark to settle the litigation. To explain why it’s necessary to hide the amount, Capmark noted that Mr. Aldinger is retired and doesn’t need the publicity that will certainly attend the news of the settlement.

“He is no longer in the public spotlight, yet the significant amount of this settlement is almost certain to return him there,” court papers say.

Mr. Aldinger is described in court documents as “a well-known figure in the financial industry and…the subject of much press, including, unfortunately, derogatory press.” It’s not immediately clear, however, to which type of “derogatory” press Capmark’s attorneys are referring. He did gain some notice in the British financial press more than a decade ago for the generous pay package he received at HSBC, but he doesn’t seem to have faced the level of vitriol directed toward other corporate executives, especially during the financial crisis.

A lawyer for Capmark deferred to lawyers for Mr. Aldinger, who didn’t respond Wednesday to inquiries concerning the need for secrecy about the amount of a proposed settlement with a key insider.

While the request to seal the amount of the settlement refers to the need to avoid “the promotion of public scandal,” Capmark’s case against Mr. Aldinger was a plain-vanilla preference action that didn’t raise any allegations of wrongdoing or mismanagement on his part. Company insiders, as well as trade creditors, are routinely targeted in so-called “preference” lawsuits, which are premised on technical provisions of the Bankruptcy Code aimed at making sure creditors share equally in the pain of financial failure.

For a certain period prior to the bankruptcy, the law presumes a company is insolvent, and thus has no business handing out excessive pay, or, in the case of trade creditors, paying bills on a stepped-up schedule, unless there was extra value received. Capmark alleged Mr. Aldinger’s severance package was such an improper payment. Mr. Aldinger defended himself on a number of grounds, including that most of the money was transferred as a result of stock dealings and was therefore exempt.

A judge has already granted Capmark permission to keep the amount of its settlement confidential, and will evaluate the settlement itself Sept. 19.

The deal is the latest example of companies seeking special treatment for top executives, in spite of the principle that transparency is the price companies must pay for the protections of Chapter 11. Early in its bankruptcy, Capmark disguised the identities of top-ranking insiders who took more than $50 million in pay, bonuses and other compensation in the year before the bankruptcy, despite the fact that official judicial forms require the names of insiders be filed with the court.

Write to Peg Brickley at peg.brickley@wsj.com.