Kentucky Chief Justice John D. Minton Jr is seen in a 2013 file photo. (Photo: John Sommers II/Special to the C)

The state's chief justice unleashed pointed criticism of Circuit Court Judge Olu Stevens in a Friday ruling, but he denied a motion to remove the judge from all criminal cases while referring the case to a state disciplinary body.

Chief Justice John D. Minton Jr. wrote that Stevens "appears to flout the directives of the Code of Judicial Conduct, creating a social-media firestorm calculated to aggrandize himself by exploiting the deep-seated and widespread distrust of the criminal-justice system by minority communities."

In the 13-page ruling, Minton said that Stevens did not "comply with the letter or spirit" of a Dec. 4 mediation agreement with Jefferson Commonwealth's Attorney Tom Wine when he wrote on Facebook that his opponents have tried to remove him from the bench and silence him on important matters of race in judicial selection.

Those posts "give a clear indication that he intends to continue violating the Code of Judicial Conduct, ..." Minton wrote.

"Rather than provide leadership on an important issue worthy of wide discussion, deliberation and action," Minton wrote, "Judge Stevens has detracted from the conversation by choosing instead to malign the Commonwealth’s Attorney and mischaracterize his motives in pursuing his constitutional right to seek clarification on an issue of law before the Supreme Court on behalf of the commonwealth."

While he had many cutting remarks for Stevens and largely agreed with Wine's assessment of the situation, Minton concluded it is beyond his power to remove the judge from all criminal cases.

“A disqualification of this magnitude would effectively remove Judge Stevens from his criminal docket for the foreseeable future and render him unable to fulfill the constitutional duties of a circuit judge,” Minton wrote.

The chief justice said he referred the case to the state's Judicial Conduct Commission – the only body with state constitutional power to discipline a sitting Kentucky judge.

Addressing the matter before the commission gives Stevens due process rights, allowing Stevens to defend himself against charges, have an attorney, examine witnesses and produce evidence, Minton said.

Stevens did not immediately respond for comment.

Wine issued a statement and said, "Justice Minton recognized that Judge Stevens 'ensuing public discourse appears to flout the directives of the Code of Judicial Conduct, creating a social-media firestorm calculated to aggrandize himself by exploiting the deep-seated and widespread distrust of the criminal-justice system by minority communities.' "

The controversy stems from a November 2014 ruling in which Stevens dismissed a panel of 41 prospective jurors – at the request of a defense attorney on behalf of an African-American defendant – when the lone black person was struck at random, leaving an all-white jury.

Stevens maintained on Facebook that he dismissed the jury panel because it was a "substantial departure from the racial make-up of the average jury panel."

Wine then asked the state Supreme Court to decide if a judge has the power to do so when there isn't evidence of discrimination by the prosecution in jury selection. That case is still pending before the high court, and as Minton notes, has nothing to do with Friday's ruling.

Stevens, in turn, denounced Wine on Facebook, saying he was a racist who supported “all white juries” because of his question to the Supreme Court.

On Nov. 18, Wine responded by seeking the judge’s removal from all criminal cases, citing bias toward his office and his prosecutors.

Chief Justice Minton ordered the two into mediation, which resulted in an agreement that Wine would withdraw his motion and both wouldn't use social media to discuss their differences.

Citing Stevens' post-mediation social media posts, Wine renewed his motion to Minton on Monday, arguing Stevens breached the agreement.

One such Facebook post, purportedly signed by Stevens, does not identify Wine or his office by name but says the concern over the judge's “method of communication” was “purposely” misplaced to distract from his message of advocating for diverse juries in the county.

It is not immediately clear if Stevens will resume his normal daily docket next week.

Minton's complaint to the Judicial Conduct Commission will set in motion a preliminary investigation that could lead to formal proceedings, state law outlines.

Reporter Matthew Glowicki can be reached at 502-582-4989 or mglowicki@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1YqGgku