Jennifer Hudson stars in The Inevitable Defeat of Mister and Pete, but at the film’s Cinema Society screening on Wednesday, everyone was dying to ask her about something else: her Funny or Die Scandal spoof promoting the Affordable Care Act.

“I teamed up with Funny or Die in their effort to raise awareness about the health-care bill,” Hudson explained of how the viral video came to be. “And who wouldn’twant the opportunity to be Olivia Pope? I’m so obsessed with her, I think I am her. I’m a gladiator. I’m Olivia.”

So she’s a problem-solver? “Yes, I am!” the Oscar winner told VF Daily. “Oh my god, don’t you notice I’m solving everyone’s problems? And I’m like, Oh my god, I’m Olivia Pope**!”

She hasn’t yet heard from Kerry Washington, but Hudson says she hopes she likes the video. (Watch it below.)

Hudson’s role as a drug addict in Mister and Pete was much more somber. She worked with an addiction coach to help her make the character realistic, and she spoke to several other recovering addicts, one of whom she connected with. She joined Hudson at the screening. “I didn’t have as much to pull from from within, so I wanted to find someone that I could draw from, that I could love, that I could care about, and whose story I wanted to tell,” Hudson told VF Daily.

The movie is about two boys who spend a summer in Brooklyn on their own while their mothers are in prison. Did Hudson ever run around Chicago, unsupervised, as a kid? “Oh, my mother didn’t allow that! No, sir,” she said, laughing. “My mother was very strict. None of that for me.”

Alicia Keys was a producer on the film and also composed the soundtrack. Although it is not a musical, director George Tillman Jr. says that occasionally Keys and Hudson would break into song. “In between the takes, you can hear them singing here and there,” he said. “It was amazing.”

Keys laughed when we asked if she and Hudson had a musical connection on set. “She breaks out in song all the time, and she was on set more than I was, as the executive producer,” Keys said. “But yes, we love to sing, so it’ll happen. You never know.”

The Cinema Society and co-host Tommy Hilfiger came up with a unique venue for the post-screening reception: Keys’s West Chelsea recording studio. The party, on the building’s top floor, was spread over multiple rooms—some packed with sound-mixing equipment, requiring partygoers to leave their drinks at the door as they entered.

The studio is apparently a magnet for musical talent. Just as VF Daily approached the building, Mary J. Blige came out and stepped into a waiting car.