Racial discord in America may be at its highest level in decades in the “post-racial era” of Barack Obama, driven by a victimization class intent on using race to promote a political agenda and a complicit media only too happy to assist.

A clear example of this discord took place on Sunday between two black panelists on the pro-Obama network MSNBC, resulting in a bitter exchange that was only mollified by a timely commercial break.

During a discussion on the Melissa Harris-Perry show, Democratic strategist Angela Rye made the insidious claim that there was a “very, very racial” aspect to the 2010 midterm tea party sweep.

Viral video: Chicago’s magical piano brings

Christmas cheer to weary travelers

A myth that Republican strategist Ron Christie simply could not let stand.

“Racial!” he called out. “I will not sit here and allow you to say that!”

“I said it, and I’ll say it again,” Rye shot back.

As Christie tried to respond, Rye told him “You should calm down just a little bit.”

“I will not allow people to sit here and say there was a racial aspect to it,” Christie continued. “That’s absolutely false!”

Harris Perry wedged her way in to break for a commercial, and when they came back she had morphed into Dr. Phil, telling Rye, “What I heard you say was that the language of ‘take back our country’ had a racialized overtone to it that was associated with the election of a black president, but what I felt like Ron heard Angela say was, ‘Republicans are racist.’”

To make her point, Rye put forth the incident in which several Congressional Black Caucus members were said to have been spat on and called the n-word on the day of the Obamacare vote.

“This isn’t something that I made up,” Rye said. “These are things that really happened and continue to happen, and we continue to see it in ways people talk to the President, about the President, and is that reflective of all people in the GOP?

But in reality, Rye is making it up because the incident never happened. Even worse for her, Christie just happened to be there that day and said the incident never happened.

No one else on the panel, to include Harris-Perry, made an effort to correct Rye.

[poll id=”144″]