Getty Images Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel

Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel lives up to his reputation as an abrasive politician in an interview with the New Republic that’s making waves Monday. The piece’s title: “Stark Raving Rahm.”

“A conversation with Emanuel is a physical experience,” reports the magazine’s Isaac Chotiner, who interviewed Emanuel in March. “When he has strong feelings about a subject — which is often — he frequently sits on the very edge of his chair, emphasizing his point through proximity.”

You can read the whole Q&A with Emanuel, who also served as President Barack Obama’s White House chief of staff, here. But here are a few excerpts from the interview.

On HealthCare.gov:

Isaac Chotiner: When the Obamacare website wasn’t working properly, did you want to be in Washington trying to fix it? Rahm Emanuel: You gotta be kidding. You get a freebie question for the ridiculousness of that question. Chotiner: I was asking about your competitive instinct. You say you like to fix things. Emanuel: [Gets up and starts walking around the office.] That goes down as one of the more intriguing questions I have ever had. Did I wish I was in Washington to fix a website? Let me answer that. I have a single-word answer. No. Please do not edit out the sarcasm of that answer. Chotiner: Don’t worry, it is staying. Emanuel: I don’t want it to be missed on your readers.

On New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie’s possible White House bid:

Chotiner: Chris Christie was going to be the savior. Emanuel: He “was.” You said it in past tense. Chotiner: Do you think it is past tense? Emanuel: I do. Nothing is ever absolute in politics, but I am willing to go out on a limb and join you. It may take more than an immediate time frame for him to recover, and he doesn’t have more than that. Chotiner: Right. Emanuel: I am listening [for the next question].

On the earned-income tax credit:

Emanuel: I have a piece today [in the Chicago Sun-Times] about the earned-income tax credit. I have negotiated to expand it. Now, is that considered left or right? Chotiner: Uh— Emanuel: It’s full of [expletive], OK? [Raises voice.] It’s crap. Chotiner: What’s full of [expletive]? Emanuel: I consider myself a progressive. I have a passion for people who work. To me, this is about forward looking versus backward looking. Ideological gradations are the wrong way to look at it.

– Robert Schroeder

Follow Capitol Report on Twitter @capitolreport

Follow Rob on Twitter @mktwrobs

Read more from MarketWatch

Jeb Bush on illegal immigration as “act of love”

Women earn less than men even in woman-dominated jobs

MarketWatch’s IPO Calendar