North Division, Career Tech and Reagan will field varsity teams this season.

By of the

The day had the makings of a hot one.

The late-morning sun was bearing down on the field next to Milwaukee North late last week. It was football weather, the scene in which the dog days of preseason camp are set, the time of year when teams build the foundation of whatever success lies ahead.

It can be a grind, but the situation is ideal for Chris Pickens. The Blue Devils quarterback is on the field with his teammates, some of his closest friends. The ball is in his hands. It's a good day.

And it's going to be a good year.

"It's going to be a great experience," he said. "After playing JV the last couple of years, this is something I've dreamt about doing ever since my freshman year and it's happening my senior year."

High school football teams opened practice last week, and three schools in the City Conference did so with a little more buzz than usual. On the north side of town, North and Barack Obama Career Technical and Education, formerly Custer, began preparations for their first varsity seasons in four years. On the far south side, the players at Reagan began their first year as a stand-alone program after a co-op with Pulaski for a number of years.

The addition of three varsity programs is just one of a handful of changes to City football this year. The league has adopted a North and South divisional format, the district completed renovations to South and Custer stadiums, and some coaches in the league have shifted schools.

The season begins for Career Tech with a game at Custer Stadium against Greenfield on Aug. 20. The next day Reagan hosts Racine Lutheran at Pulaski Stadium and North plays at Sheboygan Falls.

"My goal for us on the varsity level is just for us to compete," North coach Mickell Harrell said. "I'm instilling some toughness in my team. We're going to sneak up on some teams, but I just want us to compete."

For North and Career Tech, the return to varsity is the continuation of a three-year process that called for the teams to play at the junior varsity level the past two seasons. The return of varsity football is also part of a larger hope for athletics to reclaim a bigger place in the fabric of the school.

At North, it is the opportunity to build on what already has been an eventful 2015. Last winter, the school was home to City basketball players of the year Darrell Riley and Chamar Clay. The school also won a division title in girls basketball and produced a state champion, Shatara Mitchell, in the 400 meters at state track.

At Career Tech, athletics are being revived. The boys basketball team returned to City Conference play last season after playing as an independent for two years. This past spring, one of its athletes, Christian Ferguson, qualified for the state track meet in the high jump. The school also has a boys golf team.

There is a significance to having those teams, Career Tech coach Les White said.

"I think it's very important because the kids feel that sense of belonging," he said. "You're trying to get them to support the school and have that camaraderie and team spirit that you can build in a school. I really think the athletic programs really help that."

White led the Cougars to a 1-5 mark in 2014 and a 6-0 record last season. He said the team had about 30 players in Year 1 and 35 in Year 2. He hopes for about 40 this year.

This year, the team will lean on the talents of Ferguson, a senior receiver/defensive back, and Jacob Gundy, a senior who can play linebacker or defensive line.

"We have a decent running game we're looking forward to," White added. "We're looking to strengthen our quarterback position. All in all, we'll pull together a pretty decent offensive squad."

Three years ago, North started with about 10 players who would practice after school and scrimmage each other. The next year, the Blue Devils went 0-6 at the JV level. They improved to 4-2 last season.

This year, Harrell expects to eventually have 25 to 30 players. Pickens and senior defensive back Jamarcus Bonilla are the only two players left from that faithful 10 who helped keep the program afloat. Today, each is a captain who has taken an active role helping to build numbers on the team whether it be recruiting classmates at school or going to freshman orientation to talk about the program as they will do before the start of school.

Getting players out for the team isn't as easy as it was when Harrell, a member of the Class of 2000, was a standout at the school.

"I talk to the kids all the time," Harrell said. "I know they have lives. I have a life, too. Their expectations at home are different from mine when I was playing sports. ... They're trickling in. They're getting here daily."

Numbers aren't a problem at Reagan. The team accounted for more than 50% of the co-op's numbers at Pulaski, which made the playoffs the last two years. This year, the Huskies already have about 40 players ready to go.

The school, which enjoys most of its athletic success in soccer and baseball — the Huskies went to the spring state tournament in June — was ready to branch out, but the idea of having its own team this year was the result of an impromptu meeting coach Greg Roman and one of his assistants had with the principal after last season.

"We just talked about are we ready to start our own football program," said Roman, who coached the Pulaski Co-op the past five years. "Do we have the people in place to do it? We've got the kids. We've got coaches in the building that can do it, so we thought we had all the pieces that could make it work."

Having another varsity-ready program gave the conference 14 teams. The even number made it easier to set up the divisional format that calls for Morse-Marshall, Madison, King, North, Career Tech, Washington and Vincent to play in the North Division and Bay View, Reagan, South, Riverside, Pulaski, Hamilton and Bradley Tech to play in the South.

And for Reagan, having its own program actually has helped increase numbers. Roman believes some students have been more open to joining the team now that they don't have to travel to another school to do it.

The 15-minute bus ride players from the school used to take to practice has been traded in for a short walk to and from the practice field.

It is a walk senior Devin Williams has no problem making.

"It's really nice. I've actually always wanted this," the Huskies guard and linebacker said. "Playing for your own school, it just gives you more pride. You just want to go out there and play for them. ... It's going to be nice."

NEW-LOOK LEAGUE

After playing as an 11-team league in recent years, the additions of Career Tech and Education, North and Reagan have allowed the City Conference to split into two seven-team divisions.

North Division

Career Tech and Ed.

King

Madison

Morse-Marshall

North

Vincent

Washington

South Division

Bay View

Bradley Tech

Hamilton

Pulaski

Reagan

Riverside

South

Note:Teams will play six conference games plus one designated conference crossover. In 2016, all crossovers will be played in Week 9 and will be determined by where a team finishes in the standings. The first-place teams will play each other as will the second-place finishers, etc.