While families were gathered around their tables on Thanksgiving Day, Planned Parenthood reached directly into homes across the nation, stealing the attention of teens and turning it toward the perverse world of Planned Parenthood.

Planned Parenthood Info for Teens featured a do-it-yourself condom turkey meme on Thanksgiving. Notification arrived via portable mobile device to those who follow the page. The turkey, sporting condom feathers and a condom wattle, drew such comments as “At least it’s protected for the Thanksgiving ‘stuffing,’” and “Remember to protect yourselves, kids. . . Even if all you’re stuffing is a turkey.” One teen commented, “This is the kind of holiday I always dream of.” How many teens saw this while seated at Thanksgiving dinner?

And that’s not the only suggestion Planned Parenthood had for ruining the Thanksgiving holiday. It exhumed its Talking Turkey: 8 Easy Steps for Discussing Reproductive Health and Justice at the Holiday Table, warning, “Going home or getting together with relatives for the holidays is always a stressful time, but if your family members are the type who regularly protest outside the local Planned Parenthood, you know that this holiday is going to be a doozy.” But Planned Parenthood aficionados need not fear! Planned Parenthood coached them to regurgitate its propaganda at the Thanksgiving dinner table, while reassuring their wild-eyed pro-life relatives that their beliefs are “respected,” but whether someone has an abortion is really none of their business.

If that’s not enough meddling in Thanksgiving, the government had some suggestions for your family celebration as well. The family gathering should be turned into a recruiting session for Obamacare, from which, of course, Planned Parenthood benefits exponentially.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

In this strange new world that was not so very long ago America the Beautiful, family members are coerced to propagandize their God-fearing, freedom-loving siblings, parents, and other family members to get on board the fast train to hell during the most sacred times of the year. And if that doesn’t work, there is always the social media arm of Planned Parenthood, with its covert ability to reach right into our cozy homes to stealthily corrupt our children, even as they sit across the table from us.

The abortion giant knows no limits when it comes to recruiting children and teens to build the customer base for its sex business. It is counting on the fact that parents are too busy to notice what they are doing.

LifeNews.com Note: Rita Diller is the national director of American Life League’s Stop Planned Parenthood Project.