A 22-year-old Garland man died early Sunday after his car struck a tree in the 1000 block of North Peachtree Road, Mesquite police said.

Family and friends of Ivan Baca said he had been working long hours recently and may have fallen asleep at the wheel.

Officers discovered the accident at about 3:25 a.m. According to police, Baca was driving his 2007 Nissan Sentra when his vehicle left the roadway and struck a tree in the median.

Baca died of injuries sustained in the crash, according to police. There were no other passengers in the vehicle at the time of the collision, and no other cars were involved in the incident, police say.

Baca, who would have turned 23 in less than three weeks, had been working long hours as a shipper for Masonite International in the weeks before his death, according to family and friends. He was a 2011 graduate of Lakeview High School.

Rocio Baca, Ivan Baca’s sister, said her brother was at work the day before his death. He went to his family’s home after work and then left soon after to hang out with a friend. He said goodbye to his mother before he walked out the door, as was his usual habit.

#BREAKING #Mesquite #police working a fatal crash after a car hits a tree. pic.twitter.com/UiNhEE3h07 — FOX4Terry (@FOX4Terry) September 20, 2015

Baca spent a couple of hours with friend Eduardo Marin and several of his family members at Marin’s house. The group split a 12-pack of Corona beer, and Baca had two or three bottles, Marin said.

Marin and Baca got hungry and made a midnight trip to Jack In The Box for bacon cheeseburgers and Sprites before Baca decided to leave.

“I got a little sleepy, so … I told him, ‘You can stay at my house if you want,’” Marin said. “And he said, ‘No, I’m fine. I’m just gonna head home.’”

Marin said Baca has always been a “responsible drinker,” and that he didn’t seem impaired as he drove off into the night.

“I didn’t really think anything was going to happen,” Marin said.

Rocio Baca said her brother, tired from an exhausting work schedule, may have dozed off when he was driving home from Marin’s.

She said her brother was a quiet, respectful man and the “peacemaker” of their family. He was dutiful in helping his mother with any request, and he loved to dote on his niece, she said.

Baca also enjoyed hang gliding, bungee jumping and skydiving, his sister said.

Baca’s death is the 13th traffic fatality in Mesquite in 2015, police say. In 2014, Mesquite had 11 such accidents that resulted in death.

Investigators did not initially indicate that alcohol or sleep deprivation were contributing factors in the accident.The Mesquite Police Department Traffic Unit continues to investigate the incident.