Donald Trump tonight tweeted that the Democrats didn’t mention veterans at all. Well, get ready for a shocker, because Donald Trump just said something untrue.

I know, I know, try to contain your disbelief.

Here’s what Trump tweeted at 10:33 pm EST:

Notice that illegal immigrants will be given ObamaCare and free college tuition but nothing has been mentioned about our VETERANS #DemDebate — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) October 14, 2015

And now, allow me to run through the various mentions of veterans throughout the evening during the Democratic debate.

First, at 8:50 p.m. ET, when Jim Webb introduced himself to the audience, he mentioned that he wrote and passed the post-9/11 GI bill for America’s veterans.

Then, at 9:23 p.m. ET, Bernie Sanders said, “I’m the former chairman, Anderson, of the Senate Veterans Committee. And in that capacity, I learned a very powerful lesson about the cost of war.”

And at 9:37 p.m. ET, Anderson Cooper brought up Webb’s service in Vietnam and Sanders’ status then as a conscientious objector. Webb didn’t take the bait to attack Sanders, but he did bring up his own military family and said he would be a great Commander-in-Chief.

Cooper then turned to Sanders and asked him about the same issue. Sanders applauded Webb’s service and touted the passage of the GI bill. He mentioned another piece of legislation “under my leadership” to deal with veterans’ health care issues.

And finally, at 10:18 p.m. ET, Cooper brought up the Veterans Affairs scandal and asked why it took so many reports and investigations before Sanders and others acted. Sanders defended his record on taking care of veterans’ issues.

All of those clips, by the way, are here in this video, via CNN:

Please enable Javascript to watch.

Now, you can say you didn’t like their answers on veterans’ issues or that they haven’t done enough for America’s veterans, but saying that “nothing has been mentioned about our VETERANS” when they actually were mentioned multiple times, including by a veteran on the debate stage, is incredibly misleading, to be charitable about it.

Obviously Trump was watching the debate, because other things he tweeted out things in reaction to what the candidates were saying, but did he just selectively zone out at those various points where veterans were brought up? Or did he hear what they said and just pretend they didn’t?

Either way, if you’re going to use veterans as a political cudgel to attack your opponents, maybe you should get your damn facts straight first.

[image via screengrab]

— —

Follow Josh Feldman on Twitter: @feldmaniac