Paul Ryan Takes the Plunge Manuel Balce Ceneta/AP What Happened:



The House Republican caucus will have a new leader, and it’s the guy they wanted.



On Thursday, Wisconsin's Paul Ryan, the former vice presidential candidate and budget wonk who leads the Ways and Means Committee, answered the call to run for speaker, telling his colleagues he was “all in.”



“I believe we are ready to move forward as a one, united team,” Ryan wrote. “And I am ready and eager to be our speaker.”



With the backing of the vast majority of the 247 Republican House members, Ryan will have little trouble getting the nomination of the caucus next Wednesday and triumphing in the formal floor vote Thursday.



Why It Matters:



Before saying he would run, Ryan appeared reluctant to do so and laid out a series of conditions meant to eliminate many of the heachaches current Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, has faced during his five-year tenure. Among them was the elimination or limitation of a procedural motion that would make it tougher for members to unseat the speaker – a demand the most conservative House members called a “non-starter.”



But Ryan caved, agreeing to delay consideration of the change until some point in the future.



It was a major victory for members of the House Freedom Caucus, who will continue to push for decentralization of power and more amendments on bills while hoping to prevent changes on the motion to vacate the chair.



Should they prevail, Ryan’s honeymoon period – if he gets one at all – will be short indeed.

Clinton Triumphs in Benghazi Testimony

Clinton Triumphs in Benghazi Testimony Jacquelyn Martin/AP What Happened:



Over the course of 11 hours Thursday, House Republicans faced off against Hillary Clinton over her role regarding the 2012 attacks in Benghazi, Libya, that left four Americans dead.



Members of the chamber's special committee pressed Clinton on her involvement as secretary of state in the security preparations for the Benghazi compound. In doing so, they attempted to paint her as neglectful or uncaring in the face of repeated requests from Ambassador Chris Stevens for help in the months before the attacks, and as more concerned with her public image and claiming credit for successes in Libya than in monitoring a deteriorating situation.



Clinton deftly parried much of what the committee’s Republicans threw at her, defending her decisions leading up to the Sept. 11 violence and in the days and weeks following. She repeatedly batted away insinuations she should have handled Stevens’ requests for more security herself, insisting that allowing security experts to field such requests helps ensure that those best equipped to respond to them can do so.



Meanwhile, questions over her use of a private email server – the committee's only major discovery thus far – took up relatively little time.



Why It Matters:



Even in conservative circles, the hearing was roundly viewed as a loss for Republicans, who have struggled to fend off accusations that the committee's purpose is to damage Clinton's presidential prospects.



Democrats have long been calling the panel's activities blatantly partisan, but their narrative took off last month when House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy of California linked the committee’s work with Clinton’s sinking poll numbers. And on Thursday, in both the optics and substance of the hearing, Republicans compared poorly to Clinton, appearing to lecture her.



During one particularly tense moment, Clinton wasn't even the focus of GOP ire. Chairman Trey Gowdy of South Carolina, who has fruitlessly tried to rescue the committee’s reputation, got into a shouting match with the panel's top Democrat, Elijah Cummings of Maryland, regarding the release of testimony provided to the committee by Clinton confidant Sidney Blumenthal.



After the hearing, Gowdy seemed to acknowledge the marathon session had accomplished little.



"I don't know that she testified that much differently today than she has the previous time she testified," he told reporters.



Meanwhile, Clinton, who simply needed to avoid a major stumble, did just that. And moments in which she grew emotional while discussing Stevens and the three other Benghazi victims – Sean Smith, Tyrone Woods and Glen Doherty – could soften her perception among voters who have viewed her unfavorably.

Obama Vetoes Defense Authorization Bill

Obama Vetoes Defense Authorization Bill Susan Walsh/AP What Happened:



President Barack Obama on Thursday followed through on a threat to veto legislation authorizing military spending, the latest salvo in the battles over government funding that have plagued Capitol Hill all year.



The annual National Defense Authorization Act, which passed Congress with bipartisan support, fell victim to the debate centered on the sequester spending caps initially mandated by the Budget Control Act of 2011.



Democrats and Obama have insisted upon raising the caps for both defense and domestic spending. Republicans, however, have only been interested in raising defense funding and sought to get around the cap on it by calling for an additional $38 billion in the NDAA for an emergency wartime fund.



Critics have equated using the Overseas Contingency Operations account in such a way with turning it into a slush fund for the military. And Democrats have argued that employing the method without raising domestic discretionary spending leaves the country more vulnerable, since agencies on the domestic ledger – including the Department of Homeland Security, the Coast Guard and the Transportation Security Administration – would still be hamstrung by the spending caps.



Why It Matters:



It wasn’t clear until this week whether Obama would follow through on the veto threat, which the White House made earlier this year.



"It’s a bad bill [in] that it shortchanges the men and women who serve in the armed forces because it employs an irresponsible spending gimmick to fund them that's unreliable," White House deputy press secretary Eric Schultz said Thursday.



Now, the president's move ratchets the pressure up on budget negotiations, which were already stumbling. As a price for keeping the government open, Republicans have been demanding major cuts to entitlement programs, which Democrats say are off the table.



Two years ago, a budget-related government shutdown was avoided through the work of Sen. Patty Murray, D-Wash., and Rep. Paul Ryan, then the chairman of the House Budget Committee.



With Ryan soon taking up the speaker’s gavel, all eyes will be on him to see if he can help lead his fractious caucus to a similar compromise before the Dec. 11 deadline.

GOP Own Worst Enemy on Obamacare

GOP Own Worst Enemy on Obamacare Carlos Osorio/AP What Happened:



The House on Friday passed a bill that would gut portions of the Affordable Care Act. And unlike other times they’ve passed measures to unravel Obamacare, this one had been expected to make it through the Senate.



Using a tool called reconciliation – a process that exempts a budget-related bill from a Democratic filibuster in the upper chamber – the legislation would eliminate the health care law's individual and employer mandates, the so-called Cadillac tax and the medical device tax. It also includes a provision to block federal funding to Planned Parenthood.



However, despite needing just 51 of the 54 members of the Republican majority to pass, the bill is no longer a sure thing in the Senate. In narrowing the scope of the reconciliation bill in hopes of getting it through the upper chamber, House Republicans instead exposed it to conservative ire, with Sens. Ted Cruz of Texas and Marco Rubio of Florida – both candidates for the GOP presidential nomination – among those who don't think the bill goes far enough.



“If this bill cannot be amended so that it fully repeals Obamacare pursuant to Senate rules, we cannot support this bill,” Cruz, Rubio and Sen. Mike Lee of Utah said in a joint statement Thursday. If they persuade one more Republican to join them, the measure will fail.



Why It Matters:



Failing to pass their own reconciliation bill would be a major embarrassment for Republicans who have touted the process as a chance to land a punch on the president, who would be forced to veto the measure.



Conservatives have made repealing the Affordable Care Act one of their top priorities since its passage, and doing so has been a centerpiece of many campaigns – both for Congress in the past several elections and in the current presidential race. The stance drove much of the party's success in 2014, when Republicans swept into a two-chamber majority in Congress, and members are expected to lean on the law's continuing unpopularity among the GOP base this year.



But now, they risk undermining their own message. If even this symbolic version of an anti-Obamacare bill fails to clear the lowest bar – simple majorities in both chambers – Republicans' reputation for disarray within their own ranks will only grow.

Conservative Debt Ceiling Proposal Stumbles