Ever been bullied at work? What did you do? We are collecting examples of workplace bullying and strategies for dealing with the problem for a future On the Job column. If you've got a story to share, write our workplace columnist, Michelle Rafter at: michellerafter@comcast.net

Kendall Kelly prides herself on having a constitution “like an ox.”

It’s a good thing because until now Kelly’s job didn’t offer paid sick leave. The one time this year that the 28-year-old got sick and had to leave work early, she felt it in her next paycheck.

“I went home an hour after I clocked in, so I was out $80 or $100,” said Kelly, a receptionist at a local medical device manufacturer. “That extra money goes a long way because it goes toward groceries, gas and bills. When you’re relying on that money every week, it can hit you hard.”

From now on, the hit won’t be as hard. A new California law that passed Jan. 1 and took effect Wednesday requires employers in the state to offer employees an hour of paid sick leave for every 30 hours worked.

Paid sick leave specifics

For full-time employees, that works out to approximately eight days a year. Employers, however, are allowed to limit the amount of paid sick time a worker can take during a year to three days or 24 hours, according to the state Department of Industrial Relations. Additional hours can be rolled over to the next year but may be subject to an employer cap, according to the department.

You don’t have to work full time to be eligible. Anyone in the state who works at least 30 days within a year accrues hours toward paid sick leave. This includes part-time, per diem and temporary employees, according to the industrial relations department.

There are exceptions, including employees of publicly funded in-home care providers, some union members covered by collective bargaining, and some airline employees whose existing paid time off benefits equal those in the new law, according to the department.

In addition to working a minimum of 30 days in a year, workers must also be with an employer for a 90-day de facto probationary period before they are entitled to sick time – although employers can advance them sick time if they so choose.

Employees can use paid sick leave when they’re sick or if they have to stay home to take care of a sick family member, which the law defines as a child, spouse, parent, domestic partner, grandparent, grandchild or sibling.

They can also use it to leave work for part of the day to get a flu shot or physical. Employees who are victims of domestic violence, sexual assault or stalking can use the time to seek aid, obtain services or counseling, or participate in safety planning, according to the national labor law firm Fisher & Phillips LLP, which has an office in Irvine.

‘No Free Lunch’

The law also covers employees of staffing agencies, which place people in temporary jobs at other companies.

Kelly works for one such agency, Marquee Staffing in Irvine, which sends workers into long-term temporary and permanent professional, administrative and skilled manufacturing jobs throughout Southern California.

The new law affects 1,000 employees at Marquee, which previously did not offer paid sick leave. That’s been the norm for the staffing industry, which operates on low margins, said Tom Porter, Marquee Staffing’s founder and chief executive.

“Nobody I know does,” Porter said. “The only exception might be the highly skilled people like information technology contractors.”

A lot of Marquee employees who work as long-term contractors aspire to be hired on as full-time employees for the companies they’re placed with. As a result, they might not stay home when they get sick because of how it could affect their chances, Porter said.

Because of the new law, more of them could take to their beds when they’re under the weather – a change Porter intends to deal with by passing on some related labor costs to his clients. If he does, it’ll be a repeat of how the company passed on costs associated with implementing health care coverage mandated by the Affordable Care Act.

“There’s no free lunch, somebody has to pay for it,” he said. On the other hand, employees shouldn’t worry about ramifications from taking advantage of the time, he said. “It’s a benefit, so use it.”

Healthier workplaces

Cynthia Franco works for Marquee Staffing as a long-term temporary executive assistant at another Irvine medical device maker. In a previous job, she could take a day off when she got too sick to work and still get paid.

That ended when she joined Marquee in February 2014. Since then, the few days the 29-year-old has missed due to illness have showed up as reductions to her paycheck. “I could definitely see it since we get paid weekly,” she said.

Both Franco and Kelly believe the paid sick leave law will stop more people from working through colds, flu and other illnesses – a good thing for the workers concerned and also for fellow colleagues, who won’t be exposed to their germs.

It’s a huge win for people living paycheck to paycheck, Kelly said, adding: “It’s a comfort to know they have this to fall back on.”

Michelle V. Rafter specializes in covering jobs and employment issues. Send your questions about job hunting, careers or workplace issues to her at michellerafter@comcast.net or find her on Twitter @MichelleRafter.