Loveland e-cigarette users say the devices help them kick the smoking habit

Jason Garza, co-owner of Mad Mountain Vapors in downtown Loveland, releases a puff of vapor from an electronic cigarette on Tuesday, Dec. 31, 2013. ( Craig Young )

LOVELAND -- Jason Garza, a former pack-a-day smoker, can sit in his Loveland shop all day long without even thinking about a cigarette.

He won't claim to be a paragon of self-control, though; it's just that he's got some help.

Garza, co-owner of Mad Mountain Vapors at 325 E. Fourth St., Suite 4, satisfies his nicotine habit by taking frequent draws on an e-cigarette.

"I used to chew and smoke," he said. "I occasionally smoke now, but not anywhere near where I used to be, and I don't chew."

Garza, 38, said he started smoking when he was 14. Over the years, he tried to quit using nicotine gum, patches and pills.

"They all failed me, or I failed them," he said.

The vaporizers for sale at Mad Mountain Vapors range from simple pen-like devices up to models that mimic pipes. (Craig Young)

E-cigarette, or vaporizers, have boomed in popularity in the past two or three years. Because they're so new, they're just starting to show up on regulators' radar across the country.

The devices work by vaporizing a liquid containing nicotine. The user sucks in the vapor and gets a hit of nicotine to the lungs.

The Jury's Still Out

What users - or "vapers" - don't get are the smoke, tar and multitude of other harmful substances that come with cigarette smoke.

Garza acknowledged that the small amount of research done on e-cigarettes hasn't provided conclusive evidence on whether using them is harmful.

"To me, I'll use my own common sense," he said. "Water vapor versus smoke - I'm going to take my chances with the water vapor."

Garza, who opened his downtown shop with his brother, Keith Brennan, the week of Nov. 25, 2013, got into the business because of e-cigarettes' potential to help people quit.

Like the other nicotine-delivery products, e-cigs give the smoker a hit of addictive nicotine to help relieve craving. But Garza said they also gratify other urges that come with a smoking habit.

"It satisfies that oral fixation," he said. "It provides a certain amount of relaxation."

Jason Garza, co-owner of Mad Mountain Vapors in downtown Loveland, talks Thursday, Dec. 26, 2013, about the Innokin iTaste 134, his most expensive model, which costs $125. ( Craig Young )

E-cigarettes cover a broad range of styles - from the disposable devices available at convenience stores that look like conventional cigarettes, complete with a glowing red tip, up to large custom vaporizers that can cost thousands.

Vaporizer 'Hot Rods'

Garza sells some simpler starters, which cost $20, but specializes in the higher-priced "hot rods" of the vaporizer world.

His top-of-the-line model, the Innokin iTaste 134, is a large metal device that weighs three-quarters of a pound and sells for $125.

Loveland resident Dillon Jarvis, a frequent visitor at Mad Mountain Vapors, recently bought an Innokin 134.

"I like the way it fits in my hand," he said. "It's got weight to it. And it looks like a light saber, to be honest."

Jarvis, who started smoking as a teenager five or six years ago, said he's "really into" vaping and its technology and accoutrements.

He plans to quit smoking entirely in the new year, with the help of vaping.

"I like blowing a big, puffy cloud, like a hookah," he said. The higher-priced devices allow users to adjust the wattage and resistance, which changes the way the liquid is vaporized and the amount of steam released.

Flavorful Options

During a visit to Garza's shop last week, Jarvis tried out several different flavors of "e-juices" or "e-liquids" in samplers.

Garza sells 43 different flavors - from cigar smoke to root beer to strawberry. Each flavor comes in four strengths of nicotine.

Garza sells 43 flavors of "e-juice" liquids for the vaporizers. ( Craig Young )

The nicotine levels allow smokers to wean themselves off the chemical, Garza said. Some kick the nicotine habit completely but enjoy vaping so much that they continue using e-juices with no nicotine at all, he said.

E-cigarette opponents say the enticing flavors will attract children, making the devices a gateway to smoking.

Garza said he hasn't seen nonsmokers pick up the vaping habit, and as for children, "Unless you were hard-driven by peer pressure to begin using them, you wouldn't use them out of the blue."

Another benefit of the product is the cost, Garza said. He sells bottles of e-juice for $7 each and said $20 a month should satisfy most vapers. Cigarettes, on the other hand, cost $5-$10 a pack.

Loveland resident Dillon Jarvis samples a flavor of liquid for e-cigarettes during a visit Dec. 26, 2013, to Mad Mountain Vapors in downtown Loveland. ( Craig Young )

"Plus, you don't stink or burn your clothes or have butts in your car," he said.

Craig Young can be reached at 970-635-3634 or cyoung@reporter-herald.com. Follow him on Twitter: @CraigYoungRH.

Loveland doesn't restrict e-cigarette use ... yet

LOVELAND -- Regulations have yet to catch up with e-cigarettes in much of the country.

Anti-tobacco forces are pushing for nicotine vaporizers to be treated as cigarettes, which are banned in most public places. Just last month, Los Angeles and New York City passed restrictions on the sale and use of the devices.

Some states have enacted laws treating e-cigarettes as tobacco products, and others specify that they're in a different category. Colorado prohibits their sale to minors.

Loveland, which in 1985 became the third city in Colorado to prohibit smoking in most public places, has no regulations on e-cigarettes yet.

Assistant city attorney Moses Garcia said he looked into the issue a year or two ago, to discover what other communities were doing, but no ordinances resulted here.

"We didn't get that far," he said.

So individual businesses and venues are left to regulate e-cigarette use, like in the old days of cigarette smoking.

'Treat Them Like Cigarettes'

Dr. Adrienne LeBailly, director of the Larimer County Department of Health and Environment, said Bob Herrfeldt, the director of The Ranch, recently asked for her advice on restricting e-cigarette use at the county's events center.

"They had been telling their e-cigarette smokers that they need to smoke outside," she said, and some "vapers" had been challenging that.

"I strongly urged him to treat them like cigarettes," she said.

"We actually don't have convincing research that they don't present a health hazard to bystanders," LeBailly said. "Until we do, they should be treated like cigarettes."

LeBailly added that the devices also can be used to vaporize marijuana products.

"There's no way the staff at The Ranch can determine what's being vaporized," she said.

That's a concern of Bryan Jones, owner of Henry's Pub and the Sports Station in downtown Loveland.

He said he's encountered only one vaper at his restaurants so far, and that person was asked to take it outside.

Establishments that serve alcohol are required by law to monitor their customers for intoxication.

"If we give them a beer, and they're smoking weed on top of it, it changes the whole dynamic," Jones said. "We don't need to add something else into the mix."

'I Won't Restrict It'

Mike Severance, co-owner of the Cactus Grille in downtown Loveland, has a different perspective.

"We're not seeing a lot of it, but to be real honest with you, it's probably something that we'll allow," he said.

Severance, a former smoker himself, believes e-cigarettes can be a positive option for people trying to quit smoking.

"There's not a lot of the negative nature of the smoke and the ash and the tar and the carcinogens," he said. "It's a great alternative to smoking, and they want to take that away.

"I won't restrict it in-house," he said. "If the city asked me, I'd say they should keep their nose out of it."

Craig Young can be reached at 970-635-3634 or cyoung@reporter-herald.com. Follow him on Twitter: @CraigYoungRH.