Nebraska Methodist College has added a brand new Nursing Informatics option to its prestigious online Master of Science in Nursing program. This track, the first of its kind in the region, will train nurses to fill critical informaticist roles within health systems.

OMAHA, Neb., Oct. 13, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- In 2016, Nebraska Methodist College will debut a brand new Master of Science in Nursing specialization option to meet growing demand throughout the country.



The Nursing Informatics track will prepare nursing graduate students to fill the critical role of the informaticist within health systems, hospitals, clinics and community health organizations. The informatics industry has grown exponentially in the wake of the Affordable Care Act, which created new standards for patient and population outcomes.



Dr. Linda Foley, director of Online Graduate Nursing for Nebraska Methodist College, has been a chief proponent of the new online specialization option, which will see its first class of students begin next fall.



"While informatics has been around for awhile, the need for qualified individuals to fill these roles has perhaps never been greater," said Dr. Foley. "This is the ideal track for nurses who are interested in helping to improve outcomes for patients and populations through the use of informatics. With their experience on the hospital floor and their understanding of the needs of patients, nurses certified in informatics can develop strategies and policies that will improve care within hospital systems for years to come."



Three options, all online, will be available for nurses pursuing their informatics education. The RN to MSN degree is designed for registered nurses who have yet to attain their BSNs. The MSN option is dedicated to nurses who currently have their Bachelor of Science in Nursing. And the Post-Master's Certificate is suited to MSN-qualified nurses who want to branch out into the informatics field. Programs last for 30, 21 and 12 months, respectively.



All options will prepare students to be eligible for nursing informatics certification from the American Nurses Credentialing Center.



Nurses interested in the program can visit http://www.methodistcollege.edu/nursing/master-of-science-in-nursing to learn more.



About Nebraska Methodist College



The Omaha, Nebraska-based Nebraska Methodist College of Nursing and Allied Health has been teaching the meaning of care for 125 years and counting. An affiliate of Methodist Health System, NMC offers certificate, undergraduate and graduate degrees both on campus and online. Nebraska Methodist College is fully accredited by The Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools.

Marc Costanzo Marketing Communications Specialist 402-354-6522