The race baiters, poverty pimps and hate mongers finally got what they have been after for a very long time. A major American city is in flames, at least in part, because another black man has died as a result of an interaction with the police. The overlay is not precise for their purposes: The mayor of the city, much of its city council, the police chief and most of the police force are also black, thus removing the racial component from their frustrated and frustrating complaints about a lack of “social justice.” But in a pinch it will just have to do.

Predictably, the Rev. Al Sharpton, instead of trying to find the money his organization owes the federal government over payroll taxes that went unpaid for several years, is on his way to present, one supposes, a list of demands addressing the grievances of the injured parties. Unfortunately for Sharpton and those who will almost assuredly follow, the injured parties seem to be doing a pretty good job of speaking for themselves – and against the rioters. They are likely, therefore, to have no truck with Sharpton and other pretenders to the mantle once held by the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.



[OPINION: Baltimore Isn't Burning]

The most interesting fact is not the riots themselves – which are just as likely the product of trouble-making, outside agitators as they are an expression of any kind of legitimate rage against the machinery of government – but the way in which the citizens themselves are in goodly number standing up for their city.

Unlike in the case of Trayvon Martin or Ferguson, Missouri, the racial argument in Baltimore falls flat. Even President Barack Obama and his progressive allies, as much as they might secretly cheer what in their minds are acts of revolutionary civil disobedience, have been forced to publicly denounce the riots as stealing, looting and just plain wrong.

No one will forget the images of one mother chasing her son down the street, slapping him deservedly about the head as he was on his way, masked and wearing a hoodie, to join the in the mayhem-making. Or the line of men standing with the police, arms folded, as if to say “not in our neighborhood, you’re not.” Or the Baptist pastor stunned into disbelief as the senior-focused community center being built by his church burned to the ground.



[READ: Views You Can Use: A Violent Night in Baltimore]