If you combined hybrid creatures, science, silent film actresses and a little Mary Shelley, you would get "Random Forces," an animated film that Stacey Steers is in the process of creating.

And Steers, a filmmaker and instructor in the University of Colorado's Film Studies Program, is getting some help with her project in the form of a prestigious Guggenheim Fellowship, which she recently was awarded.

"I was surprised and honored to get the Guggenheim," Steers said. "I feel like there's a lot of people who have been helpful to me over the years who contributed to this achievement. I don't feel like I did it on my own. That includes people I studied with at the University of Colorado and colleagues."

Stacey Steers, who recently received a Guggenheim Fellowship for her filmmaking, works on her new project, "Random Forces." (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

The Guggenheim Fellowship is a grant given to individuals who have demonstrated tremendous ability in their area of expertise. The fellowship can be awarded to filmmakers, composers, scientists, scholars, photographers and others who create their own work.

"It's prestigious and it's also a cash award, so it gives you the freedom to pursue a project," she said of the Guggenheim, whose amount varies depending on the project. "The award, in a way, validates your position as an artist."

Phil Solomon, one of Steers' colleagues, merely wants people to understand the significance of her achievement.

"It is the equivalent of winning the Academy (Award)," he said. "It's the next best thing in terms of peer recognition. It speaks to the fact that she's moved into a whole new world."

Steers' "Random Forces" will incorporate ideas from her 2011 film, "Night Hunter," in which she placed silent film actress Lillian Gish in a dreamscape. The film featured more than 4,000 collages.

"It's related to work I've been doing since about 2002 when I started 'Phantom Canyon,' " Steers said.

It's not the typical filmmaking process.

"I'm taking antique film materials, mostly actresses from the silent film era," Steers said. "Then I cut them out of frames and sequences from their early films and incorporate them in handmade collages, that then I shoot in sequence to create animation.

"Essentially what I do is re-contextualize their action. So if they raise their arm in a film, they may raise their arm in my film, but there's something different going on, just to give you a feel for how it works."

In "Random Force," Steers uses silent film actress Mary Pickford as the model for the main character, a female scientist who creates a hybrid creature, part-female, part-plant. Steers describes "Random Forces" as a Victorian sci-Fi film. It's like Frankestein with a gender twist.

An image from Stacey Steers' new film project, "Random Forces." (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"It's a dystopian world," Steers said. "There's been a natural catastrophe and there are a lot of dead bees in the film. She's trying to reinvigorate the world."

In the film, Steers said, she is exploring the female role in reproduction and the idea of creation. Other characters in the film will include silent film actresses Janet Gaynor, Maria Falconetti and Gish.

Steers has five completed films on her resume: "Night Hunter" (2011), "Phantom Canyon" (2006), "Totem" (1999), "Watunna" (1990) and "The Black Sheep" (1985).

"I haven't really finished that many films because my process is so labor intensive," she said. " ... As an animator, I'm creating eight collages for every second of screen time. So it takes a long time."

Solomon, a CU film professor, speaks fondly of the depth of her films "Night Hunter" and "Phantom Canyon."

"Stacey's meanings are submerged and they're very lucid, like having access to someone's interior," he said. "It's like watching a storybook come alive. There's a narrative, but it only hints at what the anxieties are."

Steers' goal as a filmmaker is that people recognized the honesty of her work.

"If it's honest, it's deeply motivated by personal considerations," she said. "I'm just trying to explore a sense of how reality presents itself to me. How longing and desire motivate how we process our experience."