Hospitals, along with many health and social service providers around Illinois, would take a body blow in Gov. Bruce Rauner's proposed budget for the fiscal year that starts July 1. On the list: Rauner wants a $735 million slash in Medicaid reimbursements to hospitals.

No, this isn't our special pleading for Rauner to go easy on one unhappy provider. Instead it's a parable of how all providers can help a badly stressed state government reinvent how it spends money. As you read about Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, note that this isn't one more jeremiad that the world will end if Springfield balances its budget. Instead, Lurie should be a model of how providers who rely on state dollars can look for ways to stretch fewer dollars — and, in the process, improve how they serve clients.

Officials at Lurie, one of the premier children's hospitals in the U.S., tell us they're expecting — and prepared — to take the financial hit that reduced state spending would deliver.

But Lurie President and CEO Patrick Magoon also makes a compelling case for reimagining the way care is delivered to poor children on Medicaid who have the most complex — and expensive — medical conditions. Many of them are among the sickest kids in Illinois.

These children require intense treatment but also monitoring, lest they slip in and out of emergency rooms and ICUs — or simply get lost in a disjointed scrum of health providers. They're a small fraction of the children on Medicaid, but they generate a huge percentage of the bills, Magoon told us in a recent visit to the Tribune Editorial Board.

Lurie has enlisted an impressive slate of hospitals, clinics and doctors to care for these children as part of what the state calls a CCE, or care coordination entity. The goal: Lower Medicaid costs while improving children's health. The hospital seeks to treat as many as 20,000 children in a CCE framework. Hospital officials project that such a program could save the state up to $53 million over five years in the nearly $20 billion annual state/federal Medicaid budget.

But in its effort to economize, Lurie has hit a snag: As part of a broader Medicaid budget cut, Rauner proposes trimming $60 million in the care coordination fees paid to Lurie and other providers. Without that money, Lurie says it can't afford to hire care coordinators — nurses and social workers — who help patients and their families get the right care at the right time.

Upshot: Lurie says about 1,700 children now in its CCE may have their care farmed out to bigger managed care organizations that likely will lack Lurie's expertise with these unusually sick kids.

John Hoffman, spokesman for the state Department of Healthcare and Family Services, tells us those CCE fees were set to be phased out over the next couple of years and that Rauner wants to encourage providers to assume more risk in caring for patients, an incentive to coordinate care and keep children healthier.

But Magoon warns that an across-the-board cut in CCE reimbursements "will not save money, it will only cost more for this subset." The governor's budget aides should take that warning seriously, especially given that it comes from a hospital willing to make do with less state money.

The big picture here is that managed care providers get paid to coordinate medical care and keep people healthy, reducing those expensive emergency room visits and hospital stays: to save the cash-strapped state money and improve patient outcomes. Illinois wisely has moved 1.6 million people on Medicaid into managed care. Hundreds of thousands more people are in the pipeline.

Many Medicaid recipients who don't need specialized care do fine in regular managed care. But Magoon tells us that children with severe needs often don't. Frankly, coordinating care for these relatively few kids is its own complex niche.

We've backed Rauner in suggesting tough cuts. The state has to live within its means. We hear from many social service and health care providers pleading their cases. So has he. Many say they cannot continue to operate as they do today if the state gives them less money.

That's often true. But providers around the state can take a cue from Lurie's approach. Its officials aren't devoting all their energy to grousing about pending cuts. They're proposing an innovative way for the state to give them less money and improve care. That is, they're leveraging their expertise to reinvent the way Illinois delivers care to one among many groups of needy individuals.

"This isn't going to save the state," Magoon admits, acknowledging the relatively small savings in the state budget. "It isn't going to save the Medicaid program. But it's a significant contributor."

Rauner has no choice but to examine rising Medicaid spending. Obamacare has put hundreds of thousands more people on the Medicaid rolls. Costs are ballooning and the federal government won't pick up all of the tab much longer.

But if Lurie's approach can help other Illinois providers learn to survive with fewer taxpayer dollars, it should find a champion in the governor's office.