The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has updated its 2014 recommendation for kids’ well-checks to include screenings for high cholesterol, depression and HIV among others. The guidelines, published online Dec. 7 in the journal Pediatrics, are a part of the organization’s Bright Futures initiative.

According to the guideline authors, the recommendations “are designed for the care of children who are receiving competent parenting, have no manifestations of any important health problems, and are growing and developing in a satisfactory fashion.” All screenings, report the AAP, are covered by insurance, without cost-sharing, under the Affordable Care Act.

The recurring emphasis in the new guidelines is that the screenings are recommended for all children at certain ages and not only for those who might be at increased risk. The AAP’s recommendations for screenings at regular office checkups for kids and teens reflect changes in practice that have taken place over the past two years.

The screening guideline likely to affect the most kids is the recommendation that all children ages 9 through 11 should be tested for high cholesterol levels at each checkup. This comes on the heels of studies showing obesity is reaching epidemic numbers in American children.

At one time, screening for cholesterol levels were only done when children were considered high-risk, based on factors like family history, Geoffrey Simon, MD, chair of the AAP’s Committee on Practice and Ambulatory Medicine, told HealthDay. However, research has shown that such targeted screening misses too many children with abnormal cholesterol levels.

Acknowledging that some parents will question the need for cholesterol screening in children so young, Simon pointed to findings by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) that showed 20 percent of U.S. teens have unhealthy cholesterol levels, and even younger children have been found to have abnormal results. Elevated cholesterol, often a by-product of obesity, can lead to heart disease.

But Simon sees cholesterol screening as important for all children.“The goal is to identify risk factors early on, so we reduce their heart disease risk as adults,” he told TODAY. “It has nothing to do with whether your kids are obese or not.”

Two other critical recommendations call for screening for depression and for HIV. The guidelines recommend that HIV screenings should be done on teens 16 to 18. Annual screenings for depression are recommended for youth 11 through 21.

A 2013 National Institute of Mental Health study found that 11 percent of 12- to 17-year-olds had at least one occurrence of major depression. That’s a total of 2.6 million kids in the U.S.

“If we catch depression symptoms early, we can intervene,” Simon told TODAY. And it does not mean medicating kids, he added. “We are trying to get to kids before they reach the point where they might need medication.”

As for HIV testing, the AAP recommends that teens as young as 16 to 18 should be screened at least once in a healthcare setting. This guideline comes in response to trends in infection rates among young people.

The CDC reports that youth ages 13 to 24 accounted for nearly 26 percent of all new cases of HIV in the U.S. in 2010. More than 50 percent of that group did not know they were infected with HIV.

“We decided on the range of 16 to 18 based on where you are,” Simon explained. “Because of local privacy laws, sometimes you can’t give results confidentially to patients under 18.”

Among other changes in the guidelines are recommendations that children ages 6 months to 5 years receive an application of fluoride varnish on their teeth to prevent cavities, and newborns be screened for congenital heart disease before being discharged from the hospital. In addition, it is no longer recommended that girls under the age 21 be screened for cervical dysplasia -- pre-cancerous cells on the cervix -- and 18-year-olds no longer need to undergo routine vision screening. Instead, it is recommended that only those at risk for vision problems be tested.