In the fourth installment of our division by division previews, Paul Zalunardo takes a look at the SouthEast division and whether Lance Stephenson can inspire Charlotte to play-offs glory.

Raw talent: Charlotte's money-man Lance Stephenson. Photo: AP

For the past four years all the talk in this division was about one team - Charlotte and when were they going to change their name back to the Hornets. Well, they've done that now and LeBron James wants no part of this grouping. While the new old Hornets added Lance Stephenson (what could possibly go wrong there) to emerge as the improvers from among this bunch, LeBron-less Miami look like the biggest losers. Then there's Atlanta. If healthy, they just might win this division.

Atlanta (38-44)



Gains: Kent Bazemore (Lakers), Adreian Payne (rookie), Dexter Pittman, Thabo Sefolosha (Thunder).

Advertisement

Losses: Gustavo Ayón, Cartier Martin (Pistons), Louis Williams (Pistons).

When on the court, Al Horford is a really good player. The type of player teams build around. Points, rebounds, tough D, he does it all. Add him to Jeff Teague, Paul Millsap and Kyle Korver and you have a play-off team (at least in the Eastern Conference). When Horford isn't on the court, as was the case last year, a losing record is on the way.

Prediction: Horford will stay healthy and Atlanta will challenge Charlotte for top spot in the SouthEast. Will make the play-offs.

Charlotte (43-39)

Gains: PJ Hairston (rookie), Jason Maxiell (Magic), Brian Roberts (Pelicans), Lance Stephenson (Pacers), Noah Vonleh (rookie), Marvin Williams (Jazz).

Losses: Chris Douglas-Roberts (Clippers), Brendan Haywood (Cavaliers), Josh McRoberts (Heat), Luke Ridnour (Magic), Anthony Tolliver (Suns).

Lance Stephenson. It's as simple as that. If he lives up to his potential this team could be really good. They could make the play-offs again without him. But if they are to make noise during April and May they need some Lance magic. Al Jefferson is one of the most under-rated players in the league.

Prediction: We'll see good Lance this year. Good Lance means good Hornets. If they get a good draw in the play-offs, the second round isn't beyond them.

Miami (54-28)

Gains: Shannon Brown (Knicks), Luol Deng (Cavaliers), James Ennis (rookie), Danny Granger (Clippers), Josh McRoberts (Hornets), Shabazz Napier (rookie), Shawne Williams.

Losses: Ray Allen, Shane Battier, Michael Beasley, Toney Douglas, LeBron James (Cavaliers), James Jones (Cavaliers), Rashard Lewis, Greg Oden.

How can you expect to match a 54-win season when you lose Greg Oden, Michael Beasley and Rashard Lewis. Those guys are irreplaceable. In other news that only NBA tragics will know, LeBron James has gone back to Cleveland. According to Heat backers that will just result in Dwyane Wade winding back the clock. Good luck with that one.

Prediction: They went to the finals with LeBron, they'll just make the play-offs without him. The Seven Nation Army chant from the fans won't be what it used to be.

Orlando (23-59)



Gains: Seth Curry, Evan Fournier (Nuggets), Channing Frye (Suns), Aaron Gordon (rookie), Ben Gordon, Willie Green (Clippers), Devyn Marble (rookie), Elfrid Payton (rookie), Luke Ridnour (Hornets), Peyton Siva Pistons.

Losses: Arron Afflalo (Nuggets), Doron Lamb (Mavericks), Jason Maxiell (Hornets), E'Twaun Moore (Bulls), Jameer Nelson (Mavericks), Ronnie Price (Lakers).

When I first typed Elfrid (as in Payton), the predictive text suggested Eldridge. I'm not sure what that means. Useless observations aside, everyone loves this rookie. Leader, tenacious and driven are three of the words you hear. Who can't like that. His tenacity will be tested. Orlando still aren't any good. Victor Oladipo and Nikola Vucevic can play. That's about it.

Prediction: More woe.

Washington (44-38)



Gains: DeJuan Blair (Mavericks), Rasual Butler (Pacers), Kris Humphries (Celtics), Damion James (SAS), Paul Pierce (Nets), Xavier Silas.

Losses: Trevor Ariza (Rockets), Trevor Booker (Jazz), Al Harrington, Chris Singleton (Pacers).

One of the best stories from last season. John Wall and Bradley Beal are a great back court. That will be a strength. If they want to go further in the play-offs they will need Marcin Gortat and Nene to remain dominant in the paint. That pair will earn a combined $24 million this season, so they better contribute. The trump card in the playoffs could be Paul Pierce. Let him rest up until February, them get those old legs moving. He's still got it.

Prediction: The Wiz are the third best team in the East. They're not in Cleveland or Chicago's class. Yet.