When Milo Cress moved from Longmont to Bend, Ore., he took his "Be Straw Free" campaign with him. Most recently, a Boulder-based nonprofit organization named him a finalist for the 2014 Gloria Barron Prize for Young Heroes. ( Picasa )

Editor's note: The Times-Call's series Take Two revisits people and situations we have written about in the past. Take Two stories run on Mondays.

Before Milo Cress' voice drops from its boyish Mickey Mouse pitch to a manly timbre, he will have spoken across the United States and in more than a half-dozen countries promoting his "Be Straw Free" campaign.

Milo, 13, landed on his environmentally friendly cause after ordering a glass of whole milk with his meal at Leunig's Bistro and Cafe in Burlington, Vt., his home state at the time.

He was 9 then, when he recognized the opportunity to reduce plastic waste by changing waitstaff protocol — to offer straws versus automatically serving them with soft drinks.

"It is something we can all do something about," said Milo, who moved with his family last summer from Longmont to Bend, Ore.

Ever since, he has won numerous awards and held forth with audiences including Congress, the Colorado State Legislature, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the National Restaurant Association's Best Practices Conference. CNN has chauffeured him by limousine to multiple studio interviews.

Most recently, a Boulder-based nonprofit organization in October named him a finalist for the 2014 Gloria Barron Prize for Young Heroes.

The organization received roughly 400 nationwide nominations. It awarded $5,000 each to 15 winners and recognized Milo and nine others as honorees for exemplifying "inspiring public spirit" and making a "significant positive difference" in either environmental or humanitarian causes, Barbara Ann Richman, the nonprofit's executive director, said.

Boulder author T.A. Barron named the award after his mother, who inspired the hero concept he uses in his fiction for the way she acted with compassion, courage, perseverance, hope and humor, she said.

"But when he would speak, he literally heard middle schoolers say, 'But that doesn't happen in real life.' ... Through this nonprofit, he could shine a spotlight on real life young heroes like Milo," she explained.

To make his mark, Milo first did his homework.

He researched the straw industry and discovered that in the United States alone about 500 million straws get used and discarded every day, which is enough to fill more than 46,400 large school buses each year. End to end, those buses would stretch more than 325 miles.

The environmental and cost savings of going strawless prompted Colo. Gov. John Hickenlooper to declare July 11 Straw Free Day statewide, a practice now encouraged year 'round by The National Restaurant Association and The Colorado Restaurant Association.

"There are more than 10,700 eating and drinking establishments in Colorado, so I would say that all adds up," Sonia Riggs, CRA's president and CEO, said. "... We also encourage restaurants, incidentally, to offer water only upon request for the same reasons."

Besides agreeing with the campaign's green stance, Denver-based Environmental Protection Agency spokesman Richard Mylott applauded Milo's moxy.

"Milo knows what it takes to transform an idea into results; being 13 is beside the point. He exemplifies the best kind of advocacy — practical, thoughtful and convincing," he said.

That explains Milo's latest mission, one he calls "Let's Create the Future" based on the Abraham Lincoln quote: "The best way to predict the future is to help create it."

He wants to use his example to inspire other kids around the country and the world to see big possibilities in little changes.

"The straw campaign is one small step for each restaurant and one giant leap for the planet," he said.

For more information, visit www.bestrawfree.org (sponsored on Boulder-based Eco-Cycle's website) and www.barronprize.org.

Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@gmail.com or at 303-746-0942.