Photo

Obrea Poindexter is a lawyer at Morrison & Foerster in Washington.

Q. What is your practice area?

A. I advise clients on regulatory matters related to credit, debit and prepaid cards. Now, with emerging technologies, I’m also involved with mobile payments and virtual currency. I counsel companies on things like privacy concerns, data security, electronic delivery of information and electronic signatures.

What other services do you provide?

When companies want to launch a new payment-related product, I educate them on what they need to know about laws and regulations. Or a company might want advice on developing agreements with partners. We also help with product design, especially for start-ups. They may want to know the best legal framework for structuring a product.

When did you decide to become a lawyer?

As a child I thought I wanted to be one, but I loved economics in college so I changed course. One summer in college I worked at the Federal Reserve Board as a research assistant, but the job involved more number-crunching than I had expected. I was all ready to pursue a Ph.D. in economics and become an economist, but I applied to law school instead. After graduating, I became a law clerk in the Fed’s legal division and helped write consumer financial laws involving debit, credit and prepaid cards.

How did you move to Morrison & Foerster?

After five years at the Fed, I was being recruited by various law firms and decided it was a good time to move. I enjoyed the rule-making part of my job but I was interested in pursuing a financial services practice from an industry standpoint. When a recruiter called about an opening here, I made the change.

Your work has changed significantly in the last 10 years.

A decade ago the hot areas in financial services were online banking and Internet commerce. Now the alternatives to traditional payment systems are hot, such as Apple Pay and Softcard. The mobile payments and virtual currency industries are still evolving, and I’m constantly learning. It takes hours to stay current in this area, but it’s why I continue to enjoy what I do. I love learning.