CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Today's cartoon was produced Friday, before the full extent of the horrific terror attacks in Paris was known.

It was the ISIS Paris attack that ended up crashing the Democratic debate, not John Kasich, who offered up a heartfelt prayer for the victims and France.

Saturday I posted a cartoon and column on those attacks, which can be read by clicking here.

In Iowa, Saturday night, Hillary Clinton, Bernie Sanders, and Martin O'Malley debated how to confront ISIS, whether to label them Islamic extremists or Jihadists, Obamacare, policing Wall Street, campaign funding, minimum wage, and college affordability, among other issues.

Moderator John Dickerson began by asking Clinton if the legacy of the Obama administration she served in would be that it underestimated ISIS, and if she would call the attacks an act of war, as the president of France did.

Clinton responded by calling ISIS "the leading threat of an international terror network." She emphatically said ISIS must be destroyed, not contained. The comment was a notable departure from Obama's position that ISIS must be contained, degraded and eventually destroyed. A day before the Paris attacks, Obama was still making comments grossly underestimating ISIS capabilities.

Bernie Sanders not only declared that climate change was a bigger threat than ISIS, he doubled down, claiming climate change contributes to the growth of terrorism. Sanders started sounding more sane when he argued that Muslim nations in the Middle East have not been doing enough to fight ISIS and Al Qaida.

All three candidates agreed that calling ISIS simply Jihadists, instead of using the terms Islamic extremists or radical Islam, was sufficient.

The Democrats don't exactly instill confidence that they can destroy the #1 threat to the free world when they're put off by calling the ISIS terror army what they are, Islamic extremists. It's pathetic that U.S. political leaders are waging a war of semantics, when the ISIS terror army is waging an expanding war against the world.

Speaking of World Wars, Bernie Sanders declared that Dwight Eisenhower was also a great socialist.

On Obamacare, Clinton said efforts should be directed at making improvements to the Affordable Care Act. Sanders said it should be scrapped altogether in favor of single payer and declaring war on the pharmaceutical and insurance industry.

Sanders hit on Clinton's ties to Wall Street, when debating regulating the industry and campaign finance reform. Clinton took offense, accusing Sanders of impugning her integrity. Clinton said she had plenty of small donors to her campaign and was especially proud that 60% of her contributors are women. But Clinton also invoked 9-11, which would have her campaign aides doing post-debate damage control. Clinton reminded Sanders that she was NY Senator when the financial district was attacked on 9-11. The reference seemed like it would have been more appropriate to make when terrorism was being discussed.

CBS partnered with Twitter for the debate. The moments that generated the biggest Twitter spikes for each candidate were the following:

Hillary Clinton saying 60% of her contributors are women.

Bernie Sanders saying Ike was a socialist.

Martin O'Malley saying Donald Trump was an "immigrant bashing carnival barker."

In the great moderator debate, I pick John Dickerson as the winner so far. The host of "Face the Nation" didn't ask any trivial CNBC questions or pitch any FOX Business channel softballs lacking appropriate follow-ups.

I'll end this commentary on the debate the way it began. Although he's a not a Democrat, I feel it's appropriate to give the last word to John Kasich, who offered up the following prayer Friday, upon learning of the attacks on the people of Paris.

"Dear Lord, we keep the families in Paris in our prayers, the children who've been frightened to learn of the death of their mom or their dad or their brother or their sister. We know this evil can be all around us, but we know in the end it's the strength that you provide, the hope ultimately that you provide, that can help these folks deal with this terrible tragedy and recover. And we'll stand with them, Lord here across the ocean and the United States. We'll do the best to hold them in our arms, to be with them in this time of terrible grief and terrible tragedy."