After four decades in health care administration, Joel Allison still makes regular hospital rounds.

It helps him stay close to patients and those who care for them, said the former Marine and college football lineman who runs the largest not-for-profit health care system in Texas, Baylor Scott & White Health.

“If this is what I could do all day, I’d do it,” he told a nurse during a recent visit with patients at Baylor University Medical Center near downtown Dallas. “But they won’t let me do it all day. They say I’ve got to do other stuff.”

That other stuff includes preparing Baylor Scott & White, formed earlier this year by the merger of Dallas-based Baylor Health Care System and Temple-based Scott & White Health, for a future that includes full implementation of the Affordable Care Act, which is transforming how care is provided and compensated across the country.

“Right now, we’re going through probably the biggest, fastest change I’ve seen,” Allison, 65, said of his organization and the industry.

Going forward, the scale and pace of change will probably increase, he said, as health care providers bridge the strategy of today to that of tomorrow. He foresees:

A focus on quality as providers become more and more accountable for the care they deliver. In tandem, he sees a focus on wellness, keeping people healthy rather than treating them when they are sick.

Treatment will continue to move to outpatient settings instead of hospital inpatient facilities that involve overnight stays.

A focus on pricing as reimbursements to providers continue to decrease. “We’re one of the last industries to go through a repricing of our product,” Allison said.

Growing industry consolidation through mergers and acquisitions of hospital groups and physician groups. Scale is becoming critical to effectiveness and survival.

In fact, Allison said, the country may be just at the beginning of a period of consolidation.

“In 10 years, there may be only 150 large, integrated health care delivery systems in the nation able to be accountable for and able to take risk for a significant population of patients,” he said.

In October, Baylor and Scott & White completed their merger. The new organization, with Allison as CEO, has more than $8 billion in combined assets and about $6 billion in annual revenue. It includes 43 hospitals in North and Central Texas, more than 500 patient care sites, more than 6,000 affiliated physicians and 34,000 employees.

The merged system has about 4.8 million “patient encounters” a year, Baylor Scott & White says. One patient can account for more than one encounter.

“We put the two organizations together because we truly believe that one plus one equals three,” said Allison, who earned about $1.6 million in salary and bonus in 2012. “We’re building on the legacy while we make the changes necessary.”

This year, Modern Healthcare magazine ranked Allison No. 19 on its list of the 100 most influential people in the industry, just behind Tenet CEO Trevor Fetter. Kathleen Sebelius, the secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services, is No. 1, President Barack Obama No. 3.

“Joel, you’re at the peak of your career at a critical moment in health care,” KERA’s Lee Cullum told Allison on her CEO show earlier this fall. Much of the discussion was about Baylor’s merger.

During interviews with The Dallas Morning News for this article, Allison was asked if he had plans to retire. No, he answered. He said that decision is in the hands “of the Lord” and Baylor Scott & White’s board.

“I’ve seen a lot of folks flunk retirement,” he said.

“I think this is the most exciting time in my career. It’s energizing.”

Football, Marines

Allison’s perspective on health care developed over a career that began in 1973 at Hendrick Medical Center in Abilene, where he worked under Boone Powell Jr., who later ran Baylor Health Care System and eventually hired Allison here.

His life lessons began earlier. He attended high school in Jefferson City, Mo., where he played football and basketball and threw the shot and discus in track. He earned a football scholarship as a lineman (tackle) to Baylor University, where he majored in journalism and religion. He said he wasn’t a starter in football at Baylor, but he did letter.

Originally, he wanted to be a minister, he said, but eventually he figured out that he was being called to hospital administration.

With a low draft lottery number and the likelihood of being drafted, Allison said, he joined the Marine Corps reserves while waiting to enroll in graduate school at Trinity University in San Antonio, where he earned a master’s degree in health administration in 1973. He did six months of active duty in the reserves and 5½ years of reserve obligations.

Football and the Marines, he said, taught him loyalty, duty, discipline, the importance of teamwork, how to handle defeat and to never be satisfied.

On his high school football team, he remembered, anyone on the field could challenge for your job at practice on Tuesdays. If you got beat, the starter’s jersey came off.

In a long 2001 interview conducted by William Clifford Roberts and published in the Baylor University Medical Center Proceedings, Allison said the Marine Corps was one of the best management training experiences he had.

“Part of what I learned was what it is to be the lowest person in the chain of command,” he told Roberts. “I began to appreciate how the lowest person is treated by superiors. I began to appreciate that lack of information breeds fear and rumors.”

After Hendrick, where he rose to chief operating officer, Allison held a succession of CEO jobs at Methodist Medical Center in St. Joseph, Mo., Northwest Texas Hospitals/Amarillo Hospital District in Amarillo, and Driscoll Children’s Hospital in Corpus Christi before he came to Dallas in 1993 to work under Powell again.

The Corpus posting was especially appealing because it was near his family’s second home in Port Aransas. “It’s where I go when I need down time,” Allison said, calling the place his retreat.

At one time, he owned a 15-foot Dixie Airboat, one of those boats with the big fan at the back for propulsion. Allison used it to take his sons duck hunting.

“There’s nothing like sitting in a duck blind with the sun coming up and your two boys beside you,” he said. “It’s pretty special.”

In 2000, Allison replaced Powell as CEO at Baylor, ending five decades of Powell family leadership.

“Everybody recognizes that the whole health care industry is changing, and we have to respond to those changes,” Allison told The News at the time. “We want to create a model of health care delivery that is hassle-free for the patient and the physician, and that will restore the physician-patient relationship.”

Thirteen years later, the industry continues to change, but not the doctor-patient goal.

“We’re still trying to achieve that,” Allison said when reminded of his words.

Growing system

Allison credits all those who helped him in the past, including his sixth-grade teacher, his high school football coach, his pastor and, of course, Boone Powell Jr., his friend of 40 years.

“I didn’t do any of this on my own,” he said.

In an interview, Powell, now 76, said that from the first he liked Allison’s enthusiasm, commitment and ability to assess, evaluate and make decisions, essential skills for a manager.

“He was young. I was pretty young,” Powell said of the time he and Allison were at Hendrick. “The longer I worked with him, the more I liked his potential.”

When Powell got to Dallas and Baylor, he never forgot about Allison.

“Quite honestly, I always knew in the back of my mind that if the appropriate time came, I would like to invite him to join me at Baylor,” Powell said.

During Powell’s tenure, Baylor grew from one hospital into a system. It initiated partnerships with private ventures, doctors and other hospitals that helped it grow. Allison continued the strategy.

One of those ventures is in partnership with United Surgical Partners International, a for-profit company. The partnership runs ambulatory surgical centers and some other facilities, including Baylor Frisco Medical Center.

Allison has been on the board of directors of United Surgical Partners since 2002. He doesn’t receive director compensation. Instead, it goes to Baylor. Allison’s son Blake is an executive at United Surgical.

Allison met his wife, Diane, at Baylor University, and they married after their junior year. Their another son, Brent, who is a maritime attorney, and their daughter, Celeste, is a working student living in the Austin area.

Until the late 1990s, Baylor University appointed the trustees for Baylor University Medical Center and Baylor Health Care System. Since then, those trustees have been independently appointed. The hospital system, however, still licenses the Baylor mark from Baylor University, subject to maintaining certain quality standards.

Just as Allison was mentored, he is now doing the same.

Benjamin Anderson, 34, is CEO of Kearny County Hospital in Lakin, Kan., which has about $22 million in annual revenue. Anderson said he got to know Allison about five years ago when he was poised to take his first CEO job at another small rural Kansas location.

“I was very, very green,” Anderson said. He made an appointment to see Allison to get some advice. Allison complied, and they have stayed in contact ever since.

Anderson’s message for Allison: “First, thank you, and I promise I’ll pay this forward,” he said.

Allison is also active in civic organizations. He is a past chairman of the boards of the United Way of Metropolitan Dallas, the Dallas Regional Chamber and the Dallas Citizens Council.

‘A good railroad’

Since the merger, Allison has moved his office a few blocks. He used to be located with executives focused on Baylor Health Care’s North Texas operations. But he doesn’t want to suffocate them by being too close and he doesn’t want to show any favoritism over Scott & White.

His new location is close enough that he can still walk over for hospital rounds. The day a reporter and video crew accompanied him, the stops were picked in advance because of patient privacy rules.

Allison demonstrated an easy rapport with patients, nurses, doctors and other hospital personnel. He gave each patient he visited his business card and told them to contact him if he could do anything for them.

“Leaders need to be visible,” he said. “They can’t be invisible.”

Among his four stops was a cancer patient, Kevin Whitecotton, undergoing his final scheduled chemotherapy session for lymphoma. Whitecotton praised the care he received.

Another stop was heart patient Jerry Davis, who had his aortic valve replaced through a procedure that goes through an artery rather than opening his chest.

“You run a good railroad, I’ll say that,” Davis told Allison.

“I’ve got good people running things,” Allison responded. “It’s all about the people.”

With Allison heading the overall merged organization, Gary Brock is now running operations at Baylor Health Care System.

“He’s not a manager, he’s a leader,” Brock said of Allison. “He relies on his management team to manage. He wants to be kept informed but he doesn’t want to be in the group.”

One group that Allison does want to be a part of is the growing legion of Baylor football fans. He’s on the school’s board of regents and attends many of the games.

During his playing days, he said, he was listed in the program as 6-2, 235 pounds.

Today, he says, he’s about 6-1 and 180.

Did he shrink?

“I think coaches always put a little stretch in their programs,” he said.

There is no stretch, though, when Allison talks about his work — his calling, he said — even if he can’t visit patients all the time.

“Yes, we’re a big business,” he said. “But we’re really built around serving others.

“I’ve never worked a day in my life, because I love what I do.”