Dr. Ronald Swinfard once considered a career in education and even spent three years teaching high school chemistry and biology before attending medical school.

"I guess between medicine and high school teaching, I've just got a servant's mentality about me," he said. "I want to take care of people."

Swinfard announced Thursday he is retiring as president and chief executive officer of Lehigh Valley Health Network, a position he has held for four years.

"I've felt since I was in my 20s that people who reach my age in life sometimes sit on the job too long instead of getting out of the way and letting younger people bring new energy and new ideas," he said. "I didn't want to be one of those people."

Swinfard, who was LVHN's chief medical officer from 2003 until he rose to the top position in 2010, led the organization during a time of major changes in the industry.

He considers starting the journey to prepare for health care reform, while managing both the costs and quality of care, to be among the most important contributions of his tenure.

"Dr. Swinfard has prepared our organization for the future of health care and leaves us in a good position to face this ever-changing landscape," said William Hecht, chairman of the board of trustees.

Swinfard will retire effective July 1. With more than 12,000 employees, the Lehigh Valley Health Network is the region's largest employer.

Brian Nester, who will become acting president and CEO after Swinfard retires, said he had excellent relationship skills that made for a good work environment.

"Ron is a 'people first' kind of guy," Nester said. "He brought a very relaxed style to the CEO job. People knew he was extremely approachable. He was always visible, always stopped to talk to people and just put people at ease."

Swinfard said that during his time, Lehigh Valley Health Network has begun transitioning from a traditional "fee for service" system of reimbursement to a "fee for value" philosophy.

Insurers give additional rewards when the system can prove value in the service provided, such as reductions in re-admissions or errors in a hospital setting.

Swinfard said this has helped prepare LVHN for reforms necessitated by the federal Affordable Care Act and that continuing this transition will likely be the top priority of his successor.

The trustees will conduct a search that health network officials say will include internal and external candidates. Nester will serve in the interim and is a candidate for the permanent CEO job.

Among Swinfard's accomplishments during his tenure were the acquisition of Hazleton General Hospital, which became Lehigh Valley Hospital-Hazleton, and the Westfield Hospital in Allentown, which became LVHN-Tilghman and includes the Center for Orthopedic Medicine.

Others included the formation of AllSpire Health Partners, a consortium of seven hospital systems in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, and joining the Optum Labs Research Collaborative of seven health organizations committed to seeking to improve patient care through the sharing of information.

Swinfard will remain in the Lehigh Valley during his retirement but plans to travel often with his wife of 17 years, pediatrician Sara Viessman. He has three stepchildren, ages 27, 24 and 22.

Swinfard received his undergraduate degree at the University of Missouri, where he also attended medical school and was later chairman of the departments of internal medicine and dermatology before coming to LVHN.

He also served in the military during the Vietnam War, working with a medical unit attached to an infantry battalion.

Swinfard said he was partially inspired to enter the medical field by his family doctor, M.K. Underwood, who delivered Swinfard during his birth.

"He had his old black bag with medicine in it and every other thing, and he did house calls and all that," Swinfard said. "He was an old-country-style doctor, and it was sort of an inspiration."

Contact Allentown reporter Colin McEvoy at 484-894-2549 or cmcevoy@express-times.com.

Like Allentown on lehighvalleylive.com on Facebook