While the economy has struggled and full-time positions have become harder to find, employers have been busy hiring part-time workers. Whether you're looking for the flexibility of a part-time schedule or just to bring in extra money, there are thousands of part-time jobs available now. Here are the 10 companies with the most part-time positions posted this week on CareerBuilder (an AOL Jobs sponsor):6,477 part-time openings.The Alpharetta, Georgia-based sales and marketing company provides services to over 200 companies worldwide. The companies offers assisted sales, outsourced sales, training and advocacy and marketing advantage solutions."Great company, with a phenomenal culture. Can't speak any higher of it. Best 3PL company to work for out there."*6,215 part-time openings.A total of 358,200 citizens are members of the Army National Guard, as of 2013. In addition to getting called up for overseas deployment, members of the Army National Guard carry out domestic missions, taking part in flood and hurricane relief, for instance. A decade of wars, however, has taken its toll; 2012 saw a total of 350 suicides of active-duty soldiers, which includes National Guard members when they are called up, the highest such figure since the Sept. 11 attacks."You get great training and travel opportunities, but there are too many politics prevalent at the lowest levels of management."*: 4,190 part-time openings.The iconic department store is going strong after over 150 years of business, selling mid-price to high-end brands at some 800 locations across the country. Its headquarters are in Cincinnati, Ohio, but its flagship store is in the heart of Manhattan, N.Y."The discount (20%) on items is nice and they're good about working with your schedule if you're part-time. I had another job at the time, so they delivered on their promise of only scheduling me for 19 hours each week and only 4 days a week."*: 1,743 part-time openings.UnitedHealth Group currently provides health insurance services to more than 75 million people worldwide and is the largest insurance company of its kind in the U.S. With the onset of states' participation in the Affordable Care Act, the Minnesota-based insurer "has remained especially vague on the number of systems in would participate in," says The Motley Fool, "placing the number somewhere between 10 and 25.""Good, steady work. Great learning opportunities. Very little favoritism, you get ahead based on your own work. Work at home opportunities help on commuting costs. Great work-life balance, ample vacation time."*: 1,711 part-time openings.Ryder has a fleet of more than 148,000 vehicles that take care of the trucking needs for commercial clients. The company acquires new vehicles, maintains them, and manages who drives which truck. Ryder vehicles run the gamut, and include tractor-trailers as well as light-duty trucks. The company is based in Miami and operates throughout North America, the United Kingdom and Asia."Ryder is a stable company, and there are lots of opportunity to learn about multiple industries. But it's a very hard to advance in your career. You never really get a yearly raise."*: 1,565 part-time openings.Vector Marketing of Olean, N.Y., is the domestic sales arm of the cutlery company, Cutco, which sells knives and other implements nationwide. Vector offers part-time, full-time and temporary sales jobs, including summer work, and says that experience in sales isn't required."The pay, flexibility, environment were all outstanding."*1,060 part-time openings.Avon is an international cosmetics and beauty care company known for its door-to-door sales business model. Avon's "independent sales consultants" can work from home and according their own schedules."Bonuses and the time to build your schedule are the best portions of the job, but the constant recruiting [expectations] of growing the business with new people instead of developing sales from within is a con...[It's] really a constant balancing act."*: 1,044 part-time openings.This food-focused sales and marketing company has grown enormously over the last few decades, from its Jacksonville, Fl. home into a nationwide chain in almost every major city with over 30,000 employees. Associates complain that there's little room for personal ladder-climbing, but rave about the flexible hours."Independence. Working without supervision. Flexibility schedule. Ability to pick up extra hours/projects.... Good 401k match."*: 994 part-time openings.Founded in 1997, Liberty Tax Services targets low-income workers and small businesses. There are a total of 3,500 Liberty Tax franchises throughout the world. And according to the company's website , the initial fee for starting a franchise is $40,000."[Liberty Tax] is great for beginning a tax career or even to see if accounting is for you."*: 936 part-time openings.Wireless giant AT&T continues to hire in large volumes, as many customers upgrade their smartphones and purchase tablets that require LTE data plans. It recently announced that it will be adding more wireless subscribers than expected.""They provide great benefits and pay. I know they match quite a bit for 401(k) investment. It is a great job for someone interested in technology and learning about new technologies. Also, it is great to know that you are helping others out on a daily basis."***Employee reviews from the website Glassdoor.