Topics: Editor's Picks, gary busey, stevie nicks, The Weeklings, Tom Petty, Media News, Life News, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on The Weeklings

I was a teenager, set to take the weekend night shift at the local classic rock radio station. DJ Chuck Buckle was showing me the ropes. The studio was dim-lit, VU meters and console lights, the TriCity color weather radar glowing from a corner screen. Buckle cued up “Breakdown.” A simple kick drum and snare paired with a laid back electric piano slipped out slow and easy over the airwaves.

“Hear that?” Buckle asked, pulling at his mangy beard. Chuck looked sort of like a homeless Mick Fleetwood, if you shot Mick out of a cannon into a liquor store.

“Hear what?” I replied.

“Exactly,” he said as the guitars slid into the groove low and tight. “It’s sparse. That crap music they make these days don’t give you no space to think. Petty, he always gives you space.”

Chuck held up one finger for quiet and opened the mic. “11:49 under grey skies and overnight threats of rain.” He leaned over and took a long drag off his Marlboro Gold. “Cold tonight,” Buckle said, his voice an octave deeper. “Cold tomorrow. Warm inside right here with Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers. I’m Chuck Buckle leaving you now, handing it over to . . . ” He nodded for me to speak.

“Heartbreak Kid,” I said, quick, high-pitched and grinning. Buckle rolled his eyes. “DJ Jamie James, riding with you, taking you through the long night….”

He switched off the mic just as Petty began to sing about fear and pretending, letting go to hold on, how sometimes you need a stranger to get you through the night.

“Kid, listen,” Buckle said. “Don’t try so hard. Just be yourself.”

You make a great musical statement: “Trouble is where bands begin.” How did Tom Petty go from Mudcrutch to a solo artist with the Heartbreakers?

When Tom went from Mudcrutch to being a solo artist in that period before the Heartbreakers formed, it wasn’t by choice. He was young, unknown, and hoping for a career. He had a record contract, but that’s not a whole lot to have. It’s a common misconception that securing a record deal means you’ve arrived, that a career is underway. But, really, a record contract is nothing more than a lottery ticket: you need it to win, but your chances at winning are slim. Denny Cordell had lost his faith in Mudcrutch’s ability to become a recording band, which is different from being a live band. But he hadn’t lost his faith in Tom Petty. So, for the first time in his life, Petty became a solo artist—because that’s the direction in which life had kicked him. It was not by design. But that, too, didn’t last long. He ultimately wanted a hybrid: to be a bandleader but also to be in a band. And that’s what he created with the Heartbreakers.

How would the legacy be different if they had stayed a band instead of Tom turning into a frontman?

I don’t think it would have panned out. And the answer to your question hinges both on issues of creativity and issues of ambition and leadership. As Mike Campbell says, “No one is as ambitious as Tom Petty.” Without Petty’s drive, things would have slowed. The band recognized it, I think, and most were grateful that it was there. But Petty also built enough confidence, enough awareness that he had something, a voice and vision, that was all his own. When you listen to a Tom Petty recording, you know who it is. He’s got a band with a sound, and he’s got a presence as a frontman and a writer. Very few acts get that far. If it was easy to do, we’d have more examples of it to show. But being bandleader is a crap job in many respects. My friend Chuck Prophet recently shared with me Jim Dickinson’s take on the subject: “I wouldn’t wish the job of bandleader on my worst enemy.”

Reclusive, ambitious, mysterious, meticulous, focused, businessman, coolest guy in the room – your book describes Tom as all of these things. “Tinted windows on his soul” was my favorite. One always got the feeling that Tom Petty was a hard guy to get a handle on. How did you approach that as a writer?

I simply responded to the situation Tom gave me. He opened the door and invited me in. We talked, for many hours, over a few years. But I saw, sitting next to him, that he could be all the things you describe. Without contradiction. Rock and roll has the remarkable, beautiful capacity to change people’s lives. Glen Campbell, Elvis Presley, Joe Strummer, Carl Perkins, Tom Petty. But in changing those lives, rock and roll also demands a lot of the person undergoing such changes. They need to be several people, they need to find ways to protect themselves, they need to figure out how to trust and when not to. When pressed, I would have to say that I hope my own sons don’t get such a formidable task presented them. I hope rock and roll gives them its gift without taxing them so heavily. They probably wouldn’t be able to do it as well as Tom Petty has. Here’s a guy that’s kept the band together for forty years. Holy shit, right? And he’s still making records, great records. Still cutting those records live. He had to be all those things you mention. He’s pulled off a miracle.

I talked to Rickey Medlocke recently and he mentioned Dub’s nightclub and how those miniskirt contest gigs were so important in the evolution of Blackfoot – what was it about Dub’s?

Dub’s nightclub was to bands like Mudcrutch what the Kaiserkeller in Hamburg was to the Beatles. These venues were places where bands could become, places of incubation, of self-creation, of informal apprenticeship. In them bands would play multiple sets each night, would play primarily cover material (learning what good song construction felt like from the inside), and would live close to a world in which sex was being sold, whether in the form of the topless dancers at Dub’s or the Reeperbahn’s various possibilities for afterhours pleasure. If there ever will be a true “school of rock,” it will probably need to look something like one of those places. So, really, there will likely never be a true school of rock. Not like that. For better or for worse.

What was the single most important event in shaping Tom Petty’s career?

I hate to boil it down to this, but those individuals who have to process childhood abuse are shaped by that experience in ways others will never fully comprehend. At five, Petty saw his father, his protector, turn into something awful. Earl Petty wasn’t always abusive, but the young Tom Petty didn’t know when it was going to happen. That brings about a constant uncertainty. The world goes dark. I think music, songwriting in particular, would become for Petty a place in which things made more sense. So he went there often. And he created something of abundance and character. Art saved his ass. But I don’t think there’s any way to fully emancipate oneself from that kind of background. When childhood abuse begins, the world stops making sense. It’s up to the individual to create sense. That’s where songs came in.