CARMEL &GT;&GT; In a few years — 2019 is the target date — CSU Monterey Bay expects to launch a new master's degree program that will produce medical professionals known as physicians assistants — people who are trained to handle about 70 percent to 90 percent of the tasks a doctor performs each day.

That's a source of great pride to Carmel physician Dr. Alfred "Fred" Sadler, who, with his identical twin brother, Blair (a lawyer), helped create a well-paid occupation that is expected to grow by 38 percent over the next 10 years.

Sadler, 73, has worked for the past 22 years as an Urgent Care Center doctor in North Salinas — a job he still finds fascinating — but his legacy in medicine will be the role he and his brother played in health care in the United States.

The Sadlers not only were part of a group that created the national programs that educate and certify physicians assistants, they also did work with America's emergency medical systems, and were instrumental in forming the Uniformed Law Commission, which creates a compatibility of state laws governing medical issues (for example, transporting human organs and tissue across state lines).

"My twin brother and I were in Philadelphia together and were mutually interested in medical/legal things — Blair as a lawyer, and myself as a doctor — when we saw a chance to do collaborative work on issues such as the use of human beings in research and medical experimentation, and the definition of death those types of things," Sadler said.

Sadler was a 26-year-old intern at the time, and also vice president for health affairs at the University of Pennsylvania, where he introduced himself to a colleague, former U.S. Surgeon General Luther Terry, famous for his 1964 report that smoking is hazardous to health.

The Sadler brothers presented Terry with a 15-page report on the issues they'd been examining from a legal/medical perspective and were stunned by his reaction.

"He thought it was great. He said, 'We've never had a lawyer working in public health service, and you guys would be a great team,' " the doctor recalls. " 'I want you to call this guy, and I want you to call that guy '"

"This guy" turned out to be the current U.S. surgeon general. "That guy" was the reigning director of the National Institute of Health. And suddenly the Sadler twins, both fresh out of college, had a highly coveted first-floor office in Building One of the National Institute of Health in Bethesda, Maryland.

At the NIH, they researched the laws in every state governing human bodies, including medical examiner laws, unclaimed body laws, body donation laws.

"Every state had different laws, because it's an area of state concern as set up by the Constitution," Sadler said. "You don't want 50 different state laws when you're trying to transport human tissue across state lines."

The brothers were summoned to become chief consultants to a national group of lawyers, the Commission on Uniformed State Laws (now called the Uniformed Law Commission), to create a model law that would streamline all the state laws.

"So here we are, 26 years old, presenting this law to the commissioners and then, the following week, to the American Bar Association," Sadler said. "What was amazing about the Uniformed Act was that because of the timing (human corneas were already being transplanted, and the first-ever heart transplant had just been performed), it passed every state in three years. No uniformed law had ever done that well."

The Sadlers, who now were being invited to speak at international conferences, were then recruited by the director of the NIH and the assistant secretary of health to examine fledgling programs at Duke and Colorado universities that were developing physicians assistants. The program, in part, helped military corpsmen with battlefield experience make an easier transition to civilian medical care.

"At the time, if you were a military corpsman, we said, 'Thank you for your service you can become an orderly, if you like, at $8 an hour or whatever they were being paid," said Sadler, whose new home base became Yale University. "The initial military program that Duke started — which we followed at Yale — was designed as a mini-medical school where you could receive basic training in some of the sciences."

In 1972, the Sadlers were part of a conference at Duke that became the genesis of national education programs and accreditation for physicians assistants. The first exams were given in December 1973.

As the first president of the Association of Physicians Assistants Program (now the Physicians Assistant Education Association), Sadler presided over 16 accredited programs. Over the ensuing 42 years, the number of programs has grown to 189, producing about 7,000 graduates a year.

During his time at Yale, the Sadlers also were asked to look at emergency medicine systems in America.

"It was a bunch of stuff that, in retrospect, seem so obvious, but emergency medicine in the U.S. was a disastrous situation at the time. The National Research Council said you had a better chance of surviving a serious injury on the battlefield in Vietnam than a bad accident on a U.S. highway," he said.

Ambulances of the day were merely station wagons that could transport a gurney, but with no room for medical professionals or equipment. In Connecticut, where the Sadlers were based, there were 179 different ambulance companies, including one that doubled as a funeral company, rushing patients to the ER for treatment, and then taking them out the back door, to the funeral parlor, if treatment failed. Training for emergency medical technicians was nonexistent.

The Sadlers were recruited to join the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, where they co-chaired an advisory committee on emergency medical systems, which was instrumental in a reformed system that led to trained EMTs who rode in well-equipped, van-like ambulances.

They also helped develop and implement the system that became 911, enabling the public to summon emergency help without picking up a phone book to locate the nearest ambulance service.

"And we looked at the physicians who worked in emergency departments who, at the time, were mostly semi-retired doctors who didn't want to do a practice anymore," Sadler said. "They were generally good people — former surgeons, former interns, former family doctors — but there was nobody who was trained across the board in emergency medicine. So we recommended certification courses for emergency doctors and nurses."

The Sadlers co-authored a book that, with the help of five major foundations, spread the word about their work to 8,000 people, including every U.S. congressman, public health school dean, medical school dean and state health director, and a lot of federal health officials.

"In 1975 we added an epilogue to the book that focused on the fact that physicians assistants are essentially the equivalent of new medical technology," he said.

Physicians assistant and nurse practitioner are annually listed by "Forbes" and "Money" magazines among the most valuable master's degrees to hold for those entering the workforce, he said. The demand will increase dramatically, he said, with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, which provides health care to many people who previously had none.

In 2009, Sadler joined the board of directors for the Physicians Assistant Society, serving as president in 2012 and 2013. Because of those volunteer duties, he has cut back his schedule at the Urgent Care Center in Salinas to about 10 hours a week.

He also is serving as an adviser for the physicians assistant program under development at CSUMB.

Dennis Taylor can be reached at 726-4371.