The Patient Protection and Affordability Act currently provides care for the uninsured through a combined state and federal program that is intended to protect patient access to care and, ultimately when all Americans are insured, be "affordable."

Medicaid "eligibility" expansion to cover those within 138 percent of the poverty level and payments to primary-care doctors were increased to match Medicare rates for two years. Inherent to this social obligation is the question whether health care is a right, or a responsibility. I say both.

Medicare was established 50 years ago and became a barometer for payments to physicians and hospitals by government and insurance companies. Medicaid rates are a fraction of that.

The Medicaid Act requires states to set payment rates that are "sufficient to enlist enough providers so that care and services are available under the plan at least to the extent that such care and services are available to the general population in the geographic area." Currently, there are simply not enough physicians participating in the program because it fails to properly compensate doctors or hospitals — who lose money seeing patients.

In a rush to balance its state budget, Florida privatized Medicaid insurance but failed to ensure its viability by underfunding it. CS/HB 7107/7109 expanded Medicaid reform statewide and placed all Medicaid patients into a managed care system in which private Medicaid HMO/PSN's provide the insurance and payments directly to doctors and hospitals.

Florida stopped being the direct payer. To make matters worse, the Florida Legislature refused to accept $52 billion over 10 years from the federal government that would have supported the program that currently costs Florida $23 billion a year. The solution is "Medicare Parity" in which Medicaid payments to all doctors are the same as Medicare payments.

Physicians have seen managed-care Medicaid result in decreased access to care, fewer services, more forms and less satisfaction since "managed care" is really about "managed claim." Medicaid reimbursement in Broward County is one of the lowest in nation, about 50 percent of Medicare.

In addition to poor compensation, doctors are frustrated by the bureaucratic delays imposed by authorization requirements, and it is no surprise that physician-provider networks are inadequate especially in specialty care.

It is not enough to pass legislation about future systems and quality assurances still not in place after years of dismal experience. It is not enough for the state to ignore the constitutional rights of patients to choose their provider — be it a physician, hospital, managed care organization or provider service network — under the false premise that these entities will look out for their well-being while underfunding payments.

The Broward County Medical Association offered guidance to the state regarding how to make Medicaid viable while safeguarding patient rights access to care. Our proposal consequently established the Florida Medical Association's current position to publicly support Medicaid eligibility expansion under the PPACA by urging the state to accept the federal payments to support statewide privatization of Medicaid and provide insurance to more Floridians.

To assure sufficient physician participation, such programs must also bring Medicaid rate payments up to Medicare rates permanently for all physicians and hospitals.

Despite the reality that physicians consume only 5 percent of the Medicaid budget, there is no incentive for physicians to participate in this tortuous and patient-hostile system. The state should immediately accept federal funds and establish a permanent system that pays doctors and hospitals Medicare rates as payment for Medicaid services, along with strict patient safeguards.

Unfortunately, history is usually a predictor of the future.

Dr. Aaron Elkin is chairman of the Broward County Medical Association. He can be reached at obgyndr.com or 954-458-0909.