John LaDue's motives are still unknown. The 17-year-old from Minnesota had allegedly planned a massacre at Waseca Junior and Senior High School. He told police investigators,“I just wanted as many victims as possible.”

LaDue is now in court for plotting the mass shooting at his high school and middle school. He was arrested in April while he was going to his storage unit that was filled with weapons. Not only did he want to kill his classmates, but he also wanted to eliminate his mother, father, and sister as well, even though he described his parents as “good parents.” His reason for killing his family? He wanted to increase the body count.

Medical Daily spoke with Dr. Paul G. Mattiuzzi, a practicing forensic psychologist from California, who has testified in hundreds of cases where the accused mental state-of-being was questioned. Mattiuzzi has not worked on the LaDue case, so his responses were based on his strong background of cases similar to this one.

Medical Daily: Are people born to kill? And while there are genetic components that would require further investigation to answer this type of question, it does seem that in the case of LaDue, he didn’t just wake up one day and decide to massacre everyone around him.

Mattiuzzi: People like this have an unjust to their psyche, and they act in response to that — feeling righteous. But this isn’t an uncontrollable rage case. This has a case of assertion of self, from what I see.

Medical Daily: Planning this attack seemed like LaDue was trying to fulfill his identity in some way.

Mattiuzzi: He wants to be someone who is powerful and strong and he wants to demonstrate that. When people are angry and they have a way to satisfy the rage, satisfty the vengeful evil feelings, that’s a very and satisfying and reinforcing thing as I’m sure he imagined it.

--

La Due was a junior in high school, and he had posted several videos of himself on YouTube testing out the explosives. He was planning on using an assault rifle and a sawed-off shot gun for the attacks, the court papers indicated. Most school shooters have an axe to grind with their peers or those surrounding them. In the case of the Columbine massacre, the killers were angry at the world. They were angry for being teased and angry at almost anything that didn’t fit into their circle.

LaDue’s case is not that different from these boys. “He must have some dissatisfaction about something,” Mattiuzzi said. “This is what makes me righteous. I'm righteous in my efforts. I’m entitled to act because of what people have done to them.”

LaDue’s next court appearance is scheduled for July 30.

Here is a news clip of the first investigation of the teen's plot: