Carbon tax-funded grants could support future utility, address traffic-related emissions

Akane Orlandella helps her son, Ocean, 2, in to his car seat in the eGo Carshare care they checked out to run errands in Boulder on Friday. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

For more information For more on Boulder Energy Projects, visit bouldercolorado.gov/lead/boulder-energy-challenge.

A bundled financing package using the gas savings from an electric vehicle to pay for solar panels and energy efficiency upgrades. New software systems that allow homeowners to combine solar panels and storage technologies in ways that maximize greenhouse gas reductions or energy savings. Personal transportation audits that help families figure out how to leave their cars at home.

These are the kinds of innovative ideas Boulder officials hope will move the city toward its climate goals and help the "utility of the future" fulfill its promise.

Six winners of Boulder Energy Challenge grants are in the process of finalizing their contracts with the city and launching pilot programs that will test the effectiveness of these ideas.

The Energy Challenge program is funded with $300,000 in Climate Action Plan tax money. Boulder Senior Environmental Planner Brett KenCairn said the city hopes to make the grants an ongoing program to encourage innovation and commercialization of new technologies.

Several of the projects selected for the first round address emissions from driving in diverse ways. Transportation represents about 20 percent of Boulder's greenhouse gas emissions, and those emissions are largely unaffected by the many renewable energy and energy efficiency programs the city has pushed through its EnergySmart initiative or through the future city electric utility.

The city's Transportation Master Plan does have goals for reducing emissions through reducing driving.

KenCairn said the city did not start out looking for programs specifically to address vehicle emissions, but it did emerge as a theme when the city reviewed the 30 applications it received for the first round of the Boulder Energy Challenge.

"This phenomena is one of the very important themes around 'how are we going to make these significant transitions?'" KenCairn said. "The strategies that get you there are projects that integrate these elements."

Imagine: 'You never pay for electricity again'

Snugg Home, which has traditionally worked on home energy efficiency projects, is putting together a bundled financing option that would pay for an electric vehicle, solar panels and an energy efficiency upgrade and leave the family largely energy independent at the end of five years.

Electric vehicles cost more than conventional fuel vehicles, and they also have to be charged, adding to electricity costs. While the vehicles don't produce emissions when they are driven, the power that charges them still largely comes from coal and natural gas.

The Snugg Home financing proposal asks families to look not just at their potential car payment but also at what they spend on gas, electricity and home heating. When all those costs are combined, a loan that pays for the car, solar panels and energy efficiency improvements that greatly reduce electricity use and home heating costs becomes cost effective.

"We had been working on energy efficiency all over the country, and we wondered what kind of impact would there be if we could add an electric vehicle to the mix," said Adam Stenftenagel, co-founder and CEO of Snugg Home.

The current financing options for solar panels often take up to 20 years to pay off, but Snugg Home's financing proposal, which would apply the money saved in gasoline and home energy costs to the loan, would allow home owners to pay them off in five.

"After that point, you never pay for electricity again," he said.

Right now, Snugg Home is working with Elevations Credit Union and the city and county's Energy Smart low-interest loan program to provide the financing for participants in the pilot program, but Stenftenagel said eventually Snugg Home would like to provide its own financing in a single loan.

As part of the pilot program, Snugg Home is developing a software program that will help homeowners determine whether this option is right for them. Snugg Home also has local contractors lined up to do the work and will walk the homeowner through the loan process.

Stenftenagel said Snugg Home is hoping to work with 100 Boulder households over the next year. To sign up for a consultation, visit snugghome.com/bec.

The goals of the pilot program include determining whether families actually realize the savings Snugg Home believes they will and whether a bundled loan product could be supported by the market.

Electric vehicles also play a role in the project developed by Evolution7, which will install "solar plus storage" systems in several homes and businesses. Evolution7's Power Station gateway is a hardware and software system that connects solar panels with smart appliances and electric vehicle charging systems that allows more solar power to be stored on site and make better use of solar power generated during the day.

Evolution7's David Cohen said the system builds on technology developed in cooperation with the Department of Energy, and it allows homeowners to choose to optimize their solar power for the most cost savings, for the greatest reduction in emissions or other factors.

Cohen said Evolution7's technology has the potential to benefit utilities by greatly reducing load requirements, meaning a utility doesn't have to generate or buy as much power. Cohen said such energy storage and management systems are going to become more common and more affordable in the next five to 10 years.

People who are interested in participating in the pilot program can contact Cohen at dc@evolution7.net.

Loveland-based Lightning Hybrids makes a hydraulic technology that uses stored mechanical energy rather than a battery to convert mid-sized trucks and vans into hybrid vehicles.

So far, batteries have not been powerful enough for larger vehicles, limiting hybrid technology to passenger vehicles.

Through a Boulder Energy Challenge grant, Lightning Hybrid will convert a Via shuttle bus into a hybrid using the hydraulic system. On certain drive cycles, the hybrid technology reduces emissions 90 percent.

"If we can prove that it works and get more of these on the road, Boulder gets cleaner air and Via saves money," said Bonnie Trowbridge, vice president of marketing for Lightning Hybrids.

A bid to create 'unexpected synergies'

The carshare service eGo is taking a page from the city's home energy advisor program, which helps people identify potential energy savings and find contractors and rebates, with its proposed TripSmart program. Participating individuals will get a personal transportation audit that will help them identify ways to use their feet, bicycles, buses and, yes, car share instead of a personal vehicle to meet their transportation needs.

"We have really incredible infrastructure, but there hasn't been much done on the soft side of the policy, on education and outreach and connecting the dots," said Karen Worminghaus, executive director of eGo CarShare.

In addition to the transportation audit service, eGo is refining trip-tracking software that will help people analyze their patterns and identify places to make changes.

The pilot will kick off in January. Worminghaus said eGo is focusing on three target populations: low-income residents of Boulder Housing Partners housing projects, residents of the Dewey-Alpine neighborhood and carshare members.

However, there may be opportunities to work with others.

To learn about eligibility for a free transportation audit, contact Worminghaus at karen@carshare.org.

Two other programs funded through the Boulder Energy Challenge use algae to take up carbon dioxide produced by beer fermentation and produce omega-3 oils and help Boulder Housing Partners residents have more control over their energy use.

KenCairn said the Boulder Energy Challenge programs are not just about reducing emissions. They help dollars spent in Boulder stay in Boulder and create "unexpected synergies," like capturing carbon and creating a useful product out of it. The programs leverage public and private dollars and enlist market resources to solve the problem of climate change, he said.

"It's the way that these all fit together that starts to realize big changes," he said.

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere