SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

A fourth video in a series from pro-life group Live Action exposes a Planned Parenthood facility in the Minneapolis-St. Paul area encouraging an undercover investigator — who the counselor believes to be a fifteen-year old girl — to engage in high-risk sexual practices, including bondage and sadomasochism (BDSM).

The Planned Parenthood counselor claims that “anything within the sexual world is normal as long as it’s consensual,” and that if the “teen’s” sex partner “wants to try something that… is gonna cause you harm or pain, and you’re okay with that, that’s a completely different thing than [sic] if he wants to try something to do that you’re not okay with[.]”

The counselor also recommends two specific sex shops where the undercover investigator can get “sex toys” and “sex props.”

“The new video lays bare Planned Parenthood’s sexual ethos, even for kids: abusive, demeaning, and violent sexual behavior is ‘normal’ and ‘OK’ as long as the recipient believes that she’s consented to it,” said Live Action president Lila Rose in a press release.

Nearly half of Planned Parenthood’s budget is derived from taxpayers. Live Action observes that Planned Parenthood received over $540 million in taxpayer funds in its last reported fiscal year. Additionally, the abortion industry giant gets tax funding to be a “navigator” for ObamaCare, and at least a portion of the additional $75 million per year ObamaCare appropriates for “sex counseling” through the Personal Responsibility Education Program (PREP) will also go to Planned Parenthood.

According to PREP’s website, the program is “the first federal funding stream for programs that teach about abstinence and contraception for the prevention of pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections (STIs).”

The program’s website states, “PREP offers a brand new opportunity – federal funding for science-based sex education that includes information on abstinence and contraception. Until this year, the only dedicated federal funding for sex education was for abstinence-only-until-marriage programs.”

Regarding abstinence sex ed programs, PREP states, “These programs censor vital information from young people, who have the right to complete, accurate information that will allow them to make informed decisions about their sexual health.”

According to Live Action, Planned Parenthood of the Rocky Mountains and Planned Parenthood Columbia Willamette, two regional affiliates exposed in previous Live Action SexEd releases, have received PREP grants.

The Minnesota Planned Parenthood counselor states that “there are lots of things that happen in Fifty Shades of Grey [an explicitly pornographic popular book series] that border on – um, I wouldn’t say ‘abuse,’ because it’s consensual, but definitely extreme.” She repeats that “if it’s consensual, again, completely normal” and talks about how her “patients sometimes come in with rope burns or … markings on their breasts from, like, clamps.”

“What else could an underage girl agree to that Planned Parenthood would call ‘completely normal’?” Rose asked. “Cuts? Broken bones? Is child sexual abuse ‘completely normal’ if the girl thinks she wants it?”

“Planned Parenthood has covered up the statutory rape of minors for years as well, not taking child sexual abuse seriously. Apparently it’s ‘yes’ to everything – to depraved and dangerous behavior – as long as there’s ‘consent,'” Rose added.

Live Action continues to demand that legislators defund Planned Parenthood of taxpayer money and that superintendents nationwide expel Planned Parenthood from their schools.

“It seems that the thing Planned Parenthood is most terrified of telling anyone is ‘don’t’ – even if it’s a commonsense warning against the extreme physical, emotional, and mental harm these practices can cause to minors,'” Rose concluded. “That’s a great way to bring about more teen sexual activity, more teen pregnancy, and more sexual abuse.”