Garland’s tax record

REMEMBER Z STREET? Close followers of the controversy surrounding the IRS’s improper scrutiny of tea party groups certainly do. But you might not know about Merrick Garland’s role in the case.

Garland, President Barack Obama’s Supreme Court pick, took the IRS to task and ruled for the conservative pro-Israel group in what our Toby Eckert called “the most notable tax case” Garland saw during his tenure at the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. The appeals court found last year that Z Street could proceed with a suit asserting that its tax-exempt application received more scrutiny and faced delays because the group didn’t agree with the Obama administration about Israel, in what conservative activists called an opening act to the IRS’s tea party controversy.

Story Continued Below

For his part, Garland spared no scorn with the IRS’s argument that it had a 270-day cushion protecting it from the suit. "You don't really mean that, right? Because the next couple words would be the IRS is free to discriminate on the basis of viewpoint, religion, race [for 270 days]. You don't actually think that?" Garland said, according to The Wall Street Journal. "Imagine the IRS announces today a policy that says as follows: No application by a Jewish group or an African-American group will be considered until one day short of the period under the statute." More here: http://politico.pro/1nOQAq.

WELCOME TO THURSDAY, where your Morning Tax author remains grateful to no longer live in the Adams Morgan section of D.C. on St. Patrick’s Day. Good luck, friends!

Send us your tax tips and feedback. Email: bbecker@politico.com, teckert@politico.com, bfaler@politico.com, kodonnell@politico.com. Twitter: @berniebecker3, @tobyeckert, @brian_faler, @katyodonnell_ , @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Tax.

BRITISH BUDGET OVERHAUL: George Osborne, the U.K.’s Treasury chief, is tackling a fair number of hot-button tax issues in his latest budget, the WSJ reports. Among them: cutting Great Britain’s corporate tax rate from 20 percent to 17 percent, which would be the lowest rate in the Group of 20 nations, and the capital gains rate on assets sales from 18 percent to 10 percent. And how to pay for that? How about a new tax on sugary drinks, and a further crackdown on corporate tax avoidance. The new proposals came as Osborne “presented lower growth forecasts for the U.K. economy, reflecting a darkening global outlook and a gloomier prognosis for British productivity, which has fallen sharply behind that of other major economies.” More from the WSJ: http://on.wsj.com/1pL9D6Q

Here’s more from our colleagues at POLITICO Europe on the soda tax, to be launched in two years and expected to raise around $740 million in its first year. http://politi.co/1QXUoAr

And have you heard how dropping oil prices are causing problems for policymakers all around the world? The U.K. will scrap a tax on petroleum revenues in an effort to boost struggling North Sea producers. http://politico.pro/1MoAZ7H

DON’T STOP BELIEVING: More than two dozen business groups — including usual suspects like the International Council of Shopping Centers, the National Retail Federation and the Retail Industry Leaders Association — sent a new letter to House Judiciary Chairman Bob Goodlatte this week urging action on online sales tax legislation. Read between the lines — like “we have appreciated numerous meetings with you” — and you can almost hear the frustration the groups have with a chairman who has shown only the most perfunctory interest in the issue. But the groups also make their case that, with states taking matters into their own hands in the face of federal inaction, the time is now for Congress to act: “The lack of movement from Congress on the issue of remote sales tax collection has left states, local governments and our merchants with no choice but to seek disjointed and confusing remedies through individual state activity.” http://bit.ly/1Z2KXCX

CRUNCH TIME FOR THE FAA: Senators have gone public with their opposition to the House’s stopgap extension of the FAA, which would extend aviation policy for just a few months but extend for a full year the taxes that fund it. Pro Transportation’s Heather Caygle reports that with a March 31 deadline looming, the Senate might tweak the House-passed extension to have both the FAA policy and taxes run through July 15. And in true Capitol Hill fashion, the Senate might do that today — their last workday before a two-week Easter break that would push into April.

That means the House might not have a choice but to accept the Senate position, which would potentially keep another revenue measure in play for 2016. House Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady has made it clear that he won’t deal with any of the tax extenders this year, but advocates for some temporary provisions — for renewable energy, for instance — probably wouldn’t mind if the FAA bill was kept around as a potential vehicle. But don’t take it from us — take it from Rep. Peter DeFazio of Oregon, the top Democrat on the House Transportation Committee, via Heather: “There’s others who want to attach some sort of revenue provision to this because they see it as the only train leaving town,” DeFazio said. “And then there’s other people who have some energy provisions and blah-be-blah-be-blah.”

BUDGET GRIDLOCK, CONT’D: The Ways and Means Committee passed a trio of measures aimed at helping to smooth the passage of a budget out of the House, as our Brian Faler reports. The proposal to block undocumented workers from getting the refundable portion of the Child Tax Credit, an idea that Democrats and Republicans have been going back and forth about for years, passed after sharp debate, Brian notes. (The other two bills would require people who get insurance subsidies through Obamacare to shoulder more of any overpayments, and kill the Social Services Block Grant.) http://politico.pro/1PcPYBo

As for that budget those bills are supposed to help pass — well, Ben Weyl and Matthew Nussbaum report that the House Budget panel passed the measure just as darkness was setting in on Wednesday, certainly earlier than expected. But the votes still aren’t there for the floor. A complicating factor, Matt reports: The new RSC budget calls for top rates of 25 percent, lower capital gains rates, a territorial system, reducing fraud in the Earned Income Tax Credit, exempting workers over the retirement age from the payroll tax and what we’ll call the Ted Cruz approach — getting rid of the IRS and shifting tax collection “to a new entity at the Treasury Department.” (The IRS is currently housed within the Treasury Department, and accounts for the vast majority of its budget.) http://politico.pro/1Pc6L7E

RUBIO’S TAX LEGACY: Sen. Marco Rubio’s presidential candidacy is only recently deceased (suspended, technically). But his tax plan could continue to illustrate the divide between more traditional supply-side Republicans who like big cuts in tax rates and the so-called reform conservatives who want GOP tax policy to be more tailored to average families. The reformicons found a lot to like in Rubio’s plan, with its juiced-up child tax credit. (Maybe not so much the zero percent rate on capital gains.) Yet Rubio faced some skepticism — like “normally, it's liberals who like to use the tax code to further social policy” — from supply-siders during GOP debates in recent months. And while Kyle Pomerleau of the Tax Foundation said Rubio’s plan could be “a starting point for reform in the future,” he also had this to say about the proposal’s more robust child credit and the at least $2.4 trillion that Rubio’s plan would lose over a decade: “This provision alone would reduce federal revenues by about $2 trillion over a decade, without contributing to economic output in any meaningful way.”

SAYING NO TO A TRANSACTIONS TAX: The Investment Company Institute is out with a new letter trying to warn House Democrats against proposing a financial transactions tax in their budget alternative. “Quite frankly, an FTT is a terrible idea,” wrote ICI’s Paul Schott Stevens. “It would harm all investors, especially middle-income American workers saving for retirement.” Perhaps even more prominently, Sen. Bernie Sanders has also pushed for a transactions tax in his bid for the Democratic nomination. http://bit.ly/1pvdp4D

INTERNATIONAL UPDATE —

EU WANTS MORE: The European Commission said Wednesday it still needs some more information on Apple’s tax arrangements with Ireland, Reuters reports. "Ireland did not reply in full to the Commission's last request for information, which is why the Commission has sent a reminder to Ireland to request the missing data," an EC spokesman said in a statement. http://reut.rs/1LrArD0

STATE NEWS —

JUNEAU AS WASHINGTON: Alaska officials are having a debate that will sound familiar to those of us in the nation’s capital. Gov. Bill Walker’s proposals would rely on taxes to balance the budget, but Republicans on the Senate Finance Committee aren’t having it. “I’m not getting into the tax business while I know government is still too big. How do I know? Because we cut a whole bunch of fat off of it and nothing happened,” said Sen. Pete Kelly of Fairbanks, a co-chair of the committee. More from the Alaska Dispatch News: http://bit.ly/1nPBfGv

QUICK LINKS

— Treasury Secretary Jack Lew wants to “work together” with Congress on inversions. http://politico.pro/1nPBmBW

— The New Yorker on the GOP tax plans. http://bit.ly/1pGK46R

— Sen. Orrin Hatch questions Treasury, IRS over green-energy programs. http://1.usa.gov/1pv6QPo

DID YOU KNOW? Annie Moore, a teenager from Ireland, was the first passenger processed at Ellis Island, on Jan. 1, 1892.