WEST HARTFORD — Although he's a registered Democrat, presidential candidate Mark Stewart said he most closely identifies with Republican Sen. Rand Paul.

The Farmington resident and West Hartford property owner spoke at Blue Back Square Tuesday to try to attract attention to his budding presidential campaign. Stewart, 51, says he was the first candidate to file for the New Hampshire presidential primary on Nov. 4.

"I feel like mainstream Democratic voters — they don't have a real choice right now and they are scared of Republicans," Stewart said. "Maybe injecting Stewart has some value."

Stewart is one of 44 presidential candidates who have filed for candidacy in New Hampshire. Like Stewart, many are virtually unknown, but will be listed alongside leading candidates Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump. The filing period ends Friday.

Stewart has never run for office before, nor does he have any political experience. But the Dartmouth College graduate considers that an asset.

He calls himself an "IED," an "increasingly embarrassed Democrat." He said he hopes to participate in the next Democratic presidential debate Dec. 19 in Manchester, N.H.

Connecticut Man Enters Race For President Farmington resident and West Hartford property owner Mark Stewart has filed as a presidential candidate for the New Hampshire primary. Farmington resident and West Hartford property owner Mark Stewart has filed as a presidential candidate for the New Hampshire primary. See more videos

Leigh Appleby, communications director for the Connecticut Democratic Party, said the state party is trying to be "as fair as possible" to the local Democratic presidential candidate before the primary. However, he said Stewart's stance on the Affordable Care Act will not go over well with Connecticut voters.

"Based on this person's specific positions, I'd say his chances are probably not good," he said.

On his website, www.stewartforliberty.com, Stewart states that he is against Obamacare, which he said has taken away his choice of treatment and only saves money for "a few low-income people."

Stewart said he founded The Resistance, an advocacy group "dedicated to helping candidates from all parties challenge the leftists and big-government statists who have taken too much control over the federal government," according to his website.

He is also a member of the Free State Project, an organization in which members pledge to move to New Hampshire within five years in order to have "liberty in our lifetime," he said.

After Saturday's Democratic debate, Stewart spoke on the $15-an-hour minimum wage supported by presidential candidate Bernie Sanders. He said he is against a $15-an-hour minimum wage, as it would create artificial raises and increase the price of goods.

Unlike other candidates, Stewart said he would announce his full cabinet before the elections, and will announce his vice president in the coming weeks, though he would rather take on the position of vice president.

"Being president is freaking scary," Stewart said. "I can't take care of my own household."