Updated: 12/22/2015 9:02 AM

Created: 10/08/2014 4:49 PM WNYT.com

Benita Zahn

As the Affordable Care Act increases access to care, physician assistants are filling the need for medical providers. This is “Physician Assistant Awareness Week,” so NewsChannel 13 spent some time with a local P.A. to find out about their training and the care they provide.

Bethany Mills has diabetes. For years, she's relied on Physician Assistant Shannon Thompson to be her partner in healthcare.

"She knows me better," says Mills.



Better than a doctor, that is. Because a key part of a PA's focus is time spent with patients. Bret Telesky agrees.

"She always takes that extra second to kind of educate me not just what we're doing but why we're doing it," said Telesky.



That's why Telesky, who also has diabetes, drives over an hour for his care.

PA's spend two and a half years in school, compared with the four for traditional medical school. Some will go onto residency training in fields like OB/GYN, critical care and neurology, similar to physicians' residencies but significantly shorter.

Although their medical education is shorter than that for doctors, PA 's must complete a minimum of 1,000 hours before being accepted to school. That may mean working as a tech, or on an ambulance.

Their license allows them to treat patients, prescribe medicines, perform tests and some types of surgery.



"And at the end of the day we all work under the supervision of a physician," says PA Shannon Thompson. "So if I'm out of my scope of practice, in over my head, I know that a physician has my back."



Because the training is fast tracked it's appealing to those looking for a second career - like Chas Kite - formerly a guidance counselor, now a first year PA student.



"It takes people who have a set of skills, oftentimes working people, and then gives them the medical training that they need to really meet the needs of the patient in front of them," Kite explained.



When Kite eventually joins a practice it will be different than what Thompson was met with when she started 10 years ago.

Not only is the demand for PA's increasing, but as medicine evolves, the responsibilities of the doctor and PA continues to change.



"The line is very blurry because it's very different for every practice," Thompson explained. "It also is up to the PA and it's also up to the supervising doctor, what they feel comfortable with. So my life has changed dramatically over the last 10 years."

A bit of history - 1965 marked the first P.A. class at Duke University. It was based in part, on the fast-track training of medical doctors during World War II.

Thompson is a graduate of the Physician Assistant program at Albany Medical College.

More information on Physician Assistants can be found here.