Group raised $6,000 for orphanage, taped administrators to gym wall

Administrators from Peak to Peak Charter School in Lafayette were suspended by duct tape on the gym wall Thursday to help students raise money for a summer service project.

The students raised more than $6,000 selling strips of duct tape to pin high school principal Kyle Mathews and dean of students Grant Safranek to the wall. Donations were also raised through he sale of raffle tickets for pies to throw at the administrators and teachers agreeing to wear crazy outfits. Boulder-based NexGen Technologies gave $3,000 to the effort.

The proceeds from Thursday's fundraiser and a silent auction that will be held this spring will benefit an orphanage in Tanzania where students will volunteer this summer after they hike Mount Kilimanjaro.

A group of 11 sophomores and juniors and three faculty members will spend six days hiking, and hopefully, summating the 19,341-foot peak before working in the Kilimanjaro Orphanage for a week.

The group is hoping to raise at least $10,000 for the orphanage before the trip.

World literature teacher Clara Quinlan summated Kilimanjaro a few summers ago before visiting the orphanage for the first time. Two years ago she spent a month volunteering at the orphanage with another faculty member, and now she's excited to share the life-changing experience with her students.

"This is going to be a physical and emotional challenge for the students that they can't even imagine," Quinlan said.

Advertisement

"Guiding young adults toward this sort of self-awareness, while also exposing them to a culture so wholly different from their own, will hopefully inspire them toward a stronger sense of what it means to lead and give back in whatever leadership role they choose in life."

The students have already hiked three fourteeners, including Longs Peak, and completed 5K and 10K races in preparation for their upcoming hike.

The guide company that the group is using to hike Mount Kilimanjaro has agreed to donate $500 to the orphanage for every person who makes it to the top -- a total of $7,000 if all 14 climbers summit the peak.

This spring, the three faculty members attending the trip will host a weekly boot camp to train the students for the strenuous hike.

Sophomore Peter Starbuck, 15, said he is relying on his teammates to help him succeed during the climb.

"We're training to get in shape but also to work as a team and to support each other through it," Starbuck said.

Peak to Peak junior Brenna Costello, 16, said helping the children in the orphanage will provide extra motivation for the students during the climb.

"We wore pictures of the kids at the orphanage on our shirts as a running bib during the 10K," Costello said. "Seeing their faces and knowing we're doing this for them will make it easier than if it we were just doing the climb."