Flandreau, SD

A church is opening its service to the World Wide Web as it's trying to increase church members in rural communities.

It looks like a normal church service full of music, sermons and a congregation. What happens behind the scenes at The Rescue Church is different, as its service broadcasts across the internet for anyone to tune in.

"We have a live broadcast that goes out of here. Every Sunday we send it several different directions. We have an internet campus, we call it our iCampus, and people can log on to that and us from all over the United States and the world," Lead Pastor Jon Sanders said.

The church has had viewers from as far away as Germany, but the goal of the church is to help the decreasing numbers of members in rural churches closer to home. The church has added extra locations that take part in the service. Each church has its own announcements and music, but when Pastor Jon Sanders does his sermon, it's broadcasted to each campus.

"The vision of our church, we see a need in rural America for healthy churches. We see a lot of churches that are closing their doors and aging congregations and so awhile back God gave us a vision to reach these communities through the use of technology," Sanders said.

The Rescue Church added its first location in Colman in 2012, and is looking to add another location in Garretson this upcoming summer. The church also has a campus located thousands of miles away from South Dakota.

"Recently we just opened the doors of another campus in Jamaica and that was just a crazy story, we didn't seek that, but that kind of found us and so we're thrilled to have a campus of our church in a little rural place in Jamaica. A little place called Deeside," Sanders said.

While Sanders knows how to lead a service, he doesn't know how the broadcast works. That is why he feels God has given the church a great collection of workers.

"I don't know how to do this technology stuff and so he's blessed us with an awesome team of volunteers that are smarter than me about this and can figure the sound, the camera, and the lighting," Sanders said.

Sanders is also glad that the church is growing and is able to spread its message outside of its doors.

The online campus allows people to chat and take notes during the service. The church also has apps through Apple and Window phones.

For more information about The Rescue Church and its online services click here to visit its website.