Katrina Pierson’s upstart campaign for Congress doesn’t lack for conservative star power.

Just last week she brought in political commentator Michelle Malkin for a Dallas fundraiser for her campaign to unseat longtime Dallas Republican incumbent Pete Sessions. And Rafael Cruz, the conservative pastor and father of Sen. Ted Cruz, appeared as well, telling a reporter that he was backing Pierson.

But as Pierson, a well-known tea party activist, and her supporters hammer Sessions and call for an all-out war against Republican incumbents they charge are too comfortable in office, it’s unclear whether the furor will translate into voters showing up in the March 4 primary. For all the attention in conservative circles, Pierson appears to lack the money and name recognition she’ll need to turn out enough votes against a strong incumbent.

The race for the 32nd Congressional District, the first of contests across the country that pit tea party conservatives against incumbent conservatives, will test whether tea party challengers can duplicate Ted Cruz’s stunning 2012 victory.

“You in Texas did it with Ted Cruz,” Malkin said last Monday. “It can be done.”

Political celebrities add spice to an otherwise under-the-radar campaign, but political analysts say Pierson lacks the extra time and outside resources that helped Cruz against Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst in the Republican primary and runoff.

“One of the problems that these insurgents have is they don’t have the visibility, the credibility, the seriousness and the outside backing and the national money to take on incumbents,” said Stuart Rothenberg, editor of the Washington-based Rothenberg Political Report. “And Pete Sessions doesn’t have the reputation as some kind of squish.”

For a traditional campaign, Pierson, all by March, will have to raise money for campaign mailers, radio spots and maybe some television. She’ll also have to pay a campaign team and advisers.

“That’s a very long and tough road to do that,” Rothenberg said. “It’s just hard to get visibility, particularly in a House race.”

‘Part of the deal’

Sessions, a nine-term veteran, has declined to discuss Pierson’s challenge directly. Asked about Rafael Cruz’s endorsement of his opponent, he said cryptically: “It’s part of the deal.” He declined to elaborate.

Pierson and her supporters acknowledge the challenges but say she’s not running a traditional campaign.

“I’m not going to sugar coat this,” she told supporters last Monday. “This is an uphill battle. I’m not your typical Republican candidate. I’m not from one those ZIP codes. I don’t have that pedigree. I’m not a multi-millionaire. But the good news is, I’m not your typical Republican candidate.”

In an interview afterward, Pierson said it was important to provide voters with an alternative to Sessions.

“We’re going to practice what we preach,” Pierson said. “We’re going to give voters a choice.”

The 32nd Congressional District includes North Dallas, parts of Garland and several other cities, and a small piece of Collin County. It’s heavily Republican, and the primary winner will be strongly favored to defeat Democrat Frank Perez, a Dallas lawyer, in the fall.

Tea party leadership

Before running for Congress, Pierson was a Garland-based leader in the tea party movement, lending her voice and support to candidates and causes that reflected her views.

A single mother born in Kansas to a 15-year-old mother, Pierson takes a no-compromise approach to issues like repealing the Affordable Care Act, slashing government spending and halting illegal immigration.

Before getting fully involved in the tea party movement, she worked 10 years in the health care industry.

She says Sessions has sold out the conservative movement and could have had stronger positions on the issues conservatives care most about. Sessions has said that his critics have good hearts but don’t grasp the differences between activism and leadership.

Pierson deliberated for much of the summer before deciding to challenge Sessions, who chairs the powerful House Rules Committee.

“I have not lost my mind,” she said. “Yes, I’m running against the career politician. We’re going to win. I’m running for liberty.”

Pierson has been endorsed by the political arm of FreedomWorks, a group that was instrumental in Cruz’s Senate campaign.

But so far, the group’s political action committee has not given any money to Pierson.

“We’re going to run this race like we’re in this on our own,” she said. Pierson expects to report at least $70,000 in fundraising when campaign finance reports are due later this month. Sessions had more than $1.3 million on hand in his most recent report, last fall.

Malkin agrees that Pierson has to be “savvy at using alternative resources to defeat” establishment power.

“It’s open warfare,” Malkin said. “The incumbency protection racket will draw on huge resources to stifle the voices of dissent.”

Malkin, a syndicated columnist who frequently appears on Fox News, clarified the split among the GOP, saying: “The people on the left are dirty. The incumbents in power on the right are dirtier.”

Pierson said she’s made personal contact with 6,000 voters and has events planned for the rest of the campaign. She’ll also use social media to push her message.

Pierson says she’s enjoying meeting voters and activists in the district.

And wryly retrofitting a line President Barack Obama used when pushing the Affordable Care Act, Pierson said: “If you like your congressman, you can keep him.”

Follow Gromer Jeffers Jr. on Twitter at @gromerjeffers.