Topics: Barack Obama, cedric richmond, Editor's Picks, jonathan allen, Nancy Pelosi, neoliberalism, Steny Hoyer, Tea Party, Trans-Pacific Partnership, Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement, Unions, Media News, Business News, News, Politics News

Two weeks ago, after a clear majority of House Democrats Gandalf’d a crucial vote involving the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), no one was certain what the White House would do next. Press Secretary Josh Earnest did his best to spin the defeat as a victory, albeit one slightly marred by a “procedural snafu.” Those under no obligation to protect Obama’s image, however, felt differently. Vox’s Jonathan Allen reported that the president’s trade agenda was possibly already dead.

In the time since, the White House and its Republican allies in Congress have opted for a Plan B, which will require Obama to (arguably) break a promise and to muscle through the Senate a less-bipartisan version of a bill that had trouble passing already. Oh, and they’ll have to do this despite the fact that former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton looks like she’s going to follow the Democratic Party’s base and remake herself as a free-trade skeptic. All that aside, though, I’m sure it’ll be a cinch.

But while the ultimate fate of the TPP is still unclear, there’s one element of this ongoing fight within the Democratic Party that you should expect to see more of in the years to come. It’s not the rise of a more combative labor movement, though that’s certainly part of it. And it’s not the decline of the party’s neoliberal wing, though that’s happening, too. No, it’s something much less important, but much more amusing: the wails of outrage and self-pity from moderate Democrats who resent the party’s once docile, but now ascendant, liberal base.

True, as it became apparent that the House TPP vote was going to be closer than the moderates and the White House predicted, there were some murmurs of discontent. But it wasn’t until a Thursday report from Politico that we heard the pro-TPP crowd really using its outside voice. The article was analytically suspect — among other curiosities, Rep. Steny Hoyer, the decidedly moderate minority whip, seems to be presented as a liberal — but it was also well-reported. More importantly, it reflected the worldview, biases and delusions of corporate America’s friends in Washington, which is Politico’s stock-in-trade.

For example, despite the fact that, as Steven Greenhouse reported for the Guardian, the alliance against the TPP was basically comprised of the Democratic Party’s entire base, Politico focuses exclusively on organized labor. And once you read the rest of the article, you can see why: it’s the only framing pro-TPP Dems can use without sounding out of touch. Unions are easy to demonize as “special interests,” after all. If you’re talking about faith groups, civil liberties advocates, consumer protection organizations, liberal economists and more, on the other hand, it’s hard to use that talking point without sounding like a Republican.

But there’s another reason why Politico’s Democratic sources kept the focus on unions: because unions, for all their troubles, are still better than the rest of the liberal coalition at wielding their financial clout. And because the unions followed a strategy of threatening to withhold donations for — or even launch primary campaigns against — Democrats who voted for the TPP. Business-friendly Democrats know how conservative activists use a similar approach to keep squishy Republicans in line. They’ve seen it work; and they don’t like it.