Low-level drug cases have crowded Cook County courts for years, inflating one of the largest criminal justice systems in the country with costly prosecutions that have done little to stem drug use.

In 2010 alone, more than 33,000 people were arrested in the county for marijuana possession — a rate of 91 per day that was tops in the nation, according to a recent study by the American Civil Liberties Union of Illinois.

On Monday, joining a national trend toward decriminalizing minor drug offenses, the county's top prosecutor said her office will no longer prosecute most misdemeanor marijuana charges and will redirect nonviolent offenders charged with low-level felony heroin, cocaine and cannabis possession to drug treatment.

The office also plans to divert low-level juvenile drug offenders to community-based organizations for drug education and mentoring, State's Attorney Anita Alvarez said.

"What we are currently doing here in Cook County in handling our low-level drug cases is simply not working,” Alvarez said at a news conference at her downtown office. "With the implementation of this new policy, I firmly believe we are in the position to create a sea of change in Cook County’s approach of dealing with low-level drug crimes and nonviolent repeat drug offenders.”

The move brings the county in line with efforts elsewhere to treat drug abuse as a public health issue instead saddling users with a criminal conviction that does nothing to break the cycle of addiction.

State's Attorney Anita Alvarez has new drug policy for Chicago State's Attorney Alvarez announced on April 20, 2015, that some drug offenders will attend treatment centers rather than serve jail time. (WGN TV) State's Attorney Alvarez announced on April 20, 2015, that some drug offenders will attend treatment centers rather than serve jail time. (WGN TV) See more videos

The district attorney in Brooklyn, N.Y., announced a similar plan last year, and other decriminalization programs in Seattle, Santa Fe, N.M., and Albany, N.Y., also have been closely watched.

The enforcement of drug laws has also been long criticized as racially biased. According to the ACLU study, African-Americans were almost eight times more likely than whites to be arrested for marijuana possession in Illinois.

Ed Yohnka, a spokesman for the ACLU in Chicago, said the move by Alvarez was a "really good first step" that would have been unthinkable just a few years ago, when get-tough policies on drugs were still in vogue.

"It addresses one of the most dysfunctional and discriminatory aspects of our justice system," Yohnka said. "All of this speaks to the fact that Americans are ready for an adult conversation about (drug enforcement). What will be helpful is to move beyond this one announcement and think of other ways to help people who find themselves addicted to drugs."

While many experts heralded Alvarez's policy shift, questions remain about how it will be implemented in a system as large as Cook County's, which handles tens of thousands of cases in often-overloaded criminal courts. Assessing candidates and getting them treatment will require significant resources, and following through with each case could prove time-consuming and costly.

Abishi Cunningham, a former Cook County judge who last month completed a six-year stint as the county's public defender, applauded the move as a "great start" but said its implementation will have to be monitored.

"The devil's in the details, and that is what we have to look at," said Cunningham, who is also a former Cook County prosecutor.

Under the new policy, prosecutors won't proceed with misdemeanor charges for possession of less than 30 grams of marijuana against those who have fewer than three arrests or citations on similar charges, Alvarez said.

Those with three or more arrests or citations will be sent to an existing drug school program and have their charges dismissed if they successfully complete the program.

Except for those with significant criminal histories of violence, anyone charged with the lowest level of felony drug possession will be routed to an alternative prosecution program that will link them to treatment and social services.

Offenders will be identified for the program in bond court, the earliest stage in the court process, to reduce their days in custody, Alvarez said.

Alvarez said the changes are the result of a yearlong analysis by her office that looked at how prosecutors handled drug cases in major cities and counties around the country. The proposed changes will not affect pending cases, according to Sally Daly, Alvarez's spokeswoman.

The office also wants to add more state's attorneys to bond court to help assess the felony cases that would be eligible for deferred prosecution.

Alvarez said the new policy would help shift tight financial resources to fighting violent crimes. Last year the lowest level of felony drug possession cases, Class 4, accounted for almost one-fourth of the nearly 40,000 felony cases prosecuted by the office. In addition, the office handled about 15,000 misdemeanor marijuana cases.

"Drugs are bad, and I am not promoting any drug use. I am not promoting the legalization of anything," Alvarez told reporters. "This is not being soft on crime at all. This is being smart."

Pressed on whether there would be enough money and social services resources to meet demand, Alvarez said her office was exploring reimbursements from Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act and is already in contact with providers like Treatment Alternatives for Safe Communities, which connects people in the criminal justice system to drug treatment programs.

Daphne Baille, a spokeswoman for TASC, said organizations probably will need to increase staffing if the policy is going to work.

"I think it's going to be something we are going to want to watch closely," Baille said. "Somewhere there have to be providers who can meet the demand for services."

Adam Gelb, director of the Public Safety Performance Project at the Pew Charitable Trusts, said Alvarez's decision is in line with a trend that began about eight years ago in Texas, where lawmakers voted to divert money from prisons and put it toward treatment for low-level offenders.

Since then, a growing number of policymakers from both sides of the aisle have realized that locking up as many people for as long as possible is not the best path to public safety, Gelb said.

Alvarez's announcement came as she faces a possible election challenge next year from Kimberly Foxx, the chief of staff to Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle, who has pushed to change the way the county's criminal justice system deals with low-level drug offenders.

Speaking to the Chicago Tribune Editorial Board on Monday, Alvarez denied she was trying to protect herself politically by taking away a potential key issue for Foxx.