Buy Photo Washington County School busses stored near Dixie High School Friday, March 11, 2016. (Photo: Chris Caldwell / The Spectrum & Daily News)Buy Photo

There is a concern about bus drivers in the Washington County School District and it’s coming from both the district and the parental side.

Hiring and keeping quality bus drivers is an issue WCSD Transportation Director Launi Schmutz-Harden is trying to address.

It’s a problem she said lies within the 30-hour rule of the Affordable Care Act, more commonly known as Obamacare, which makes employers give benefits to anyone who works at least 30 hours.

“We gave people positions when we had money to give benefits and other than that they were able to work 40, 45 hours a week,” Schmutz-Harden said. “When the 29 hours came out, the school district couldn’t afford it so they were bound to 29 (hours).”

According to Schmutz-Harden, bus driver salaries start at $14.64 with less than half of the district’s school bus drivers being full time.

Schmutz-Harden said she has asked businesses in town to partner with the school district to provide the drivers with additional jobs. She added the district has started working with the city to share employee drivers and has had group homes share employees in the past.

One example would be SunTran employees who also work part time as school bus drivers and vice versa.

However, this can be a catch-22 because if those part-time employees find full-time jobs with benefits, they are more likely to leave their school bus job, Schmutz-Harden said.

"Most Utah school districts seem to be struggling to maintain enough school bus drivers,” wrote Murrell Martin, state director of student transportation at the Utah State Office of Education. “The 30-hour rule from the Affordable Care Act seems to have limited what many districts are able to offer drivers, and it is said to be one of the biggest impacts to driver shortages."

Out of 130 buses, there are 80 buses that run daily that take students to and from school within Washington County.

There are approximately 9,140 eligible students within the district, with an average cost of $409.83 per student from the state allotment of $3,910,876, according to figures from the USOE sent to Wayne Reese, Cache County Utah transportation and logistics administrator. The district is audited and tracked on its expenses by the USOE and the legislature with expenses being cost per mile and minute.

There is also the issue of training, set by the USOE, which can take three weeks to a month to complete and before a license is issued.

Schmutz-Harden said it’s that slow process along with a job that usually lasts only nine months out of the year that can be a deterrent for someone needing an immediate job to cover expenses.

“The people that we are losing now are people that are retiring or moving,” she said. “The first couple of years after the 29-hour (rule) was when people left for benefits in another job.”

Some employees can receive a retention bonus put in place where they are paid $500 or $1,000 if they work a certain number of hours in the summer. But insurance comes into play here as the district is only covered if drivers are using the buses for school-related transportation.

On the parental side, there have been worries after children have been left standing at their bus stop with no pick up.

Jen Cloward had this exact situation play out with her own children last year. She said there had been at least two incidents where the bus did not come to pick up her children to take them to Lava Ridge Intermediate.

She added that other times her children had gotten out of school early and would have had to wait for the high school to let out before a bus was available.

“I don’t see anybody trying to make any solutions to the problem. They just kind of brush it off,” Cloward said. “I just think they’re setting themselves up for something serious if they don’t change the situation.”

Newly-hired bus driver Robert Cox pointed out that similar situations could be a result of substitute bus drivers within the district who do not have a regular route and can be called to pick up students in areas they have never been before.

A substitute himself, Cox said his routine may consist of driving a local route or getting a call at 5 a.m. to be in Apple Valley that morning. He said he tries to plug routes into his GPS or drive the roads beforehand if he can.

“Sometimes that’s a challenge if I haven’t driven the route before,” Cox said. “I might be a few minutes early, I might be a few minutes late, but I’m learning that route and the different things about it.”

Schmutz-Harden pointed out that buses also have a GPS that tells the speed of the bus and when it makes each stop. She said the district would like for parents to call officials if a student is not picked up so they can make alternative arrangements.

Schmutz-Harden added the district also have run into a problem when it comes to hiring and training, noting it takes a unique person who has patience with children as well as a clean driving record and background.

“Not everybody is cut out to be a bus driver and some people don’t even last the first training period,” said Ken Mickelson, a WCSD bus driver for nine years. “This is a job that people have to go into understanding that it’s not going to be a full-time job they probably won’t get benefits.”

Mickelson, who is retired, has about nine runs a day. He said the job appealed to him because he didn’t need the longer hours that other people might be looking for.

Roy Wanlass, who is also retired, said when drivers are getting an hourly wage and only working a few hours in the morning and evening, he can understand the difficulty in keeping employees if a full-time position opens elsewhere.

Wanlass said he loves his job driving the school buses, noting the shorter hours and days off make it ideal for someone like him who doesn’t need the job to make a living.

“It’s hard for these districts to operate under the budgets they get,” he said. “I understand what their struggle is.”

And even though Cox is only a substitute, he has started a regular bus run every Tuesday and Thursday for special needs students.

He said he started doing the route when the district couldn’t find a driver to drive it. He also helps out with other runs such as driving sports teams and choirs to events.

“Because of the money issues in the school, they don’t have the capability of having a whole fleet of drivers who are full-time,” Cox said. “When you drive a bus for the most part it’s not a full-time job…that makes it difficult to keep a bus driver.”

Follow Nichole Osinski on Twitter, @nrosinski, and on Facebook at www.facebook.com/osinskireporter. Call her at 435-674-6231.

Popular stories

"Suspicious" downtown fire injures one

Undercover investigation leads to prostitution arrests

Utah budget will see increased education funds

Read or Share this story: http://www.thespectrum.com/story/news/2016/03/12/washington-county-facing-road-bumps-bus-drivers/81694710/