President Obama is officially coming back to the area.

The President will be arriving in Elkhart June 1 to speak at Concord High School.

It will be his fourth trip to Elkhart County but the first since 2009.

Authorities say this event will not be open to the public, however, the topics released are as follows:

In 2009, unemployment in Elkhart peaked at 19.6 percent while, nationally, unemployment surged to 10 percent. Today, unemployment in Elkhart has dropped to 4.1 percent - lower than its pre-recession average. And, nationally, the unemployment rate has been cut in half to 5 percent.

In Elkhart County's public schools, high school graduation rates have jumped from 75 percent to close to 90 percent and, across the country the graduation rate is at an all-time high at 82 percent.

At the peak of the housing crisis in 2010, 9.5 percent of mortgages in Elkhart were late or in the process of foreclosure. Today, that percentage is down to 3.7, lower than pre-crisis levels. Nationally, troubled mortgages peaked at 9.7 percent and today stand 4 percent.

Across the country, 20 million more Americans now have health insurance thanks to the Affordable Care Act, and, under the ACA, health care prices have grown at the slowest rate in 50 years. In Indiana, nearly 200,000 people selected or were re-enrolled in a 2016 Marketplace plan. Additionally, Indiana expanded Medicaid. As of February, 330,233 more Indianans were covered by the state's Medicaid program than before the Marketplace opened in 2013.

While in Elkhart, officials tell us the President will also take part in a town hall hosted by PBS, where he'll have the opportunity to hear directly from Elkhart residents.

President Obama wrote a statement to the citizens of Elkhart:

Just three weeks into my presidency, I made a promise to the people of Elkhart, Indiana.

It was the first city I visited as President. Folks there had been hit harder by the recession than almost anywhere else in America. The unemployment rate was on its way to nearly twenty percent. Companies that had sustained that community for years were shedding jobs at an alarming speed -- and hardworking families were losing their homes and health care along with those jobs.

When I spoke to the people of Elkhart in February of 2009, I promised them that if we worked together, we could pull that community and this country out of the depths of recession -- that we could not only recover, but put ourselves on a better, stronger course.

Today, thanks to the hard work of people in Elkhart and in communities across the country, America has recovered from crisis and we're on the cusp of resurgence.

The story of Elkhart's recovery is the story of America's recovery.

Today, Elkhart's manufacturing industry is back, and the town has regained nearly all of the jobs it lost during the downturn. The unemployment rate is lower than it was before the recession, and lower than the national average. In Indiana, more people have health insurance, and fewer homeowners are underwater.

This progress is thanks to the effort and determination of Americans like you. And it's a result of the choices we made as a nation.

We still face some tough economic challenges, there's no doubt about it. And all of us have to make some very important decisions about where we go from here.

Thanks,

President Barack Obama