Otis Amey former 49ers player speaks to people at the annual Health and Wellness Fair at Solano Community College on Saturday about eating right and watching what you eat. (Susan Hiland/Daily Republic)

FAIRFIELD — Eat healthy foods and watching what goes into your body was the key to former 49er Otis Amey’s message Saturday at the annual Solano Coalition for Better Health Faith Based Collaborative Health Fair and Awards Summit.

Since leaving the team two years ago, Amey packed on 20 pounds. After a visit to the doctor, he went home in shock.

“How did that happen? I wasn’t eating what I thought was bad food,” he said.

After examining what he was eating, he realized the food wasn’t as healthy as he thought.

“I never realized how much sugar was in my food. I read labels, I do the research and became aware of what goes in my body,” he said.

He compared the experience of eating poorly to putting sugar in the gas tank of a car and expecting it to work right.

“That just wasn’t going to happen,” he said.

He took off the weight, and has since been talking to people about watching what they eat and staying healthy with regular exercise.

Amey notices when he eats sugar he gets an unpleasant rush, when he eats something fatty he feels sluggish and his body just doesn’t feel right.

Celina Keshishian, project coordinator for Community Clinic Consortium, also gave an in-depth talk about insurance.

“The system has become very complicated,” she said.

She noted that one of the best parts of the Affordable Care Act was free preventive health care services.

“That is the best and biggest change of the whole thing. It used to be you paid for these things like screenings for breast cancer but not anymore,” she said.

Gigi Crowder, with Mental Health Friendly Communities, said she was excited to share a new project aimed at helping pastors and other faith-based workers identify when they can help mentally ill people or refer them to someone who is more equipped to deal with their issues.

“Many African-Americans who are suffering from some form of mental illness will go to their church first, when they really need to go to a doctor,” Crowder said.

“Rather than sending them home with Scripture to read, this is geared to help the pastor identify that this is a mental illness that needs another kind of assistance,” she said.

The Rev. Bryan Harris of Emmanuel Temple Apostolic Church in Vallejo said he hoped that the health fair would bring information and awareness to the African-American community.

“One of the big things we are focusing on in Solano County is the fight against diabetes,” Harris said.

He said he hoped that by being at the Solano Community College it would be an event that would introduce healthy eating to a younger generation.

“This is really the time when they start setting their eating habits for life,” he said.

Reach Susan Hiland at 427-6981 or [email protected]