Buy Photo Russell Bethea, right, serves food to Ruth Neville, left, and Dan Koppelman, center, at High Cotton in Greenville on Tuesday. (Photo: HEIDI HEILBRUNN/Staff)Buy Photo

There was just a day that Scott Bordages decided to move from the back of the house to the front. At that point in 2002, the Charlotte, North Carolina, native had been working as a chef in restaurants in New York City and San Francisco for about seven years, and as much as he loved it, he saw more potential on the other side of the kitchen doors.

"There are two stories I tell people," says Bordages, who graduated from the Culinary Institute of America in New York City. "The real story is you work half the hours, you make double the money. The story I tell people I don't know is because I get to see the guests' interaction and I get to guide their dining experience to the best of what the restaurant can show."

For all the attention chefs get these days, those who bring the food to the table are enjoying an elevated status as well, particularly in finer dining establishments where experience is a premium. Long thought of as a secondary career, or a lesser one, waiting tables is now a professional endeavor, one that provides benefits and a decent wage.

Statistics about server pay are skewed, since the average includes jobs across the spectrum. In South Carolina, the average server salary was $18,460 in 2013, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. But servers working at local high-end restaurants report salaries closer to $35,000 to $40,000 a year. And in larger cities, professional servers make even more

"I know some personally who make $100,000 a year," says Mike Granta, a chef instructor with the Culinary School of the Carolinas. "But they run it like a business, like they're leasing five tables a night, and their business is selling and serving."

As Greenville's food scene grows, ushering in more refined restaurant choices and attracting a wider swath of clientele, it's casting a spotlight on the the local service industry and those who work in it.

Restaurant owners and managers are combating turnover through incentives such as health insurance, retirement benefits, paid vacation and, in some cases, a higher hourly wage than the $2.13 standard.

They are upping the training they provide to waitstaff, adding classes on wine and food pairing or sessions on farm-to-table sourcing.

"This market is going to continue to grow," says Rick Erwin, owner of Rick Erwin Dining Group. "And with growth is going to come more restaurants, and more restaurants are going to create a need for more great servers."

The growing need for great servers is hitting some smaller, independent restaurants harder.

"It's tough to compete sometimes," says Jason Scholz, owner and executive chef at Stella's Southern Bistro in Simpsonville. "I'd love it if we could provide benefits for everybody, but for a small operation like us you can't. So you have to find ways to compensate for that."

The need grows

Greenville is not the place it was 20 years ago, or even 10 years ago. One look up and down Main Street, or Woodruff Road, confirms it. The city has emerged as a center for international business, has appeared on Top 10 lists from Esquire to AARP Magazine, and had been featured in The New York Times travel section.

The area's restaurants are a huge economic force, generating $794,930,200 in revenue between July 2013 and June 2014, a 5.9 percent increase over the previous year, according to county economic data from VisitGreenvilleSC.

Erwin has watched the changes from his vantage point as owner of now four restaurants (a fifth one is set to open in the spring) for the past 10 years. With each new venture, the need for professional servers has grown, and it's gotten harder to find people who fit the bill.

"I just think the pool of service professionals is not as big as it needs to be in this market," Erwin says. "But I think that will eventually take care of itself."

Erwin is doing his part to see that it does. Three years ago, he added new benefits for servers. His dining group offers full health and retirement benefits to full-time workers, as well as raises based on years of service.

Table 301 Restaurant Group has the same policy in place for its service staff of about 120 to 150. Table 301 owner Carl Sobocinski calls it an investment in the business.

Typically, full-time workers get paid vacation, health and retirement benefits and financial support for continuing education. All the policies go toward keeping good people, Sobocinski says.

"I think we retain people because we care about them," he says. "And we try to be flexible, and we also give them the same opportunities and benefits they would have in corporate America."

Chet Green, general manager for High Cotton in Greenville and a stalwart of the food industry for many years, says it costs money and time to train people to the level needed in today's restaurants.

To attract professionals, you have to treat people as professionals, Green says. High Cotton offers benefits, paid vacation and has moved to a regular paycheck system versus the longtime standard of pocketing tips at the end of the night.

Instead, High Cotton servers report tips earned each night into a computer system and receive payout in their paychecks every other week. The system means servers receive paychecks more similar to other industries.

"It allows servers to have a document for proof when they apply for a house loan or a car loan," Green says. "That systematic approach and regular paycheck almost gives it more a sense of a real job."

The plight of smaller restaurants

While larger restaurant groups can afford to pay for benefits packages for employees, smaller ones often cannot. This means restaurant owners must find other ways to keep good staff.

"It's not easy," says Jason Scholz, of Stella's Southern Bistro. The independent restaurant cannot afford to cover benefits for all employees, Scholz says. The issue has made it difficult in some cases to keep good people, particularly those who have families. Though Scholz says he hopes to see some changes thanks to Obamacare.

"It'll level the playing field out before long," Scholz says hopefully.

In the meantime, what Scholz can't offer in benefits, he tries to offer in other ways.

Staff always get a free meal during the pre-dinner service. But beyond that, Scholz says he tries to set his staff up for success through adequate training and a comprehensive explanation of the menu and specials before every service, from farm of origin to the preparation of the sauce. The more knowledge the staff has, Scholz reasons, the better they'll be able to sell the products.

"If they don't have the right tools and training, it makes it hard to be a good salesman," Scholz says. "If they're making good money and are in an environment that sets them up for success, those tools level that playing field."

More training

Setting servers up for success increasingly means more professional training.

"Thanks to the Food Network and the multitude of shows on food and chefs, the consumer is more educated and they expect a much higher level of expertise and care," says Sobocinski, whose Table 301 Group includes six restaurants. "So societal changes and changes to our industry through social media, blogging, through television shows, has led to a more educated and demanding consumer and we need to be as versed as they are, in my opinion."

Waitstaff training at Table 301 has gone from one week to two and includes learning how the kitchen works and how ingredients are sourced, for example, as well as how to serve customers.

Table 301 servers must complete a 12-week beverage program that includes everything from how to open a bottle of wine to how to select the best wine for a dish.

"When the job does require you to be more knowledgeable and when you can talk to (customers) about these wines on our list or where the food comes from and local producers, all of a sudden you feel more engaged," Sobocinski says. "You're sharing information that that person at the table didn't know. So it's a lot more professional and you've got a lot more pride in what's being done."

At High Cotton, servers in training generally shadow seasoned servers for two weeks, Green says. And knowledge of sourcing and ingredients is imperative.

"People expect not just for someone to bring them more water and food," says Russell Bethea, a server at High Cotton. "It's about having a knowledge of what you're doing. I think the quality of the food and the service is really what makes the biggest difference."

The Culinary Institute at Greenville Tech requires students to take a dining room management class that includes topics like how to set a proper table, the correct technique to use for serving food and the different kinds of service. There are three, Russian, French and American, each with its own rules and requirements.

More recently, the Institute has added programs on beverage pairing, in which students learn how to find tasting notes in wines, beers and even hot teas. Students also get TIPS-certified (Training for Intervention Procedures), which covers how to safely serve alcohol.

At Stella's Bistro, new servers get a manual to take home and study, with information about the restaurant and its philosophy and the farms and farmers who provide ingredients.

A cheese plate at Stella's, for instance, is not simply set on the table. Servers are expected to be able to identify each of the five cheeses, along with where each is from, as well as its tasting notes.

"Your servers are your sales people," Scholz says.

"As the business owner, I can't maximize the profits in the restaurant without a waitstaff that is trying to sell things," Scholz says.

A bona fide career

The changing nature of the service industry is making it a career people are not simply forced into, but are choosing. It takes skill to succeed.

"It's just as nuanced a career as anything else," says Mamie Morgan, who for seven years worked equal hours teaching poetry at the Governor's School for the Arts and Humanities and waiting tables at Lazy Goat.

She estimates she put in about 35 hours a week at each job and earned about $35,000 from each. But while the teaching job fulfilled Morgan's passion for writing and for inspiring young minds, as a part-time position, it did not pay her benefits. The waitressing job did.

"That's something to think about," Morgan says with a smile. "It's so funny people use the phrase 'real job,' when for all intents and purposes, my waitressing job was my real job for seven years."

Today, at 32, Morgan is working full time as a poetry teacher, but she hasn't completely left the service industry behind. She averages about 20 hours a week as a manager for Table 301.

But there are others who have chosen waiting tables over another career. Sobocinski saw a deluge of people during the economic downturn who turned to waiting tables after being laid off from corporate jobs.

"All of a sudden, you had a higher level of education, more family-oriented, less transient person looking for work," he says. After a year or two, they often found the pressures were less than that corporate job and they were making close to the same wage, with a better family life.

Edgar Flores chose waiting tables over a career in graphic design. That's one of the biggest misconceptions about the service industry, Flores says, that it's a dead end.

"In 2009, when I was in school, everybody and their cousin was a graphic designer," Flores says of his career path. "I was working so I wouldn't be in debt with school, but then at the end of the day, you tally up all the money you're spending . ..." The better financial decision, he says, was to stay in the service industry.

As a waiter, Flores has flourished. The 25-year-old father has found a passion for serving people. He has taken advantage of some of Table 301's education programs, too. He recently became a certified sommelier.

"People still ask, When are you gonna get a real job?" Flores says. "But I definitely see a future in this. My long-term goal is to be fully immersed, whether to be partnered with someone at a restaurant or to be a beverage director for a restaurant group.

"You kind of think of it as a stepping stone, but you find a passion for it."

TRENDING ON GREENVILLEONLINE:

Q&Amy: New neighborhood, wider street for Roper Mountain Road

Simpsonville police: Armed man robbed CVS

Read or Share this story: http://grnol.co/1DQTU7t