The Maricopa County Elections Office in Arizona has for the second time mailed out ballots that leave off a legitimate candidate’s name, and now he’s threatening to sue.

Ken Krieger, a Republican who is running against two other Republican candidates for the Peoria City Council’s Mesquite District seat, was left off early vote ballots in Peoria only to be left off again in the new batch of ballots recently mailed by the county.

“What we found today when the ballots were delivered to us … we found the print vendor reprinted the ballot with the same error,” said elections director Karen Osborne, a local Fox affiliate reported.

“I failed to put him back on the ballot,” she said. “I regret it very much.”

The mistake is expected to cost taxpayers thousands of dollars.

The elections office said in a statement: “The Primary Election ballot originally sent to voters in the City of Peoria, Mesquite district had an error. The ballot contained an incomplete listing of the candidates for the office of Council member. Once our office received notice of the error we immediately worked to advise voters and bring awareness to the situation and send voters a replacement ballot.

“Unfortunately, a mistake was made by the print vendor when reprinting and resending the replacement ballot, and the original incorrect ballot was mailed,” the statement continued. “We are working closely with the City of Peoria to resolve this as quickly as possible and determine what course of action to take next.”

But Mr. Krieger isn’t satisfied with that response. He wants the county “to start over and have a special election where Dr. Krieger’s name has a fair chance of being first on the ballot,” said his attorney Kory Langhofer, a local CBS affiliate reported.

County officials said there isn’t enough time for that, and Mr. Krieger is threatening to sue.

“One way or the other, the voters are going to be informed about what happens in government and what can happen with elections that is not according to the law and that is not proper,” he said.

Mr. Krieger said he’ll wait to see the outcome of the Aug. 26 election before he takes any action.