Donations at 24 sites being taken through Friday

Connor Taylor, right, jokes with his brother Griffin Taylor, eft, as their mother Kimberly Taylor looks on while they pick up donated coats for the Longmont Rotary Winter Warmth Coat Drive in November 2014, ( Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call )

Locations for Rotary Club of Longmont 25th Annual Coat Drive Bank of the West - 1610 Hover St. Bethlehem Lutheran Church - 1000 W. 15th St. Central Elementary 1020 4th Ave. Compass Bank - 1849 N. Main St. YMCA: 9th & Lashley St. First Bank - (3 sites) 1707 N. Main St.; 1250 So. Hover St. and 6080 Firestone Blvd, Firestone First Lutheran Church - 3rd & Terry St. First National Bank - 915 S. Hover St. First United Methodist Church - 11th & Emery St. Francis Street Cleaners - 1152 Francis St. Hover Community (2 sites) 1380 Charles and 1401 Elmhurst Dr. LifeBridge Christian Church Hwy. - Highway 66 & Gay St. Longmont Civic Center - 3rd & Kimbark St. Longmont High School - 1040 Sunset St. Longs Peak United Methodist Church - 1421 Elmhurst Dr. Meadow View Cleaners (2 sites) - Nelson & Airport and 2318 17th Ave. First National Denver Banks (2 sites) - 601 S. Main and 17th & Hover St. Rawlins National Bank - 2001 N. Main St. Seagate - 389 Disc Dr. St. Stephens Episcopal Church - 1303 S. Bross Lane Silver Creek High School - 4901 Nelson Rd. Skyline High School - 600 E. Mt. View Ave.

The 25th Annual Coat Drive, organized by the Longmont Rotary Club, is currently underway and will be accepting donations until Friday.

Advertisement

Gently used coats, along with blankets, hats, scarves, gloves, mittens and boots, will be accepted at 24 sites in the city, and taken to the sorting and distribution site at St. Stephen's Episcopal Church.

Debbie Setlock, chair of the coat drive committee for the Longmont Rotary Club, said, "Our club is pleased to be spearheading efforts for this annual event. We have over 40 volunteers in our club that assist with the collection, drop-off, sorting and distribution of the coats. This event is the largest single activity for our club and each year we are amazed by the outpouring of support from our community."

The first Rotary Club Coat Drive took place in 1991 with six drop-off sites and one volunteer who sorted, cleaned, weighed and delivered the coats to the OUR Center, according to news release.

Over the years, more collection sites were added and the sorting and distribution sites ranged from a moving and storage warehouse to locations throughout the school district and space within the former Times-Call building. St. Stephen's Episcopal Church is also donating space for the collection, sorting and distribution this year.

Coats and other winter clothing items can be dropped off at sites around the city, and those locations can be found at the Rotary Club of Longmont website.

"We've extended the locations, so we have 24 whereas we had 22 last year," said Nancy Rezac, Rotary Awareness for the Longmont Rotary Club and executive director at Visit Longmont. "So the number of opportunities for people to contribute in the community this year is greater."

Rezac said there are some specific sizes that they are in need of, though all donations are welcome.

"In the past, we've really found that there's a need for both XL and XXL women's and men's coats, and then children's coats are always a necessity," she said. "Also, blankets, gloves, mittens, hats and scarves."

Clients of the OUR Center are the beneficiaries of the Coat Drive donations.

"OUR Center client families throughout the greater Longmont area rely on this program each year to help keep them warm in cold weather months," said Edwina Salazar, OUR Center executive director. "We expect to see hundreds of families in need on distribution day, and it is our hope that with the community's help, we will have more than enough items to ensure that everyone has something to keep them warm this season."

Elaine Klotz, development director at OUR Center, said that approximately 600 clients benefit from the drive each year.

"They come here through our intake office," Klotz said. "On that day, they need to show up with the voucher and ID in order to get coats for the families.

" There's no guarantee regarding proper sizes — it's just what we get through donations, but we certainly stretch that as far as we can. Of course, or clothing bank distributes clothing throughout the year, so if they don't get specifically what they need, then we do encourage them to check back at the clothing bank any other time."

Brett Callwood: 303-684-5274, callwoodb@timescall.com