Family matriarch Daria Harasymiw holds a doll she made during a Ukrainian Christmas gathering Saturday at a home on the south side. The Orthodox Christmas is Jan. 7. Credit: Mark Hoffman

By of the

More than 60 years ago, after enduring a decade of war and confinement, first in a work camp and then in a camp for displaced people, Daria Harasymiw arrived in Milwaukee with virtually nothing.

"We came here no money, no spoon, and nothing in the spoon," she said.

Saturday, she had everything. She had borscht and holubtsi and other good things to eat from her native Ukraine. She had a candle burning and a plate of kutya — a sweet concoction of wheat berries, nuts, poppy seeds and honey — set out in remembrance of her ancestors.

Best of all, she had her three children, and their children, and their children — 31 people in all — surrounding her in her little home to celebrate a traditional Ukrainian Christmas Eve.

"I am happy," she said as family members filled their plates. "That's what keep me going. I am 90. Pretty soon going to be 91, but I'm still pushing. They told me if I don't want to go to nursing home, I have to push, and I'm pushing. And that's it."

It is indeed. Harasymiw does tai chi on Thursdays and aerobics on Mondays and Fridays. She rakes the leaves in her south side yard, and she helped prepare the food for Saturday's feast.

"For two days she's been cooking, straight," said Ola Zyszkiewicz, one of Harasymiw's daughters.

The cooking included making some of the varenyky — dumplings stuffed with potato and cheese. All told, the family cooked 700 of them, with Zyszkiewicz and her sister, Oksana Carlson, starting production back in November.

They've made as many as 1,000 in some years, but about 10 relatives couldn't make the celebration this time.

Christmas Eve for Eastern Orthodox Christians is Jan. 6 — they observe the Julian calendar while western Christians follow the Gregorian — but the Harasymiw clan gathered on the weekend before so as many family members as possible could be there.

They've been celebrating this way, every year, for more than six decades.

"When we came in 1953, it was just me, my husband, her and him," Harasymiw said, pointing to Carlson and her brother, Jim. "And now look."

Now the basement was jammed from one wall to the other with folding tables decorated for Christmas and packed with buzzing family members.

Harasymiw met her husband, Konstantyn, who died 18 years ago, in a displaced persons camp. They came to Milwaukee because a church sponsored them. They didn't know anyone here. Neither spoke English.

But Konstantyn was a tool-and-die maker, and in Milwaukee in the early '50s, that was more than enough to get going.

"He went andapply Friday and Monday he went to work," Harasymiw said.

She worked, too, first sewing, then as a nurse's aide. She retired after 44 years at a small hospital on Milwaukee's west side.

She learned English watching television, and then from her children.

"I say something wrong, they say, 'Mama, don't say like that,'" Harasymiw said.

But she definitely had the aptitude. She already spoke Ukrainian, Polish, Russian and German.

"But now I forget German," Harasymiw said.

She broke a hip a couple years ago, but bounced back by doing extensive rehab, three hours a day according to Jim — eight according to Harasymiw.

"That's determination," Jim said. "But then of course she survived the war and camps and a lot of other things."

Though it's not at all apparent to a visitor, a stroke two years ago slowed her somewhat. She doesn't drive now, which she misses.

But she still keeps her own house — Zyszkiewicz lives down the block — sharing it with her cat, Murka.

And she still is the hub of family Christmas Eve celebrations that begin every year with kutya and end with gifts, dessert and, in a little Wisconsin touch, Brandy Alexanders. Guests are welcome to the latter.

"You can have it tonight," Harasymiw said.