It's Take 2 for the Legislature, and Round 2 in the ongoing, eye-glazing (but important) fight over health care for poor Floridians. Lawmakers reconvene Monday for a special session after the regular session imploded, and the state budget hangs in the balance.

It's easy to tune out this fight, especially if you're not among the roughly 816,000 uninsured Floridians who make too much to qualify for Medicaid but too little to qualify for federal subsidies to buy health insurance.

Even if you can't follow all the confusing acronyms, even if you don't know federal LIP hospital funding from the Senate's proposed FHIX fix, make no mistake: This will impact you.

If the Republicans who control Tallahassee can't reach a budget deal, state government faces a shutdown July 1. And any deal that doesn't include Medicaid expansion means other budget priorities could take a whack.

"You can forget increased funding for education, or some of the tax cuts that Gov. Scott wants, like on cell phone bills," said state Sen. Maria Sachs, a Democrat who represents parts of Broward and Palm Beach counties.

The federal government and state Senate have shown signs of reason and compromise in recent weeks. The Obama administration has offered to extend the low-income pool (LIP) a few more years to reimburse Florida hospitals that treat the uninsured, but would prefer poor people get preventative health care through Medicaid expansion.

The Senate keeps tweaking an expansion plan that would offer a market-style approach using private insurers, co-pays and require recipients to work or attend school. The Senate's plan has been embraced by Florida business groups.

One more thing to like about the Senate plan: It lays the groundwork for a state-run insurance exchange. That could be huge if the U.S. Supreme Court strikes down Obamacare subsidies through the federal Healthcare.gov website; a ruling is expected next month.

But Gov. Scott and House hardliners seem unwilling to bend. They refuse to accept any insurance or Medicaid expansion for the poor that would take federal dollars.

Yet Scott and the House have no problem taking federal LIP money for hospitals. That's inconsistent and illogical. Under this setup, the uninsured still depend on emergency rooms for crisis care, and local hospital taxing districts with a mandate to treat the poor might have to raise property taxes.

"It's baffling," said U.S. Rep. Ted Deutch, D-Boca Raton, who held a news conference at taxpayer-assisted Broward Health North hospital in Deerfield Beach last week. Deutch said state leaders' "venomous hatred" of Obamacare means "they want to stick it to these families because they want to stick it to the president."

The only rationale against the Senate plan seems pure political spite. If the goal is to sabotage Obamacare no matter what, then who cares about people's health?

It's kind of ruthless. In Florida, ruthlessness is winning.

Common sense is stuck waiting in the ER.

mmayo@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4508.