Buy Photo Volunteer Jackie Shrago navigates the Healthcare.gov website to help Connie Austin sign up for insurance through the Affordable Care Act on Thursday in Nashville. (Photo: George Walker IV / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Those who want to ring in the New Year with health insurance bought on the federal exchange have until Monday to buy a plan.

The second open enrollment period under the Affordable Care Act runs through Feb. 15. But, to get insurance beginning on Jan. 1, the plans must be purchased on the exchange by 11:59 p.m. EST Monday. There were about 462,000 people who bought insurance over the exchange in the first week of the 2015 open enrollment period, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Nashville Mayor Karl Dean stopped by the Nashville Financial Empowerment Center on Foster Street on Thursday as four volunteers helped at least half a dozen people navigate the exchange process.

"We're as busy this year as the last enrollment period — it's that frantic," said Jackie Shrago, a volunteer with GetCoveredTenn.org. Many of those they were helping were first-time buyers.

There were 151,352 Tennesseans covered on the exchange. Of those, 55 percent were female and 32 percent were younger than 35. Eight out of 10 received financial assistance. GetCoveredTenn helped 30,000 people get covered last year, Shrago said.

"Last year was the first year, and this was all new to us. Even so, based on the figures we received, Nashville led the state in enrollments," Dean said. "We definitely want to do that again this year."

GetCoveredTenn volunteers are working throughout Davidson County, as well as the state, to make sure people are not flustered by the process. They will be available Friday, Saturday and Monday, as well as through the final Feb. 15 deadline.

"What we have found is that they didn't think it was affordable last year," Shrago said. "They didn't know where to get local help, and they were uncomfortable doing it on the phone."

Katelyn Carrick, 26, is a student studying social work at Middle Tennessee State University who signed up for a Blue Cross and Blue Shield plan last year because she didn't have access to insurance through her two part-time jobs. She said her plan — comparable to one she had before college — costs $19 a month after a $139 monthly tax credit.

She took a break from work on Thursday afternoon to come to the Financial Empowerment Center to re-enroll.

"I am educated, I work for a nonprofit, I rallied for (the ACA) in D.C. For the average person who doesn't know this stuff, the process would be challenging," said Carrick, who helped friends enroll last year.

Volunteers often explain premiums and deductibles to those have been uninsured in the past. And sometimes they go the extra mile to help people enroll.

"The need is so desperate," Robert Dorris, one of the volunteers.

Dorris offered to drive Sydney Jordan, 27, back to Magdalene Thistle Farms if she would stay to finish her enrollment process, which hit some speed bumps that clashed with her transportation plans. Jordan considered enrolling last year but opted to remain without. This year, she is determined to enroll.

There is no "typical" person who turns to GetCoveredTenn. Many are successful, but not all walk out with insurance in hand. Two Meharry School of Dentistry students came to the session only to learn they don't qualify because of income minimums.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1AngpPk