PR Web

Bellevue, Washington (PRWEB) June 18, 2014

Filing a pet insurance claim is now as simple as taking a picture on your phone. Using the Healthy Paws Pet Insurance® Mobile app, just snap a photo of your pet's veterinary invoice and submit your claim without the need for paper claim forms.

Healthy Paws Pet Insurance & Foundation is the first pet insurance company to introduce a mobile app and do away with claim forms. "The Healthy Paws Mobile app enhances the customer experience by offering a faster, easier way to submit and track claims," says Healthy Paws' co-founder Steve Siadek . "More than half of Healthy Paws customers have a smartphone, so connectivity on the go is clearly important."

The Healthy Paws Pet Insurance Mobile App complements the Healthy Paws Customer Center that allows customers to access policy information online, upload pet photos, file claims, view their claims status, and manage their billing.

For customers that download the app, simple directions on their phone will guide them through the mobile claim process. Customers take photos of their veterinary invoice and submit the photos through the Healthy Paws Mobile app. The claim is processed quickly and a reimbursement is sent.

"We are always seeking innovative ways to serve customers and removing the obstacle of paper claim forms makes getting reimbursed even easier," says Vice President Brian Jorgensen .

The Healthy Paws Mobile App is available for free download in the iTunes App Store . For more information about Healthy Paws Pet Insurance , including free quotes, please visit http://www.healthypawspetinsurance.com.

About Healthy Paws Pet Insurance & Foundation

Healthy Paws is one of the leading pet insurers in the U.S. and ranked No. 1 by customers on leading review websites. Aon Corporation , the world's largest global insurance broker is a majority owner of Healthy Paws. Ace Group , an A+ rated insurance carrier, underwrites its insurance policies. For more information about Healthy Paws Pet Insurance , visit http://www.healthypawspetinsurance.com.

Through their 501(c)(3) non-profit organization, The Healthy Paws Foundation , Healthy Paws provides cash grants to pet adoption organizations specifically for life-saving vaccines, spay/neuter surgeries and advanced medical treatments of homeless pets in their care. To learn more about their mission to save more homeless pets and how you can help, visit http://www.healthypawspetinsurance.com/how-we-help.

iPhone and iPad are trademarks of Apple. Other company and product names may be trademarks of their respective owners.

Read the full story at http://www.prweb.com/releases/2014/06/prweb11945141.htm