Dems say Eyman campaign pokes disclosure laws in the eye

Photo: Joshua Trujillo, Seattlepi.com Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Tim Eyman has made a living and kept himself in the public eye through 17 years of sponsoring ballot initiatives. He has lately launched a "Vote Them Out" campaign against legislators he does not like. A complaint filed Monday says Eyman has flaunted state public disclosure laws.

less Tim Eyman has made a living and kept himself in the public eye through 17 years of sponsoring ballot initiatives. He has lately launched a "Vote Them Out" campaign against legislators he does not like. A ... more Photo: Joshua Trujillo, Seattlepi.com Dems say Eyman campaign pokes disclosure laws in the eye 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Initiative promoter Tim Eyman is flouting state disclosure laws in going after state legislators he doesn't like, according to a complaint sent Monday to the state Attorney General and King County prosecutor.

Eyman and allies have launched "Vote Them Out" campaign, directing 21 video hit ads at Democratic legislators, a scattershot effort whose targets include lawmakers who are retiring or seeking higher elective office.

The letter was filled by a recently created, self-described citizen watchdog group called Washingtonians for Ethical Government and headed by two longtime Democratic attack dogs.

"Eyman's latest violations are part of a long history of Tim Eyman's disregard for our state's public disclosure laws," said the letter to AG Bob Ferguson and King County Prosecutor Dan Satterberg.

"Tim Eyman has repeatedly shown a complete and utter disregard for our public disclosure laws, and must be prosecuted to the full extend of the law," it added.

Eyman is already under investigation by the attorney general. The AG received last year a scathing, detailed Public Disclosure Commission report that Eyman took money from initiative campaigns for personal use and illegally used money donated to one initiative to put a different initiative onto the ballot.

Vote Them Out is a classic example of the "independent expenditure" ads in politics, but such expenditures against targeted candidates must be given footprints. For instance, the Eyman videos do not contain the required disclaimer that no candidates have authorized the ads.

The Eyman campaign contrasts with a series of 30-second cable TV ads being aired by an allegedly non-partisan but pro-Republican business political group called Enterprise Washington.

The Enterprise Washington ads effusively praise of state Sen. Steve Litzow, and urge viewers to dial up the Mercer Island Republican and thank him for his multiple good deeds.

Enterprise Washington is clearly listed on the ad. The group has also reported its major contributions to the Public Disclosure Commission: The Associated General Contractors have given $10,000, Washington Build another $10,000, and the Washington Farm Bureau $5,000.

Eyman has a record of violating public disclosure laws that goes back to a $50,000 penalty imposed in 2002. The current campaign to "unelect" Democratic legislators has followed a kind of catch-me-if-you-can pattern.

"Eyman has a long history of concealment, sloppy reporting and delinquent filing: He's a serial offender who continues to re-offend, election after election," said Andrew Villeneuve, head of the Northwest Progressive Institute. Villeneuve has spent a decade blowing the whistle on Eyman.

"Washingtonians for Ethical Government" has informed Ferguson and Satterberg that it is giving them 45 days notice to act on Eyman's flouting of the rules.

The group said that after 45 days it will send a second notice. "If, after 10 days following receipt of the second notice you still have not filed suit against Eyman, Washingtonians will bring an action in Superior Court," it added.

It's not likely Washingtonians for Ethical Government will be filing any complaints against Democrats.

As a "board member," one of two listed in the group's filing, Villeneuve is an active Democrat, was a delegate to the 2012 Democratic National Convention, just elected over the weekend as a 2016 national convention delegate pledged to Bernie Sanders.

The group's attorney is Knoll Lowney, who went after the Building Industry Association of Washington in the last decade over its boosting of Republican Dino Rossi, and challenged 2012 GOP gubernatorial candidate, AG Rob McKenna, for joining in a legal challenge to Obamacare.

Eyman's response will be reported as soon as it is received.