WASHINGTON, October 23, 2014 — On October 16, 2014, Secretary of Homeland Security Jeh Johnson issued a press release announcing Temporary Protected Status (TPS) for eligible nationals of Nicaragua and Honduras for an additional 18 months, effective Jan. 6, 2015, through July 5, 2016.

Earlier this year, Johnson announced the process for individuals to renew enrollment in the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program, to:

allow individuals previously enrolled in DACA, to renew their deferral for a period of two years. At the direction of the Secretary, effective immediately, USCIS will begin accepting renewal requests. USCIS will also continue to accept requests for DACA from individuals who have not previously sought to access the program. As of April 2014, more than 560,000 individuals have received DACA.

“Despite the acrimony and partisanship that now exists in Washington, almost all of us agree that a child who crossed our border illegally with a parent, or in search of a parent or a better life, was not making an adult choice to break our laws, and should be treated differently than adult law-breakers,” said Secretary Johnson.

“By the renewal of DACA, we act in accord with our values and the code of this great Nation. But, the larger task of comprehensive immigration reform still lies ahead.”

More than half-a-million children are waiting for amnesty in the form of permanent residency, with benefits including health care, education, housing and welfare.

This seems a fait accompli as the White House is preparing to order up to 34 million work permits and green cards in preparation for a post midterm-elections executive order. Breitbart.com first reported that a solicitation for the cards was issued on October 3, 2014:

Bob Dane of the Federation for American Immigration says this is proof that President Obama is getting his “ducks in a row” before he legalizes millions of illegal immigrants with the sweep of his pen.

There is plenty pointing to this action; a significant “executive action” was promised by Senior Obama adviser Dan Pfeiffer in July, teasing that the action would be so significant that it might possibly “trigger impeachment proceedings” against the president.

‘I think the president acting on immigration reform would certainly up the likelihood that they would contemplate impeachment at some point,’ he said at a media roundtable sponsored by the Christian Science Monitor. In June, the president tasked Jeh Johnson, the secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, and Attorney General Eric Holder to vet executive options in the absence of comprehensive immigration reform legislation. They are to present ideas to Obama by summer’s end, and Pfeiffer foreshadowed that the president’s unilateral actions will capture national attention and rile the GOP. ‘I suspect that will generate a particularly aggressive reaction by Republicans when we do that, perhaps one that exceeds all the executive actions we’ve taken to date,’ he said. (RealClearPolitics.com)

The impact on America would be immediate and severe when millions suddenly stood in line for jobs and entitlement benefits, as though they were natural citizens.

Data on the USCIS website show that the first six months of this year, the agency processed 862,000 work permits — Employment Authorization Documentation (EAD) cards. The solicitation is seeking a guaranteed minimum order for each period of 4 million cards, a total of 34 million cards. It would be simply impossible for the U.S. government to conduct backgrounds checks prior to providing these persons work permits and Permanent Residency Cards (green cards)

According to the US Citizenship Application, to become a U.S. Citizen you must be

18 years of age

A lawful permanent resident for five years

Have maintained continuous residency during the past five years

Have maintained physical presence during the past five years

Have good moral character

Have basic knowledge of English

Have basic knowledge of US Government and History

Be willing to take the Oath of Allegiance

The chance that any of the illegal immigrants not covered by the Dreamer Act could meet any of these requirements, except for the age requirement, is doubtful. The Obama Administration’s millions of children that surged the border would definitely not meet these requirement.

Therefore the executive order will be to provide illegal immigrants with “green cards,” or permanent resident status, which requires only that they are living in the United States and that they qualify for refugee status, hence the administration’s reference to the people surging across the border last spring as “refugees.”

Applying for a green card is also called “adjusting status” from illegal to legal resident.

The application does require a fee. Children under the age of 14 filing without at least one parent must pay a fee of $985. Adult/non-child immigrants must pay a fee of $985. Children under 14 applying with at least one parent must pay a fee of $635.

The Obama Administration loop hole, however, is that he may very well declare all illegal immigrants living in the U.S., regardless of their length of stay or age, as refugees, thus waiving those fees and putting the cost of processing these applications on American taxpayers.

The process also requires that the applicant be able to complete an Affidavit of Support, or a “contract” between the applicant’s “sponsor,” a person legally living in the U.S., and the United States people.

According to the U.S. Citizenship web site, “The sponsor must provide documentation showing their income and/r assets. In order to be eligible, the sponsor must be able to show adequate proof that they will be able to provide for their current dependents and the applying immigrant by maintaining the household at 124 percent of the Federal Poverty Guidelines.”

This is also highly doubtful for most of the illegal immigrants awaiting Obama’s amnesty. Not only will the process be expensive for Americans, the long term cost could break our already fragile and overtaxed economy.