Health and Human Services posted notice of Medicare/Medicaid termination

This past Friday, the Department of Health and Human Services, the federal agency that oversees the Medicare and Medicaid programs, published a public notice regarding its relationship with Hopkins County Memorial Hospital, a “Public Notice of Medicare/Medicaid Termination of Provider Agreement.”

The published notice said, “The cause for Medicare/Medicaid termination is Hopkins County Memorial Hospital's failure to meet the minimum health and safety standards required for Medicare program participation. The hospital does not comply with the Medicare/Medicaid Conditions of Participation.”

The notice caused alarm for many in the community who depend on Medicare or Medicaid for health care and prompted questions of where they would have to go to get medical care.

The notice does not mean Hopkins County Memorial Hospital is being closed by this agency or any other agency.

In response to the published notice, HCMH Chief Executive Officer Michael McAndrew issued a brief statement this morning in which he said he believes the matter can be resolved.

“As CEO of the hospital, I was very surprised at the notice of termination. Our hospital staff and physicians work hard to provide high quality patient-centered care,” he said. “We will work diligently to resolve the issues identified during the recent CMS survey.”

Hopkins County Memorial Hospital released a statement Friday afternoon regarding the notice.

“Thursday, the hospital received notice via email that it has been terminated from the Medicare/Medicaid program effective Nov. 6, 2015. We have a meeting scheduled with CMS officials on Tuesday, Oct. 27, at 1 p.m. We hope to get the matter resolved at that meeting. If we are unable to do so at that time, we will officially begin an appeal process. We intend to be transparent about this. We realize the gravity of the situation and have done and will do whatever it takes to address the findings. As we learn more, we will disseminate the information via all media outlets.”

The Board of Directors of Hopkins County Memorial Hospital District has scheduled a meeting for 6 p.m. Tuesday during which they will meet with representatives from Health and Human Services about the notice.

McAndrew and board members said if the hospital is unable to resolve the issues, an official appeal process would be started.

Such a notice does beg questions as to what life-threatening issues were uncovered in an inspection of the county's only medical facility.

Calls to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services [CMS] offices in Dallas Friday afternoon were answered by voice mail, so there was no one answering phones there to shed any light on the hospital's “failure to meet the minimum health and safety standards.”

After asking assistance from Congressman John Ratcliffe's office, the News-Telegram was able to talk to a media representative in that Dallas office and asked for specific information about the “minimum health and safety standards” cited in the notice to terminate Medicare and Medicaid agreements.

By press deadline today, a request to CMS for the inspection information leading to the termination notice had not been answered.