Team to compete in world championship

Fifth grader Julia Wilson works on a robot design during a robotics club meeting, Thursday at Alpine Elementary School. Visit timescall.com for a video. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

With the VEX IQ robotics world championship in Anaheim, Calif., just a few weeks away, four girls from Alpine Elementary School are designing, building and testing their new robot.

"We're making a new one ... that will help us in the competition," said Julia Wilson.

In that competition — just as at all VEX competitions this year — the team's robot has to collect balls from a 4-foot-wide, 8-feet long field and deposit them in different areas to score as many points as possible. Each team participates in three different challenges: the robot skills challenge, in which one team member controls the robot; the programming skills challenge, in which the team members have to program the robot to work on its own; and the teamwork challenge, in which two teams work together.

Third grader Ellie Wilson works on robot design with Angela Long, right, at Alpine Elementary School. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

The robot that got the girls to the world championship used a claw at the end of an arm to pick up individual balls. The new one will have a platform with two moving bands to gather and collect more balls, so they can earn more points, said Julia, 11.

"We're kind of combining some of the different designs we saw to make them better," she explained.

Julia and the other members of the Battery Charged Blue team — Kendra Buzzetta, Dara Ouellette and Ellie Wilson, Julia's younger sister — are some of the 43 Alpine students making up 11 teams in the school's robotics club. About one-third of the club members are girls, said Axel Reitzig, the school's robotics teacher and club sponsor.

Advertisement

Four of the school's teams competed in February's state competition in Pueblo, where Battery Charged Blue won an excellence award and qualified for the world championship, Reitzig said.

Kendra joined the robotics club because she was curious.

"I wanted to see what kind of robots they were making and what we could do to improve them," Kendra, 11, said.

Ellie got involved because Julia did, she said.

Fifth graders Kendra Buzzetta, left, and Julia Wilson work on a robot design. (Matthew Jonas / Longmont Times-Call)

"I realized I can learn about something I think is cool, which is how robots work," said Ellie, 9, the team's only third-grader. The other girls are in fifth grade.

Even though they'd worked together previously, the girls had to learn more about teamwork as they learned about robotics.

"We didn't agree on things a lot ... and we'd be mad at each other," Kendra said. They've learned to take a break and talk out their differences, she said.

They've also divided up the work so that four people aren't trying to do the same thing.

"We found it easier to work in two teams," Julia said.

Reitzig has seen the girls gain self-confidence since they started meeting in January. Instead of getting upset when something doesn't work, they take it apart and try again, he said.

"It means they're self-sufficient," he said.

Although she's not a team member, Silver Creek High School freshman Angela Long is mentoring the Alpine girls. She's been involved in robotics for four years and competed at the world championships as an Altona Middle School student.

She shares the younger girls' excitement for robotics.

"It's just a lot of fun and it's something you can use in real life," the 15-year-old said. She plans to make a career in robotics, likely as a programmer.

"With robotics, you have to design what you want the robot to do, and I just really like that," Angela said.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Victoria Camron at 303-684-5226 or vcamron@times-call.com