Memorial honors recipients from all branches, conflicts since WWII

U.S. Army Veteran and Purple Heart recipient Daniel Pineda poses for a portrait Tuesday at his home in Longmont. Pineda was recently awarded the The Military Order of the Purple Heart 2013 Patriot of the Year Award for helping bring a Purple Heart memorial to Longmont. (Matthew Jonas/Times-Call) ( Matthew Jonas )

Daniel Pineda is seen in this undated photo taken during his service for the U.S. Army. (Matthew Jonas/Times-Call) ( Matthew Jonas )

If you go What: Dedication of Purple Heart memorial When: Monday, 9:30 a.m. Where: east side of Roosevelt Park, Terry Avenue and Longs Peak Avenue Contact: Phil Williams at 303-588-0073 What: Veterans Day parade When: Monday, 11:11 a.m. Route: south on Coffman Street starting at Longs Peak Avenue, west on Fourth Avenue, north on Terry Street; Viewing stand will be at the southwest corner of Fifth Avenue and Coffman Street. Contact: parade chairman Bill Bohn, 303-776-5783

LONGMONT -- Decorated Vietnam veteran Dan Pineda has another award to add to his collection this month after being named the Patriot of the Year by the local Military Order of the Purple Heart.

Pineda's jacket is cluttered with military medals and insignia, including a Purple Heart and five Army Commendation Medals. And his basement wall is covered in plaques and certificates received during and after his military service.

"It may look like a bunch of scrambled eggs to someone else but it shows what I've accomplished during my time," said Pineda, a Longmont resident and Mead native.

Advertisement

Pineda, 67, was recognized by the Christopher Anderson Chapter 434 of the Military Order of the Purple Heart for his contributions to area veterans through the group and help bringing the first Purple Heart memorial to Longmont.

The memorial, which is made of blood-red, granite and features an image of George Washington and a Purple Heart, will be dedicated Monday, Veterans Day, at 9:30 a.m. at Roosevelt Park.

Longmont's memorial will be the third in the state to honor Purple Heart recipients, following Greeley and Englewood, said Ray Athey, commander of the local chapter, which is based in Longmont.

Pineda is the first to receive the award from the local chapter in four years, Athey said, for his contributions, which included helping raise $7,000 for the memorial.

"Dan proved that his service to our group was above and beyond," said Athey, who is also a Vietnam veteran.

Pineda's wife, Lucy, said her husband doesn't have much energy these days, but he spends what he does have helping the group support area veterans.

Daniel Pineda's basement wall is seen lined with many awards and certificates recognizing his service Tuesday at his home in Longmont. Pineda is an Army veteran who served two tours in Vietnam. He now suffers from a blood disorder caused by years of exposure to Agent Orange, a chemical used during the Vietnam War. (Matthew Jonas/Times-Call) ( Matthew Jonas )

In 2001, Pineda was diagnosed with the blood disorder polycythemia vera, which he said is a result of years of exposure to Agent Orange, a toxic herbicide used by the United States during the Vietnam War.

After surviving two tours to Vietnam and injuries, including an explosion that shot shards of metal into his back and neck and a helicopter crash that left him with leg injuries, it is the chemical impact that has forced Pineda into hospice care 28 years after retirement.

"I may be in bad shape on the outside but we're all still in bad shape on the inside," Pineda said, referring to Vietnam veterans.

As his body continues to deteriorate, Pineda said it eases his mind to know that Longmont will have a lasting reminder of the men and women who gave so much for their country.

The memorial will not feature any names but will represent Purple Heart recipients from all branches of the military and all conflicts from World War II to present.

"It's a reminder for anybody that goes by that there are people risking their lives," Pineda said. "It's not for me, but for those brave soldiers who aren't being recognized for what they gave up for their country, for you."

Whitney Bryen can be reached at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com.