David Cobb, the national spokesperson for Move To Amend, was in Syracuse Monday to gather support for a constitutional amendment that would curb the influence of corporations and money in politics.

Late in the day Monday, Cobb met with the editorial board of Syracuse Media Group before speaking at Plymouth Congregational Church in downtown Syracuse. He's in Binghamton today, Ithaca on Wednesday and Buffalo on Sunday.

Cobb, a native of Texas, ran for president on the Green Party line in 2004. The Move To Amend movement is not allied with any political party, he said, because the issue of returning government to "we the people'' is not a partisan one.

Section 1 of the proposed 28th Amendment would overturn U.S. Supreme Court decisions over the past three decades that, taken together, give corporations some of the same rights as individuals. In addition to corporations, the term "artificial entities'' also would apply to unions and nonprofits. Cobb expects an upcoming decision in Sebelius v. Hobby Lobby, over the contraception mandate in the Affordable Care Act, to expand corporate rights into the realm of religion.

Section 2 of the proposed amendment would permit regulation of campaign contributions and expenditures, require disclosure of contributors' identities and declare that courts may not construe ''the spending of money to influence elections to be speech under the First Amendment.''

Congress attempted to regulate campaign contributions by corporations and unions with legislation known by the names of its Senate sponsors, McCain-Feingold. In Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission, the Supreme Court declared those rules an unconstitutional abridgement of free speech.

Cobb considers the court's rulings in Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission and McCutcheon v. FEC to be examples of judicial overreach.

"Money buys an amplifier for speech,'' Cobb said. "Money is property. Money isn't speech.''

The result is a political system dominated by corporations and rich people -- a plutocracy. "That's an invitation not just to apathy, but to cynicism,'' he said.

Move To Amend started in 2010 with a dozen people. Today, it boasts more than 348,000 supporters, 120 local affiliates, resolutions of support in 600 communities and in 16 states. Cobb's Upstate barnstorming tour to build awareness and grass-roots support is just the start of a very long game -- one he figures to be a decade or two long.

That's because amending the Constitution is really hard. It takes a two-thirds vote of both houses of Congress and ratification by three-fourths of the states.

Cobb likened the Move To Amend effort to other movements that mobilized in response to decisions by the Supreme Court that denied citizenship to African-Americans (Dred Scott v. Sandford), declared separate but equal accommodations to be permissible under the Constitution (Plessy v. Ferguson) and declared that women were not persons (Minor v. Happersett).

Over time, the abolitionist, civil rights and women's suffrage movements overcame the societal forces arrayed against them.

"They built movements, broad and deep,'' Cobb said. "They did not ask the existing political class what they were willing to do. They were so loud, the political class moved to them.''

Cobb believes a similar movement is necessary to end "corporate personhood'' and to restore the integrity of the electoral process.