Getty Images Magomed Abdusalamov punches Mike Perez during their Heavyweight fight at The Theater at Madison Square Garden on Nov. 2

By Tim Smith

Heavyweight boxer Magomed Abdusalamov was brought out of his medically-induced coma and removed from a respirator by doctors at St. Luke’s-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan on Friday morning, according to Nathan Lewkowicz of Sampson Boxing, Abdusalamov’s promoter.

Mr. Abdusalamov, 32 years old, opened his right eye and moved his right foot when he woke and is breathing on his own, Mr. Lewkowicz said, adding, “That’s very good progress considering three weeks ago they thought he was going to die within 48 hours.”

Abdusalamov suffered a brain injury during a 10-round match against Mike Perez at The Theater at Madison Square Garden on Nov. 2.

After the match, he went to the hospital to get treatment for a broken nose and an injured hand. He also complained of a headache and started to vomit and doctors discovered that he had a blood clot on his brain. He had surgery to remove the clot and doctors put him in a medically-induced coma to keep down the swelling. He suffered a stroke shortly after.

The incident raised questions about whether the match should have been stopped. As Gordon Marino wrote in The Wall Street Journal on Nov. 8:

Laz Benitez, a spokesman for the New York State Athletic Commission, emailed, “As we do in all such cases, NYSAC is reviewing the circumstances surrounding Mr. Abdusalamov’s injuries.” The referee, who in this case was Benjy Esteves, will seldom halt a contest when a fighter is still firing punches. Despite his condition, Abdusalamov was never knocked down and he continued his relentless attack to the end. Indeed, even in the final frame he was able to throw 32 punches. But some boxing experts say that this event shows that dangerous bouts should not be allowed to go on just because a fighter on the losing end is still active and punching.

Mr. Lewkowicz said Mr. Abdusalamov’s wife, brother and cousin were at his bedside when he woke, and were overjoyed at his responsiveness. Mr. Lewkowicz said he remains in critical but stable condition in the intensive care unit, and doctors haven’t determined yet the long-term effects from the injuries.

“He’s not up and walking around,’’ Mr. Lewkowicz said. “They’re not going to let him loose from the hospital just because he’s out of the coma. He’s got a long way to go.’’

Abdusalamov is from Makhachkala, Russia, but moved to Florida when he turned pro in 2008. He went toe-to-toe with Mr. Perez for 10 grueling rounds on Nov. 2.

The New York State Inspector General’s office said they stepped in for the New York State Athletic Association and launched an investigation into the fight. William Reynolds, a spokesman for the Inspector General’s office, said the investigation is still in the preliminary stages.