I may be savaging my party, but I do it with love and some survival tips from my business career.

President Reagan and Democratic House Speaker Tip O'Neill in the Oval Office, Washington, D.C., Nov. 15, 1985. (Photo: Terry Arthur, Courtesy Ronald Reagan Library)

I have been a Republican all my voting life. Okay, I didn't vote for Barry Goldwater, but neither did most Americans. Of course, I have voted for Democratic senators, congressmen and governors whom I thought were clearly superior to my party's offerings, but if I could count my total votes, the vast majority would be for GOP candidates.

Most polls predict the sixth presidential popular vote loss in the last seven contests for the Grand Old Party. I have spent my business career helping organizations improve performance, and I have some ideas about how my party can turn around its miserable national election record. The GOP should take them seriously. As a retired officer of Sears, I know what happens to organizations that can't change. They become irrelevant.

It’s important to discuss how the party got to this low point. According to Gallup, only 26% of Americans identified as Republicans in 2015, compared with 29% as Democrats and a near-record 42% who said they were independents. For two years in a row, meanwhile, Americans have told Gallup that some aspect of “government” — President Obama, Congress or political conflict — is the country’s most important problem.

One reason people like me are disillusioned is related to the Republicans’ mystifying role as the party of "no." The GOP has made an inordinate effort to oppose all things Democrats are for without clearly making the case for alternatives. The Republicans in Congress seem to be intent on butting their collective heads against a brick wall by voting again and again to defund Obamacare and Planned Parenthood. They have perpetuated an unending discussion about Benghazi which continues even after House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy told us it was all politics. For Republicans it always seems to be about politics, the latest example being their refusal to even consider any Supreme Court nominee.

An even more significant problem is that the GOP has not been attentive to the needs of many Americans who struggle with stagnating wages and the loss of good jobs. Americans have voted for Republicans, but the party doesn't deliver for them.

Republicans like to quote Ronald Reagan, but they don't apply his personal style of respect and chivalry. They have made compromise that could help solve some important problems seem like a dirty word. The "all or nothing" scorched earth strategy isn't working and as the polling shows, voters know it.

Reagan fought for everyday voters with innovative new policies such as reducing top marginal income tax rates – from 70% in 1980 to 28% in 1987 – with the goal of spurring economic growth. This tactic is still cherished by many Republicans although it isn't effective given the maximum 39.6% marginal rate in place today.

Republicans show a complete lack of creativity as they clumsily try to apply Reagan's ideas to a modern America in a new era of world competition. It seems to escape them that 35 years have passed since the Gipper was elected. If he were here, he would politely scold them, but he is not here.

POLICING THE USA: A look at race, justice, media

The GOP has been commandeered in a hostile takeover by Donald J. Trump. His personality and character are as far from Ronald Reagan as anyone could imagine. His unfavorable ratings give him little chance of moving into 1600 Pennsylvania Ave.



So now that you probably think I have savaged my party, let me say that I do so with love. The three steps to engineer a turnaround in any organization are: Crank the numbers to find out what's not working, present the case and plan for a dramatic new direction for the organization, and bring in individuals who can execute the new strategy. The second of these steps is the most difficult because change is hard and many avoid it with denial or rationalization. That's where the party is right now. So here are my suggestions for a turnaround.



First, make the best of a bad situation in 2016. Don't wrestle the nomination from Trump with some convention floor fight that proves that the GOP oligarchy continues and that voters’ wishes are irrelevant.



Second, begin to change the primary voting rules in every state by allowing independents to vote in Republican primaries. And get rid of caucuses. Republicans have left the party, so invite them back by allowing them to help select candidates whom they can support.



This simple strategy will allow the GOP to get a little older under an enlightened new leadership model. I'll bet that's what Ronald Reagan would advise if we could ask him.

James Rohrer, a moderate Republican, is a Colorado-based business consultant who writes for the Canyon Courier in Evergreen.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the Opinion front page and follow us on Twitter @USATOpinion.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1N6sEuR