But Georgia and other states that did not expand Me­di­caid continue to have higher uninsured rates than those that did. Georgia, in fact, declined in the number of people who had publicly provided coverage, according to the National Health Interview Survey.

The state did see one of the biggest increases in people gaining private insurance in the past year – a trend noticed by clinics in Augusta that serve low-income and uninsured residents.

Nationally, the rate of people who reported they were uninsured fell from 11.5 percent in 2014 to 9.1 percent in 2015, a decline of 7.4 million people, according to the survey. For those ages 18 to 64, the rate was 12.8 percent, down from 22.3 percent in 2010, according to the survey.

The rates for adults are significantly different for states that expanded Medi­caid compared with those, including Georgia and South Caro­lina, that did not: The uninsured rate for adults in expansion states went from 18.4 percent in 2013 to 9.8 percent last year, while non-expansion states declined from 22.7 percent to 17.5 percent over the same period.

Georgia saw a similar decline for adults, dropping from an uninsured rate of 27.2 percent in 2013 to 15.9 percent last year, a rate still significantly above the national average. Part of that could be explained in a sudden drop in public coverage among adults of 16.5 percent in 2014 to 13.9 percent last year, the fourth-largest among states.

The state benefited, however, from a big jump in private insurance coverage, from 64.3 percent to 71.5 percent, the third-largest among states last year. Part of that undoubtedly is people gaining private insurance through the Affordable Care Act, Augusta clinic directors said.

Both Medical Associates Plus@Belle Terrace and Christ Community Health Services, the two federally qualified health centers in Augusta, have seen decreases in the uninsured and increases in patients with private insurance.

“We are also seeing that trend, which is a good thing for us because although we are premised to see the uninsured we still have to keep our lights on, so we want as many of the insured as possible as well,” said J.R. Rich­ards, the CEO of Medical Asso­ciates Plus. “We’ll have fewer that can’t pay and those with the private insurance, that insurance can then offset some of the costs we have to eat every year for providing uncompensated care.”

That comes to about $1.5 million each year, he said.

Having more patients with insurance should improve patient results, said Jeff Drake, the executive director of Christ Community.

“It is an encouraging sign that more people have payer sources, and hopefully that means that more people will actually use the insurance they are getting and will stay healthier and have more consistent care,” he said.

The concern would be whether that will continue if the costs of premiums rise, Drake said.

“I’m hearing rumblings that premiums are going to go up and that some insurers are not going to do as much Affordable Care Act work as they have in the past,” he said. “Is the system sustainable?”