When Bill de Blasio set off for Washington last week to unveil a Progressive Agenda to rewire the rules of economic engagement and enable broadly shared prosperity, he proudly invoked the legacies of two great New Yorkers as paving the way.

Former Gov. and President Franklin Delano Roosevelt and Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia, de Blasio said, showed via the New Deal 80 years ago how government can remake the economic order for the popular good.

De Blasio surely owns his claim on their vast progressive legacy, which encompasses public housing, mass transit and much more — great works that put New Yorkers back to work during the Great Depression and have enriched their lives ever since.

In rapid succession, he has delivered on universal pre-K, paid sick leave, municipal ID and a living wage for employees on government-funded projects. He continues to fight for a higher minimum wage for all New Yorkers and an affordable housing empire.

Yet all this ambition exposes a powerful irony: Even as de Blasio carries past innovators on his shoulders as heroes, and forges shiny new tools to combat economic inequality, New York’s New Deal brick, mortar and steel legacies, and those of more than a century of progressive endeavors, stagger for want of investment.

More than 400,000 public housing residents live with the consequences of $18 billion in unfunded maintenance work, heading to court by the hundreds in a desperate bid to force repairs to unsafe, unlivable conditions by judges’ order.

Public hospitals, our front line against epidemics and catastrophic injury, are burning through the last of their cash, and facing a billion-dollar annual budget hole.

Subways swell and stall for want of modern signals.

Libraries that can’t afford to keep a full-service schedule close their doors on patrons seeking a lifeline to jobs, literacy and the glories of the internet, in woefully outdated buildings.

None of these crises is new, or of this mayor’s making. But as de Blasio turns to the New Deal as his lodestone, the decay of the inherited legacy jumps into sharp relief.

To sustain these vital assets for a new generation, this mayor must muster the same courage and creativity that once drove his predecessors.

Paradoxically, that likely demands a break from the New Deal mold, which relied on generous infusions of funds redistributed via Washington.

***

No mayor of New York, in any era, can count on the federal government as a surefire partner in lifting up the needy. Even LaGuardia, as he sought in the 1930s to knock down slums and replace them with gleaming, modern public housing funded by New Deal loans, found his ambitions constrained by members of Congress who had no love for New York. (He also confronted no shortage of critics at home.)

Sound familiar?

De Blasio took office following years of federal budget cuts to urban aid — and just in time for Republicans shamelessly hostile to spending, especially on cities, to claim control of both houses of Congress.

Given that difficult reality, it’s de Blasio’s burden not only to shout at the tide and try to turn it, but also to steer the ship.

What he has done instead with the launch of his national progressive campaign is to look to stir a groundswell of support at the polls for the Democratic Party from its slumbering left — those millions who typically stay home on election day.

I don’t fault him for trying. But this is the sketch for a 2016 revolution — and a political long shot by any measure.

Meantime, in the here and now, like sedimentary deposits, more than a century of ambitious social construction has accumulated, and now demands sustenance.

The public hospital system treats 1.4 million New Yorkers a year, turning away no one.

Public libraries lead the way to technology training, high school equivalency diplomas, and, for immigrants, the English language.

The subways, at first privately built, reached full flower with a public expansion and integration that today allows anyone, for $2.75, to travel the length and width of the city to work, school and play.

All these and more great institutions today make a decent life for lower-income people in New York City possible.

Or did. Public housing has come in for a particularly tough retreat from once-robust levels of federal funding.

The New York City Housing Authority calculates that it has lost a cumulative $1 billion in federal capital funds since 2001, plus another $1.2 billion for operating its 178,000 apartments. Largely as a result, NYCHA must fill a roughly $100 million cash shortfall each year.

Thus have the solution to slums become slums themselves. From Far Rockaway to Gravesend to East Tremont, leaking roofs and plumbing inundate apartments, breeding mold, shredding walls, aggravating asthma and sowing despair.

Nor can the poor count on the subway fare, just recently hiked, to stay within reach of their budgets. By the end of this month, there’s a serious chance this Republican-controlled Congress will let a crucial transportation trust fund simply dry up — stranding the MTA even as it stares down a $14 billion gap in funding for crucial maintenance, and looks ahead to future fare hikes.

Think about that next time you try to make out the voice on the loudspeaker explaining why your train isn’t coming.

And as city Controller Scott Stringer recently noted, the city’s public hospitals face the imminent loss of more than $800 million as part of Obamacare, as federal funds shift from paying hospitals to care for the uninsured into helping pay for insurance coverage.

The LaGuardia legacy (UNKNOWN)

***

On each of these fronts, de Blasio has cued up the decent beginnings of a response.

He recently pulled together $300 million to replace leaky NYCHA roofs. The city has ceased charging NYCHA for police protection and property taxes.

NYCHA Chairwoman Shola Olatoye also creatively engineered a private financing deal that will pay to repair hundreds of apartments while generating some cash for the hungry Housing Authority budget. This month, she’ll unveil a plan for NYCHA’s future that promises still more strides.

De Blasio’s Health and Hospitals Corporation chief, Dr. Ram Raju, has meanwhile pushed plans to step up enrollment into HHC-sponsored health insurance, called MetroPlus, and dramatically expand the number of insured patients who choose HHC.

And de Blasio threw a relatively healthy $657 million for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority into his new budget.

All good — and far from enough. Now comes the really, really hard part: Reviving and rescuing the aging, creaking progressive backbone of New York City.

It will take money. It will take management chops. It will take political guts to attack entrenched interests.

Most of all, it will take imagination.

***

Grand public projects cost massive amounts of money to maintain. But they also harbor tremendous value that — with the right vision and political fortitude — can be tapped as resources in their own right.

As it happens, de Blasio entered office with at least two such schemes at his disposal.

One was Mayor Michael Bloomberg’s quest to rent patches of NYCHA land for real estate development, with the goal of paying for desperately needed repairs on the public housing towers next door. A trial run brought in bids worth $37 million a year to NYCHA.

The other, unveiled in de Blasio’s third month on the job, is the Move NY plan devised by former city traffic commissioner Sam Schwartz, which would reconfigure tolls on city bridges and tunnels, in the process generating billions in new revenue — enough to fund MTA repairs.

Both plans reeked of political poison, not least because of their links to Bloomberg.

Move NY shared certain elements with Bloomberg’s failed 2007 bid for congestion pricing: charging vehicles to enter prime Manhattan, including through tolls on the now-free East River bridges.

Meanwhile, Bloomberg’s housing infill plan met with a chorus of boos from the very residents it aimed to benefit.

It was thus no shocker to see de Blasio suspend NYCHA site development, replacing it with a far more modest scheme to tuck new affordable housing into the corner of three developments unlikely to generate much money for the authority.

Meanwhile, the mayor has been near silent on Move NY, calling it only “a productive contribution to the discussion.”

De Blasio has every reason to be politically nervous in the face of both propositions — and every need to lead the city to embrace them, as exemplifying the creativity and courage necessary to lift up the poor when no one else will.

His heightened courage shouldn’t stop with NYCHA and the MTA.

Public hospitals, already struggling with reduced staff on the wards, will need to find their way in a furiously competitive health-care marketplace, where patients have an ever-wider array of choices of providers and are less likely than in the past to stay long-term in a hospital bed.

As for libraries: The mayor who’s devoting $70 million to expand broadband access ought to look to them as partners, not competition, in the race to universal access.

And on and on.

I suspect that deep down de Blasio understands all this. Four months into his term, asked to speak at Columbia on his leadership vision, the mayor described it this way:

“In the face of such intense challenges as we face today . . . we could say we are therefore reduced to less because we don’t have the partnership and support we deserve.

“Or alternately we could say we have to go create a new paradigm. We have to do it on the ground city by city. We have to create something that then bubbles up and changes the debate around us and above us and changes the rules of the game. I think that is the prescription, and in fact the only path we have.”

He then invoked LaGuardia and FDR, “titans of this state’s history.”

If de Blasio truly wants to match their achievements, he’ll follow them “on an uncharted path, surrounded by critics and cynics, innovating things that had not previously existed.”

akatz@nydailynews.com