Chris Lu’s unique perspectives on policy come from a lengthy experience in public service. His dedication to public administration and policy strategy can be traced to his 1991 clerkship with Judge Robert Cowen in the US Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit. From there, he moved to a series of prestigious positions in government and politics: he was part of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee in the House of Representatives, a communications advisor to then-Senator John Kerry, a crucial aide to then-Senator Obama in 2005, and executive director of the Obama-Biden Transition Project where he put together Obama’s federal government plan. He went on to become Assistant to the President and President Obama’s Cabinet Secretary. GPPReview’s Executive Interview Editor, Cristina Lopez G., talked to Chris Lu about a wide array of topics, ranging from policy lessons to affirmative action.

GPPR: What can you tell a policy student about your work on the Obama-Biden transition team? What were your most important experiences there?

Chris Lu: The 2008 transition was a lesson in the importance of doing as much preparation as possible. Putting together a federal government in 77 days, which is how long we had between Election Day and Inauguration Day, is impossible. So that work really needed to start earlier, about 6 months before Election Day. It was one of the most interesting experiences of my career because it involved managing policy, personnel, and logistics, all at the same time.

In terms of lessons I learned: number one, being prepared. Number two, building a strong team of people who have a broad base, not only of policy expertise, but also of knowledge about how Washington works. Number three, and I think this is a hallmark of the Obama administration, checking your ego at the door. The mission of the transition planning team was so important that it couldn’t be about our individual policy preferences or what jobs each of us wanted in the Administration. The mission was about how to build the best possible organization to take over on Inauguration Day. I’m proud of the work we did in 2008, and independent observers have said that our transition was one of the most successful in history.

GPPR: Since 2010, the Administration’s agenda has been substantially marred by partisan conflict in the House. What lessons in bipartisanship, if any, can be learned in the aftermath of the shutdown?

Chris Lu: Because of the shutdown, the American people developed a greater appreciation for the crucial role that the federal government plays in their lives. Often times, people take for granted the services and protections that the government provides. They don’t realize government’s importance until it shuts down.

The shutdown was an unfortunate moment in our nation’s political history, and I think everyone learned something from it. We can have policy disagreements, and we can fight vigorously for our positions, but in the end, we have to find ways to compromise. When we reach this point again in the middle of January 2014, I’m hopeful that our leaders can make some sensible policy decisions that put the country on a better, long-term fiscal path.

GPPR: Republican opposition to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act fueled the Shutdown. What do you think the next major policy battle will be and why?

Chris Lu: Fiscal issues will continue to be important next year. We need to come up with a sensible plan for funding the federal government that ensures we are taking care of important policy priorities to move the country forward, while at the same time, putting our fiscal house in order. That means looking long term at how much money the federal government is bringing in and how much it is spending in terms of entitlements.

Next year, I am optimistic that there will be agreement on a comprehensive immigration bill. This is something that has broad public support. A comprehensive bill passed the Senate on a bipartisan basis, so I’m hopeful there can be some movement on this bill in the House of Representatives.

This interview has been edited and condensed from its original version.