Extremist Pastor Robert Jeffress announced to O’Reilly Factor viewers tonight that President Obama is somehow paving the way for the antichrist via ObamaCare, same sex marriage and the contraception mandate. Not surprisingly, “no spin” Bill O’Reilly offered no challenge to Jeffress’ outrageous claims.

Media Matters has a nice profile of Jeffress’ extremism – and the media’s knee-jerk acceptance of him as a legitimate commentator. Our own Priscilla has written about his many friendly appearances on Fox.

Now, in his latest right-wing attack disguised as religion, Jeffress told O’Reilly:

There’s going to be a future world dictator, before Christ returns, who’s going to usurp people’s personal …rights. …He’s going to wage war against God’s people, he’s gonna change God’s laws and he’s going to do it without any opposition. And my question was, how’s he going to be able to pull that off? And my thesis is, people will have been conditioned long before the Antichrist comes to accept governmental overreach. And that’s what you’re seeing with President Obama right now.

Jeffress predicted this cataclysm (or is it the apocalypse?) will be worse than the Nazis or Stalinism. But, he said, “I want to be clear… I’m not saying President Obama is the Antichrist. In fact, I’m sure he’s not. Because the Antichrist is going to have higher poll numbers, according to the Bible, at least at the beginning. But I believe he is conditioning people to accept governmental overreach which they will finally give in to when this final dictator comes, whether that’s ten years from now or a thousand years from now."

Jeffress assured viewers that Obama “doesn’t consciously know” the evil he’s bringing down on the country. But it’s not just via ObamaCare, it’s also the contraception mandate and same-sex marriage.

“The good news is, though, Christ is coming back,” Jeffress assured us. “The short-term forecast for the world is turbulent, the long-term forecast is good.”

Evidently, he either assumed everyone watching was Christian. Or maybe he just didn’t care whether other people’s views – religious or otherwise - might see things differently.