Public housing evictions are on the rise and families face homelessness with three strikes policy

Updated

Sorry, this video has expired Video: Concern over public housing eviction policy (ABC News)

No-one likes bad neighbours and WA's hardline three-strikes policy to evict troublesome public housing tenants has proven wildly popular with residents keen to preserve tranquillity in their streets.

Queensland has now embraced its own version of the policy and there are calls in South Australia for that state to do the same.

But in Western Australia there are growing concerns among housing advocates and welfare groups that the policy is having a devastating impact on Indigenous families, forcing perhaps thousands of children into homelessness.

This is the story of three Indigenous women living with the threat and consequences of eviction.

Frances Narrier, 50, was still in her Midland home when the bailiff arrived with a blunt message.

"Excuse me Frances, I must ask you to go into your house now. Get anything that is urgent. Any medication."

"I don't need to listen to you. Don't tell me nothing cause I might slam the door in your face too. Stay the heck away from me." Frances Narrier

But Ms Narrier was in no mood to be lectured.

"I don't need to listen to you. Don't tell me nothing cause I might slam the door in your face too. Stay the heck away from me," she said, slamming the door.

Long before the bailiff turned up at her home, Frances Narrier already knew she was running a losing race against time.

"I've got five minutes, they've only given me five minutes to get out of here," she told a friend on the phone.

"They're going to change the locks. And they're here. They're ready to change the locks."

Waiting to see if death or eviction came first

The grandmother wasn't sure which would come first; the eviction from her public housing home in the Perth suburb of Midland or death from the cancer that was spreading through her frail and pain-wracked body.

"I had my left side breast removed. And I went back for my test on Monday and I found out that I've got cancer, like in my knee, in my joints. And also on the side of my brain. And like on my ribs, on my bottom ribs. So its actually spreading there, they can't do nothing for me," she told the ABC.

She'd hoped the tragic reality of one, would delay the other. That her terminal illness would somehow bring a pause to the process of eviction being pursued by WA's Department of Housing hardline three-strikes eviction policy.

"There were a total of 30 complaints..fighting, physical assaults, threatening behaviour, overcrowding, drinking, vandalism, property damage and offensive language." Steve Altham

The department's Manager of Client Services, Steve Altham, explains why the department pushed ahead.

"There were a total of 30 complaints from six different complainants," he said.

"It related to fighting, physical assaults, threatening behaviour.

"Overcrowding, drinking, vandalism, property damage and offensive language. Sometimes very late at night and early into the morning."

Frances Narrier says it wasn't her.

She says other people coming to the house were causing the problems. Under heavy medication for the pain from her cancer, she simply wasn't able to stop them.

"When I'm asleep, when I take my painkillers. I'm out you know," she said.

"I can't just wake myself up out of it. So if someone's at the door and they're knocking and you don't open the door they should just leave, but they don't especially if they're under the influence of alcohol.

"But you can't just go out and tell them to leave because they might likely punch you, you can't trust anybody."

The complaints were investigated by the Department of Housing, formerly known as Homeswest, which manages tens of thousands of public housing tenancies across WA.

The department says it issued warnings and offered support but in the end the problems continued, and there were enough substantiated complaints to issue three strikes.

"Basically, a large number of people in the community [said] that the actions that were happening in this tenancy, over an extended period of time were affecting negatively on their way of life," he said.

Frances Narrier was told to get out. She refused. And then the department took the gravely-ill grandmother to court.

Even there, Ms Narrier hoped there might be some reprieve, that the court would see past the policy and the complaints, to allow her to stay in the house for the coming months, to allow her to die in her home.

There wasn't.

"That was on the 11th I went to court. Dennis, I can't recall his last name, he was the boss. He come to the court house as well. And the magistrate who gave me 24 hours to get out, I had no say whatsoever, she didn't take into consideration me being sick. She just went ahead, and says you know, I'm sorry to hear that you've got cancer but you need to be evicted," Ms Narrier.

Department takes action as complaints continued

Steve Altham says the department knew of her condition but the problems at the property were serious and continued as Ms Narrier's illness progressed.

Something, he says, had to be done.

"The department has the discretion, I suppose, to choose not to go down a particular path. But I think the government was very clear in the actions it took with the department and the disruptive behaviour management strategy to try and remove some of that discretion. And I think that has certainly happened," he said.

"For us not to go through our process and go through the legal process and take it to a magistrate and make that final judgment on behalf of the community would be a big decision. And once you start creating exceptions, and there have been some...you start to open the gate and you have to be really careful with that," he said.

But if the department can consider serious mitigating circumstances, why wasn't Ms Narrier's terminal illness considered serious enough to halt her eviction and allow her to live out her remaining time in her house?

"That was a very sad case," Mr Altham said.

"I'd have to say that's probably the worst one I've dealt with personally in the seven years I've been here, because of the circumstances.

"The behaviour did not end and it was having an impact on the community. The range of things we have open to us to change somebody's behaviour is limited. We tried to do that."

The bailiff was flanked by Department of Housing staff and WA Police. When she saw them, it was clear to Frances Narrier her time in her home was up.

"These fellas have got no consideration for me or whatever. Like I've got a letter here from my specialist. I haven't got long to live. And these fellas going to chuck me out on the streets. So I've got nowhere to go. And you know that I've got no where to go. So where do they want me to live?" she said.

"This woman is dying, this woman is on her death bed, she hasn't got much longer to live. How do you feel about kicking her out of her house?"



Professor Ted Wilkes

But Ms Narrier had her supporters too. Aboriginal elder Ben Taylor stood at her side, as did long time Aboriginal activist and academic, Professor Ted Wilkes.

He was unrelenting in his condemnation of the eviction.

"It's absolutely shameful. It's an absolute disgrace," he said.

"What's going on? What are you doing? This is about humanity. What's this about? This is about certain people. This woman is dying. This woman is on her death bed. She hasn't got much longer to live. How do you feel about kicking her out of her house. She's got cancer. And you stand here, and you come around with the police to enforce your law. You know you're a brave man, you're a really brave man. Your boss must be so proud of you," Professor Wilkes said.

But neither her terminal illness, nor the pleas of her supporters could halt the eviction process now underway.

Bailiff evicts tenant with police backing

The bailiff told her that irrespective of her personal circumstances, she had to go. Now.

"I have to ask you to leave the premises. There is a court order issued by the magistrate for you to vacate the premises. I would ask you to leave the premises. Obviously there's other circumstances involved that we don't get involved with. But I do have to ask you to leave the premises. In fact I do have to ask everybody to please leave the premises and go to the verge," the bailiff said.

With seemingly no other option, she did just that.

"There's the keys, you want the keys, you've got the keys," she said

When the bailiff thanked her, she vented her anger and frustration.

"Don't thank me. Don't thank me. Don't f****** thank me. You arrogant white bastards that's all yous are," she yelled.

The department did not accept that Ms Narrier, even with her terminal illness, was unable to prevent disruptive behaviour at her property.

"There are a number of interventions in that case and it was really, really sad that that had to happen," Mr Altham said.

"But it just staggered me that the person wasn't able, obviously in a difficult life circumstance, wasn't in position to end the bad behaviour that was happening in the property, the type of behaviour that was happening there.

"We believe that could have happened. And so, it was a very sad case but the neighbours, the five or six neighbours who were impacted by that, are much happier at the situation."

But creating neighbourhood peace and quiet came at a high price to Francis Narrier. She was condemned to homelessness for the last months of her life.

As she left, Ms Narrier again expressed frustration at what she considered to be the heartless and unfair approach.

"This is f******. This is not right at all. Why'd they give me a card to ring Homeswest. Why should I take their f****** card. Their minds are made up, they know what they're doing. They're not blooming stupid. I've got no say whatsoever," she said.

As she left the property, she seemed overwhelmed by what was ahead of her.

"I can't even go in to get my f***** clothes. They're not even giving me time. At least they could have given me a week to come back and get my stuff. No. But they don't want to do that. Their minds are just made up. They went and got the police, they knew what they were doing."

Crackdown on bad behaviour prompted by meth explosion

Frances Narrier was forced onto the street by State Government policy hardened in 2011 as part of a crackdown on bad behaviour in public housing.

In March of that year, five people were injured when a methamphetamine laboratory in a public housing home exploded.

The incident stunned the government. It then emerged that neighbours had repeatedly complained about problems at the house but WA's Department of Housing had failed to act.

The WA Government's solution was a simple, hardline approach.

Three verified complaints, three confirmed strikes against a public housing tenant, and they were out. A point stressed by the then Housing Minister Troy Buswell.

"This is a big stick approach. This is an approach which says if you do not behave in an appropriate way you will be evicted," Mr Buswell said at the time.

Two-and-a-half years later, the policy enjoys wide public support in Western Australia, and has solid backing from both major parties.

In fact, some local MPs even lobby the Department of Housing, pushing for the eviction of tenants after receiving complaints from their constituents.

The department's Steve Altham says the policy is working.

"I think the fact that we have had over 32,000 complaints in just over two years, and we've only issued about 3200 strikes indicates that there's a level of scrutiny over all of those complaints," he said.

"The fact then that we've had a number of first strikes, but much fewer second strikes, and even fewer third strikes, I think gives us an indication that it's working. And there are other measures that we will put in place over time as we become more used to the practice.

"I think very early on there was a concern on the level of organisations in the community that perhaps this was going to result in wholesale evictions and the reality is, it hasn't. What it's done is actually change the behaviour of a lot of people."

A quiet social catastrophe from eviction to homelessness

Housing advocates and welfare groups believe the policy is having a damaging impact, and is creating a slow, quiet, social catastrophe with hundreds of families and perhaps thousands of children being evicted from public housing, and into homelessness.

Professor Mary McComish was the Dean of Law at WA's Notre Dame University. She's now a volunteer advocate with the DayDawn advocacy centre representing tenants facing eviction.

"Well, in my experience it is hurting Aboriginal families, usually large Aboriginal families where there are children," she said.

She says the policy may be solving neighbourly noise and behaviour problems, but it's creating widespread social harm to generations of Indigenous people.

"A lot of the clients that we see have got what you would probably describe as overcrowded tenancies, for one reason or another. And they're multigenerational so there are grandparents, parents and children all living in the home," she said.

"It's inevitable there's going to be noise, there's going to be disruption. There's going to be cars coming and going. And quite often in a quiet suburban street, where there aren't other families like that in the street, that family will stand out. And eventually the neighbours will start to take action and make complaints."

She says those most at risk are women and children.

Mother and four children homeless after eviction

Grace Cockie, 34, is an Indigenous single mother with four children aged from six-months to 12 years.

In 2012 she and her then three children were evicted after receiving three strikes for disruptive behaviour. They've been homeless ever since.

"Went to cousin's houses. Living on couches. I went to DCP and everything to because they said when I get kicked out they wouldn't let me and my kids be homeless. I went to see them and they said they couldn't do nothing," she said.

"And that's what I said, well why did they say they were going to help me and my kids. And that we were not ever going to be homeless. And we ended up being homeless."

"The people in the street were experiencing screaming, fighting, offensive language, drinking, there were reports of drug taking, windows smashing, physical assaults." Steve Altham

Mr Altham says whatever the impact on Grace Cockie and her children, the eviction was justified.

"That tenancy had a total of 24 complaints over a period of about a year," he said.

"There were five complainants in the vicinity of that tenancy. And it eventually went to three strikes and the department took the action.

"It was again, about disruptive behaviour. The people in the street were experiencing screaming, fighting, offensive language, drinking, there were reports of drug taking. Windows smashing, physical assaults. Some of that, it was acknowledged, was between the couple living in the house, others weren't."

Grace Cockie was a victim of domestic abuse. Her partner was violent, and the assaults were serious.

"Very bad because when I was pregnant for my oldest one Robyn, he [her partner] came back," she said.

"He caught my cousin in the house with me and I was helping him out and he thought stupid stuff and ended up flogging me all that night and next morning. Give me two black eyes while I was four months pregnant."

Her partner went to prison but when he got out he returned to their home.

By that stage, the three strikes policy was in force and his behaviour was attracting attention and prompting complaints.

The department says it offered support and referral to domestic violence services, but Ms Cockie didn't use them.

Domestic violence not an excuse says department

Steve Altham says domestic violence was a problem but not an excuse.

"It certainly helps you understand what was going on in that house, to a degree. But not all of those incidents were related to the domestic violence scenario," he said.

"Effectively, again, it was about the behaviour. It was having an impact in a strongly negative way on a number of people in the community. And despite whatever support we put in place, that support wasn't taken up."

Ms Cockie says she tried to explain the situation to the department.

"That it was Bernard (her partner). That he was intoxicated with alcohol. Shouting around there. But (they) never took no (notice)...they just give me the strike."

She also tried to explain the situation to the court, carrying letters of support from her school and some neighbours.

"They never took nothing under consideration...how I was going through domestic violence. Just kicked me out because I had three strikes."

Mr Altham says it's the behaviour, not the circumstances, that is the decisive factor in deciding whether to evict.

"It's acknowledged it's sometimes difficult for people in those circumstances do to anything. But there are things that they can do," he said.

"It's a terrible situation to be in but, again, from our perspective, as sad as those situations are, and as much as we will try to help people, ultimately, it's up to them.

"The behaviour has to change and the rest of the people in the street need to be able to get on with life," he said.

But the the policy seems to rest on the assumption that people have got total control and total responsibility for what happens in and around their property.

How can that be true with a woman who is being beaten and abused by a man who is the cause of the disruptive behaviour?

At best, the domestic violence victim's options for control would be extremely limited.

"There are options, there's not a lot of options, but my understanding is that she chose not to take any of those up," Mr Altham said.

"Even if the woman does have a violence restraining order...it doesn't guarantee that the person won't come around to their house and get into their house and assault them." Professor Mary McComish

But Professor Mary McComish says domestic violence victims have little control over the behaviour their abusive partners.

"Almost no control at all. I would argue that most of the clients that we see have been physically assaulted in very serious ways, along the way, by a partner or an ex-partner.

"And even if the woman does have a violence restraining order, which quite a lot of our clients do, it doesn't guarantee that the person won't come around to their house and get into their house and assault them before the police can be called or before anything can happen.

"So a lot of our clients live in absolute terror. Whether they've got a VRO or whether they haven't.

"They know that they are fairly vulnerable. And I don't think, causing a strike, that's the least of their worries. They don't even think about it when the circumstances arise, but it does result in a strike."

Mother considers suicide but stays strong for children

Grace Cockie's eviction led to 18 months of homelessness that's pushed her close to breaking point.

"I was thinking about committing suicide, you know but I've got to be strong for my kids," she said.

"Because it's like I had nothing....and I just felt so down. I'm glad for my sister come save me."

She's living with her sister, sharing a single room with her four children.

She's on the priority waiting list and hopes she and her kids can hang on until they get their own home.

One room may not be much, but it's enough to give her hope.

"They have my strength, I've got to show them how to be strong. Teach them life. Yeah, when I went wrong, I want them to do good."

Grace Cockie is just one of the 137 tenancies terminated under the Disruptive Behaviour Management Strategy since its introduction in May 2011.

Of those, 82 were Indigenous tenants.

The State Government has consistently rejected any suggestion that the policy is racist in its impact.

The Department of Housing argues the policy applies a common standard to all tenants, irrespective of ethnicity and who it impacts is not the department's concern.

"In effect, that's not our area to work in," Mr Altham said.

"That's not our mandate. Our mandate is simply to provide safe and affordable housing for people on low to moderate incomes to get them to pay their rent, to get them to look after the place, and to basically get on with their neighbours and not cause misery and disturbance to them."

But the same disproportionate impact is also seen in the overall statistics.

From a total of 945 evictions for all reasons, including three strikes, 519 were Indigenous tenancies.

If a policy designed to be equal for all people is having a disproportionate impact on one group of people, is the policy discriminatory?

"Our job is to provide safe and affordable housing. We have no part to play in a person's background or whatever their life circumstances are," Mr Altham said.

"We simply do our best to ensure that they are able to just get on in the community as everybody has to. That they look after the place, that they pay the rent, and that their behaviour, their behaviour is the only factor we have to work with.

"We refer people on to different support groups. We employ Aboriginal customer support officers. We have particular support programs in place for people who are finding that difficult. But at the end of the day we have to apply the policy equally to everybody and that's our brief."

While Indigenous tenants hold less than 30 per cent of public housing in WA, they make up more than 60 per cent of those tenants being evicted for three strikes or other reasons.

Advocates say children hit hardest by three strikes

Housing advocates and welfare groups argue the policy may not be racist in its intent, it is indirectly discriminatory in its effect.

Professor Mary McComish says it shows the policy is having a disproportionate impact on already disadvantaged Indigenous families.

"Yes the policy applies equally to everyone but the impact is unequal and disproportionate and it's quite clearly so when you look at the figures," she said.

"And it's not just the disruptive behaviour policy, it's all evictions that are being effected on Aboriginal families. Any reason that is given will always be able to sheeted home to some area of Aboriginal disadvantage."

While the statistics state how many tenancies have been terminated, they do not show how many people have been evicted.

With 500 tenancies, advocacy groups fear the number of families and children being made homeless could number in the thousands.

"I don't think anyone has any idea at all," Professor McComish said.

"I don't think the department has any idea at all and there's certainly no one else who would be keeping the statistics but, just as a guesstimate, most of the tenancies would involve fairly large numbers of children.

"So even if you conservatively estimated there were four children per family evicted, we're looking at 2000 odd children who have been impacted by this policy.

"It's a staggering number and it's a very serious number and when you think what the future those children have, it's even worse.

"Because once those children get evicted from their home, and probably not much prospect of a stable home for five or ten years. Then the impact on those children is virtually, any hope they might have is pretty minimal."

There are 11 children in Robyn Stratton's public housing home in Perth's southern suburbs. It's sometimes host to up to 15 people. She has seven sons, two daughters, four grandchildren and her partner Athol Michael.

Her case provides an insight into the complicated and troubled lives led by some Indigenous families as they struggle to keep their homes amidst problems with behaviour, alcohol, drugs, relationships and property standards.

"My children all feel numb, they feel like they've done everything they could."

"They're worried where they're going to be when I go to court for this eviction." Robyn Stratton

But it also poses the question of what happens to a family of more than a dozen people spanning three generations, ranging in age from 43 to just five months, when they face eviction to homelessness.

"My children all feel numb. They feel like they've done everything they could," she said.

"They're worried where they're going to be when I go to court for this eviction. I believe they're starting to go into a depression mode, 'cause they're just acting like, they want to sleep all the time, My daughter cries, my eight-year-old daughter. She feels like she's done something wrong. But she hasn't."

In mid-November, Ms Stratton was told by the Department of Housing that their families lease on the house would not be renewed.

"I think it was November the 11th they told us that, after the Strong Families meeting they wasn't going to renew the contract, renew the lease, for tenancy.

"I must say it's absolutely blown us away. We don't know what we've done wrong. We believe we've done everything we were supposed to do, that Homeswest has told us to do."

The Department of Housing's Steve Altham says the family has a long history of troubled tenancies stretching back a decade, and had been the subject of numerous complaints in their two years in the house.

"There were certainly plenty of evidence of disruptive behaviour at that tenancy," Mr Altham said.

"There were, I think, in the last couple of years something like 46 disruptive behaviour complaints against this particular address from 11 or 12 different complainants.

"There's certainly a range of evidence there of quite bad behaviour and very strong level of disruption with the neighbours."

Kids could be pushed into gangs: mother

The family had been in an intensive, multi-agency program designed to solve those problems, and help get their lives back on track.

Known as "Strong Families" the government-run program focused on getting the younger children back to school, the older children into training or work skills programs, and keeping all of them out of trouble.

Ms Stratton says with the support, the family was making progress.

"We thought things were going okay," she said.

"The kids were all going to school. All my boys were involved in TAFE courses.

"One who was so far in we didn't think we'd pull him back out of darkness. He has now got his "L's" his learners for car driving. And he's now looking, he's actually in a course that fixes Homeswest houses up and he's looking forward to some work after he's finished his course.

"We're on income management and they were paying our bills."

The family believed they'd been working hard to meet the Department of Housing standards. They believed they were making improvements.

Strong Families documents suggest those running the program believed the family's situation was improving but the department remained unconvinced.

"Oh, well we say they weren't engaging a great deal with those services," Mr Altham said.

"There were certainly, in the last three to four months, very strong indications through the Strong Families program, that they weren't actually engaging with it to the satisfaction of the case workers involved."

But while the department is close to solving it's troublesome tenant problem, the prospect of eviction presented Ms Stratton and her family, with a whole range of new and potentially catastrophic problems.

"The kids won't be able to go to school because we'll be on the streets." "I don't want them involved in gangs but the way things are going they are being pushed and pushed into things like that." Robyn Stratton

She worried most about her children.

"We honestly don't know what's going to happen with them," she said.

"Their training will probably go out the window because they probably won't be able to go to training because we'll be on the streets.

"The kids won't be able to go to school because we'll be on the streets. It's just going to be such a big impact for our children that have been trying."

"I don't want them involved in gangs. But the way things are going they are being pushed and pushed into things like that.

"I know for a fact if I lose this house, my boys were turn to their associated friends. I know for a fact they would turn to the streets for crime. They would go down the drain so fast they wouldn't know what was hitting them."

If that happened, she says she'd be powerless to get their lives back on track.

"There's nothing I could do. I feel absolutely, I feel absolutely gutted to know that if I did lose the house, I feel I failed as a mother," she said.

"I've tried my hardest, I have tried my hardest, but I don't know what else I could do."

Tenants told keep behaviour on track

The fact that there were up to 15 people living in the house, ranging in age from 43 to five months, was not a factor in the department's decision to evict them.

It remained unmoved by the prospect of an eviction that would leave children as young as five months old homeless.

"Well, you'd think in the first instance if you had that many children you would be having some concern to the fact of your own behaviour and your own actions," Mr Altham said.

"And what your responsibility and accountability is to your own children and the other children that are in the house.

"Ultimately somebody, the tenant and the parent, has to take a level of responsibility for their actions.

"They were certainly never in any doubt that this tenancy was going to end badly because we were moving inexorably towards that."

Professor Mary McComish says the loss of the home would cause whatever progress the family has made to rapidly unravel.

"When you have a large family like that you will probably have some of the children sort of skating along the edge of the criminal justice system," she said.

"Hopefully they'll be in some programs, some diversionary programs. And once they lose their house, all of those programs usually will just come to nothing because the children will just disappear, particularly the teenage children, they will just go off the radar."

When the bailiff arrived at her house, the final act in Robyn Stratton's struggle to avoid eviction played out quietly, with no disruption or disturbance to the neighbours.

She pleaded with the bailiff not to evict them.

"Please we'll do anything that we need to. I don't know where my kids are doing to sleep tonight," Ms Stratton said.

Robyn Stratton sat on a crate, quietly listening. Then, through tears, the 43-year-old mother and grandmother begged for her family to least be allowed to stay until Christmas.

"There must be someone who will listen. I'll get on my knees if I have to," she said.

"Unfortunately I don't have the power I just have to execute the court order," the bailiff replied.

The family walked away with the blankets and sleeping bags they could carry, and sat in a nearby park.

Clutching her grandson Cayleb, 3, Ms Stratton seemed dazed and overwhelmed by the uncertainty of what happens next.

"Yeah, I'm going to have to take it a day at time now. I probably won't be able to sleep tonight because I've got to watch over my boys, my babies in the park. Anyone can walk through and take them," she said.

Topics: housing, homelessness, perth-6000, wilson-6107, midland-6056

First posted