When Todd Helton watched Peyton Manning at football practice at the University of Tennessee, he knew his future was in baseball. Manning backed up Helton at quarterback in 1994. The two have been backing each other ever since.

Reached Sunday, Helton praised Manning’s career after the five-time NFL MVP decided to walk away.

Statements from John Elway, Gary Kubiak, Joe Ellis on Manning’s retirement

“Peyton is quality in every aspect of his life. His work ethic, achievements, the ability to overcome obstacles, leadership and friendship. He has never done anything halfway,” Helton said. “To me he represents the pinnacle of excellence on and off the field. I am thrilled he’s walking away a champion.”

Manning and Helton remained close after the two went their separate ways. Helton forged a 17-year major league career as the most accomplished player in Colorado Rockies history. Manning carved out an 18-year career that leaves him in the conversation as the greatest of all time. Even as Manning became an iconic athlete, his friendship with Helton remained unchanged. He joined Helton at Cincinnati’s Riverfront Stadium for batting practice early in his NFL career, and later did the same at Coors Field.

After retiring following the 2013 season, Helton made a point to visit Manning during Broncos training camp, quipping, “How many times in my life is my good friend going to be Denver’s quarterback?”

Helton saw a side of Manning most don’t — his dry wit and desire to help others without fanfare.

“We have all watched his athletic ability and knowledge of the game. It’s amazing. As someone who knows him personally, that’s how he approaches everything: to achieve excellence,” said Helton, who spent time with Manning hunting in the offseason over the past several years. “He deserves to be celebrated for all he has accomplished in his career. On top of that, he’s a good guy who invests in others. I wish nothing but success in his life after the NFL.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or @troyrenck