<p>STAR FILE PHOTO</p>

By Stephanie Hoops

Port Hueneme is considering contracting with an outside law enforcement agency to replace its small police department, which employs some of the highest paid officers in Ventura County.

The struggling beachside community of 22,000 is looking at the major cost-cutting move because it has limited financial options and few sources of significant sales tax revenue, such as an auto mall or major retail center.

“I’ve been informed by the city manager that there is a consideration to outsource the policing of the city of Port Hueneme and replace the police department with some other agency such as the sheriff’s department to save money,” City Councilman Jim Hensley said.

He noted that concerns him because the Police Department has longevity in the community and enthusiasm in the department is low.

“I feel there’s a deep problem with morale issues with the police department and they’re not getting the support they need,” he said.

City Manager Cynthia Haas didn’t reply to email and phone call questions about whether she talked with Hensley or other council members about the outsourcing of the police department.

But Haas said in an earlier email that she has “been given no direction by the City Council to outsource the police department to any outside agency.”

City officials are looking at various measures to help improve the city’s financial condition, Haas said, including shrinking staff levels by attrition, reducing program subsidies and sharing costs with other government agencies.

“I also met with city employees and invited them to offer suggestions they may have for reducing city costs or increasing city revenues without reducing service levels,” she said.

The city spent more than $8 million on policing last year. According to Haas, that covered salaries, benefits, department operations, workers’ compensation, retiree medical costs and fleet expenditures.

The city is dealing with trying financial circumstances because of the loss of redevelopment funding, said City Councilman Tom Figg.

“There’s no question that this is going to be one of the most difficult budget years the city’s ever faced,” he said.

Figg said he hasn’t had discussions with Haas about outsourcing the Police Department, but outsourcing of all services was a topic of discussion at the city’s strategic planning session in late February. He noted those conversations will continue in April.

It’s not known how much the city might save if it outsourced police duties because it would depend on the level of services purchased from what amounts to a “menu” of choices, Figg said. “But the conventional wisdom is there are cost savings by virtue of scales of economy.”

Figg would like to see the city pass a tax measure that restricts the use of funds for the Police Department, which he said takes the lion’s share of the city’s general fund. However, getting voters to approve a restricted-use tax isn’t easy. It requires approval from two-thirds of the city’s voters and an attempt to enact that kind of tax measure failed in 1994.

“There’s a higher threshold for voter approval,” Figg said.

Police Chief Robert Gager said cost-saving measures have been implemented in his department since the loss of redevelopment funding. For example, Gager canceled a traffic officer program and reduced its K-9 police dogs from four to one.

Two positions in the department’s Special Problems Unit have not been filled either. At the same time, overtime has risen because the department has been “plagued with numerous injuries, causing us to operate at minimum staffing levels,” Gager said.

If morale is low, Gager said it isn’t outwardly visible in the department. Productivity is up and the crime rate is down, he said.

“The uncertainty of the city being able to address the shortfall in revenues and increased expenses concerns us all,” he said. “Here in the Police Department we are doing all we can to improve operations and reduce costs, but we are running out of viable options.”

The Port Hueneme police are paid notably higher wages than officers in other cities.

Last year, the Port Hueneme Police Department employed 32 people at an average wage of $133,997, up 12 percent from $119,165 in 2013. Police departments in Ventura, Simi Valley and Santa Paula paid average wages in 2013 of $71,307, $91,255, and $43,526, respectively.

Talk of outsourcing comes 20 years after Port Hueneme residents rallied to keep their police department.

In 1994, the last time there was talk about contracting out services, residents peddled hot dogs and T-shirts to get taxpayers to pass a measure that would have generated $500,000 a year from restricted-use property taxes. The measure, which required two-thirds voter approval, failed.

Residents didn’t give up, however. In 1996 — when Port Hueneme police officers earned an average $39,787 in base salary and deferred compensation — voters approved a utility tax meant in part to help police.

The utility tax dollars went into the general fund, meaning they don’t necessarily have to be spent on policing. The utility tax generated $1.15 million last year, which doesn’t come close to covering the more than $8 million Port Hueneme spent last year for its police department.