Reliance Human Capital Management founders Jack Silberman and Ryan Davis said their new business will combine technology and personal attention in an effort to provide the best customer experience possible.

"We were going to be called Reliance Benefits, but we are actually doing a lot more than benefits," Silberman said. "So we called it human capital management, [which] essentially means the managing of what your people cost you."

Called Reliance for short, and working in the same space as Reliance Partners, the company is ramping up with new hires.

Silberman and Davis both have experience in the industry and spent years as employee benefit advisers.

They will be joined by multiple staff members who have worked for benefit advisory firms in roles such as account management, compliance, HR technology and accounting. The firm is launching with 35 years of combined experience, according to a news release.

They met more than five years ago and now have taken "a leap of faith" to build their new company, which is backed by venture incubator Lamp Post Group.

They said they value people above everything else and want to create one of the best workplace environments in the city.

"It's all about culture here," Silberman said.

And Davis said that one of the company's differentiators is how they will use technology to make processes easy and efficient.

Reliance’s core business will be in these categories:

HR technology—bringing the small and midsize business market a software as a service solution that will tie together HR, benefits and payroll

Employee benefits—advising on benefits packages for businesses

Payroll—"world-class" payroll and technology with a local representative

Time and labor management—equipping companies to track time and manage employees' complicated schedules and accruals

Affordable Care Act compliance—helping customers navigate the Affordable Care Act legislation

Disclaimer: Nooga.com's parent company is Lamp Post Group, but editorial decisions for this publication are made independently of the Lamp Post Group.