WASHINGTON - The White House is hoping March Madness, and members of the Miami Heat, can help sell young Americans on Obamacare.

Heat forward Shane Battier joined Obama administration officials in a telephone conference call Tuesday to urge people to sign up for healthcare plans under the Affordable Care Act.

He is the third Miami player to tout Obamacare, after former All-Star Alonzo Mourning and Heat star LeBron James.

It's part of a White House push to enroll young people, especially young men, who are coveted by insurers because they tend to be in good health.

More than 5 million people have signed up for healthcare plans, putting the White House in range of its goal of 6 million by the March 31 deadline.

The administration is launching promotions tied to the upcoming NCAA basketball tournament, including what one official called "our own Sweetest 16 reasons to get covered."

Battier was plugging a new government report highlighting the need to have healthcare coverage for injuries that result from popular sports.

President Obama speaks about the Affordable Care Act in September. After a rough October launch, enrollment has grown steadily. (MANDEL NGAN/AFP/Getty Images)

"If you are playing sports, it is important to make sure you also have great healthcare because you never know when you are going to take a hit," Battier said, before chronicling a long history of injuries his health insurance has helped to cover.

The new report says about two million people a year receive emergency treatment for sports injuries. Basketball caused the most injuries, 570,000. Bicycling caused the second most, 557,000, but it has by far the highest injury rate, 126.5 injured per every 100,000 people.

The most commonly treated sports injuries are sprained or fractured ankles or knees. The report highlights how expensive those injuries are. Sprains cost a 25- to 40-year-old who lacks insurance an average of $3,175. Fractures can cost as much as $7,666 for the uninsured.

"Play hard, be smart and get covered," Battier said.

The former Duke star, who said he was looking forward to a Tuesday night game in Cleveland, didn't stick around for media questions.

dfriedman@nydailynews.com