If you’re one of those people who collects hotel points and airline miles to save money on travel, as I do, be on the lookout for another round of changes in many of these programs.

Sometimes, changes can be dramatic. Remember when some airlines started putting expiration dates on frequent-flier accounts, and some folks discovered too late that their accounts had been zeroed out due to inactivity?

Other times, changes can be routine annual events that still could impact your travel plans. For example, Starwood Hotels (Sheraton, Westin, Aloft and other brands) is changing the number of “SPG” points needed for a free night in more than 22 percent of its hotels effective March 10, with some getting more expensive and some less.

Airlines miles and hotel points are a form of currency, generally worth one to three cents each, depending on how they are used. For those with brand-affiliated credit cards, points and miles are similar to cash-back offers, but you get points or miles instead of cash credits.

Even cash changes value, due to inflation and currency exchange rates, but points and miles can become worth substantially more, or less, overnight. Here’s an example.

Starting March 10 a free night at the Sheraton in downtown Columbia will require 10,000 SPG hotel points, instead of 7,000. The Sheraton in Jacksonville, Fla., will require 7,000 points instead of 4,000. On the other hand, some hotels will require fewer points, such as the Westin at the Los Angeles airport.

If you have any upcoming hotel plans involving SPG points, check the list of changes to see if you should book before, or after, March 10. The shortened website address is: sta.rw/1AXcqvT.

Participants in points and miles programs may not always be warned of coming changes.

As of the middle of last week, Star- wood had not posted the category change information on the company website, and an online customer service representative told me it would not be released until Tuesday. A different company rep I reached on Twitter, however, provided a link to the information when I requested it.

Southwest Airlines also has some changes in the works, for its “Rapid Rewards.” That program has been a favorite of mine because instead of making it nearly impossible to find tickets eligible for purchase with miles or points, as some airlines do, Southwest lets customers pay for tickets with dollars or points at what amounts to a fixed exchange rate (currently 70 points to the dollar for the least-expensive fare).

Considering that Southwest often offers a deal where you can get 50,000 points (more than $700 in airfare) for signing up for their branded credit card, and they charge no luggage fees, that’s a great program. Now, the airline has announced that “Beginning April 17, 2015, the number of Rapid Rewards Points needed to redeem for certain flights will vary based on destination, time, day of travel, demand, fare class, and other factors. However, there are still many flights which will stay at the current redemption rate.”

Details have not been provided but that sounds like a change that will make Southwest points worth less, at least when used to book a seat on a popular or busy route. If you plan to fly Southwest this year using Rapid Rewards, consider booking before April 17. With Southwest’s (current) program, if you book a flight with points and then change your mind, you get the points back.

The takeaway: Airline points and hotel miles are a valuable form of alternative currency, despite the fact that there are many ways to acquire them at little or no cost. However, over time those points and miles often become worth less as hotel and airline companies change the rules.

Making the most of those programs requires attention to the rules, which as I’ve noted, can change significantly.

In some cases, if one program becomes less attractive, you can transfer the points or miles to a different one. For example, Starwood hotel points can be transferred to some airline miles programs, and if you have a Southwest credit card, you can cash in Rapid Rewards points for gift cards to retail stores and restaurants, at a rate of 100 points to the dollar.