Four Center for Lifelong Learning student murals are on display in the Noyes Museum’s Young-at-Art Gallery at Stockton University in Galloway

A completed Center for Lifelong Learning 4-by-6-foot mural on display in the Young-at-Art Gallery in the Noyes Museum of Art at Stockton University. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Middlesex Regional Educational Services Commission) Story Highlights Lisa Burger, an art teacher at the CLL, took several art therapy workshops at the Noyes Museum.

The exhibit runs through July 28.

Burger applied what she learned and now her special-needs students will have their art displayed.

Four murals by the CLL students are in an exhibit at the Noyes Museum at Stockton University.

After completing several “amazing” art therapy workshops for special-education students at the Noyes Museum at Art of Stockton University in Galloway, Lisa Burger applied what she had learned to benefit her students.

Burger, an art teacher at the Center for Lifelong Learning (CLL), a special-needs school in Sayreville, discovered new approaches to help students use art as an outlet for self-expression, in addition to increasing their ability to make decisions independently. She incorporated her additional training on behalf of the more than 200 students with autism and multiple disabilities attending CLL. As a result, four CLL student murals are on display in the museum’s Young-at-Art Gallery.

“I love these paintings,” said Saskia Schmidt, Noyes Museum’s director of education.

Schmidt said she was delighted to exhibit the art after receiving slides of the murals and being contacted by Burger.

Burger was thrilled with the opportunity to showcase her student’s art work. Assisted by her husband, she went to the Noyes Museum and spent an afternoon mounting the four murals, each 4 feet wide and 6 feet high.

“The abilities of our students vary greatly. However, everyone at CLL participated in this project,” Burger said. “For some, it was a lot to make little marks, while others put in a significant amount of time. But the fact that all of our students participated was great.”

Students had full decision-making power regarding color choices, and had several items to choose from to paint with, including sponge brushes, paintbrushes of varying sizes, paint rollers and cotton swabs.

“The students enjoyed the experience and were proud of their work,” CLL Principal Mary Beth Conley said. “It was a joy to see how pleased they were with what they had accomplished.”

The Center for Lifelong Learning is one of seven schools operated by the Middlesex Regional Educational Services Commission (MRESC), which offers comprehensive services for students ages 3 to 21 with autism and multiple disabilities, including two schools with on-site clinical support services. Established in 1977, the MRESC is the largest Educational Services Commission in New Jersey, and also coordinates transportation services for nearly 14,000 students throughout the state.

The exhibit runs through July 28. For more information, contact Schmidt at 609-652-8848, ext. 303, or go to www.noyesmuseum.org. Visit www.mresc.k12.nj.us for more information about the MRESC.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1MoDB65