British singer Morrissey says the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) is worse than the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) terrorist group.

He says in a new blog post on his website that the TSA has been unresponsive to sexual assault complaints he lodged earlier this year, adding that the agency's acronym should stand for something else.

ADVERTISEMENT

"TSA have ignored my official and legal and constitutional complaint. From this we gather that TSA stands for Thorough Sexual Assault," he said.

"If you are traveling through San Francisco International Airport you must be ready for a full sexual attack by people who claim to have your interests at heart," Morrissey continued. "It is unlikely that ISIS would stoop so low."

Morrissey accused a San Francisco International Airport TSA worker, whom he has not named, of sexual assault after an incident he described in a July blog post.

TSA officials said in the summer that they were looking into Morrissey's complaint.

"TSA takes all allegations of misconduct seriously and strives to treat every passenger with dignity and respect," TSA spokesman Mike England said in a statement provided to The Hill after Morrissey's initial blog post was published.

"Upon review of closed circuit TV footage, TSA determined that the supervised officer followed standard operating procedures in the screening of this individual," England continued.

The former lead singer of the 1980s band The Smiths said in an interview with Larry King in August that the TSA worker touched him inappropriately after he had already been through one of the agency's X-ray machines.

"I had been through the full scanner and I had been through the second bit, so everything was fine and clear, and then he went straight for my private bits and then he put his finger down my rear cleavage," Morrissey told King.

Morrissey said then that he did not expect to receive a response to his complaint about the TSA worker because he said U.S. airport security agency is "above the law."

"Yes I filled in a complaint and so forth [but nothing happened]," he added.

The Hill has contacted the TSA for a response to Morrissey's latest statement.