By Ashley Wilson

Until recently, I didn't have a strong opinion about the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium (SBAC) state test. I'm a 16-year teaching veteran in the Beaverton School District, and standardized testing wasn't something I put very much thought into. I know my students show gains in learning every year. So, although I don't give any standardized test much merit, I've complied with testing requirements because I have to.

On a recent weekend I had a little extra time, so I pulled up the fourth-grade practice SBAC and began to go through it with my 9-year-old daughter. I was appalled by the first task. The test asked my daughter to read an argumentative paragraph about why cursive handwriting is not important but math and science are. The paragraph went on to say that important subjects are defined as those that are tested by the state. It also said there's not enough time in the school day for "unimportant" subjects. Since math and science were the two examples given to define important subjects, one could infer that all other subjects are unimportant.

This infuriates me. Not only is the SBAC testing kids on subjects and skills that aren't grade-level appropriate, but it also appears that the test makers are attempting to brainwash kids into thinking that only core subjects matter. As a person who believes in teaching the whole child, this test has my stomach churning.

There is a need for assessment and teacher accountability. I'd venture to say that not more than three minutes goes by without me assessing how and what my students are learning. I am continuously reteaching, slowing down or speeding up, as determined by my constant assessment of my students. Look at my plan book that is full of arrows and X's as I constantly switch plans around based on the needs of my students.

Rather than relying on standardized tests as a gauge for competent teaching and student strengths, I encourage the powers that be to come in and visit. Come to my room every day for a year and see the change in each student from September to June. Compare a student's writing in September to what they are able to produce in June. Notice the behavioral skills we work on every day as we teach the whole child how to be successful in every subject. Then, have a constructive conversation with me. Don't use a one-time standardized test to judge what I do so passionately, every day. Don't tell my students that the phyical education, music or calligraphy class that intrigues them are not important. Those are the very subjects that just may hook them and keep them in school.

As a parent, I have a choice to opt my daughter out of testing, which I've done. As a teacher, I don't have a choice but to administer it. However, I will not accept that the test results accurately or comprehensively define my abilities or those of my students.

•

Ashley Wilson teaches humanities at Mountain View Middle School in the Beaverton School District.