Michael Ranson is holding the rest of Colorado basketball for ransom.

How else to explain the Pueblo Central senior’s torrid scoring? Through his first six games, Ranson averaged a ridiculous 37.7 points. Whether you’re from the days of Pistol Pete Maravich or Steph Curry, that’s serious scoring.

Hot? The 6-foot-2 Ranson’s hands are so warm that they melt his cellphone. “But only when I get the bill,” said his father and Wildcats coach Brad Ranson.

Seriously, Ranson lit it up through his first five outings by making 34 3-pointers and 41-of-49 free throws as Pueblo Central got off to a 2-3 start. He opened with 39 points in a 55-54 loss to Lewis-Palmer and followed with 35 against Vista PEAK in a 64-58 setback that included nine 3-pointers.

He really started to take off against Denver West with a 43-point effort in a 79-36 whipping, “settled” for 27 against Golden in a 63-52 loss, then turned in one of the memorable games of the era. Ranson made eight 2-pointers, 8 3-pointers and was a sparkling 19-of-19 on free throws for 59 points versus Falcon in a 90-88 overtime thrilling win.

On Thursday, in a 44-39 victory over Loveland, Ranson had a season-low 23 points as the Wildcats evened their record and his average dipped below 40 points.

Even Ranson admits to being dumbfounded.

“I don’t know, just playing my game, trying to win games,” he said. “Just trying to do what I can to help us win, I guess. But what’s it like. I don’t know, I really can’t explain it. My dad has always taught me how to score … it’s just crazy to kind of comprehend it, I really don’t know. “

Brad Ranson said his son “still has some football in him” after passing for 1,316 yards and 12 touchdowns, and rushing for 918 yards and 14 touchdowns this past season. However, the coach added, “he’s taking good shots and just putting it in the hole.”

Of course, the opposition has already tried trick and specific defenses in order to stop his son, even slowing the pace on purpose, but he knows to expect anything. “He gets different looks every night,” coach Ranson said.

Plus, Wildcats injuries have practically required the younger Ranson to score more.

Senior Kobi Betts, who was the team’s second-leading scorer in 2014-15 and signed to play at Air Force, went down with an ACL in a scrimmage Nov. 28. And junior point guard Isaiah Marquez may not be back until January after suffering a broken jaw.

“I’m OK with it,” said Ranson, who averaged 25 points a year ago and signed early with Northern Colorado. “And the team is OK with it.”

And how long can it last?

“If I have to? You know, I feel like I can do it. It just depends on what other teams are going to do, box-and-one, diamond-and-one. … Every game teams are turning up the heat now,” he said.

“But fun? It’s really fun.”

Neil H. Devlin: ndevlin @denverpost.com or @neildevlin