WASHINGTON – Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, who has made criticizing Republican congressional leaders a major part of his presidential campaign stump speeches, said Friday (Sept. 25) that the resignation of House Speaker John Boehner doesn't go nearly far enough.

"That's one down, 434 more to go before we are done," Jindal said, apparently alluding to the 435 elected House members during an address to the conservative Family Research Council's Values Summit in Washington.

Jindal also called for Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., to step down. And to dramatize that point, Jindal tweeted that "it's time to fire everybody in Washington, DC."

In his speech to the Values Summit, Jindal said he is "actually angrier with the Republicans than with the Democrats" because they (GOP congressional leaders) "don't do the things they say they're going to do."

On the campaign trial, Jindal regularly blasts congressional GOP leaders for not being able to repeal the Affordable Care Act, not stopping the president's immigration policy, which he describes as amnesty and failing to stop funding for Planned Parenthood. There's no excuse, he said, after Republicans won back the Senate majority in the 2014 mid-term elections.

Jindal suggested one way to block Democratic filibustering in the Senate would be to change the rules and allow legislation to pass with 51 votes, instead of the 60 required to end debate. But he didn't mention that Republicans used the filibuster effectively over the previous four years to block the then-Democratic majority from passing bills pushed by the Obama administration.

The GOP was also blocking key Obama nominations, until the Democrats ended the filibuster for nominations while retaining it for legislation.

In his speech to the annual Family Research Council conference that attracts top Republican and conservative leaders, Jindal also repeated his attacks on front-running Republican presidential candidate, Donald Trump.

"You know that he has not read the Bible because his name is not in the Bible," Jindal said to laughter, repeating his description of the billionaire businessman as a narcissist.

Earlier this week, Jindal's campaign manager, Timmy Teepell, was asked during a National Review conference why Jindal, a Rhodes Scholar and health policy expert, has resorted to making some of the most contentious comments during the presidential race rather than emphasizing his policy views.

Teepell said that Jindal has presented plans in specific detail on health care, energy, and other issues, but that the "press isn't interested in covering that." He said Jindal is trying "to cut through the clutter" as he competes for press coverage with other presidential candidates, most notably Trump who continues to dominate TV coverage, in particular.

Jindal is currently polling at 0.3 percent of the Republican primary vote, according to RealClearPoltiics average of major polls. That's next to last among the 15 polled candidates, just slightly ahead of Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., who is polling at 0 percent.

The good news for Jindal is one of those ahead of him – Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, who was polling 0.5 percent, dropped out of the race this week.