Indian River Medical Center in Vero Beach. (FILE PHOTO)

By Charles Fischman

President Barack Obama famously said that once the Affordable Care Act was enacted, "If you like your doctor, you will be able to keep your doctor. Period."

Unfortunately this is untrue for many patients in Vero Beach, who are struggling to find physicians willing to see them and accept their Affordable Care Act insurance plans.

Insurers have been increasing premiums and deductibles to individual policyholders and have dramatically slashed reimbursements to physicians. Many plans are only paying physicians 70 percent of what they would normally receive on patients insured by group plans or by Medicare.

The insurers recently have informed physicians, who now are losing money each time they see an Obamacare-insured patient, that they need to "See these patients, or you will be dropped from our Participating Physicians Network."

The intended, or unintended, consequence of the Affordable Care Act is that physicians in private practice may soon be placed on the "endangered species" list. To survive, many private physicians have become concierge doctors, or have ended up selling their practices to local hospitals. This enables the doctors to receive a predictable salary.

Five years ago, Indian River County had 14 cardiologists, physicians who treat heart disease, in private practice. Today, six remain in private practice, and eight now are employed by the Indian River Medical Center or Sebastian River Medical Center. There were six private-practice gastroenterologists, specialists in disorders of the stomach, intestines, and liver, five years ago in Vero Beach. Today, of that original group, only one remains in private practice, while IRMC now has five on staff.

This reduction of physicians in private practice has many unintended consequences for our community.

First, it has become increasingly difficult for the remaining private practitioners to recruit new, high-quality physicians to the area. Private physicians cannot compete with the salaries or benefits offered by our local hospitals, or promise new recruits a long-term predictable salary.

Most private physicians also do not have the finances to shoulder the high cost of physician recruiting, which frequently runs more than $50,000 per recruited physician.

"Facility fees" charged by hospitals help finance the recruitment of physicians. When a physician works for a hospital, the hospital bills the patient for the doctor's services and then adds a "facility fee." This added-on fee is substantial.

The Medicare Payment Advisory Commission has acknowledged that an office visit with a physician in a hospital outpatient department is reimbursed at a rate 80 percent higher than the same visit performed in an independent, private practitioner's office.

This facility fee, which is a windfall for hospitals, is the major reason hospitals are buying up the practices of private physicians. The increase in cost of the facility fee is substantially passed onto IRMC's tax subsidy by the residents of Indian River County. The facility fee also results in more out-of-pocket expenses for patients, and drives up the costs of health insurance premiums for county residents.

Are these all truly unintended consequences of the Affordable Care Act, or did the masterminds who wrote the bill know that this would occur?

House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi famously said, "We have to pass the bill to find out what's in it."

Was the end game of the Affordable Care Act to make private medical insurance available, but unaffordable? Was its enactment to eventually force most primary care physicians into large hospital affiliated groups, or full-time hospital employment? Perhaps the Obama administration's final move will be to slash the "facility fee" paid to hospitals, thereby reducing their financial viability and eventually making them fully dependent on the federal government. This necessarily would lead to a single-payer system.

Only time will tell.

Dr. Charles Fischman is an internal medicine specialist who has practiced in Vero Beach for 34 years.