Topics: fhm, lad mags, Maxim, Men's rights, Pick up artists, zoo, Media News, News, Politics News

The death knell continues to sound for “lad mags,” the once-ubiquituous reading material for bros and wannabes who found that cat-calling wasn’t quite enough to satisfy their resentment towards women for being full human beings instead of purchasable playthings. FHM and Zoo, two once-popular lad mags that have been running on fumes in recent years, are finally closing up shop. Maxim has been trying to rebrand itself into more of a classy fashion magazine like Esquire or GQ, but that effort seems also to have failed, as the female editor hired to usher in the new era recently stepped down. People who want classy reading material probably need a few more decades before the word “Maxim” doesn’t make them shudder.

It would be nice if all this were a end times sign for the misogyny that helped these magazines, in their heyday, give traditional nudie mags like Playboy a run for their money. But, as any lady with a Tinder account can tell you, the world is not bereft of men who treat women’s minds like they are unfortunate obstacles to overcome on the way to vagina.

The truth is that lad mags can’t compete in the age of the internet. Today, a young man awash in anger at the discovery that women are allowed to make their own choices, even about sex, doesn’t need to buy some cheeky magazine that tries to leer women back into their place. He can go straight to the Internet, where the misogyny is unvarnished, participatory, and free.

Maxim and the other lad mags arose in the late 90s and early 2000s as part of that era’s backlash against the reinvigorated feminism of the 90s. The 90s was a time when women were speaking out against sexual harassment, campus activism was strong, a pro-choice president was in the White House, and women were a prominent presence in pop culture, particularly music, where music acts like TLC, Hole, En Vogue, and L7 were breaking into the mainstream with strongly feminist points of view. (Sound familiar?)

Lad mags were, in large part, an ugly reaction to this. Their language and imagery was deliberately dumbed down. As Susan Douglas explained in her book “The Rise of Enlightened Sexism“, Maxim used “irony as a shield”, often employing copy that ostensibly argued that “beautiful women” are superior to the readers, assumed to be “less cool, lazier, not as smart, dorkier, and very possibly not as good in bed”. This humble pose functioned as cover for what was actually going on, which was resentment towards women for not being satisfied with a secondary role to men. Women wanted equality, but the lad mags distorted it to make it seem like women were somehow dominating men.

For a time, this toxic mix of male insecurity and resentment towards women helped these magazines sell well. But lad mags, being lifestyle magazines like their classier betters, still had an editorial mission to be aspirational. They had to strike a balance between stoking resentment at women for supposedly being too stuck-up for their humble readers while also seeding the idea that buying a new motorcycle or stereo would be just the thing that makes the babes come running. Wallowing in bitterness or being overly hateful turns off advertisers, after all.

But now we live in the age of the Internet. For the young (and sometimes not so young) men out there who are embittered women’s autonomy, there’s no need to read a magazine that filters your resentment through cheesecake pictures and pictorials on home stereos. You can go straight to Reddit, start an account, and start talking with like-minded men about how bitches these days think they’re all that. Online, there’s no market pressures keeping a check on some men’s belief that women owe them.

As a point of comparison, look at this infamous article from Maxim in 2003, titled “How To Cure A Feminist“. The article feeds of male resentment of women who want equality and assumes women are stupid, but it still takes the common sense position that if you want people to like you, you have to be nice to them (even if it is all an act).

Compare that to a recent diatribe by Scott Adams, the writer of “Dilbert” who has built up an online following with his narcissistic blog postings about how the rest of the world, but women especially, fail men like himself and his readers. In this recent piece, Adams paints men as hapless victims of gynocracy that tortures men by extracting everything out of them for the faint hope of touching the female bodies.