An upstate mayor blasts Big Bill

Oswego: I know Bill de Blasio. I like Bill de Blasio. I hope he does well in his term of office as mayor of our greatest city. But so far, Bill de Blasio as mayor is no Ed Koch. He’s not even Dave Dinkins.

What de Blasio needs is a basic tutoring in how to act mayoral. He hasn’t quite made the transition from public advocate to being mayor, and as a result, his proverbial slip is showing.

He could start by reading Koch’s book, “Mayor.” I did, and it helped me formulate a way of approaching things when I was Mayor of a small upstate city (Oswego). You have to learn to be, first and foremost, a good gardener. You must be on a constant lookout for weeds, and uproot them before they are firmly entrenched.

Being a good mayor doesn’t mean you are the ideologue in chief. It means that your primary focus needs to be on quality-of-life issues that matter to your constituents. Pothole-patching is important. Tree planting and curb cuts matter. In Staten Island, they want a mayor to show up when a firefighter is imperiled. Gyms in Park Slope can wait.

Koch’s famous saying was, as he greeted constituents, “How am I doin’?” I dare say de Blasio would be loath to utter that phrase to strangers on the street these days.

“Good government is good politics,” de Blasio recently said. I believe that too. I also believe, as Tip O’Neill famously said, “All politics is local.” In order to have good government, you need good hands-on management, and 24/7-type vigilance. Trips to Rome and Iowa can wait. Canarsie and Coney Island beckon first. John Sullivan, Mayor of Oswego (1988-91), co-chair of N.Y. Democratic Party (1995-98)

Cruelty, thy name is Donald

Manhattan: After reading the editorial on Donald Trump’s immigration reform plan (“This is Trumpistan,” Aug. 18), I got chills of anxiety and dread. Force American-born children out of the country. Change the American Constitution to legally do such a horrible thing. No new immigrants until we take care of the ones already here. My God, what kind of country would we become? I was wondering what type of a President Trump would be. After reading his immigration solution, I sincerely hope that the people of this country make sure that this man comes to the White house like the rest of us — as a visitor on a guided tour. Ralph V. Robinson

‘A wielder of opinion, a force’

Clinton, Conn.: It’s amazing how closely Donald Trump is beginning to resemble Lonesome Rhodes in “A Face in the Crowd.” Donald Zukowski

A big target

Iselin, N.J.: President Christie: Fat chance. Harry Rose

It’s time

Brooklyn: Mayor Clueless created a disaster when he turned Times Square into a pedestrian mall. His quixotic, insane closure of the Crossroads of the World created a crossroad without roads. All I can say to Mayor de Blasio is “tear down this mall.” Perry Greenberg

Red, white and boob

Carlstadt, N.J.: These women do not even speak English. Why are they painting the American flag on their boobs? It’s disrespectful to our flag. Geri Sabia

Double-D standards

Jamaica: In regard to the painted naked women in Times Square, I wonder why the ultra-feminists aren’t rushing over there, with clothing and the victimization stamp, to defend these “desnudas”? I wonder if they would call that young boy who posed with the woman a “sex trafficker”? Oh, wait — these women are profiting without having sex! Is this the new-century double standard that the American woman now enjoys? Torin Reid

We dare

Sayville, L.I.: Re the headline “Tit for brains” (Aug. 18): The News crusades against the body painters to protect children, but prints a crude headline about it on the front page that any child walking past a newsstand can read. Great way to insure that potential future generations will not grow up to be newspaper readers. You are cutting your own throats. Dare you print this? Michael Hooker

Holy indecency

Manhattan: I see the naked ladies in Times Square often wear timely head gear or use current news props. We’ll see what they will do during the Pope’s visit. Their choice of head gear, at least, is probably obvious. Don Wigal

Don’t be boobs

Dumont, N.J.: I find it laughable that the Daily News supposedly objects to the topless women in Times Square, yet splashes the nauseating photos on the front page and inside pages. Lisa Russo

Move along

Bronx: How many days do we have to see the trash in Times Square littered on the front page? Julie Reitano

Read it for the articles

Forest Hills: I am disappointed in the choices you make in terms of what to print. I am a professional and a mother and I might as well have a subscription to Hustler or Playboy. There are so many more important issues to report that I do not need to approach my front stoop every morning and see bare naked bodies. Not only the cover story — but page after page of nudity. Maya Geiger

Let them learn

Bronx: Kudos to Voicer Ed Greenspan. I am a retired teacher and spent several years as a dean in a junior high school. If you have never been a classroom teacher, you have no idea how profoundly discipline affects the learning experience. Just imagine a surgeon trying to operate and all of his assistants are being disruptive during the operation. Disruptive children do not have the right to prevent the entire class from learning. They may need help, but disruptions can’t happen in the classroom. Gilbert M. Lane

Malthus for President

Manhattan: The News consistently advocates for immigration with the mantra, “It’s good for the economy.” In only two years there are 150,000 more residents in New York City — 150,000! You can see it in the clogged streets, on the packed subways, in class size and the supply-and-demand effect on the astronomical cost of housing. De Blasio’s 8,000 so-called “affordable” housing units coming online are like a bandage on a severed limb. Donald Trump is calling for a moratorium on all immigration. Apparently he is the only candidate who has the nerve to address what has become New York’s and the nation’s most pressing issue: population control. We can no longer shelter the world. We must tend to our own. Carl Rosenstein

The needle and the damage

Manhattan: In response to recent discussion of heroin addiction, someone must again say “black lives matter.” As a young adult in the ’60s, I went to many funerals of our young men in the black community. They had died from overdoses of pure heroin brought into our community by another culture. No one outside our community made any effort to stop this killer of people and their dreams. Now heroin has come to the suburbs of Long Island and New Hampshire and the CDC confirms there is an epidemic. Now there are all-out plans for treatment rather than jail. The more things change, the more they stay the same. Helen Marshbern

Anti-anti-anti-semitism

Staten Island: With regard to Voicer Joseph Ceder’s comments about Jimmy Carter and Jewish medical innovations: I doubt most Jews would associate themselves with your thinly veiled poison pen regarding Carter’s cancer treatment options. If you believe only Jews discovered major treatments and cures for cancer, you’re delusional. Ellen Settanni

Bias incarnate

Fairfield, Conn.: To Voicer William Jackson, who asks why the Daily News tells “only one side of the Israeli-Palestinian story”: Have you visited Israel? Have you lived there? Do you know what it is like having rockets and missiles raining down on you daily? Do you know what it is like to experience terrorism on a daily basis? Israel builds bomb shelters for its citizens. Palestinians build tunnels intended to murder Israelis. Israel has a right to defend itself, just like any other nation. I suggest you read up on the history of the region. Emily Winters

Work harder

Bridgeport, Conn.: Linda Stasi evidently did not read all of the lengthy New York Times article about Amazon (“Work up a frenzy,” Aug. 19). The article reveals the lack of understanding and compassion for workers’ hardships that could temporarily affect their work performance. Stasi writes as if employees want to be congratulated for coming to work. In fact, Amazon seems to be regressing to Dickensian times. Alice Lazaro