Washington, D.C. – October 15, 2015 – U.S. News & World Report, publisher of Best Hospitals for more than 25 years, today announced a special series of sessions focused on the future of health care policy during the third annual Hospital of Tomorrow conference, taking place on October 20 at the Renaissance Downtown in Washington, D.C.

Featured speakers Andy Slavitt, Acting Administrator, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; Sen. Debbie Stabenow (D-MI), Ranking Member, Senate Finance Subcommittee on Health Care; Sen. Bill Cassidy, M.D., (R-LA), Member, Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions; and Rep. Kevin Brady (R-TX), Chairman, House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, will examine the key issues transforming the health care arena, including value-driven payment models, health IT and the next steps for accountable care organizations.

Other distinguished policymakers and industry experts scheduled to appear include:

Jon White , M.D., Deputy National Coordinator for Health Information Technology, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

, M.D., Deputy National Coordinator for Health Information Technology, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Alice M. Rivlin , Ph.D., Director, Health Policy Center; Leonard D. Schaeffer Chair in Health Policy, Brookings Institution

, Ph.D., Director, Health Policy Center; Leonard D. Schaeffer Chair in Health Policy, Brookings Institution Patrick D. Pilch , Managing Director, National Healthcare Advisory Leader, BDO Consulting

, Managing Director, National Healthcare Advisory Leader, BDO Consulting Andrew Truscott , Managing Director, Accenture Federal

, Managing Director, Accenture Federal Kenya S. Woodruff , Partner, Haynes and Boone, LLP

, Partner, Haynes and Boone, LLP Jeffrey H. Birnbaum, President, BGR Public Relations, BGR Group

The Hospital of Tomorrow forum brings together the country's top medical executives, government policymakers and industry leaders to explore the intersection of health care policy and practice. The event will address topics such as the shift toward value-based care, telemedicine, big data, Medicare incentives and penalties, precision medicine, patient safety, and more.

"With the changes brought by the Affordable Care Act, U.S. News is pleased to have the key movers and shakers in health policy speaking at this year's conference," said Brian Kelly, editor and chief content officer at U.S. News. "At Hospital of Tomorrow we take on the critical challenges facing the hospital industry, generating discussions that ultimately benefit the provider and the patient."

Media interested in attending the Hospital of Tomorrow conference should contact Sophia Sherry at ssherry@usnews.com. Follow the conversation on Twitter via @USNHOT and by using the hashtag #USNHot15.

About U.S. News Hospital of Tomorrow

Hospital of Tomorrow, produced by U.S. News & World Report, brings together the country's top medical executives, experts and thought leaders, with the goal of providing best practices to hospitals and providers to help them maintain the highest standards of care and stay equipped for success during uncertain times. The third annual event will be held in Washington, D.C., from October 18-20, 2015.

About U.S. News & World Report

U.S. News & World Report is a digital news and information company that empowers people to make better, more informed decisions about important issues affecting their lives. Focusing on Education, Health, Personal Finance, Travel, Cars and News & Opinion, www.usnews.com provides consumer advice, rankings, news and analysis to serve people making complex decisions throughout all stages of life. 30 million people visit www.usnews.com each month for research and guidance. Founded in 1933, U.S. News is headquartered in Washington, D.C.