Recommended Top TSA Official Removed From Duties Over Backlash For Sluggish Security Lines Matt Vespa

Honorable Mentions: Bob Beckel, Joe Biden, Bill de Blasio, Michael Bloomberg, Barbara Boxer, Cher, Bob Costas, Al Gore, Alan Grayson, Chris Hayes, John Kerry, Paul Krugman, Ezra Klein, Sheila Jackson Lee, Bill Maher, Mike Malloy, Meghan McCain, Michael Moore, Michelle Obama, Dan Savage, Ed Schultz, Chuck Schumer, Andrew Sullivan, Joan Walsh, Elizabeth Warren, Anthony Weiner

20) Nancy Pelosi: After being displaced as Speaker of the House, Pelosi returned to Mordor, reformed herself as a giant eye and the legends say her minions prepare for war and eternally search for a magic ring that will allow her to return to power.

Defining quote: "Our view of the law is that it — if somebody is here without sufficient documentation, that is not reason for deportation." — Nancy Pelosi

19) The Southern Poverty Law Center: Ironically, the Southern Poverty Law Center used to do good work cataloguing hate groups around the country, but it’s since become little more than a hate group itself. Floyd Lee Corkins tried to murder people at the Family Research Council because the Southern Poverty Law Center falsely labeled them a hate group. You might think almost getting people killed might make the SPLW reconsider labeling people as hate groups for the sake of politics, but it continued the practice in 2013, even as Corkins faced 25 years in prison for the attempted mass murder that it inspired. That's why the Southern Poverty Law Center is just as much of a hate group as the American Nazi Party, the KKK or the New Black Panthers.

Defining quote: "While interviewed by the FBI, Corkins admitted that he wanted to 'kill as many as possible and smear the Chick-Fil-A sandwiches in victims' faces, and kill the guard.' I was one of those people who could have been his victim. I was on the 6th floor of the FRC building working on my pro-life internship assignments. I could have lost my life. My dear friend Rosa and everyone else in the building, including my boss Jeanne Monahan, now president of March for Life, could have lost their lives. ...It saddens me and brings tears to my eyes that a person like Corkins would resort to violence out of political disagreement, especially on the topic of gay marriage. It breaks my heart that Southern Poverty Law Center facilitated his intent to commit such a horrific act of violence by labeling FRC as a 'hate group.'" -- Anna Maria Hoffman

18) Piers Morgan: The last time there were Brits in America who were this annoying, Andrew Jackson drove them out of New Orleans during the War of 1812. Morgan's pretentious caterwauling about guns would be irritating under any circumstances, but if we wanted to be told what to do by Brits, we wouldn't have poured their tea in Boston Harbor to begin with.

Defining Tweet:

Hey, @piersmorgan, can you please explain these signs on your Beverly Hills property? http://t.co/OvPpUy2ZpX — James O'Keefe (@JamesOKeefeIII) April 2, 2013

17) Jay Carney: It's a little bit of a cheap shot to pick on a White House Press Secretary since by definition, they're always playing Waylon Smithers to the Mr. Burns in the White House. Yet and still,Carney is such a petulant lick-spittle that it's hard not to hold him in contempt as you look into his dead little eyes while he spouts lies at each and every press conference.

Defining Tweet:

Carney blows more smoke than a Rastafarian death rattle. — Dennis Miller Show (@DennisDMZ) May 14, 2013

16) Wendy Davis: Nobody fought harder to kill babies in 2013 than Abortion Barbie. Now she's trying to turn her lust for dead children into a springboard to make her the next governor of Texas. Good luck with that, Killer!

Defining quote: "The left is in a tizzy on twitter for my referring to pink shoes wearing Texas State Senator Wendy Davis as “Abortion Barbie.” It sums her up perfectly. All the nation knows about Wendy Davis is that she is ignorant of the horrors of Kermit Gosnell, wears pink shoes, and filibustered legislation to save the innocent in Texas. She joined the long line of Democrats before her to oppose legislation to protect other people while using property rights arguments to do so." -- Erick Erickson

15) Kathleen Sebelius: She would be the hapless "Brownie, you're doing a heck of a job" mope of the Obama administration if there was anybody competent on staff to use in comparison. However, she stands out, even in a Three Stooges administration because she's so far over her head trying to implement Obamacare that it would almost be tempting to feel sorry for her if she weren't wrecking the lives of tens of millions of Americans in the process.

Defining Tweet:

RT @memphisdaily: TN Sen @BrianKelsey gave Kathleen Sebelius "Websites for Dummies" during #Memphis #healthcare event pic.twitter.com/JTPuPkyVY6 — Brian Kelsey (@BrianKelsey) November 1, 2013

14) Alec Baldwin: Baldwin was already known as such a pretentious, homophobic creep that conservatives were calling on Capital One to fire him for his gay slurs BEFORE MSNBC ever hired him. Then, MSNBC brought him on board, he allegedly exploded with more gay slurs, and MSNBC execs sent him packing. Why were they shocked? It wasn't like they didn't know he was prone to doing that already.

Defining quote: "C**ksucking f*g." -- Alec Baldwin allegedly to a member of the paparazzi in an outburst that cost him his job at MSNBC.

13) Debbie Wasserman Schultz: She's a bit of a puzzler in that she's habitually dishonest, nasty, annoying, and generally unlikable; yet she's risen to become the Chair of the Democratic National Committee. Also, did I mention she's delusional as well?

Defining quote: "...Democratic candidates will be able to run on ObamaCare as an advantage leading into the 2014 election!" -- Debbie Wasserman Schultz

12) GLAAD: These hypocrites stood strongly behind Alec Baldwin when he shouted homophobic slurs in public, but regularly try to destroy Christians for refusing to toe the liberal line on gay marriage. GLAAD is every bit as much of a rabidly anti-Christian group as it is a pro-gay rights organization. Even people who agree with GLAAD on gay rights shouldn't be supporting such a hateful, hypocritical group of bullies.

Defining quote: "Is GLAAD’s position so weak, so intellectually indefensible, that it cannot prevail in reasoned debate, and therefore all opposition must be bullied into silence? This is how America becomes divided and balkanized; because groups like GLAAD make civil disagreement impossible." -- V the K at GayPatriot

11) Oprah Winfrey: Oprah Winfrey built a net worth of more than 2 billion dollars on the backs of her white female fans, but suddenly America became an awful, racist country because she had a movie to promote. If this is such a horrible, bigoted country, how is it that Oprah was able to become the most successful black woman on planet earth while living here? Is she just that much more wonderful than everyone else?

Defining quote #1: "There’s a level of disrespect for the office that occurs. And that occurs in some cases and maybe even many cases because he’s African American. There’s no question about that and it’s the kind of thing nobody ever says but everybody’s thinking it." — Oprah Winfrey

Definining quote #2: "You know, as long as people can be judged by the color of their skin, problem’s not solved. As long as there are people who still, there’s a whole generation – I say this, you know, I said this, you know, for apartheid South Africa, I said this for my own, you know, community in the south - there are still generations of people, older people, who were born and bred and marinated in it, in that prejudice and racism, and they just have to die." -- Oprah Winfrey

10) Chris Matthews: Aside from constantly claiming to hear the same racist dog whistles that everyone else on MSNBC does (Maybe everyone at that network should get his ears checked), Matthews may be the biggest Obama fanboy on the planet. I'm not entirely sure if Sasha and Malia Obama love their daddy the way Chris Matthews does and if those horrible rumors about the Obama marriage crack-up in the Enquirer turn out to be true, we do know at least one "journalist" who'd be happy to let Bo crash on his couch for as long as he wants.

Defining quote: "I look at Obama as a perfect American,” Mr. Matthews said, according to the show’s transcript. “I don’t mean politically. … But as a citizen. The guy went to school, he never broke a law. He did everything right. He raised a wonderful family. He’s a good husband, a good father. My God, I don’t think he’s ever gotten a speeding ticket. The guy does everything right." -- Chris Matthews

9) Hillary Clinton: Wow, what a role model! She married a guy who screwed half of Arkansas behind her back, leveraged people's pity for her into a Senate seat in New York and then turned a failed presidential run into an abysmal term as a Secretary of State that was most noteworthy because her incompetence got Americans killed in Benghazi. After all that, she wants to run for President again. Wheeeeeeeeeeee!

Defining quote: "With all due respect, the fact is we had four dead Americans. Was it because of a protest or was it because of guys out for a walk one night decided to go kill some Americans? What difference at this point does it make?" -- Hillary Clinton on her department’s lies to the American people about an Al-Qaeda attack.

5, 6, 7 & 8) Michael Eric-Dyson / Jesse Jackson / Al Sharpton / Touré: All of these men are listed together because they're such indistinguishable professional race hustlers that they don’t even merit their own entries. All four of these men have managed to turn finding new and creative reasons to call people racists into a profession that's probably only slightly more reputable than professional kidnapper or puppy torturer (Saddam Hussein probably had one of those, right?).

Defining Conversation: "Matt Lewis: It took 10 minutes — 10 minutes to get to the race issue. Clearly that’s why Republicans – Michael Eric-Dyson: Sir, sir — I didn’t interrupt you when you were offering bromides. Matt Lewis: I didn’t accused anybody of being – Michael Eric-Dyson: Hold on, I didn’t interrupt you. Don’t interrupt me. Martin Bashir: Matt, Matt – Michael Eric-Dyson: Don’t deploy the very principles of white privilege to silence a black man on the panel because you don’t want to talk about race. So be quiet." -- Michael Eric Dyson plays the "white privilege card" on Daily Caller writer, Matt Lewis

4) Martin Bashir: Happily, in the unlikely event that Bashir is ever remembered in the history books, it will be as the cable news host who was fired from MSNBC for suggesting that someone defecate in Sarah Palin's mouth.

Defining quote: "One of the most comprehensive first-person accounts of slavery comes from the personal diary of a man called Thomas Thistlewood, who kept copious notes for 39 years….In 1756, he records that ‘a slave named Darby catched eating canes; had him well flogged and pickled, then made Hector, another slave, s-h-i-t in his mouth.’ This became known as ‘Darby’s Dose,’ a punishment invented by Thistlewood that spoke only of the slave owners’ savagery and inhumanity….When Mrs. Palin invoked slavery, she doesn’t just prove her rank ignorance. She confirms that if anyone truly qualified for a dose of discipline from Thomas Thistlewood, then she would be the outstanding candidate." — Martin Bashir explains why Sarah Palin should have someone crap in her mouth.

3) Harry Reid: Reid spent 2013 picking on kids with cancer and driving a dagger through the heart of the filibuster, which will make our system of government considerably less stable from here on out. In other words, he's both a terrible human being AND a terrible Senate majority leader.

Defining quote: “If you can help one child who has cancer, why wouldn’t you do it?,” Bash asked. “Why would we want to do that?” — Harry Reid

2) Melissa Harris-Perry: It's tempting to lump Melissa Harris-Perry in with the other race hustlers, but her tampon earrings, mockery of Mitt Romney's adopted child and her creepy, fascistic desire to see children pried away from their parents sets her apart. It's like Al Sharpton mixed with Leon Trotsky, all rolled up in one hateful package!

Defining quote: "We have to break through our kind of private idea that kids belong to their parents or kids belong to their families, and recognize that kids belong to whole communities." — Melissa Harris-Perry

1) Barack Obama: America's worst President offered up another year of lies, division, vacuous speeches and selfies to go along with what may be the worst government program in America's history. Ironically, even as his administration proved to be completely incompetent in every facet of governance and utterly lawless, Obama demanded more power over gun laws, immigration, our taxes and our health care. We should be grateful he spends so much time on vacation because the country is safer every time that nincompoop goes out of town.

Defining quote #1: "Now, if you have or had one of these plans before the Affordable Care Act came into law and you really liked that plan, what we said was you can keep it if it hasn’t changed since the law passed." — Barack Obama lies about his “If you like your plan, you can keep it” lie.

Defining quote #2: "Well, you’ve touched on it to a degree. (Obama) made so many promises. We thought that he was going to be – I shouldn’t say this at Christmastime, but – the next messiah." — If you want to know how a buffoon like this could spend two terms in the White House, this quote from Barbara Walters offers up a lot of insight.