It was the dawn of Ian Sunter, the high noon of Chuck Ealey, and the sunset of Angelo Mosca — an enormity of excitement compacted into a final minute and 51 seconds of clean slugfest and improbable new Cinderella script.

Pencil-line clouds striped an azure sky, a crisp December wind crossed the dry Florida turf, and the live gate of 33,953 waited breathlessly upon the ultimate spectacle of Hamilton's eminently successful Grey Cup week — a game-winning field goal as time ran out, earning Hamilton its 13th all-time Grey Cup triumph.

From his own 15, with 1:28 left, Ealey hit (Tony) Gabriel at the Ticat 42. Then he hit him again at the 54 with 1:11 left. Then he hit him a third time at the Rider 41 and :51 left. Then he hit (Garney) Henley at the Rider 25 with :27 left.

And finally, there he was again, the ruddy-faced 19-year-old Sunter with the long hair and very new moustache, lining up for a 34-yard field goal with 13 seconds left, keeping his head down as the coaches had warned him, and waiting for word of his success or failure from Garney Henley, the ball holder.

"When I'm doing what I'm told," said Sunter, "I never see the ball go through the uprights. But when Garney says, 'Atta Baby' … then I know without seeing that I've scored."

It was the quietest and most composed dressing room in Ticat history — little wild giddiness and champagne squirting, no shrieking, no throwing things, no dumping people in the showers.

For a team that came through a season doing what it had to do when it had to be done, the atmosphere was workaday.

"But I died twice out there," said (George) Wells, one of the club's resident comics. "I died when I jumped offside and nullified (Al) Brenner's touchdown, and I died when (Ron) Lancaster threw me an interception and I dropped it. Otherwise, I was very, very good."

Brenner didn't know who had nullified the touchdown until halftime. He then warned Wells that if he (Brenner) didn't win the car, then Wells owed him one.

Lewis Porter was most likely going to hospital for X-rays of his neck and back.

"I doubted I'd be able to play in the second half, but they put a lot of heat on it, and I was able to go back in there."

The line play was very clean, but very knock-em-down-and-drag-em-out.

Garney Henley, like most, was asked a lot of soft and rather far-out questions. Somebody wanted to know what was he going to do on Monday.

"Be on time in the morning for my position at University of Guelph," he replied, "and then coach our basketball team in a regular game in the evening."

And what kind of patterns had he been running most of the time?

"I was coming from the weak side and cutting into a zone seam behind the linebackers. On those short or intermediate passes, Ealey's running threat helps the receiver by causing linebackers to play up tighter."

Said Ian Sunter, who talks in a rather old fashioned matter-of-fact way … "Midway through the fourth quarter, it appeared to me that the game might have a field goal conclusion."

So Ian got up and began moving around and loosening up.

When Henley came down at the 25, with .27 on the clock, Jerry Williams first asked Bill Van Burkleo if he could sent a punt over the dead line — giving Hamilton a one-point victory. Van Burkleo said it was close — he couldn't be sure.

So Williams signalled for Sunter and gave him a little solace before he started on the field.

"If you miss it," the coach told Sunter, "don't worry. Because if we don't win this one now, we'll win it in the first overtime."

Was Ian nervous?

"I was too busy concentrating to be nervous. I didn't even look at the time on the clock. This was my moment, what I live for. It was my thing and I had to do it."

And so, as a frosty gloom closed over Ivor Wynne Stadium, long after the party was over, you had to reflect on the great first years of Jerry Williams and Chuck Ealey, of the string of victories across the season, of the hairbreadth finishes, of fate perhaps lending a hand in the story book finish of Ticats, taking the big one in their own back yard.

And as you looked around the dressing room in that final, shining, post-game hour, you knew that perhaps half a dozen of the Ticat winners wouldn't be back.

One would retire, some would be traded, some would be replaced by better talent of a brand new '73 season.

Time waits for nobody, and if glory waits, it doesn't wait for long!