Topics: Barack Obama, Books, Citigroup, Dodd-Frank, economy, Editor's Picks, Elizabeth Warren, excerpts, Franklin Roosevelt, Glass-Steagall, Great Recession, Lehman Brothers, Too Big to Fail, Business News

Like the Roosevelt administration before it, the Obama administration’s response to the crisis entailed much more than just the use of fiscal and monetary tools. It included an impressive array of initiatives targeted at specific sectors, from housing and motor vehicles to financial services. Few if any of these, however, began to approach, in ambition or achievement, the initiatives launched under the New Deal.

In particular, the Obama administration’s attempts to provide distressed homeowners with mortgage relief were a pale imitation of what was achieved by the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation of the 1930s. Changes in the nature of housing finance in the intervening period made it more difficult to restructure mortgages without imposing large losses on either the banks or taxpayers, something that was both a political and an economic nonstarter. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 did not begin to rise to the ambition of the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 or the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. By more successfully deploying their monetary and fiscal tools, policy makers this time prevented the worst. And by preventing the worst, they allowed the vested interests that benefited from the prevailing financial system to regroup. They relieved the pressure for root-and-branch reform.

* * *

Residential construction had accounted for 6 percent of U.S. GDP at the peak in 2005; its share now fell to barely 2 percent. Construction activity always falls sharply in a recession, to be sure. But what was worrisome now was how weak residential construction continued to act as a drag once the economy began to recover.

To explain the failure of construction to recover, observers pointed to the outsized building boom prior to 2006 and the exceptional severity of the recession, which drained the pool of potential homebuyers. Problems in the banking system and securitization markets made it hard to finance construction of new subdivisions and apartment buildings. Mortgage underwriters, having embraced lax standards before, swung now to the other extreme. Regulators tightened their scrutiny of lending practices.

Above all, as many as four million of the sixty million American homeowners with mortgages had fallen behind on their payments by early 2009 and were at risk of foreclosure. It took a home builder of unusually sunny disposition to invest in a new subdivision with this massive shadow inventory hanging over the market. A further ten to fifteen million households were encumbered with mortgage debts that now exceeded the value of their homes. For the moment, they were still current on their mortgages, but there was always the risk that they might walk away, adding their homes to the list of bank-owned properties. In addition to the drag on the construction sector, there were the losses for the banks. There was the deterioration of neighborhoods blighted by untended properties. Above all, there were the dislocation and suffering of families losing their homes.

In the 1930s the Home Owners’ Loan Corporation helped to mitigate these problems. But there was no HOLC this time. Instead the Obama administration responded with a set of limited initiatives that failed to deliver even on their own modest ambitions. The Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP) was designed to provide financial incentives for banks and mortgage servicers to reduce interest rates for four million homeowners unable to make their monthly payments. Servicers satisfying program provisions received an up-front fee of $1,000 and further modest payments if the borrower remained current. But as of late 2013, just 1.3 million mortgages had been modified under the program. The government had spent barely a quarter of TARP funds earmarked for the purpose.

The Home Affordable Refinance Program (HARP) was designed to permit an additional five million homeowners not immediately at risk of foreclosure to refinance at lower rates. To qualify, a mortgage must have been acquired by Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae. Conveniently from this point of view, Fannie and Freddie now owned or guaranteed a majority of US home loans. Less conveniently, Freddie and Fannie’s independent administrator, Ed DeMarco, who was charged with rehabilitating the GSEs, resisted enlisting them in the cause. By mid-2011 barely a million homeowners had been helped, and by the end of 2013, six full years into the crisis, fewer than 3 million homeowners had availed themselves of this program. There were also initiatives for lending money to unemployed homeowners and transfers to the states for anti-foreclosure programs. But fewer than one in thirty homeowners were helped by these government programs, compared to one in ten in the 1930s.

Policy makers struggled with both ethical and budgetary dilemmas. A program narrowly targeted at delinquent homeowners would reward those who had stopped paying, using the tax dollars of others whose homes were also underwater but who nonetheless continued to make their payments. A program addressing the problems of all twenty million homeowners whose mortgages exceeded the value of their homes would, however, quickly become so expensive as to be politically toxic.

Alternatively, the foreclosure problem could have been addressed through changes in statute. Judges could have been empowered to restructure mortgages in personal bankruptcy proceedings, just as they restructured other debts. Senator Obama had sponsored legislation to this effect, and Candidate Obama endorsed the concept. But for President Obama, this would have meant losses for the banks, which preferred to extend and pretend—to hope that their problem loans would be repaid once the housing market recovered. Some loans might have to be written down, but the banks preferred to realize these losses later, when their condition was stronger.

And, despite the bailouts, the banks remained a powerful lobby. Community banks lobbied against legislation to allow bankruptcy judges to meddle with their mortgage portfolios, just as they had lobbied against deposit insurance in the 1930s. This created doubts that legislation empowering judges to restructure mortgages could attract the necessary supermajority of votes in the Senate. In any case, a policy that implied large losses for the lenders would have undermined Treasury’s strategy for rehabilitating the financial system, which was based on the banks’ earning their way back to health. Secretary Geithner opposed any form of intervention that meant losses for the banks. The Senate was quietly told that bankruptcy reform was not a priority of Treasury, and legislation aimed at revising the statute died a quick death.

It has been argued that the difference in the 1930s was decisive action to resolve the banking crisis. By declaring a bank holiday, closing down bad banks, and allowing only well-capitalized depository institutions to open, it is said, FDR strengthened the banking system sufficiently so that it could absorb losses from a more ambitious mortgage restructuring initiative. This, as we have seen, is inaccurate. The main thing FDR did was to provide a cooling-off period, some soothing words, and the capacity for the Federal Reserve to act as a lender of last resort through the Emergency Banking Act of 1933. Then as now, the banks were too weak for the government to force them to absorb large losses. The Home Owners’ Loan Corporation, recall, bought only mortgages that financial institutions willingly sold.

In fact, the HOLC could help as many as one in ten homeowners without massive budgetary costs and without imposing large losses on banks and other mortgage lenders because its help was limited to interest-rate relief. This was all many homeowners needed, since, given down payments of as much as 50 percent, few of them were underwater even with the sharp fall in house prices. The fact that more homeowners were underwater in 2009 as a result of having made smaller down payments made resolving the foreclosure crisis harder.

Finally, the greater complexity of mortgage finance made restructuring more difficult. Having purchased a mortgage, investors might lose as much as 40 percent if a home was repossessed; such were the costs of evicting the occupant, sprucing up the property, and putting it on the market. They therefore had an incentive to agree to at least some reduction of principal to keep the borrower in his or her residence. Homeowners, however, dealt not with investors but with mortgage servicers, who were set up to collect monthly payments if they were made and to foreclose if they were not. Servicers were not competent to restructure mortgages, as subsequent tales of lost paperwork and serial miscommunication made clear. Nor did the prospect of a $1,000 HAMP payment give them much incentive to acquire the capacity.

In principle, this was a problem that the public sector could solve. The federal government hired twenty thousand specialists to administer the HOLC and oversee mortgage restructuring in the 1930s. This time, in light of the greater complexity of mortgage finance, the commitment of manpower would have had to be greater still. But given pervasive distrust of big government, there was resistance now to doing anything similar.

* * *

The Great Depression and the banking crisis prompted passage of the Glass-Steagall Act, creation of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and measures strengthening the power of the Federal Reserve to act as a lender of last resort. These reforms did not eradicate every trace of the earlier banking and financial system. The United States still had a large number of banks, matched now by a large number of regulators. The shadow of history was too long for it to be otherwise. Still, by creating deposit insurance, establishing a proper lender of last resort, and subjecting banks and securities markets to stricter regulation, policy makers drew the right lessons. By strengthening confidence in the banking and financial system and limiting risk taking, they inaugurated what was, in retrospect, a singular half-century of financial stability.

Financial reform this time was more limited. The most important explanation, alluded to above, was the very success of policy makers in preventing the worst. Building on the lessons of the 1930s, they averted an economic calamity on the scale of the Great Depression. The Depression discredited inherited financial arrangements. The implosion was so complete that there was little left to risk by radical reform. Unquestionably, the rescues of Bear Stearns, AIG, Citigroup, and Bank of America and the failure of Lehman Brothers were a shock. But this shock paled in comparison with the catastrophe that was 1933, when the banking and financial system was shut, the basis for the monetary standard was suspended, and economic activity ground to a halt. With things so bad, it was hard for the opponents to argue that root-and-branch reform would make them worse.

The other factor standing in the way of more fundamental 1930s-style reform was the size and complexity of the financial system. The complexity of megabanks like Citigroup, Bank of America, and Wells Fargo made breaking them up more easily said than done, however much the proponents of breakup asserted otherwise. Not only were the big banks still in business but, as a result of the shotgun marriages presided over by the authorities, they had grown even bigger. There was a wider range of financial institutions and instruments to be brought into the regulatory net, including hedge funds, insurance companies, and money market mutual funds. Because the cogs of the financial system were interlocking, radical reform of the rules governing one might have unintended consequences for others. If money market funds were obliged to hold costly capital, for example, they would have to reduce their returns. Investors would shun them, forcing the money funds to curtail their purchases of commercial paper. Hence reform of the rules governing money market funds might have a negative impact on the commercial paper market and impair the operation of the financial system as a whole.

Similarly, the existence of a wide variety of derivative instruments complicated efforts to drive their trading into clearinghouses and onto exchanges. Although easily standardized securities would survive such requirements, others might not. It was not clear which were which, or whether those that survived would mainly be the instruments used by farmers for hedging risk or speculators for manipulating it.

And derivative securities were traded not just in the United States but internationally. In the 1930s world of controls on capital flows, it was possible for national authorities to proceed unilaterally. But if other countries now failed to follow the United States in tightening regulation, transactions and the institutions undertaking them might simply move offshore, much as AIG Financial Products had moved offshore before the crisis. The $6.2 billion of trading losses incurred by JPMorgan’s Chief Investment Office in 2012 similarly occurred offshore. As former Senator Ted Kaufman, onetime chief of staff to Joe Biden and no friend of the financial services industry, put it, Bruno Iksil, the JPMorgan trader immediately responsible, wasn’t called the “London Whale” because he worked in Philadelphia.

The regulatory apparatus was similarly more complex. The United States had as many as seven separate bank regulators, each with its turf. Lobbying by regulators as well as the regulated made radical reform such as creation of a single consolidated bank supervisor impossible to achieve. Moreover, there now existed international standards for capital and liquidity, the Basel Accord, with which the United States had to comply. Compared to 1933, there were simply more facts on the ground. Incremental reform was still possible, but radical reform was hemmed in on all sides.

* * *

There were two estimable congressional leaders in 1933, Carter Glass and Henry Steagall, but there were now two equally effective leaders in Congressman Barney Frank and Senator Christopher Dodd. Frank, the chair of the House Financial Services Committee, had an outsized ego even by congressional standards. Prone to strong statements and bad jokes, and conscious of his reputation as the quickest mind in the House, he did not shy away from denigrating his opponents. But he was able to master complex technical issues and had a knack for shepherding controversial legislation through committee. Dodd, chair of the Senate Banking Committee, ran a disastrous presidential campaign in 2008, and as a “friend of Angelo” he received mortgage loans on his houses in Washington, D.C., and Connecticut from Countrywide Financial. But he was committed to forging a bipartisan consensus, and as a lame-duck senator who announced his decision not to run for reelection in January 2010, he saw successful financial reform legislation as his legacy.