Sources: UnitedHealth to enter Illinois health exchange

State's No. 2 insurer could have major impact if it offers Obamacare policies next year, expert says

The decision by UnitedHealth, the nation's largest and the state's No. 2 insurer, has the potential to shake up the Illinois market, which was dominated in 2014 by Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois, the state's dominant insurer.

After sitting out the first year, UnitedHealth Group Inc. intends to offer individual policies on the Illinois health insurance exchange next year, according to sources familiar with the company's plans.

Blue Cross this year wrote about 92 percent of the policies bought on the Illinois health insurance exchange, the new marketplace created under the Affordable Care Act, according to state and company data.

United's decision to jump back into the Illinois market "absolutely could have a meaningful impact, but it all depends on what they bring to market," said Leemore Dafny, a professor at Northwestern University's Kellogg School of Management who studies the health insurance market.

"This is another potentially significant player entering the marketplace, and given that so few are in the exchanges today, I think that additional choice is going to be very welcome to potential enrollees," Dafny said.

United's participation also could help lower rates for consumers, a key concern among the law's supporters.

While United would neither confirm nor deny its plans to offer policies in Illinois next year, a spokesman said the Minnesota-based insurer intends to increase its participation over time in exchanges nationwide.

"In the near term we remain focused on the necessary first steps of this process, which include careful evaluation of exchanges on a state-by-state basis," spokesman Kevin Shermach said.

Five insurers offered plans on the Illinois health insurance marketplace in the first year, including Blue Cross, Humana, Aetna, Health Alliance and the startup Land of Lincoln Health.

Each is expected to submit applications to offer plans again next year. They can begin submitting health plans Tuesday for inclusion in the 2015 Illinois marketplace. They have until June 10 to do so.

United executives said in an April conference call with investors that the insurer was evaluating other markets with the intent to expand its relatively modest footprint.

"At this stage, our bias is to increase our participation" next year, said Gail Boudreaux, chief executive of UnitedHealthcare, United's primary health insurance subsidiary.

Nationwide, UnitedHealth offered exchange-based products in the individual or small-business markets in 10 states and Washington, D.C., this year. It did not offer individual policies on the exchanges in any of the 34 states where the federal government operated the marketplaces, including Illinois.