Young men and women competed in the national equestrian vaulting competition at The Ranch

Carlee Heger leaps on her horse, Xena, at the silver individual freestyle event that was part of the national competition for equestrian vaulting at The Ranch on Sunday in Loveland. ( Trevor L. Davis/ Loveland Reporter-Herald )

It's like dancing on a moving horse.

The vaulter leaps onto a horse, which circles around a lunger, in a move that looks as easy as sitting on a chair. Then she or he spins around to face the rear, leaps into the air, straddles the horse with athletic grace, and performs other feats to dazzle the audience and the judges with his/her strength, flexibility and balance.

Around 35 clubs, made up of 300 vaulters and 75 horses, competed in the Equestrian Vaulting National Competition — held by the American Vaulting Association — at The Ranch in Loveland this weekend. The final day was Sunday.

Carlee Heger of Fort Collins took home several awards.

This weekend at the Equestrian Vaulting Nationals, Carlee won or helped win three national championships for her club, the Mile-High Vaulters, which were a few of the numerous awards the club won. She won the pas-de-deux with her partner, Haley Smith from Parker (a partner event), the team championship in the B class, and the silver individual freestyle championship.

Equestrian vaulting can trace its origins to the 19th century, when military people were part of a calvary.

"If you got knocked off, you needed to be able to catch up to the horse and get back on," said Joanie Krostenko, a parent volunteer.

She said they were trained to mount a cantering horse, shoot over their shoulder and pick up compatriots who had fallen.

Advertisement

The sport evolved later into a ceremonial event for parades and shows, although it was still about men being warriors.

Krostenko said that after World War II, it became fashionable in Germany and turned into a more elegant gymnastics and dance event.

"Combine music, gymnastics, makeup and spandex and it became quite popular with girls," she said, although men still do perform in the sport.

She said equestrian vaulting helps young people develop balance and a rapport with large animals.

"You don't have to own the horse," added Carolyn Belardi, who traveled with her daughter, Tessa, with the "Mt. Eden Vaulting Club" from California for the competition. "Kids join a club and the club owns the horse. All the vaulters are responsible for care, grooming, tacking, cleaning stalls.

The sport is also a friendly "sisterhood" where clubs sometimes borrow each other's horses instead of paying for the expense of bringing their own horses across the country.

"We send our best vaulters to Europe," Krostenko said. "The competition there is even more incredible."

Carlee is one such vaulter who is an alternate for Team USA at the Junior World Championships and is flying to Germany today (Monday) to train for the competition in the Nederlands.

Carlee Heger high-fives a Luke Overtom from Warm Beach Vaulters in Washington while waiting for her turn at the silver individual freestyle event at The Ranch on Sunday in Loveland. (Trevor L. Davis/ Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"She probably won't compete because she's an alternate," said her mother, Dana Heger. "But it's still pretty exciting. This is the first time ever for Junior World Championships. They've never had them before. They just have the regular world championships."

She said the junior division is for 14- to 18-year-olds.

Carlee began vaulting in 2010 with Complete Equestrian Vaulters in Fort Collins.

She now trains three times a week.

Her mother drives her from Fort Collins to Fort Lupton to rehearse with her coach.

Her coach, Jodi Rinard, also acts as her "lunger" who guides a horse around a circle with a long lead and gentle whip.

Heger also does cross training, gymnastics and bodyweight exercises to get stronger.

The Mile High Vaulters, the club to which Carlee belongs, was started by Jodi Rinard around 2004. Around 40 members are a part of the club and come from all along the Front Range. Around 30 of those vaulters were at the competition this weekend.

For more information: To find more details on equestrian vaulting, visit the American Vaulting Association at www.americanvaulting.org, the local club Complete Equestrian Vaulters in Fort Collins at www.cevaulters.org and Mile High Vaulters at www.milehighvaulters.org.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.