Midwest travel: Intuit exhibits Richard Saholt collages

hello

Chicago

The outsiders

Take the opportunity to visit the one-of-a-kind Intuit: The Center for Intuitive and Outsider Art in Chicago during the run of "MAD AS HELL: The Collages of Richard Saholt." World War II veteran Saholt (1924-2014), of Minneapolis, was known for his large-format collages that combine shocking commercial illustrations with powerful words and phrases taken from magazine and newspaper headlines. Although earning a Bronze Star for bravery, he was unable to get financial or psychiatric help after the war but found some solace by collaging text and pictures that speak of war and mental illness. There are also collages devoted to famous figures such as Prince Charles and Princess Diana, Pope Paul II, Natalie Wood and John Belushi, as well as politically charged topics like gun control and Watergate. 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Tuesday through Saturday; 11 a.m. to 7:30 p.m. Thursday; and noon to 5 p.m. Sunday, through Jan. 3, at Intuit: The Center for Intuitive and Outsider Art, 756 N. Milwaukee Ave., Chicago. Entrance fee is a $5 suggested donation. (312) 243-9088 or art.org.

A boo with a view

Celebrate the season with the finest city views from the terrace at Loews Chicago. The hotel's first Harvest Festival & Pumpkin Patch works for families with kids as well as adults with a pumpkin patch, decorating area, face painting and an autumnal photo booth. Parents, couples and friends can stop by to sip on an adult beverage in the adults-only biergarten amid the fantastic skyline views. 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday, Oct. 17, and 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. Sunday, Oct. 18, at Loews Chicago Hotel, 455 N. Park Ave., Chicago. Free entry with a $5 donation per pumpkin for Ronald McDonald House Charities. facebook.com/events/1647106622224231.

Midwest

Take me home, country roads

The 28th Annual Autumn Drive takes harried city folk and suburbanites away from the malls for a day and instead winds by a dozen farms in rural McHenry County from Woodstock to Marengo. You might find antiques and arts and crafts at one stop and pumpkins, hay rides and fiddlers at the next. Garage sales and barn sales are scattered throughout the drive, as are produce stands and baked goods for sale. Each stop offers a distinctive country experience from corn mazes and apple picking to warm, tasty food and kids' activities. 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. rain or shine, Friday through Sunday, Oct. 16-18, along Garden Valley Road between Woodstock and Marengo. Get a list of participating farms and maps at autumndrive.net or call (815) 923-2429.

Do the Heidel hop

A name like Heidel overflows with Teutonic history, so raise your glass and celebrate Heidel House's German spirit at the Wisconsin resort's sixth annual Oktoberfest. Schnitzel is only the beginning of tasty German fare; the selection of Oktoberfest beverages, live polka music, contests and activities will be prodigious. The event includes a ceremonial blessing of the beer, Klement's Sausage Races, a polka dancing contest and a Das Boot Relay. Pack the lederhosen for a chance to be dubbed "best dressed" for your traditional outfit. Ticket purchase or reservations are not required. 2 to 10 p.m. Saturday, Oct. 17, at Heidel House Resort & Spa, Green Lake, Wisconsin. Free admission, but Oktoberfest weekend room rates start at $89 per night. (800) 444-2812 or heidelhouse.com.

Chilling city

Gothic Milwaukee, a haunted, historical walking tour company, conducts tours in the heart of Milwaukee's historic downtown area. A costumed guide leads walkers through the streets of Milwaukee and tells tales of bygone times while highlighting the history and architecture of the city. The routes cover notable locations like City Hall and the Pfister Hotel, and The Ghosts of Yankee Hill tour route is an off-the-beaten-path tour. Each tour lasts around 90 minutes and has a route that is roughly 1.25 miles. Most nights in October. Tours cost $15. For details, including tour times and dates, visit gothicmilwaukee.com or call (414) 301-2266.