Eva Longoria: A Tejana who has an uncommon and positive impact is Eva Longoria. Longoria is uncommon because she is equally philanthropist, humanitarian, entrepreneur, Hollywood star and co-founder of Latino Victory Project.

Successful Latinas are underrepresented in all areas, including the corporate world, politics and entrepreneurship. Only 15 percent of adult Latinas hold college degrees. Longoria serves as a great role model for Texan adolescents and millennials in a state where the Latino population is 36 percent and growing.

Right now, she is shedding light on human rights issues through her documentaries. Food Chains, now in theaters, highlights modern-day slavery occurring in the U.S. and raises awareness on pesticides. Recently, she has discussed issues such as the cycle of poverty, the importance of education, women business owners’ access to capital and business training, and the need for women to become mentors to younger women.

Longoria gives young Tejanas someone to look up to; someone who looks like them, has integrity, is successful and humble, and is giving back. After all, “you can’t be what you can’t see.” — Erika Vargas

Clay Jenkins: A person’s true character is shown in how they respond during a crisis. Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins was a real leader during the Ebola crisis, calmly working in uncharted territory while the eyes of the nation were on Dallas.

Jenkins showed the ability to think quickly and logically under pressure by developing an action plan to take care of Thomas Duncan’s family. He supported the health care workers on the front line at Texas Health Presbyterian Dallas Hospital. He showed strength of character and courage to the residents of Dallas as well as the rest of the country by personally escorting Duncan’s family from their apartment to temporary housing, and visiting with them during the quarantine period.

Above all, Jenkins’ actions showed compassion. He did all of this with social — and potentially physical — risk to himself and his family, which we saw play out when parents expressed fear at having their kids in the same school with his daughter. For his leadership, clear thinking, courage and above all, compassion in the face of crisis, Clay Jenkins should be named Texan of the Year. — Tami Cannizzaro

Texas Health Presbyterian professionals: The health care professionals at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas are Texans of the Year. If you are looking for people who have had uncommon impact across our city, our state, and even our country, you need not look further than the men and women who were involuntarily thrust into the spotlight in caring for the first patient to be diagnosed with Ebola in this country.

From housekeeping staff to highly trained ICU nurses, these Texans stepped up and volunteered to confront a deadly virus when many of us would have stepped away. They improvised when required and worked tirelessly. They accepted criticism and faced death threats. They carried on and did their jobs as news trucks lined up outside the hospital.

When two of their own team contracted Ebola, it must have shaken them all to the core. But they kept doing what health care professionals do. They cared for the sick and bound together in a manner that inspired many.

On a practical level, their successes and their mistakes taught lessons to hospitals across the state. Regulators and health care providers alike have upped their games to better protect all of us in the future. — Caryn Carson

Dr. Kent Brantly: For weeks, CNN headlines sported Dr. Kent Brantly’s name and his unfortunate delay in his journey to help victims afflicted with the Ebola virus in West Africa. In just this year, we saw someone from our own state saving others halfway across the globe, contracting the deadly disease, and then fighting back against its spread by giving a blood transfusion to one of the Dallas nurses who contracted the virus while caring for Thomas Duncan. I believe that he is the Texan of the Year because he has taken on what so few would even consider, and has saved many lives while battling the disease himself. He has spread the common Texan etiquette of politeness, generosity and love for others through a most uncommon feat, giving many parts of the world a special touch of Texas. — Catherine Blizzard

Barack Obama: It sounds strange to answer the question of who is Texan of the Year by saying Barack Obama, but without the Affordable Care Act my son of only 28 would have no insurance, and no rehab of any kind. After returning from two years in the Peace Corps in Africa in the early summer of 2013, my son worked for a small company that didn’t provide health insurance. Then he had a major stroke last December while playing basketball at the YMCA in Austin. He was in the hospital right after having two stents placed in his carotid artery. I was fortunate to be able to sign him up for health insurance on the last day to apply — one week after his stroke.

He spent two months in ICU in Austin and had to have part of his skull removed, but due to great rehab he can now swallow, speak well and walk. In short, he has a future.

Other than surgeons fees, which I paid out of my pocket, his hospital bill for the seven days without insurance was $553,000. Since he got insurance through the Affordable Care Act, no hospital administrators have expressed concern about his ability to pay bills.

The Affordable Care Act basically gave my son a life! Whenever any politician says the first thing they’ll do is repeal Obamacare, the hair on the back of my neck rises. Every American needs affordable health care! Barack Obama and those Texas members of Congress who supported his health reforms are my choice for Texan of the Year. Name anyone who has done more for so many Texans. — Steven O. Spurger

Ben Piece: For Texan of the Year, I nominate young Ben Piece of Denton. Nine-year-old Ben is slowly losing his eyesight to a congenital birth defect. Yet, in the spirit of a true Texan, Ben perseveres with a positive can-do attitude. He doggedly pursues his bucket list to see and experience all he can before he loses his vision permanently.

In spite of his own impending blindness, Ben has enlightened and inspired us all by showing us the unseeable quality of an unquenchable spirit in the face of hardship. He has helped us see how to soldier on in spite of the unthinkable. Ben’s courage has given us all more courage to face the unfaceable and to realize that life goes on after tragedy and loss.

His Texas swagger has blanketed the whole country. National news coverage includes the Big Three networks and stories on both Good Morning America and Today. Ben’s rugged determination transcends the ages and would make the likes of Sam Houston and William B. Travis proud. — Diana Austin

Very Good and Good Teachers: Not all teachers can be Teacher of the Year, and not all teachers deserve Needs Improvement. The majority of teachers I know are very good and good. It seems that these teachers go unrecognized for their work.

These are teachers who may be in an Academically Acceptable or Academically Unacceptable school and not on the front page pictured in the newspaper or on TV the first day of school. These are teachers who decide to stay in an inner-city school or a Title 1 school, knowing it can be a difficult decision.

My husband is one of these teachers at an elementary school, and I see the extra effort every day to make sure these students have food for lunch, a uniform, time to learn and play. These students don’t have a lot of advantages; some don’t have Internet at home. What they do have is teachers who care enough to spend extra time with them, care about them and share their time with them, which is precious.

I nominate this group of teachers, Very Good and Good Teachers, as Texan of the Year for taking their time, resources and most of all their hearts to help our students with a strong base from which to grow. — Perri Brackett