The Fix's Chris Cillizza recently wrote about the remarkably low percentage of Americans (23 percent) who trust the federal government to do the right thing "at least most of the time." While Cillizza was right to point out how small this percentage is within the context of public opinion ("Donald Trump's approval ratings look down on those numbers!"), he failed to note that this number has ticked upwards (from 19 percent) since the fall of 2013.

It shouldn't be any surprise that this percentage was lower in October 2013 than it is now. The headlines then were largely focused on governmental dysfunction. First, there was the federal shutdown, which was brought about by an unrealistic Republican House majority, a showboating GOP Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, and a defiant Democratic Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid who was defending a post-re-election and mandate-claiming President Barack Obama. Next came the not just a "glitch" rollout of the Affordable Care Act's federal website. This second incident of governmental incompetency wasn't even included in the Pew Research Center's data, but it surely contributed to Gallup's December survey finding that 72 percent of Americans – the largest number in 50 years – said "big government" is the biggest threat to the country's future.

[READ: Rubio's Position on Cuba May Clash With Florida Voters]

But what's more interesting than these snapshot views of trust are the long-term trends of trust and distrust, which Pew has plotted on an interactive graph.

When one clicks the "distrust" button and overlays those data points with those of "trust," it becomes evident that since 1973, the only time more Americans trusted rather than distrusted government was in the immediate aftermath of 9/11. While there have been ups and downs, which appear to be inversely related to the monthly unemployment rate, it's clear that the back-to-back shocks of Vietnam and Watergate took their toll on the public's perception of what Washington can effectively do and how corrupt partisan politics can be.

Beyond this, the rise of polarization shows up when one clicks the "trust by party" button. Prior to 1992, the percentages of Republicans and Democrats who trusted the government tended to move together, meaning that while Democrats trusted the government more than Republicans when Jimmy Carter was president, their level of trust fell with the Republicans' trust over the course of his presidency. The same dynamic occurs during Ronald Reagan's presidency – Republicans trusted the government more than Democrats, but both gained and lost trust in relation to historical events and political accomplishments. Starting with Bill Clinton, the pattern changes and different groups of partisans begin trusting government differently. Intriguingly, this polarization commences after what Pew described as the "steepest drop ever in satisfaction and trust," from March 1991 to October 1992 (see the 1992 dot on graph).

[READ: Ted Cruz's 2016 Bid Is Good for Democrats (Unless He Wins)]

So, what happened in the 1992 presidential cycle, aside from the economic downturn, that made more people sour on government and start seeing the world through a partisan lens?

The only thing that was especially unique was Ross Perot's presidential candidacy. Whether it was his relentless focus on the government's annual deficits and exploding debt; his well-financed challenge to the "duopoly" of the two major parties that terrified activists; his aiding and abetting in the rise of politics as entertainment as seen on cable television; or his ultimately self-defeating, erratic candidacy, which possibly disappointed between 10 to 15 percent of the electorate who wound up not voting for him, or perhaps, not voting at all (in June 1992, his poll numbers suggested he had the support of 37 percent of registered voters and on Election Day, he earned about 19 percent of the popular vote) is tough to say. It could have even been that despite earning nearly 20 million votes from Americans, he didn't win a single vote in the Electoral College.

Whatever the cause (and it could have nothing to do with Perot, and everything to do with then-House Minority Whip Newt Gingrich's Republican Revolution in 1994), we now understand that over the last twenty years, partisans began viewing politics more as a team sport and government more as a trophy than as a system through which to resolve policy debates.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

Although trust rose throughout the late 1990s and remained relatively high in the wake of 9/11, it shouldn't be overlooked that during these years (1999 to 2003), politicians passed legislation (amid the Monica Lewinsky scandal and the chaos following the 2000 election), and the economy grew. But over this last decade, as the Iraq War faltered, the economy weakened and polarization increased, Americans have grown tired by the partisan bombast (see, for instance, the rise in the percentage of independents). This is why the presidential candidate that wins in 2016 isn't going to be the one who is the most optimistic or the most charismatic. We're not living in Reagan's post-Carter America. Americans will likely want "change," but they've been too burned to again trust "hope." Whether the majority of voters' idea of change includes nostalgia (e.g., Hillary Clinton or Jeb Bush) or something new (e.g., Scott Walker, Rand Paul, Marco Rubio or Cruz) remains to be seen. But National Review's Charles C.W. Cooke is spot on in arguing that the successful candidate will be the one who runs against the last sixteen years.