VENICE - Venice Regional Bayfront Health has Florida's highest rate of patient complications and stands to lose 1 percent of Medicare payments for a year, based on data from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

Preliminary data from 2012 and 2013 shows several dozen Florida facilities are in the penalty zone. If they do not improve their final scores, they face losing 1 percent of Medicare funding. Hospitals were measured on a 10-point scale, with failing measured as 7 and above. The final scores may differ because Medicare will be looking at infections over two years, not one. Preliminary scores are based on infections during the 12-month period from July 2012 through June 2013. Final scores will include infections that occurred from the beginning of 2012 through the end of 2013. • Venice Regional Bayfront Health: 10 • Manatee Memorial Hospital: 7.575 • Sarasota Memorial Hospital: 7.55 • Doctors Hospital of Sarasota: 6.275 • Peace River Regional Medical Center, Port Charlotte: 6.075 • Fawcett Memorial Hospital, Port Charlotte: 5.675 • Blake Medical Center, Bradenton: 4.35 • Lakewood Ranch Medical Center: 1.35 • Englewood Community Hospital: 1 SOURCE: Kaiser Health News

Sarasota Memorial and Manatee Memorial hospitals also had preliminary rankings that failed the government's new standards, although their scores were much closer to the cutoff than was Venice's, according to an analysis published this week by the nonprofit Kaiser Health News.

The scores are based on rates of infections in patients with catheters in major veins and their bladders as well as eight other patient injuries, including blood clots, bed sores and accidental falls.

The scoring is a preliminary to the Hospital-Acquired Condition Reduction Program, which is mandated by the Affordable Care Act and will require Medicare to reduce payments to bottom-ranking hospitals. Certain types of hospitals are exempted from the penalties, including critical access hospitals, specially designated cancer hospitals and those devoted to rehabilitation, children, long-term care and psychiatric treatment.

Venice Regional received a preliminary score of 10, the worst possible.

If that score does not drop below the penalty threshold — currently a score of 7 or higher — when the government releases the final scores in its Hospital-Acquired Condition Reduction Program later this year, Venice Regional stands to lose 1 percent of each Medicare payment from Oct. 1 through Sept. 30, 2015. That could have significant impact, as Venice has one of the oldest populations in the nation and Medicare patients make up a large percentage of the hospital's business.

In comparison, the second worst score, 9.35, was held by Gulf Coast Medical Center Lee Memorial Health System in Fort Myers. Sarasota Memorial Hospital also had an unacceptable score, 7.55. Manatee Memorial had a 7.575 score. Attempts to seek comment from Manatee Memorial and Sarasota Memorial were unsuccessful.

On the opposite end of rankings, Englewood Community Hospital received a score of 1. Lakewood Ranch Medical Center scored 1.35.

Venice Regional administrators declined a request for an interview Wednesday, but issued a written statement that read:

“Providing quality care and safety for our patients is our top priority, and we continuously review our outcomes and adjust our practices to support these goals. We are participating in collaboratives focused on reducing pressure ulcers, falls and infections associated with central lines and catheters. Through this work we have adopted best practices that support the best possible outcomes.

“Quality improvement is a hospital-wide culture and involves medical staff leadership, clinical departments and our board of trustees in reviews of our clinical results to document success and identify opportunities to improve the process of care. As our medical staff, employees and other care providers apply these practices, we expect to see continued strengthening of our quality.”

Infections are not only often life-threatening to patients, but significantly raise the costs for Medicare, which is already facing major funding challenges.

A Harvard study found central line-associated bloodstream infections averaged about $45,000 per case, according to HealthDay News. Pneumonia infections that strike patients who are put on ventilators to help them breathe cost about $40,000 per case. The most common infections, surgical site infections, which happen in about one of every 50 operations, cost around $21,000 each to treat.

The final scores may differ from the preliminary ones because Medicare will be looking at infections over two years, not one. The preliminary scores are based on infections during the 12-month period from July 2012 through June 2013. Final scores will include infections that occurred from the beginning of 2012 and through the end of 2013.

Medicare is using three measures to calculate the hospital-acquired conditions scores: bloodstream infections and urinary infections caused by tubes or catheters, and the number of complications caused by eight types of potentially preventable conditions, such as bedsores or blood clots.

Each measure counts a third, except if a hospital is missing data or has too few incidents to be evaluated. Infection rates were adjusted by the type of hospital, and complications were adjusted to take into account the differing levels of sickness of each hospital's patients, their ages and other factors that might make them more or less fragile.

Information from Kaiser Health News, a nonprofit organization covering the nation's health care system, was used in this story.