<p>CONTRIBUTED PHOTO</p>

By Tony Biasotti

After 10 months of study and deliberation, a special committee voted Wednesday to recommend that Ventura County adopt Laura’s Law, which would allow for involuntary outpatient treatment for mentally ill people.

The working group on Laura’s Law reports to the county Behavioral Health Advisory Board, which now must make its recommendation on the issue to the Ventura County Board of Supervisors, which has the final say.

The committee had 18 members at Wednesday’s meeting in Oxnard, but only 10 voted. Seven supported creating a Laura’s Law program for Ventura County. Other members who abstained work for the Behavioral Health Department, including Janis Gardner, who chairs the Behavioral Health Advisory Board and ran the working group meeting.

Laura’s Law was passed in 2002 and has been implemented by a handful of California counties, including Los Angeles. It was named for Laura Wilcox, a 19-year-old mental health worker in Nevada County who was killed in 2001 by a man who had turned down psychiatric treatment.

The law allows judges to order outpatient treatment for mentally ill people who have refused treatment, are “substantially deteriorating” in their conditions, and have a history of involuntary hospitalizations or violent acts. People who are considered dangerous to themselves or others can already be committed for up to 72 hours without their consent, but before Laura’s Law, there was no way to force treatment beyond that.

Laura’s Law has no penalties for noncompliance. Still, mental health professionals say it has been effective in pushing people into treatment.

In Ventura County, the program would be run by the county Behavioral Health Department and cost about $2.2 million per year

The working group’s previous chairman, Dave Holmboe, died on May 17. His health problems led to postponing a vote on the issue that had been scheduled for late April. Holmboe was regarded as a county leader in advocating for mental health services.

On Wednesday, 10 people, including many parents of mentally ill people, spoke in support of Laura’s Law. Ventura Mayor Cheryl Heitmann volunteered her city as the host of a pilot program, if the Board of Supervisors chooses not to implement the law countywide.

“Our contention is that allowing mentally ill and or psychotic individuals to live in a homeless situation due to lack of treatment is simply irresponsible,” Heitmann said. “The lack of treatment for these people results in jails and hospitals becoming de facto psychiatric centers, staffed by people who are not trained or equipped for that.”

Three working group members who voted against Laura’s Law instead supported a new program with mental health professionals available 24 hours a day to enroll anyone in the county in voluntary treatment.

If Laura’s Law is implemented, the voluntary treatment program also will be available; state law mandates that the court-ordered treatment under Laura’s Law be the same as what’s given to people who sign up voluntarily.

Rod Kodman, Ventura County’s chief deputy public defender, said he voted against Laura’s Law because public defenders, like all attorneys, are duty-bound to represent their clients’ interests. If a mentally ill client does not want to enter treatment, Kodman said, his or her attorney must respect that decision and fight on the client’s behalf.

“We believe that there must be more help for those that suffer from mental illness in our community, but we cannot support any program that is adversarial to our clients,” he said.

Before the vote, Elaine Crandall, director of the Ventura County Behavioral Health Department, gave a presentation on how Laura’s Law would be administered and what it might cost.

Based on the demand for services in counties that have already implemented the law, she predicted a caseload of 34 people per year undergoing court-ordered treatment, with another 75 who would enroll in voluntary treatment rather than go before a judge.

Treating those people would require 14 staff members, as well as part-time help from nurses and doctors. The total cost would be about $2.2 million per year. A strictly voluntary program would treat about 20 people, at a cost of about $500,000 per year, Crandall said.

Crandall did not factor in court costs from Laura’s Law hearings, or the savings that might result from having fewer mentally ill people in jails or emergency rooms. The law is so new, she said, that there isn’t reliable data on what those long-term effects might be.