Last month, Austin-based Spindletop Capital Management, a private equity firm that focuses on investing in the healthcare industry, announced two new executive promotions for the company, with the addition of Steve Whitlock and Bob McDonald to the executive staff. Today, according to a company press release, the company has followed up with another executive addition, announcing the addition of Kelly Huang, PhD, as Operating Partner.

Dr. Huang comes to Spindletop directly from another Texas-based biotech position, serving most recently on the Executive Committee of the $3 billion revenue pharmaceutical company Endo Health Solutions and as President of its urology-focused subsidiary HealthTronics.

The press release explains that Dr. Huang’s most recent experience with HealthTronics and Endo Health speaks to his long, proven experience and leadership in the global healthcare business sector, bringing together scientific, consumer, and professional insights to his executive roles. The focus of his approach in helping healthcare companies succeed to develop and create value by putting the customer and patient at the center of the company’s business model. In his most recent role as a member of Endo Health Solutions’ Executive Committee, Huang was directly responsible for financial performance of the company as well as the overall leadership of Medical Services with the $200M+ HealthTronics subsidiary.

The press release goes on to explain that, “with Endo’s shift to a solutions strategy, he broadened HealthTronics beyond surgical services to data-enabled applications and solutions that improve patient outcomes and practice economics. This was accomplished through acquisition of MeridianEMR and IMS/UroChart electronic health record companies, Trellis Healthcare, a business intelligence company, and collaboration with CareCloud for integrated practice management software. Upon the systems foundation, Dr. Huang built capabilities in analytics and consulting services to enable new business models that network physicians into a data-enabled channel.”

Dr. Huang has previous biotech experience with large cap biotech companies as well, having spent 16 years with Johnson & Johnson in the role of Vice President of Research & Development. He was also a corporate officer of the $1 billion dollar Neutrogena Corporation, which is a Johnson & Johnson company. Prior to beginning his professional career, Huang earned his Doctorate and Masters degrees in Chemical Engineering from Stanford University in California, and also holds a Bachelors degree in Chemical Engineering, with a minor in Chemistry, from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.

Dr. Evan Melrose, Managing Director at Spindletop Capital, commented on the addition of Dr. Huang to the executive staff: “We are pleased that Kelly has joined our team here at Spindletop,” adding, “I believe that his expertise and experience growing healthcare companies complements the work being done here and allows us to better assist our portfolio companies as they develop. We look forward to adding Kelly to our healthcare services and healthcare IT practice in addition to our life sciences team.”