Topics: 2016 Elections, Editor's Picks, Foreign policy, GOP, Iran nuclear talks, Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, presidential candidates, Rand Paul, Rick Perry, Scott Walker, Ted Cruz, The Right, wingnuts, Politics News

In a shocking turn of events, the field of potential presidential candidates reacted negatively to news of a preliminary political framework from the Lausanne nuclear talks yesterday.

“Nothing in the deal described by the administration this afternoon would justify lifting US and international sanctions, which were the product of many years of bipartisan effort,” Jeb Bush said. “I cannot stand behind such a flawed agreement.” This will please the neoconservatives who had begun to worry about Bush’s commitment to omnidirectional global warfare, though he still will have to murder James Baker to fully prove his loyalty.

Florida Senator Marco Rubio, the neocons’ current fling, pretended that he would still have to consider all the details before making up his mind. When he makes up his mind, later, after pretending to consider all the details, he will come to the conclusion, probably, in all likelihood, that this’n here’s a shit deal.

Awaiting more details on #Iran deal but early reports indicate this is Obama admin spinning diplomatic failure. — Marco Rubio (@marcorubio) April 2, 2015

Former Texas Gov. Rick Perry, who is still a thing(?), tweeted, “Americans and our allies are right to be wary of a nuclear deal w/ Iran that is riddled with concessions by the Obama Administration.”

Ted Cruz: not a fan.

Scott Walker, also, too, does not like the political framework for a nuclear deal with Iran.

The absolute best “response,” though, was from our man Sen. Rand Paul. The “old Rand,” who had all sorts of problems but was certainly the type to support diplomatic negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program, remains in conflict with the “new Rand,” the generic defense budget-busting hawk who aims to be president. How did Paul reconcile his two selves? His staff is telling reporters that the senator “is out of pocket with family and not doing any media all week long.” (We’re not sure about the lingo, “out of pocket.” Is this a thing? Does he mean “out of the pocket,” like he’s a quarterback scrambling for his life? That would be apt.) Rand Paul is conveniently not commenting on any news, be it the Iran talks or the Indiana RFRA or the Miley Cyrus/Tom Cotton stand-off, until after he officially announces his presidential bid next week. “Not saying anything” is always Rand Paul’s best option, but it’s not sustainable in the long-term.