This is disgusting.

The PNJ’s Mary Lett reported Friday that “West Florida High 10th-graders and their parents are fighting expulsion following an Oct. 1 incident where a junior varsity football player was allegedly "pantsed" on a school bus after a game.”

For those unfamiliar with the term, Lett explained that “pantsing is pulling down someone's pants, revealing underwear or other undergarments.” In other words, it’s a silly gag that’s as common place in Bugs Bunny cartoons and Mel Brooks movies as it is among rowdy groups of teenage boys. The “pantsing” is not what is disgusting.

What’s disgusting is that three of our kids would be kicked out of school over horseplay. What’s disgusting are stats that show Escambia County is a place where this sort of unjust, excessive discipline is too often doled out onto our children. What’s disgusting is the fact that the kids who are bearing the brunt of that excessive discipline are by and large, black.

State statistics show that during the 2013-14 school year, black students accounted for only 34 percent of the student population in Escambia County, yet they made up 63 percent of the students disciplined. Of the entire population of black students, 33.8 percent were disciplined, while only 10.8 percent of all white students were disciplined. And of all students who received either in- or out-of-school suspension, 4,676 were black while 2,151 were white. That’s not just a perception problem. That’s cruelty in numbers.

It is unacceptable that Superintendent Malcolm Thomas has chosen to stay silent in this case. Instead of being a vocal public leader in the face of public outcry, Thomas hid behind bureaucratic process by citing district policy. "We do not comment about any discipline incident that involves specific students," he said. "If a student commits a serious conduct breach, they're entitled to due process and have an opportunity to a hearing before a committee."

A “serious conduct breach?” A serious conduct breach is violence or threats thereof. We’re talking about pantsing, here. Please.

Taxpayers deserve more from Thomas. Recently, the superintendent was more than outspoken when he sat down with the PNJ to offer criticism of Florida’s broken system of student testing. He was right and we praised him for his vocal leadership against a flawed system that harms students and schools. But he ought to be equally outspoken in the face of a disciplinary system right here at home that is crushing our own kids.

Indeed, this sort of irrationally harsh juvenile discipline is a hallmark of Escambia County. It’s not unrelated to the sad, sick fact that Florida sends more children, especially minorities, to adult court than any other state. Tonia Galloni, managing attorney for the Southern Poverty Law Center in Miami, recently told the PNJ that prosecutors in Escambia County are especially inclined to try juveniles as adults.

“In 2013-14, Escambia County prosecutors transferred 70 children to adult court,” she said. “This is the same number of children that were ‘direct filed’ in Orange County, with a youth population almost five times the size.” While the statewide trend to do so is declining, the opposite is happening in Escambia, she pointed out. What’s worse is how often this harsh punishment is meted out for non-violent offenses and how these kids are almost always black.

How can this be? Are black kids in Escambia County somehow worse than black kids in inner-city Orlando? It’s absurd. This is an unacceptable status quo and it’s symptomatic of some larger cultural sickness in our community. These are our children that we’re destroying.

Families of two of the boys from WFHS, both 15 years old, are fighting it. One of the boys has no disciplinary history at all, yet he’s being expelled over the incident.

It should not be like this. After all, let’s remember that this is about a prank, a pantsing. Teenage boys act like teenage boys and we ban them from a place of education? Is that the best answer we’ve got? How about running the bleachers or wind sprints until they collapse? How about scrubbing the cafeteria floors? How about cleaning the campus or mandatory weekend landscaping duties? How about something productive?

We send our kids to school because, as a society, we believe it will make them productive citizens. What does it accomplish to scrap that in the face of mischief?

Taxpayers and parents need to demand a full, public justification from Superintendent Malcolm Thomas and the Escambia County School District — not only about the pantsing case, but about the awful numbers of an unjust disciplinary system that crushes black kids more often than others. Black parents should speak out. White parents should speak out. Especially white parents. Because injustice for any of us is injustice for all of us.

We are a community and these are all our kids. But stories like this show that the disciplinary systems that we’ve created for them — that we force upon them — are too often excessive, unjust and immoral. And that’s simply disgusting.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1RNDHau