A knee replacement is performed at the Great Falls Clinic Medical Center recently. The Great Falls Clinic has implemented new guidelines it hopes will maximize patient outcomes and decrease costs. (Photo: Courtesy of Great Falls Clinic)

Last fall, when he's normally preparing for hunting season, Jack Johnson could barely walk 50 yards and couldn't ride a horse.

The former teacher and football coach initially thought he was having problems with his knee. A trip to see Dr. Gregg Pike at Great Falls Clinic showed it was actually his hip causing the pain.

Johnson, whose home is replete with hunting trophies, couldn't go out on opening day. Instead, he prepared for a hip replacement.

"I just took a nosedive," said Johnson, who just turned 71.

In hindsight, Johnson now says he began noticing symptoms last spring. The pain in his knee, glutes and groin became greater as the months wore on.

Johnson would be an early patient in the Great Falls Clinic's new approach to joint replacement, referred to as an orthopedic destination center. Already a top-performing joint replacement program, the orthopedic department recently has begun a new program that provides education before surgery and support immediately after.

Johnson and his wife, Roseann, attended pre-surgery classes where they learned what to expect from the surgery and recovery. Patients are encouraged to designate a friend or family member to go through the process, too.

Johnson underwent surgery on Monday, Dec. 8, and recovered at the Great Falls Clinic Medical Center, whose nursing staff has gone through training specific to the destination center.

Johnson went home the next Wednesday around noon after going through some physical therapy and learning exercises he can do at home to hasten his recovery.

In the weeks since his replacement, Johnson has worked up to walking about three miles a day and continues to do his exercises.

"It feels much better than it did before, that's for sure," he said.

This new model used by the clinic's orthopedic providers is an example of a new strategy in health care that relies on rigorous standards to ensure the best possible patient outcomes.

The clinic's orthopedic team already began with a strong baseline — its joint replacement program is highly rated by Healthgrades, a health care rating system, and had low rates of complication and blood transfusion and shorter-than-average length of stay for its patients.

This new program, devised by Marshall Steele and Associates, holds doctors and staff to an even higher standard, and its goal is to standardize care and reduce cost, said Dr. Nicholas Bonfilio, an orthopedic surgeon at Great Falls Clinic.

Patient care and experience is at the center of the program, with patients doing some therapies together and having a reunion meeting a few weeks after their surgery.

This new model that focuses on the minutiae of standardizing patient care will, health care analysts hope, reduce costs, increase good outcomes and make patients' experiences better.

In the reality of the post-Affordable Care Act world, reimbursement rates for medical centers are changing, with insurance companies beginning to demand high quality outcomes before they will agree to pay for a procedure performed by a given doctor.

For the clinic's team, that means setting and meeting goals for patients' physical therapy, walking distance after surgery and range of motion.

Rachel Pahut, director of nursing at Great Falls Clinic Medical Center, said those goals are sometimes difficult to meet. Getting patients up and walking soon after a joint replacement, which increases the chances of a quick recovery and good outcome, can be a challenge. If the staff isn't committed to making sure patients are up and walking, it might not happen.

"Everybody knows it's a goal," she said.

To make sure patients have the best experience at the lowest cost, Pahut and her nursing staff keep a close eye on data about their patients. Better recovery times are linked with therapy and family involvement.

Discharging patients to their home is also a goal. Sending patients to a nursing facility or rehab facility, while necessary for some, also is expensive. Going home following a hospital stay also decreases the patient's risk of illness and is more comfortable, Bonfilio said.

The clinic's length of stay following a joint replacement is 2.4 days; the national average is 3.5 days.

Blood transfusion rates also are low. Nationally, the rate is 9.9 percent. It's so rare at the clinic Pahut and Bonfilio can remember specific cases in the last year that needed a transfusion. The last quarter of 2014, no patients needed a transfusion.

The focus on outcomes and strict guidelines related to care encourages staff to ask questions about the best practices for many situations — how should coagulants be used? What about catheters?

According to Bonfilio, this value-based approach is the future of medicine.

That's a shift for physicians, but he believes it's worth it if costs go down and patient outcomes are improved.

Bonfilio isn't alone in his belief about value-based medicine.

Nate Kaufman, a strategic health care adviser based in San Diego, works with hospitals looking to shift to this value-based approach.

Hospitals and physicians groups who want to implement this approach need a robust system of measuring outcomes and best practice guidelines that optimize care, Kaufman said.

Data is at the heart of the value-based approach, and one of the leaders of data-driven medicine is the Dartmouth Health Atlas of Care, which began two decades ago documenting variations in standards of care throughout the country. Dartmouth's approach employs data from Medicare, which has long been a gold mine for health care professionals looking for ways to optimize patient outcomes and lower costs.

"What happens with the Dartmouth Health Atlas if they were able to identify this huge variability in cost of care and use rates of care, and that's really the beginning of the change," Kaufman said.

Insurance companies are noticing and liking value-based medicine because it saves them money. They are beginning to reward doctors who provide lower cost care that also has a good outcome.

Kaufman said doctors have to be part of the culture shift. Traditionally, doctors have been taught that they are responsible for the patient and are the "ultimate arbiters of how care should be delivered," he said. The issue with that, according to Kaufman, is that measured outcomes showed that there was a large variability in the type of care patients received for the same illness or injury.

However, this model, sometimes referred to as accountable care organizations, is not without question. Medicare has pushed for ACOs in an attempt to drive down costs, but data released by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid last year showed that improved quality of care may not correlate with lower costs, according to a report written by David Muhlestein and Chase Hall, of Leavitt Partners, a health care intelligence business.

In the first year that CMS measured ACO performance, Muhlestein and Hall said that overall, ACOs did "above average" but added "there is considerable room for improvement" where cost-savings are concerned.

With value-based care, doctors are asked to follow group- or hospital-wide guidelines to ensure that everyone is getting the care that is evidence-based and has the best outcomes.

Of course, they're called "guidelines" for a reason, and if the situation calls for deviation from them, doctors are free to do that.

Bonfilio isn't concerned about the loss of autonomy as a doctor.

As he puts it, "Variability is the enemy of quality."

He likens it to football, where a team runs the same play over and over again, each time getting a little better. Or, alternately, practice makes perfect.

For example, data shows that using a tourniquet to reduce bleeding during a knee replacement increases thigh pain and swelling, which can lengthen recovery time. So Bonfilio doesn't use tourniquets.

It may be easy to imagine a hospital run by guidelines to become an assembly line of surgeries, medication times and physical therapy sessions. That isn't the case with the destination hospital, say Bonfilio and Pahut.

Patients are encouraged to attend group physical therapy sessions where they build camaraderie and a little healthy competition amongst themselves. While not a requirement of the stay, Bonfilio said patients seem to be embracing the group approach and appreciate having someone to share the experience with, even if it's only for a couple days.

The idea is to give a sense not of sickness or weakness, but wellness.

"You're getting better and getting better fast," Bonfilio said.

The Great Falls Clinic Medical Center, currently located at 9th Street South, will soon move to a new location at 15th Avenue South near the clinic's existing Specialty Center. This new building has been designed to accommodate the new model of patient care, Bonfilio said.

That opens the door to implementing this model in other areas, not just joint replacement or orthopedics. This is just the beginning, he said.

Read or Share this story: http://gftrib.com/18hvSc6