By MARK COWLING

Staff writer

Dieter and Margit Cloes sat on their backyard patio with a couple of visitors who were each enjoying a tall cool glass of well water and endless views of unspoiled desert. It was a fitting way to spend Earth Day, especially considering the house is “off the grid” from public utilities.

The couple didn’t set out to build an Earth-friendly house, six miles as the crow flies from the nearest neighbor, when they bought their 40 acres, 14 miles from Florence off Florence-Kelvin Highway, more than two decades ago. It was just a beautiful property with plenty of space to shoot targets – one of the couple’s favorite hobbies.

But after a few years, when it became apparent that electric service wouldn’t be available to their property anytime soon, they started designing their house with sustainability in mind. They sketched out the plans themselves -- as natives of Germany – in meters and centimeters. An architect placed their plans within context of local building codes and translated their metrics to feet and inches, and so they could get a building permit. A Mesa contractor built the house with high-insulating e-crete concrete blocks, and the house was finished at the beginning of 2005.

Dieter calculated the 4,000-square-foot home’s electrical requirements himself, and an engineer in Scottsdale designed the solar system. Much of the time they generate more power than they need, and it’s stored in batteries. For the rare occasions when they run low on sun power, they have a back-up diesel generator. They have evaporative coolers for summer heat. In the winter they burn wood.

Forced to move

They love their home, but they’ve put it on the market. The asking price is $580,000, which Dieter says is close to what they spent to build it, and which their real estate agent said is what the home’s appraised value was last summer.

They don’t want to leave, but after being legal US residents for more than 30 years, their residency status is running out. They said their circumstances don’t fit laws intended to help deserving resident aliens stay in the country.

“The problem is, we do not fit any category under your immigration law. … What is missing in your immigration law is a category for people who can support themselves. We are self-sustained. We are not a burden on your social system,” Dieter said.

A German air force officer, Dieter, 69, trained American fighter pilots, some of whom are now colonels, serving in the US Air Force. The Cloeses said they’ve met with congressmen J.D. Hayworth and Trent Franks on their immigration status, to no avail. One visit to the immigration office in Phoenix was enough for Dieter, who said the staff had little interest in his case.

Margit also worries what will happen to them if they have a big medical bill. “We don’t want to move; Obamacare makes us move. We can’t afford it,” she said.

The home and property can be seen in a 3 ½-minute aerial video shot with a drone at https://player.vimeo.com/video/106996029 .

“I can’t watch the video any more, I get tears in my eyes. It breaks my heart,” Dieter said.

More information on the property is available from real estate broker Jeff Reich at jeff.reich@russlyon.com.