Time flies when you’re having fun zooming across the Arthur Ravenel Jr. Bridge.

So slowing down enough to realize that 10 years have passed since it opened isn’t easy.

And even while exceeding (slightly) the 55 mph speed limit on the duty-bound drive to work, it was hard to get out of the way Wednesday morning when a motorcycle roared past doing at least 90.

The Ravenel has eight lanes — usually enough (so far) to spare us the aggravation of stop-and-go traffic except at peak rush hour.

But that advantage is inevitably accompanied by the disadvantage of some folks crossing it too rapidly.

Still, the bridge has become not just a good-looking local landmark but a grand community asset.

Among its positive elements:

It was finished ahead of schedule and under budget.

Federal taxpayers picked up a major chunk of the tab for building it.

Unlike some other infrastructure ludicrously named for politicians (for instance, the Chip Limehouse Interchange at the intersection of U.S. Highway 17 North and Interstate 526), it’s large enough to merit a namesake — though such honors should be bestowed only in posthumous fashion.

Arthur Ravenel Jr. was one of the first politicians in these parts gutsy enough to call himself a Republican.

The bridge has a swell, roomy pedestrian/bike lane — and a swell, sweeping view.

As reported on our front page Friday, Bright-Bricks, “a professional Lego-building company in the United Kingdom,” is here this weekend as part of the Ravenel’s 10th anniversary celebration “to oversee a public build of a 25-foot-long model” of it. That construction project, once completed, will contain up to 50,000 Lego bricks and weigh up to 250 pounds.

Test your memory span

OK, that’s a heavy enough load of bragging about things you probably already knew about our colossal marvel of engineering over the Cooper River.

Now for some bridge-oriented stuff you might not know in a pop quiz, with answers at column’s end. (Hint: All but two of the answers contain the word “bridge”):

1) Name the World War II movie, with a cast including William Holden, Alec Guinness, Sessue Hayakawa and James Donald, about a POW camp in Burma where the Japanese abuse their Anglo-American captives.

2) Name the World War II movie, with a cast including George Segal, Robert Vaughn, Ben Gazzara and Greenville native Bo Hopkins, about a way over the Rhine.

3) Name the World War II movie, with a vast cast including Sean Connery, Maximilian Schell, James Caan, Hardy Kruger, Edward Fox, Elliott Gould, Robert Redford, Liv Ullman, Dirk Bogarde, Anthony Hopkins and Laurence Olivier, about Operation Market Garden, a failed Allied mission into Holland.

4) Name the movie starring Meryl Streep as a farm wife having an affair with a visiting photographer played by Clint Eastwood.

5) Name the 1970 song that became the best-selling single by a duo that produced eight Top 10 Billboard singles.

6) Name another hit song by that duo that begins with the lyric, “Slow down, you move too fast ...”

7) Name the slogan of President Bill Clinton’s re-election campaign in 1996, the same year he prematurely proclaimed in his State of the Union speech, “The era of big government is over.”

8) Name the small stone structure between the 1st and 18th fairways at the Old Course in St. Andrews, Fife, Scotland, where the 144th British Open will continue today and conclude Sunday.

9) Name the 1970 James Brown hit in which “Mr. Dynamite” asks, “Bobby! Should I take ’em to the bridge?”

10) Name the action movie that features not just Bruce Willis, Samuel L. Jackson and Jeremy Irons but the old 1929 John P. Grace Memorial Bridge, which is now gone (not to be confused with the new old 1966 Silas N. Pearman Bridge, which is also now gone), over the Cooper River.

A too-often-fatal flaw

The Ravenel Bridge is spectacular.

But it should be harder to jump off of that bridge — the barrier on the water-side edge of the southbound side is less than three feet high.

Yes, the pedestrian/bike lane has a railing more than six feet high on the northbound side.

However, those who have sunk into deep enough despair to consider ending it all can easily cross all eight motor-vehicle lanes to get to that low southbound barrier.

Lowering that risk by raising the difficulty of jumping would make our wonderful bridge even better.

Answers

1) “The Bridge on the River Kwai”

2) “The Bridge at Remagen”

3) “A Bridge Too Far”

4) “The Bridges of Madison County”

5) “Bridge over Troubled Water”

6) “The 59th Street Bridge Song (Feeling Groovy)”

7) “Building a Bridge to the 21st Century”

8) The Swilcan Burn Bridge

9) “Get Up (I Feel Like Being a) Sex Machine”

10) “Die Hard with a Vengeance”

Frank Wooten is assistant editor of The Post and Courier. His email is wooten@postandcourier.com.