LOVELAND SKI AREA — Ski helmets adorned with white lace veils and black silk top-hats floated down the ski slopes of Loveland Mountain on Valentine’s Day, as about 100 couples flocked to the mountain for the ski area’s 25th annual Mountaintop Matrimony.

Held at Ptarmigan Roost Cabin, at 12,050 feet, couples from all over took to the snow to show their devotion to the two loves of their lives — each other and the slopes.

The Mountaintop Matrimony annual event allows couples an opportunity to get married or renew their marriage vows for a 2-for-1 lift ticket price, just $ 65, in a “mass wedding” ceremony on the cabin’s outdoor deck.

The backdrop for the nuptials featured a panoramic view of the surrounding snowy peaks.

For Meegan and Adam Bennett, there was no better place than the mountains to celebrate Valentine’s Day and the renewal of their love. The couple was first married during the Mountaintop Matrimony three years ago, and have come back each year since to renew their vows.

“We actually met on a mountain during a mountain biking trip when he was my excursion leader,” Bennett said. “We both love the mountains and love to ski.

” When we got engaged, we both knew we didn’t necessarily want to spend a lot of money on a wedding, so we decided this is where we should do it. I even bought white snow pants and a white jacket instead of buying a wedding dress, and I’ve gotten more use out of it than I ever could have with a dress.”

While many of the couples gathered in the cabin were returning guests — some with over a decade of the tradition under their belts — the majority were first-timers.

Karla and Jed Rumora first met in third grade, but had lost touched. After each ended previous marriages, the two reconnected on Facebook and got hitched just two years ago.

For them, this tradition only adds to their fairy tale romance 40 years in the making.

“We were sweethearts from third to seventh grade, so this is truly like marrying your best friend,” Karla Rumora said. “Jed always loved skiing and loved Colorado, and since his birthday was in January, this was my gift to him. It’s our first time, but he’s always said he’d marry me every year from here on out, so we’ll likely be coming back to do this again.”

Of the 89 couples to participate, 14 used the annual Valentine’s tradition to officially tie the knot. The ceremony was ordained by the Rev. Harry Heilman of Universal Life Church and long-time minister of the Mountaintop Matrimony celebrations.

“I’ve been doing this 23 years,” he said. “I was working here and would marry various couples on the mountain on Valentine’s Day, and now it’s turned into something that can bring crowds of hundreds up here.

“It’s funny, ultimately it’s the folks renewing their vows who start to cry during the ceremony, because they’re looking backward and forward at their lives together. But they always take care of the new couples there, too. Everybody is just happy and smiling.”

Couples were dressed in anything from traditional wear, such as white veils and wedding dresses, to riskier and more distinctive dress, such as a pair of matching penguin costumes.

But all wore matching smiles.

“You’ve got two hearts beating in tandem, and that’s a lasting force that will get you through all trials and tribulations in life,” Heilman said amongst cheers and an occasional whizzing snowball.

“Hey, you all know your anniversary now, don’t you?” he continued. “Grab an extra pair of hands next to you and stay warm today. Let’s all ski together and be merry.”

Natalie Munio: 303-954-1666, nmunio@denverpost.com or @nataliemunio