The Eagle Mountain International Church near Ft. Worth, Texas, was the scene of a measles outbreak during the month of August.

A visitor who had traveled overseas visited the church and unknowingly spread the disease when hugging parishioners and handling babies in the church daycare. 16 cases of the measles originated at the church, including seven adults and nine children. The youngest is just four months old. Health officials say that 11 of the victims have never been vaccinated.

According to CNN (see video embedded below), church officials had preached against vaccinations in the past — part of a trend involving religious exemptions that has alarmed pediatricians. There have been measles outbreaks in New York, California, North Carolina and Indiana, where vaccinations have been shunned. Televangalist Kenneth Copeland has spoken out against children getting immunized, CNN alleges by showing a video clip where Copeland linked vaccinations with autism — a link that medical officials have not found. When Minnesota Rep. Michele Bachmann sought the presidency during the 2012 Republican primaries, Bachmann reiterated the claim that vaccines were linked to autism.

Terri Pearsons, Copeland's eldest daughter and pastor at the Eagle Mountain International Church, released a statement. "Some people think I am against immunizations, but that is not true," it read.

"If you read the Old Testament, you'll find that it is full of precautionary measures," Pearsons claims in a clip aired by CNN to document the church's belief in faith healing. "Go in faith. Don't do anything you don't do in faith. If you're somebody and you know that you know that you know that you've got this covered in your household by faith, and it crosses your heart of faith, well then don't go do it."

CNN reports that the church website urges people to first seek the wisdom of God and then appropriate medical attention. This comes from the church's announcements from August:

From the Executive Offices of Kenneth Copeland Ministries | August 21, 2013 Kenneth Copeland Ministries’ position regarding dealing with any medical condition involving yourself or someone in your family is to first seek the wisdom of God, His Word, and appropriate medical attention from a professional that you know and trust. Apply wisdom and discernment in carrying out their recommendations for treatment. This would include: vaccinations, immunizations, surgeries, prescriptions, or any other medical procedures. Public Health Announcement | August 14, 2013 We are working with the Tarrant County Public Health Department to stand against a recent attack of measles. Eagle Mountain International Church had a visitor attend a service that had been overseas and exposed to measles. Therefore the congregation, staff at Kenneth Copeland Ministries, and the daycare center on property were exposed through that contact. KCM/EMIC is in close contact with Tarrant County Public Health Department and we continue to follow their instructions on how to best deal with this outbreak. The ministry has held free immunization clinics for employees and church members to assist them in obtaining the best medical care for their families. We continue to follow up on pending and confirmed cases to help in any way we can to keep the outbreak contained. We ask that others join with us in prayer over this outbreak, and we believe that God is moving on behalf of each affected family. We know the truth; we are healed according to Isaiah 53:4-­5 and I Peter 2:24 and are standing against any plague that would try to attack us as a body. So agree with us that this will stop now according to Matthew 18:19.

In an August 29 announcement on the church's website titled “Let’s Clear the Air” by Pastor George Pearsons, parishioners were advised:

Let's clear the air about all these "anti-vaccination" accusations. Our church is not and has never been "anti-vaccination."

We do not have an "anti-vaccination" policy.

In all our years of pastoring, we have never preached against vaccinations.

We have never advised anyone against a vaccination. When receiving a vaccination, Kenneth Copeland says, "Pray over it with the same rules of faith and prayer that you use to pray over your food. Receive it with thanksgiving and sanctify it by the Word of God and prayer. Take advantage of what God has provided for you in Jesus' Name." For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: For it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. —1 Timothy 4:4-5. Recently, a visitor came to our church from an overseas mission's trip and had contracted measles while there. After being tested, the lab notified the Tarrant County Health Department who confirmed it as measles. The Health Department met with our leadership team the next day and advised us on how to handle the situation. That day, without hesitation, Pastor Terri and I immediately complied with all of their recommendations. We invited the Health Department to conduct a total of five vaccination clinics at our church. Vaccinations were made available at no cost to our daycare children, KCM employees and congregation members. We have continued to work with the Health Department throughout this time and deeply appreciate their assistance and guidance. We also appreciate our on-site Kenneth Copeland Ministries Medical Clinic staffed by an MD and CMA.

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention:

Measles can be dangerous, especially for babies and young children. In the United States in 2011, 38% of children younger than 5 years old who had measles had to be treated in the hospital. For some children, measles can lead to pneumonia, a serious lung infection. It can also cause lifelong brain damage, deafness, and even death. One to three out of 1,000 children in the U.S. who get measles will die from the disease, even with the best care. About 150,000 to 175,000 people die from measles each year around the world—mostly in places where children do not get the measles vaccine.



{video link}