More than a million Connecticut taxpayers are expected to file returns by April 18 this year. Getting it done right makes sense — and saves money. Here are some tried-and-true tactics to get your best deal.

Log that mileage

If you drive for your job and don't receive full mileage reimbursement from your employer, log your miles traveled and claim the IRS deduction. If you itemize deductions, it's easily done. Yet some taxpayers don't bother. For 2015, the standard mileage rate for use of a car, van or truck is 57.5 cents per mile.

But wait — what if you're retired and all your driving these days is for volunteer work? The IRS lets you deduct 14 cents a mile.

Only a minority of taxpayers qualify for a medical expense deduction. The expenditure has to exceed 10 percent of your annual income, or 7.5 percent in the case of those age 65 or older. But if you do qualify, you also can deduct for mileage, at 23 cents per mile, for any travel to hospitals, doctor appointments, lab tests, physical therapy, etc. (The cost of flights and lodging for any out-of-town travel, when medically justified, also counts.)

Let solar shine

A tax credit, which reduces income tax due dollar-for-dollar is always better than a deduction, which goes to reduce the "adjusted gross income" on which your tax bill is calculated. Taxpayers get a credit a credit of 30 percent for what they spend on buying and installing solar hot water heaters, solar panels that generate electric power, wind turbines or fuel cells. In most cases, the credit — which will disappear after the 2016 tax year — also can be claimed for a vacation home or rental property.

Report all cash income

Brenden Healy, a CPA and director of Whittlesey & Hadley, P.C., of Hartford, says if you're among the growing ranks of self-employed earners, never fudge figures on your taxes. It's especially important if yours is a cash-based business, such as contracting, catering, landscaping or house cleaning.He said the IRS zeros in on businesses with a high potential for hiding cash earnings. "I tell clients if you do that you may save some taxes now, but down the road there's a real risk you'll get caught. And ... when you go to sell the business do you want to be telling the buyer, 'The revenue is actually a lot better than my tax records show'?"

Take credit for charity

It's easy to remember to deduct your United Way contribution or donations to your church or synagogue. But don't overlook small charitable gifts that add up over the course of a year. Keep receipts for food donated to a soup kitchen or clothing and household goods dropped off at Goodwill Industries and other charities. The IRS requires you to have a letter of acknowledgment from the receiving nonprofit group for any donation of $250 or more. Your canceled check is no longer sufficient proof. And for non-cash donations worth more than $5,000 — say a vehicle or a work of fine art — IRS rules require that value be determined by a professional appraisal.

Obamacare Subsidies

About 80 percent of taxpayers — those who have health insurance through an employer, Medicare or Medicaid — need only certify on Form 1040 that they have coverage, as required by the Affordable Care Act. But if you're receiving health insurance subsidies under Obamacare (in the form of tax credits), it's a lot more involved, says CPA Bryan Ricci of Bristol, who handles more than 300 tax clients.

You'll receive a Form 1095-A in the mail from the exchange that sold you the policy. This serves as proof of health insurance. It lists your cost of coverage and the tax credit extended, which is based on the taxpayer's projected earnings. Using another tax form, Form 8962, you'll compare these figures to actual 2015 earnings to determine whether your Obamacare tax credit should be raised or lowered. People who underestimated their earnings, or who saw them rise faster than expected during the past year, may lose all or part of the subsidy and suffer an unexpected tax hit, Ricci said.

"Head of household" deduction

Many taxpayers are unaware that they may be able to lower their tax bill through an optional standard deduction called "head of household." When adult children return to the family nest in their mid-20s, Ricci said, this tactic can help. You have to file without itemizing deductions, and the child must be too old to be claimed as a dependent for tax purposes.

For 2015, the standard deduction for a married couple filing jointly is $12,600 and the standard deduction for single tax filers is $6,300. But a single adult (such as a divorced or widowed parent) with a child living at home can claim $9,250 as a head of household standard deduction and trim almost $3,000 off his adjusted gross income. "It's good to know if you have a child move back in with you," Ricci said.

Forget about in-kind services

Pro bono work for a charitable group in lieu of a cash donation is not deductible. Many professionals donate time and expertise by, for example, serving on the board of a charity and Jim Candiloro, a Glastonbury CPA, said some ask whether the value of their services can mean a deduction. But IRS rules won't allow that. With a broad range of fees for professional services, he explained, there's just no fair way to set a value for pro bono "in-kind services."

Deduct for your home office

Starting with returns filed last year, the IRS made it simpler for the increased number of people working from home to claim a "home office" tax deduction. This applies to the portion of your residence that is used exclusively for business purposes on a regular basis — whether that is an office, a studio or a workshop.

The new simplified method applies a standard deduction of $5 per square foot of space used, up to a maximum of 300 square feet, or $1,500. Taking the standard deduction avoids the need to keep track of business expenses, mortgage interest and property taxes, and calculate a tax deduction each year based on those.

Save now for retirement

Candiloro, the Glastonbury CPA, said it's not new or exciting, but he urges clients to look ahead and shunt as much income as possible into an employer-sponsored 401(k) or 403(b) account. That shelters the amount set aside from income taxes until it's withdrawn for retirement. The same goes for an IRA, which shelters earnings from taxation for all but the highest-echelon taxpayers.