— If the artists in this past weekend’s Sanding Ovations festival want to build sand sculptures on Treasure Island beach next year, they may have to haul in their material with wheelbarrows.

After a recent court ruling against parking and driving on the beach, city leaders say they won’t be allowed to truck in tons of sand for the annual event or park a beer stand or even permit a truck to carry cabanas back-and-forth to the water every day.

At a meeting last week, city commissioners even debated if raking the sand with a tractor fits the law’s definition of “cleanup” and “maintenance,” the only justifiable reasons for driving on the beach.

“Would [raking up] sand spurs be considered a public safety issue?” Mayor Bob Minning mused.

“Sand spurs are actually a native plant,” Commissioner Alan Bildz said.

“Not when they’re in your foot,” the mayor replied, adding, “It’s just very unfortunate the unintended consequences that have come out of this judge’s order.”

The exchange drew some laughs from the meeting audience, but city officials and local business leaders say the impacts of the ruling are serious and far-reaching for their community and others that like to throw big parties on the sand.

A trio of hoteliers aggrieved by sound stages and parked cars on this especially wide section of sand near 107th Avenue prevailed in their lawsuit, which argued that state law prohibits vehicular traffic on Florida beaches unless the city had rules in place permitting it prior to a statewide regulatory change in the late 1980s.

The city has appealed the ruling, but in the meantime, it is being forced to cancel or significantly scale down more than a dozen events that use this part of the beach as a festival ground and limited parking area for attendees.

The order by Pinellas County Circuit Court Judge Pamela Campbell only explicitly prohibits such activities on Treasure Island beach, though it could set a precedent for residents in other communities to raise legal challenges about concert stages being hauled onto Madeira Beach or sand getting trucked in for Clearwater’s Pier 60 Sugar Sand Festival.

“It just takes one person now – it doesn’t matter who they are – and they can use this as case history,” said Gregory Tong, board director for the Treasure Island/Madeira Beach Chamber of Commerce.

City officials in Clearwater said they were reviewing the judge’s order to determine whether it would have any impact on their beach events.

In neighboring Madeira Beach, most sections of the shoreline aren’t wide enough to accommodate the kind of festivities that have been a long-standing tradition on Treasure Island’s sprawling sands.

Coincidentally, the city’s July 4th festival that has in the past brought a music stage and food trucks onto the sand near Archibald Park is moving this summer to a park along Boca Ciega Bay, City Manager Shane Crawford said.

He’s hopeful the ruling won’t end up preventing limited events from being held on the sand in the future.

“It’s a reason why people come here. If you can’t take certain pieces of equipment out there to have festivals or parties or have events, I think that is unfortunate, especially if you’re going to do it in a responsible way,” Crawford said.

These events have been permitted by the Florida Department of Environment Protection, but the judge’s order interprets the law as banning even this occasional vehicle traffic, which could damage sensitive sand dunes.

While the legal injunction doesn’t prohibit events on Treasure Island’s beaches, it’s likely to effectively kill them if food, drink and entertainment vendors aren’t allowed to use vehicles to setup.

“For Sanding Ovations, there’s just no way to get the trucks out there. We can’t get the sand out there and we can’t get the equipment out there to move around the sand,” City Manager Reid Silverboard said at last week’s meeting.

“Obviously, the other complication with not being able to do anything on the beach is part of the way we recoup [city] expenses is by having vendors and beer trucks and things like that.”

Some events, such as the American Legion’s annual charitable car show, likely will move to the Treasure Island Community Center Park on the opposite side of Gulf Boulevard, which is where the Rotary Club moved its Greatest Show on Surf carnival last spring, to avoid complications from the pending lawsuit.

The park, however, is a much smaller venue and scant parking will make it difficult for many to attend, says Tong, who organizes the car show.

The commission ultimately stopped short of cancelling a handful of budgeted city events for 2015, including Sanding Ovations and Bands on the Sand, directing staff to weigh whether they’re still financially feasible in a different location or without putting any vehicles on the beach.

In addition to the city’s appeal, Tong and others have raised the possibility of seeking a change to state law that would allow communities to set their own rules about vehicle traffic on the beach.

At the meeting, several commissioners and residents spoke with dismay about the ruling, though at least one person praised the hoteliers’ actions, saying it would protect the community’s most precious asset for years to come.

“That beach is our bait and hook for businesses and several thousand people who live in and visit Treasure Island,” said Mel Lenehan.

jboatwright@tampatrib.com

(727) 215-1277