Inside the Annapolis Crowne Plaza on Tuesday, Republican presidential candidate and Ohio Gov. John Kasich continued his push to contrast the bravado of his two opponents, playing the role as the centrist in the 2016 race.

During a rally that largely focused on his record, as well as a plethora of anecdotes to highlight his connection to the working class, Kasich saw the support of prominent politicians like former Maryland Gov. Robert L. Ehrlich Jr. and Annapolis Mayor Mike Pantelides.

But in a state where Republicans skew more moderate than in other early primary states, he continually reiterated his desire to be viewed as a champion for the working class.

"I'm just like a normal guy in a big office," he said of his reign as Ohio's governor.

It has become part of his larger push to seek out a surprise win in Maryland, where one poll put him second behind Donald Trump by about 10 points.

Presidential candidate and Ohio Gov. John Kasich held a rally at Crowne Plaza in Annapolis on Tuesday night.

And in the county where Gov. Larry Hogan called home, he spoke mostly on economic terms, much like how Hogan himself rarely dived into the realm of social issues.

"We are $19 trillion in debt. When the debt goes up, the job opportunities go down," he said. "And you can't have crazy regulations that are killing (a local small business owner)."

When Pantelides introduced Kasich, he touted his record as the former chairman of the House Budget Committee in the 1990s, which saw the country balance the budget during Democratic President Bill Clinton's term.

"When people ask me why (I support John Kasich), I told them ... the country needs a strong leader to take us forward," Pantelides said.

And Kasich's main play Tuesday was personal responsibility.

Ranging from the country's drug addiction to its education system, he regularly called on those in attendance to take their own action, decrying the idea that government has the tools to solve all of the nation's problems.

"This is not that hard to fix if we remember that we're Americans before we are Republicans or Democrats," Kasich said of education.

While Kasich looks to make headway in the Northeast, he's still well behind Trump and Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, front-runners in the national race.

Kasich has only won his home state so far in the primaries and mathematically cannot win the party's nomination with a majority of delegates before the Republican National Convention.

So Kasich played up his "positives," or essentially his statistics on favorability with independents and Democrats, saying he would be a better candidate to win a contested convention in July.

He pointed to polls which show he would defeat Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton in a theoretical Kasich-Clinton matchup, while Cruz and Trump see unfavorable numbers against the former secretary of state.

"People don't like politicians who they don't like," he said.

The most frequent question asked from audience members regarded health care and the Affordable Care Act.

Kasich said he wouldn't want to remove the provision that those with pre-existing conditions could be denied service, adding "but Obamacare is not the answer." Kasich drew the ire of some Republicans because, as Ohio's governor, he successfully made the push for Ohio to accept $13 billion in federal funding to expand Medicare.

Tuesday, he pushed back on the idea that mandated health care works, saying rising costs of medicine and health care premiums are outweighing the positives of requiring universal coverage.

So he said he'd push for an incentive program, in which doctors "who provide a high quality of service" and "drive down yearly health care costs" are rewarded by the government through additional funding.

Because, in his words, "It's almost like we all have catastrophic coverage."