When Amber Bright is out for a night on the town with girlfriends, sometimes the temptation of a street sign is just too much.

“To us, we immediately see the pole and we’re off,” says Bright, owner of Apple Jelly Studios, a Sarasota business offering classes in pole dancing and fitness. “Some guy will make a lewd remark and we’ll be like, ‘Hey buddy, that is not what we are doing here. You want to say something about it, let’s see you do this.' ”

Then they’ll whip off a Brass Monkey, a Dragon Tail, a Yogini or a Rainbow Marchenko — tricks requiring strength, flexibility and technique while hanging off a pole — and leave him with his mouth hanging open ... for a different reason.

You can hardly blame the poor guy. Mention “pole dancing” to almost anyone and what comes to mind is not a fitness studio with eight students of all shapes and sizes doing upper body crunches while holding their bodies off the ground horizontally with the power of their inner thighs.

But that’s what you’ll see during “Pole Boot-y Camp,” a once-a-month 90-minute class at Apple Jelly taught by Gina Duncan who, at 36 and after three kids, has the body of . . . well, of a different type of pole dancer.

More photos from Apple Jelly Studios' "Pole Boot-y Camp"

“The thing people don’t realize is that pole is not just one thing,” says Bright, 27, who lives in Tampa but bought the business in Sarasota two years ago after falling in love with the sport. “It’s for fitness or it’s dance-oriented or it’s even for people who want to spice up their life at home. We do embrace the sexy side of it, but that’s not the same as stripping in a club.”

In fact, there is an entire industry built around the “pole sport,” the athletic variant of pole dancing, with international and national organizations, a full calendar of competitions and celebrities as idolized in their own field as ice skaters are in the rink. Pole work is touted as a way to build strength, flexibility and balance and you don’t have to be young, female, an exhibitionist or wearing stilettos to give it a try. (Though 99 percent of Apple Jelly’s clients are women.)

In fact, at least initially, working on a pole is not only un-sexy, it can be downright ugly.

“In the beginning, it’s not pretty,” says Bright. “You get lots of bruises and calluses and stinging rashes on your legs. And it’s hard. When I first started three years ago, I couldn’t have climbed to the top of the pole to save my house if it was on fire.”

Still, the biggest hurdle to getting people to walk in the door, Duncan says, is the “stigma.”

“When I tell people I do pole, they immediately start whispering,” she sighs, mimicking a conspiratory stance. ” 'You do pole? You mean you’re a stripper?' ”

“I am a pole dancer, I’m not a stripper. I don’t take off my clothes. But you have to spell out the difference for them. It’s a completely different thing doing a three-minute song in a club or a 45-minute workout class.”

Potential clients are quickly reassured that no nudity or heels are required. (Though just in case, there are some 7-inch, plexiglass platforms for sale in the studio’s anteroom.) Skimpy workout wear is simply helpful in maintaining non-slip leg contact with the pole, something you find out quickly if you’re wearing baggy sweats. Heels with leather straps can serve the same tractional function.

And whether you are 49-year-old Roxy Rusu, a hardbody with “Sexy” printed across the derriere of her bikini shorts, or Melissa Prueitt, a 37-year-old in shorts and a T-shirt who visits sporadically when she’s not traveling for work, you are part of what Bright calls her “Apple Army,” enfolded into a “sisterhood” that is rewarded with endless buoyant encouragement and smoothies and healthy snacks after class.

“You’re in for an hour and a half of sheer bliss!” yells Duncan over the rap music (“Fat butt, fat butt, wiggle, wiggle, wiggle") during a recent session, sprinkling her instruction with plenty of “girlfriends” and “darlin’s.” “No a-pole-ogies!”

Apple Jelly’s students range in age from 18 (the minimum age allowed) to a grandmother of almost 60 (“We call her “Glamma,” says Duncan). They come from, as Bright puts it, “all walks of life.”

“Doctors, teachers, moms, accountants,” she says counting off on her fingers.

Strippers?

“If they are, they don’t tell me,” she shrugs. “But if they were it would be fine.”

Rusu, tall and graceful, is a runner who took up pole a year and a half ago to achieve a full body toning.

“It’s a better workout, it involves at the same time all the muscles,” says the Romanian native. “And I always like to try new things, especially things people are scared about.”

Twenty-year-old Sydney Kling first saw someone pole dance while watching the movie “Rock of Ages.” She pulled out her smartphone in the theater, Googled on the spot and signed up for a class the following week.

Prueitt, whose work involves implementing tax software, came to Apple Jelly the first time when a friend rented out the studio for a party that involved Champagne, cookies and an introduction to the pole. She doesn’t talk about her hobby at work, but her boyfriend knows and “he thinks it’s funny.”

For those who move to the advanced levels, there is a Grindhouse class (sexy moves), a Spin class (the pole has a turn setting) and one where you can create a dance routine. Just because you keep your clothes on doesn’t mean pole work can’t be sensual, says Duncan.

“We’re creating a space for women of all ages and sizes to feel strong and confident and not have to answer to anyone about what they’re doing,” she says. “You’d think that, in 2014, that would be something everyone could applaud.”