About 600 Boulder Valley fourth-graders from eight schools recently planted seeds, climbed into the driver's seat of a massive combine and participated in other hand-on activities at Boulder's Arapahoe Campus to learn about farming and food.

"It's important that kids know about farming," said Nancy McIntyre, district manager for the Boulder Valley and Longmont Conservation Districts. "We want kids to understand that agriculture is a very important part of their lives."

This was the third year the "From Our Lands to Your Hands" program was offered in the Boulder Valley School District. A similar program is offered in the St. Vrain Valley School District in the spring at the Boulder County Fairgrounds for about 1,200 students.

The program is a collaborative effort of the Boulder Valley and Longmont Conservation Districts, Natural Resources Conservation Service, Boulder County Parks and Open Space, USDA Farm Service Agency, Colorado State University Extension Service and the Boulder Valley School District. About 42 farmers and experts volunteered their time to lead sessions for the Boulder Valley students.

Arapahoe Campus high school students also helped by serving as group guides and leading a lesson on seeds in the school's greenhouse. As part of the lesson, students planted a variety of seeds, including cantaloupe, sunflower, corn and lavender.

Arapahoe Campus junior Lindsey Kenyon, who's taking a greenhouse management class, said she wanted to teach students where their food comes from and show them career possibilities.

Advertisement

"When you're a kid, people don't really tell you that you can be a farmer," she said.

Outside, the students also learned about irrigation systems and tried using a siphon tube to move water. To climb up in the combine, students had to first ask its owner, farmer Cory Bateman, a question. They asked everything from the size of the wheels (6 feet) to the cost ($105,000, used) and its top speed (20 mph).

Inside, students learned about chicken eggs and embryos from CSU Extension, examining eggs under a light to see the developing chicks.

Volunteers used displays to teach students about popular Colorado crops and the products made from those crops. They checked out fresh vegetables from Longmont's Ollin Farms, touched corn kernels, barley, sunflower seeds, oats and cotton in bins and got an up-close look at big, lumpy sugar beets.

"There's a huge disconnect in really understanding where food comes from," said Ann Cross of Colorado Corn. "Less than 2 percent of our population is farming so the other 98 percent can eat. I'm passionate about farming."

Students gave the day positive reviews.

"It's really fun, and we're learning a lot of things about nature and farming," said Foothill Elementary School student Rachel Simon.

Eisenhower Elementary's Isabella Gritti said she learned that dollar bills are made mainly out of cotton. Her favorite activity was planting seeds.

Classmate Eli Hall liked the greenhouse and the chicken eggs. He added that he learned it's "tricky" to be a farmer.

"You've got to get a perfect amount of water and sunlight," he said.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com.