PRIVATE SYDNEY

Whiff: Lady Gaga said she wanted her fragrance, Fame, to contain the "essences of semen and blood". Photo: Ian Gavan

First it was Santa Claus who began gobbling up Jesus Christ's most wonderful time of year, but these days both Santa and JC have a few other contenders to deal with when it comes to Christmas, with an ever-growing list of celebrities cashing in.

In the lead up to Christmas, a barrage of celebrity products have flooded the market, hopeful of finding their way under the family Christmas tree or stuffed in a stocking or two.

Celebrity products are not that new. I still have frightening flashbacks to my days working the "red light" Christmas specials as a teenager in 1987 at Tamworth Big W when a crate of Forever Krystle perfume, featuring actor Linda Evans' airbrushed visage all over it, was reduced to $2 a bottle. When I flicked on the flashing light and announced the deal over the megaphone, I was almost bowled over by the stampede of women heading in my direction. At two bucks a bottle, what Tamworth lady didn't want to be spritzed with a bit of Denver glamour?

But these days everyone is on in the act. In recent weeks I've been inundated with press releases breathlessly announcing things like Real Housewives of Melbourne star Janet Roach launching her own range of herbal teas, while co-star Gina Liano is flogging her own range of shoes.

Advertisement

Lara Bingle has launched a range of beauty products in recent weeks called The Base, which includes something called the Body Glow Oil, presumably so boyfriend Sam Worthington can find her in the dark?

Kylie Minogue is spruiking a range of cushions, doona covers and scented candles with her At Home With Kylie range while Miranda Kerr has her own range of tea pots and cake stands.

Better Homes and Gardens' resident pet expert "Dr Harry" has a huge range of products aimed at the family pet, including his own special formula Puppy Shampoo and Conditioners. Apparently it's a huge hit.

But not all celebrities have struck gold. A few years ago Shane Warne launched his range of men's and boys' wear called Spinners, even sending a pair of jocks to old mate Russell Crowe, though it appears the range is no more given the company he teamed up with to do it went into administration – they also produced a range of lingerie for Dita Von Teese.

Then there are the celebrity products which don't seem to make much sense at all beyond a star's hunger for profit generation.

Maria Sharapova, tennis star and former Sports Illustrated swimsuit model, launched a range of lollies, including little lemon-lime tennis balls.

While the licensed Justin Bieber products, ranging from perfume to toothbrushes, is nothing out of the ordinary, there is also an inflatable doll apparently modelled after the singer but "unlicensed" which is currently available for those more, ahem, dedicated fans to do unprintable things to.

Jessica Simpson once launched a line of edible beauty products, called Dessert Treats, which included lotions, perfumes and lipglosses.

Food-themed products have proven very popular, especially among American celebrities.

American television food queen Paula Deen, famed for her devil-may-care approach to fried and rich foods, has her own "butter flavoured" lip balm, which carries the tagline "Put a little south on your mouth".

And these days it's not just fictional television soap opera characters who have perfumes out.

Real, living celebrities are pushing piles of perfume at this time of year, though what to make of Lady Gaga's Fame scent?

Gaga first announced in 2011 that she was launching a new perfume, not much out of the ordinary there, except when she added she wanted it to contain the "essences of semen and blood". Well that's what she told Kyle Sandilands and Jackie O on air.

"But it doesn't smell like it," she then told the show. "You just get sort of the after feeling of sex from the semen and the blood is sort of primal. And the blood was taken from my own blood sample, so it's like a sense of having me on your skin," she said.

In her words the perfume smelled like "an expensive hooker".

No thanks Gaga, I'll stick with a bottle of $2 Krystle, which by now is probably vintage.