Four agencies in Missouri were awarded federal grants Monday to help consumers navigate their health care coverage options in the online federal marketplace that begins open enrollment in November.

The list of grantees did not include Columbia-based Primaris, which was one of two Missouri entities sharing $1.8 million in navigator grant funds a year ago.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Last year, Primaris led a statewide coalition of 11 agencies that provided navigator services. The absence of a new grant means the elimination of four jobs at Primaris, including program director Jeremy Milarsky, who was named 2014 Health Advocate of the Year in June by the Missouri Health Advocacy Alliance.

“This is the nature of government grant-funded work,” Milarsky said this morning. “We thought we had a strong proposal,” but “we knew this was a possibility.”

Primaris will have four staff members working as enrollment counselors under a grant from the Missouri Foundation for Health. Other local agencies with enrollment counseling funded by the foundation include Central Missouri Community Action and the Family Health Center.

The list of 2014 navigator grantees for Missouri includes Missouri Association of Area Agencies On Aging, or MA4, which includes Central Missouri Area Agency on Aging at 1121 Business Loop 70 E. in Columbia. Catherine Edwards, executive director of MA4, said her agency will use its network of area agencies on aging and senior centers to help people learn more about and enroll in health insurance coverage options through the state’s federally run health insurance marketplace.

Last year, more than 150,000 Missourians chose health insurance options through the marketplace. The marketplaces and navigator positions were created under the Affordable Care Act, signed into law in March 2010. A navigator is an individual or organization that’s trained to help consumers, small businesses and their employees look for health coverage and complete eligibility and enrollment forms through the online marketplace.

Others sharing Missouri’s $1.6 million in 2014 navigator grants include Advanced Patient Advocacy LLC, with offices in Kansas City and Independence; Community Action Agency of St. Louis County Inc.; and National Healthy Start Association, based in Washington, D.C., but with offices in Kansas City, Sikeston and St. Louis.

Edwards said MA4 has established eight regional information centers throughout the state. Additional enrollment and informational events also will be scheduled.

The open enrollment period for people interested in Health Insurance Marketplace coverage for 2015 will begin Nov. 15. Additionally, Missouri has been selected as one of five states that will allow businesses with fewer than 50 full-time workers to access the Small Business Health Options Program in late October, ahead of the regular open enrollment start date.

Edwards said full details regarding plan options, pricing and which insurance carriers will participate are not yet available, “but our network is in place and will be prepared to help once details for the 2014 enrollment period are released.”

Despite the group’s focus on senior health and wellness, Edwards said, all services provided by MA4 under the Marketplace program will continue to be available to all Missourians regardless of age.

Meanwhile, Milarsky said the grant announcement that didn’t include Primaris was “disappointing,” but the Primaris-led coalition “did meet and exceeds goals” for consumer contact and enrollment under last year’s grant.