If the Supreme Court rules against Obamacare subsidies, the four governors running for president will face a harsh choice: Let tens of thousands of people get kicked off their health plans, or try to create a state exchange and lose credibility with a virulently anti-Obamacare Republican primary base.

Louisiana’s Bobby Jindal, Wisconsin’s Scott Walker, New Jersey’s Chris Christie and Ohio’s John Kasich all refused to set up Obamacare exchanges, as did most other GOP governors. Their states would be directly affected if the court rules that the health law’s subsidies can go only to people living in states that did establish the new online Obamacare markets.

Story Continued Below

They’d have several options, all which carry significant political risk as they balance their roles as governors with their presidential aspirations.

They can say it’s a Washington problem. But if gridlocked Washington can’t fix it, they’d be stuck with no good answers for their own citizens losing coverage — other than trying to deflect blame to President Barack Obama and Obamacare.

Or they could undertake the politically and economically challenging task of trying to create a state exchange, after shunning them a few years ago. But that would put them in the difficult position of fixing a law they’ve vowed to repeal; doing anything that looks like salvaging the Affordable Care Act is not going to go over well with GOP primary voters.

Neither is easy. But how the governors position themselves now, and how they’d react in a few months if the ranks of the uninsured grow in the aftermath of a Supreme Court decision in the coming days, is a big unknown that could well play out in the GOP primaries.

As governors, their immediate concern would be making sure the people who lose subsidies are taken care of, says Republican pollster David Winston, who tracks health politics. But as presidential candidates, they would — in the event of a Supreme Court ruling against the White House — receive an opening on the campaign trail to criticize Obamacare as fatally flawed and spell out how they’d move the country beyond it.

“This is a moment where people are going to be listening, and if the response is effective, that enhances the credibility for when you want to address the broader issue,” Winston said.

Each of these four governors has interacted in his own way with Obamacare: Complete rejection by Jindal. An original twist on using the federal subsidy dollars by Walker. An acceptance of Medicaid expansion for the poor by Christie and Kasich. That past may contour how they respond to the ruling in King v. Burwell.

Walker, who hopes to appeal in the GOP primaries to the conservative base, faces a unique set of circumstances of his own creation.

Wisconsin had expanded its Medicaid program before Obamacare. But after the federal law was enacted, he took 92,000 people who were just above the poverty line out of that program and moved them to the Obamacare exchange instead, where they could get heavily subsidized private insurance. That let him boast that he rejected Obamacare — but still made sure everyone in his state had access to coverage.

But if the Supreme Court rules against the subsidies, those low-income Wisconsinites — as well as tens of thousands of middle-class residents of the state — could be among the 6.4 million people whose subsidies would be cut off, perhaps within a matter of weeks. On average, the subsidies pay for about three-fourths of the monthly premium, and a lot of this population wouldn’t be able to keep their health plans without them.

Wisconsin Democrats have introduced legislation to create a state exchange, but it’s gone nowhere in the Republican-controlled legislature. And Walker himself has been saying for months that it’s up to the feds to fix the problems stemming from a terrible law.

“While we continue to monitor the federal court case and the pending outcome later this year, ultimately, the responsibility rests with the federal government to fix this federal law,” his press secretary, Laurel Patrick, emailed. “Following the issuance of a decision, we will continue to work with members of Wisconsin’s federal delegation to enact a solution.”

Even though he’d have a whole lot of newly uninsured people at home, he might be able to turn it to political advantage, said Charles Franklin, who oversees the Marquette University Law School Poll.

“This paradoxically works to Walker’s advantage to point to a new reason why he was right to oppose the Affordable Care Act,” Franklin said. “It gives him a talking point.”

Jindal probably has the clearest political path. With Obamacare, he’s been a “just say no” governor all along. He didn’t expand Medicaid. He didn’t do an exchange, and has said he won’t do one no matter how the Supreme Court rules. Of the likely 2016 candidates, he has the most fleshed-out alternative health proposal, his own Obamacare replacement plan that he released more than a year ago.

He says too many GOP proposals are “Obamacare Lite.” His is not.

“I don’t believe that any plan that repeals and replaces Obamacare’s trillions in taxes and spending is a conservative alternative,” he wrote in a POLITICO op-ed this year.

The looming King ruling hasn’t changed that view.

“Creating a state exchange would be a mistake as it would reintroduce these government mandates and increase taxes,” his office said in a statement. “The bottom line is that Obamacare needs to be repealed and replaced with a plan that will reduce costs and put patients in charge.”

While GOP governors tend to rail against Obamacare generally, a few of them have nuanced histories with the law’s implementation. Kasich and Christie, who would be vying for center-right voters in the primary, already bucked party orthodoxy when they accepted Obamacare’s voluntary expansion of Medicaid to hundreds of thousands of low-income adults.

Christie didn’t have much choice; he’s got a Democratic legislature in a blue-leaning state. But he didn’t set up an exchange, twice vetoing Democratic bills that would have established a state-run marketplace.

If the court rules against the subsidies, the state Democrats say they would step up the pressure for an exchange.

“I would hope that he would not leave tens of thousands of New Jerseyans in the lurch,” said New Jersey state Sen. Joseph Vitale.

Like the others, Christie has said it’s Washington’s job to fix the problem if subsidies are scrapped. He’s not likely to change that tune, said Harvard University political scientist Theda Skocpol, who tracks health care politics.

“He’s trying to position himself as a tough guy,” she said. “So I expect a lot of yelling from him about how this is President Obama’s fault.”

Kasich has been the most willing to accept and actually champion at least part of Obamacare, the Medicaid expansion. He went to extraordinary lengths to enact it, relying on an obscure state board when his Republican legislature wouldn’t agree. He’s consistently argued that there’s a moral case for expansion to cover the poor — and that expansion keeps Ohio tax dollars in Ohio.

Although he’s never embraced the state exchange concept, his aides said he hasn’t ruled it out if the high court rules against the White House. But that could be a problem for the 2016 race, where conservatives already aren’t thrilled about his decision on Medicaid.

But Ohio political observers think a state-run exchange is where the policy-oriented and sometimes blunt governor might end up, assuming Washington doesn’t find a solution.

“I don’t think John Kasich would be in the ‘hell no’ category,” said John Green, a political scientist at the University of Akron. Kasich might not even wait that long to see if a federal fix emerges, Green suggested.

“He can be a pretty impatient leader, and I don’t know how long he would wait,” he said.

Former Utah Gov. Michael Leavitt, who ran Health and Human Services in President George W. Bush’s administration, said pragmatism may win the day. Being under the microscope of the Republican primary might impact the governors’ views, but he still thinks the state executives will try to find a way to keep subsidies for their residents, he said.

“Governors tend by nature to defend their partisan flag until such time as their own state becomes negatively affected and their constituents are directly impacted,” said Leavitt, now a consultant whose firm has advised Republican states on health law implementation.

He recently pitched his own plan on how the Obama administration could make it easier for states that rely on HealthCare.gov to instead set up their own exchanges as a way to keep the subsidies flowing.

Republican pollster Gene Ulm, who has been in active in states including Walker’s Wisconsin, has another take.

The governors understand that the loss of subsidies “would affect massive amounts of people and massive constituencies — hospitals, insurers, everybody,” he said. “You’ve got a lot of people just praying to God — although they never say it — that the Supreme Court doesn’t overturn it.”