Buy Photo Iowa Statehouse (Photo: Des Moines Register)Buy Photo

Nursing-home representatives and advocates for people with Alzheimer’s disease squared off Monday over whether the state should require care-facility employees to show they understand how to serve people with dementia.

About 20 lobbyists surrounded three legislators giving an initial review to a bill on the matter. House Study Bill 566 would require training about dementia for new employees and would require that they demonstrate they understand the training. Supporters of the bill said the second part would be its main change.

Many good facilities already are providing solid training to their employees, said Noah Tabor, a lobbyist for the Alzheimer’s Association. “What’s not happening, though, is the skills being proven,” Tabor told the legislators.

“Current dementia training isn’t working in this state. It’s not the fault of facilities, it’s not the fault of workers, it’s just not working,” Tabor said. He then provided copies of state inspectors’ reports showing problems with nursing homes in the legislators’ districts. For example, he gave Rep. Dave Heaton, the subcommittee chairman, reports about the Donnellson Health Center. Problems there included a dementia patient who was able to wander away from the facility because of insufficient safeguards, according to the state inspectors.

RELATED:Transfer trauma 'can be awful' when elderly are moved

Representatives of the nursing home industry countered that the bill would impose new, costly training requirements on top of ones that are being imposed by the federal government under the Affordable Care Act. “We support proper and good training,” said Susan Cameron, a lobbyist for the Iowa Health Care Association. But she said if the government continues to pile on redundant regulations, care providers could become discouraged. “We don’t want to create a situation where our facilities won’t take dementia patients,” she said.

Heaton, a Mount Pleasant Republican, said other states are adopting rules similar to the ones in the bill, which came out of a task force on the issue. He expressed puzzlement at the nursing-home industry’s opposition to the training proposal. “If you’re doing it, what’s the difference between this and what you’re doing?” he asked, his upturned hands held out in a questioning gesture.

The bill also would affect staff members of home-care agencies. It was moved along to the House Human Resources Committee by Heaton and the subcommittee’s other two members, Reps. Dave Dawson, D-Sioux City, and Tom Moore, R-Griswold.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1TmrXzd