Source: Jonathan Karley, "What Is the Optimal Drinking Age?," personal.psu.edu, Dec. 6, 2013 According to a meta-study published in the latest issue of the Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs , the minimum legal drinking age (MLDA) of 21 reduces alcohol-related traffic crashes, alcohol consumption by youth, and long-term negative consequences in adulthood such as drug dependence, suicide, and homicide.



Case Closed: Research Evidence on the Positive Public Health Impact of the Age 21 Minimum Legal Drinking Age in the United States," analyzed dozens of peer-reviewed journal articles that evaluated MLDA 21 in the United States or that investigated the potential effects of raising or lowering the MLDA.



The investigation came as a response to advocacy organization Choose Responsibility's call in 2006 to repeal the . In 2008, the organization created the Amethyst Initiative , a group of college and university presidents advocating for a lower drinking age of 18. Public health and traffic safety experts responded with dozens of new research papers on MLDA's effectiveness. The study, "analyzed dozens of peer-reviewed journal articles that evaluated MLDA 21 in the United States or that investigated the potential effects of raising or lowering the MLDA.The investigation came as a response to advocacy organization Choose Responsibility's call in 2006 to repeal the National Minimum Drinking Age Act of 1984 , which led all 50 states to establish MLDA 21 or risk losing millions of dollars in federal transportation funds

According to study authors William DeJong and Jason Blanchette, researchers at the Boston University School of Public Health and School of Medicine, MLDA 21 has "served the nation well by reducing alcohol-related traffic crashes and alcohol consumption among youths while also protecting drinkers from long-term negative outcomes they might experience in adulthood, including alcohol and other drug dependence, adverse birth outcomes, and suicide and homicide. The evidence is clear that, absent other policy changes and improved enforcement of the nation’s alcohol laws, lowering the legal



The meta-study also compared the United States with other countries in Europe, responding to the notion that lower legal drinking ages introduce

drinking age would lead to a substantial increase in injuries, deaths, and other negative health-related consequences."The meta-study also compared the United States with other countries in Europe, responding to the notion that lower legal drinking ages introduce more responsible drinking habits and result in fewer alcohol-related problems, and concluded that the vast majority of European counties have greater proportions of high school-aged youths who report heavy alcohol use and drinking to intoxication. Compared to other regions of the world, Europe has the "highest per capita alcohol use, the highest percentage of deaths attributed to alcohol, the highest burden of disease related to alcohol, and the highest prevalence of alcohol dependence," according to the study. According to study authors William DeJong and Jason Blanchette, researchers at the Boston University School of Public Health and School of Medicine, MLDA 21 has "served the nation well by reducing alcohol-related traffic crashes and alcohol

has little or no life-saving effect." His research, comparing traffic fatality rates in states before and after they changed their MLDA from 18 to 21, examined separately the impact in states that adopted an MLDA 21 on their own and those that were "coerced" by the National Minimum Drinking Age Act.



According to Miron, "virtually all the life-saving impact of the MLDA 21 comes from the few early-adopting states, not from the larger number that resulted from federal pressure. Further, any life-saving effect in those states that first raised the drinking age was only temporary, occurring largely in the first year or two after switching to the MLDA 21. Our results thus challenge both the value of the MLDA 21 and the value of coercive federalism."



45 states currently have MLDA 21 exceptions for some forms of alcohol consumption. 29 states allow exceptions on private, non alcohol-selling premises with parental consent, 6 on private non alcohol-selling premises without parental consent, 26 for religious purposes, 16 for medical purposes, 4 for government work related purposes, 11 for educational purposes, 17 when reporting medical need due to underage drinking for another minor, and 10 on alcohol-selling premises with parental approval. By contrast, Jeffrey A. Miron , PhD, Senior Lecturer and Director of Undergraduate Studies in the Department of Economics at Harvard University, stated that MLDA 21 "



Sources: William DeJong and Jason Blanchette, "Case Closed: Research Evidence on the Positive Public Health Impact of the Age 21 Minimum Legal Drinking Age in the United States," Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, Aug. 18, 2013



Bahar Gholipour, "Keeping Legal Drinking Age at 21 Saves 900 Lives Yearly: Study," huffingtonpost.com, Feb. 24, 2014



Priyanka McCluskey, "Study: Drinking Age of 21 Saves Lives," bostonherald.com, Feb. 24, 2014



Maanvi Singh, "Legal Drinking Age of 21 Saves Lives, Even Though It's Flouted," npr.org, Feb. 24, 2014



Honor Whiteman, "Drinking Age of 21: Review Confirms It Saves Lives," medicalnewstoday.com, Feb. 24, 2014