WASHINGTON -- Former Sen. John Breaux, D-La., offers the best quote in a New York Times story about how Republicans are trying to make President Barack Obama's performance the chief issue in the upcoming congressional elections.

"Obama bad," is how Breaux says one Louisiana Republican described the 2014 platform of Republicans to him in the highly competitive Louisiana Senate race and it is the case nationally.

"Well, every single Senate candidate we have you can summarize the race by saying: 'Obama bad," Breaux, who now is a lobbyist, told the Times.

In Louisiana, three-term Democratic incumbent Mary Landrieu is running on her record of delivering for her state, including billions of dollars of aid following hurricanes Katrina and Rita. The two major Republican candidates, Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, and Tea Party conservative Rob Maness are running largely on their opposition to Obama administration policies, including his signature health law, the Affordable Care Act. Maness has offered more specific alternatives to the Obama agenda, mainly what he calls his eight "solutions for us."

On Sunday's Meet the Press, Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., and Rob Portman, R-Ohio, debated the prospects for the two parties in Senate contests that will determine whether the Senate remains under Democratic control or goes Republican.

Said Schumer: "Well, I think we will hold the Senate...First and foremost, economic issues predominate. Ebola's in the news, ISIS is in the news, but the average voter, every poll shows far and away, cares most about economic issues."

"Like minimum wage. Like equal pay for women. Like not sending jobs overseas predominate. Second, we have a much better ground game. You can add two to three points at a minimum (to most Democrats poll numbers.)"

Said Portman: "We've talked earlier about the incompetence that some people feel about the Obama administration. And that's catching up to them. And people are asked, you know, 'What do you think about the president,' in your poll today. And you know what they said? He gets less than 40 percent approval in all those states."

"And when the president goes on national TV and says, 'You know what, this is about me. These are my policies, all my policies are on the ballot'...So it is a national election."