Oh, Sunset Street Bridge, that subject of many a pointed question directed at Longmont city staff. As the community moves toward the second anniversary of the September 2013 flood, Sunset Street Bridge is moving closer to a construction date. The Times-Call sat down with project manager Tom Caprarella on Friday to get some answers to the oft-uttered query "Why isn't it done yet?" Be sure to check out the complete interview at TimesCall.com.

Q: Why has it taken so long to start the Sunset Street Bridge?

Caprarella: Well after the flood hit, Boulder County kinda fought a battle with the (Federal Highway Administration) to secure permanent repair funding for the bridge. So after they got through that process, we started a master plan design for the whole corridor, from Boston Ave. to 3rd Ave. so that brought us through the summer of 2014. After that summer, when we completed that master plan we had to go out to bid to get a final design consultant, so that brought us to September of 2014 when we actually started the final design on the bridge, and that design has lasted until now.

Q:Why was the decision made to replace the whole bridge instead of just repair it?

Advertisement

Caprarella: We got an estimate of about $300,000 to $400,000 to actually repair the bridge. From a cost perspective we don't want to throw away $300,000 to $400,000 on a repair. So not only that, but the bridge was at the end of a 50-year design life. It was built in 1958. So we're looking at this now and we're saying we want to build a bridge that's going to be able to stand for the next 75 years. It's going to be able to withstand a 100-year flood event and also it'll be a much better multi-modal type of street. We're going to have sidewalks, we're going to have bike lanes. The original bridge was only 24 feet wide. So this will be a much better piece of infrastructure for the city.

Q: When will it be done?

Caprarella: We're hoping to start construction in the fall of this year and hoping to finish in the spring of next year, 2016.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci