Kiz: Yes, quarterback Peyton Manning is 39 years old. But this draft should have nothing to do with helping Manning to win the Super Bowl this season. As Broncos executive John Elway confessed, he doesn’t believe in rookies. When Denver grades draft prospects, his main concern is “Can he be a starter by the second year?”

Hooch: But can they find a guy who can be a starter in his first year too? They have so many 300-pound question marks on the offensive line. Yes, I know they used a third-round pick last year on an offensive lineman, but it’s possible that a player such as Oregon’s Jake Fisher, Miami’s Ereck Flowers or even Pittsburgh’s T.J. Clemmings will be available.

Kiz: If the Broncos draft for need, they can take the best pass protector available in a draft deep with talent at offensive tackle. But if Denver selects a tackle in the first round, it’s a mistake. The reward for being a talented team that drafts late in the opening round is the chance to take a flier on an outlier that has a chance to be great, even if the Broncos have no real need at his position.

Hooch: We saw how important first-rounder Bradley Roby was a season ago — shoot, even in his first-ever game. Clearly, a guy can make an impact this season if Denver hits on a dude. Why not try to hit on a tackle who could help the Broncos, as Elway says, “win now and from now on.”

Kiz: The outliers who intrigue me bring a crazy athleticism in need of refinement. So the players I hope are available to Denver at No. 28 include Washington linebacker Shaq Thompson, Oregon defensive end Arik Armstead and Alabama safety Landon Collins. Maybe none of them would start for Denver in 2015. But one of them could be a Pro Bowler in 2017.

Hooch: I remember watching Shaq demolish Colorado in Boulder. No question he’s a beast. But I believe the Broncos should draft a player who can make an impact immediately on the offensive line. If they feel that player doesn’t exist at No. 28, then go after the crazy athleticism.