The Santa Clarita Valley Chamber of Commerce and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce honored Rep. Steve Knight (R, CA-25) for his support of pro-growth, pro-jobs policies by awarding him the “Spirit of Enterprise” award on Monday night at a special reception.

“The Santa Clarita (Valley) Chamber of Commerce does fantastic work to ensure that our local businesses can grow and continue to hire our neighbors,” Knight said. “I am honored to receive this recognition and I look forward to working with them to advance pro-jobs policies in Congress.”

The prestigious Spirit of Enterprise Award is given annually to members of Congress who advocated for legislation identified as critical to the business community by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.

Knight was among the select group of honorees this year for his votes in favor of a wide range of pro-growth policies.

“The Spirit of Enterprise Award honors those who are committed to ensuring that our businesses can continue to operate and grow,” said Sue Nevius, immediate past president of the Santa Clarita Valley Chamber Board. “We are pleased to recognize Representative Knight for his work to help strengthen both our national and local economies.”

Among the pro-business policies Knight supported was a measure that would modernize the federal rulemaking process to curb costly regulations and another aimed at repealing the unpopular Medical Device Tax brought about by the Affordable Care Act.

In addition to these key votes, Knight worked closely with the SCV Chamber to understand and promote the priorities of local businesses. With the help of the Chamber, Knight toured several businesses in the Santa Clarita Valley and talked with their owners about the challenges they face in growing their operation. As a member of the House Small Business Committee, Knight has championed multiple bills that would address these problems at the federal level.

Representative Steve Knight, (R-Antelope Valley), represents California’s 25th Congressional District in the US House of Representatives, which includes the communities throughout the Antelope, Santa Clarita and Simi Valleys.

Ed. Note: This article is a press release provided by the SCV Chamber of Commerce.