Delaware's Heroin Crisis Special Report

Share This Story 160 Tweet Share Email

In Burlington, Vermont, the police chief sees soccer moms hooked on heroin.

In Knoxville, Tennessee, addicts desperate for help are waiting six months to get into treatment facilities.

And, in Ohio, the Republican governor who had long called for the repeal of Obamacare has since sidestepped the GOP Legislature to enroll his state in Medicaid.

The United States is in the grips of one of the worst heroin epidemics in its history, due in part to a flood of cheap doses of the drug, which can be had for as little as $4 apiece, ordered on dark corners of the Web and delivered to your front door in the suburbs. In some regions, heroin is deemed "highly available" by local police in more than three times the number of communities as it was just seven years ago.

“We've got soccer moms on heroin … you walk down any street in any town in Vermont right now and chances are there is at least one house where someone is dealing with this. This is a completely underground, behind-closed-doors phenomenon.” Police Chief Michael Schirling of Burlington, Vt.

The resurgence of the deadly drug has sparked a flurry of action from governors' mansions and statehouses across New England and the Midwest to small-town police stations from northern Kentucky to Wisconsin.

"It's really on the top of everyone's radar from a public health perspective," said Thomas MacLellan, director of homeland security and public safety for the National Governors Association. Even Capitol Hill and the White House are weighing in on what's become a full-blown health crisis that cuts across geographic, social, racial and economic boundaries.

Estimates on the number of U.S. heroin addicts range from 300,000 to 500,000, up about 75 percent from five years ago. And while that is just a minor portion of the nearly 24 million Americans that abuse drugs overall, heroin use is growing faster than all others.

Given the drug's nasty reputation and deadly nature, the heroin epidemic has been called a full-blown health crisis that cuts across geographic, social, racial and economic boundaries.

"We've got soccer moms on heroin … you walk down any street in any town in Vermont right now and chances are there is at least one house where someone is dealing with this," said Burlington Police Chief Michael Schirling, who has seen heroin trafficking cases in his area increase fivefold in just two years. "This is a completely underground, behind-closed-doors phenomenon."

State legislatures are considering more heroin laws than ever, Congress has held a series of hearings, and even governors are taking it public – even as some critics say the response has come too late and more could have been done to prevent the spread of heroin.

Vermont Gov. Peter Shumlin in January went so far as to devote nearly his entire state of the state address to what he called the "rising tide of drug addiction and drug-related crime spreading across Vermont."

All told, heroin and related opioid pain pills have killed more than 125,000 in the last 10 years. And federal data indicates that another 75,000-plus pain pill abusers will turn to heroin annually.

One early victim of the crisis was Casey Wethington, who died in 2002 of a heroin overdose at the age of 23.

"Within six months of learning about Casey's heroin addiction, we were burying him," said his mother, Charlotte Wethington of Morning View, Kentucky, who is now an anti-drug activist.

"We have a tremendous amount of needless deaths – tens of thousands," said Wethington. "These statistics are real people. And those who knew them, their lives will never be the same again."

Charlotte Wethington of Erlanger, Kentucky knows the pain a heroin addition can cause. After losing her son to the addiction, she now works bring awareness to the need for better treatment options. VPC

'Cycle of addiction'

It is impossible to understand the heroin surge without understanding the drug's link to prescription painkillers including OxyContin, Vicodin and Percocet. The drugs are heroin's chemical sibling, all containing compounds derived from or similar to opium, one of the world's most dangerous drugs.

"Heroin is just a symptom of the prescription drug problem," said Joseph Rannazzisi, deputy assistant administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration, during a U.S. Senate hearing in May on the topic.

From 1999 to 2010, the sale of opioid painkillers increased 300 percent, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Enough prescription painkillers were prescribed in 2010 to "medicate every American adult around-the-clock for one month," the CDC reported in November 2011. The drugs are now prescribed to 12 million Americans a year.

With the reformulation of prescription opioids to make them harder to abuse and new regulations aimed at curbing prescribing the drugs, addicts are turning to heroin by the tens of thousands.

"People are going to go where the drugs are, and right now, the cheapest and easiest way to keep that addiction going is through heroin," said DEA spokesman Rusty Payne, noting that the agency spotted this "cycle of addiction" as soon as 2009.

Mexican drug dealers met the new demand with a new supply of cheap heroin, delivered to customers' homes and not sold on street corners. Payne says more than half of all heroin in the U.S. now comes from Mexico – a huge change from previous decades when most of the drug originated in Asia. And it's cheaper and easier to use than ever. Mexican heroin sells for $4-10 a dose, compared with $40-80 for an 80-milligram opiate pain pill.

But more than that, new powder heroin can be snorted as well as injected, removing a psychological barrier for some users and introducing a new generation to the highly addictive drug.

Now, federal research indicates the problem is growing even faster.

Dr. Nora Volkow, director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse, the federal medical agency that tracks drug abuse and helps shape policy, says surveys indicate 80 percent of recent heroin addicts switched from opioid pain pills.

Those same surveys show that 3.6 percent of the nation's 2.1 million opioid pill addicts turned to heroin since 2007, a percentage that Volkow predicts will grow.

Until 2007, the U.S. did "a great job as a country containing the spread and use of heroin," said Volkow in an interview. Then heroin use exploded, "doubling in some states."

The nexus with pain treatment makes heroin "a very sensitive issue" for policy makers "because we can't just do away with opioid medication," Volkow said.

Heroin Availability By Region The percentage of police agencies reporting "high availability" of heroin in their communities in 2008, 2010 and 2013 in federal surveys. 2008

2010

2013





Far-reaching impacts

States and local governments are struggling to keep up with the ongoing crisis.

• In Butler County, Ohio, the home of U.S. House Speaker John Boehner, the number of children being removed from their parents' custody doubled between 2010 and 2012, with heroin accounting for more than half of all child removal cases in the county in 2012.

• In Knoxville, Tennessee, 73 people died from drug overdoses last year, more than from homicides and traffic accidents combined. According to a new report, opiates of some sort were involved in at least 36 of those deaths. (It's hard to say which ones were heroin because of the difficulty in differentiating heroin from other substances through tests.) "Heroin got here later than other places, but it is here now full blast," said Knoxville Police Chief David Rausch.

• In communities across Kentucky, heroin abuse is "spreading like a cancer," Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Kentucky, told the Senate Caucus on International Narcotics Control in May. The problem is most acute in Northern Kentucky just across the Ohio River from Cincinnati. "We are losing close to 100 fellow Kentuckians a month to drug-related deaths," McConnell said. "This is more lives lost than to fatal car crashes." Actually, drug abuse deaths now exceed car fatalities nationwide according to the CDC and NIDA.

Law enforcement officials aren't the only ones dealing with the strain. Treatment facilities are overwhelmed, with communities such as Knoxville reporting wait times of six months or longer.

"We have 40 beds available, and we're increasingly having to turn people away," said Ginger Marshall, the volunteer alcohol and drug treatment coordinator for the Lost Sheep Ministry in Knoxville. "This is just overwhelming everyone. It doesn't help that most insurance only pays for 30 or 60 days of treatment, when it can take that long just to get the drugs out of your system."

Said Kolodny: "We have effective treatments; unfortunately in the communities hit hardest by the epidemic, the availability of treatment does not come close to meeting demand."

States battle epidemic

Governors and other state officials across the country are taking drastic steps to control the epidemic, which is worst in the Great Lakes, New England and Mid-Atlantic regions along with New York and New Jersey.

Narcotics Lt. Jesse Duncan looks over a bag of heroin that weighed in at nearly 6 grams as he discusses evidence collected in the Louisville area on Jan. 30, 2014.

(Photo: Alton Strupp, The (Louisville) Courier-Journal)

In Delaware last year, 2,750 adults who identified heroin as their drug of choice sought state-funded treatment, the highest number since at least 1987. State Health and Human Services Secretary Rita Landgraf said kids have gotten into the juvenile treatment system for heroin as young as 12.

At least 18 legislatures have considered new heroin legislation this year, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures. Subjects range from allowing easier access to drugs that counteract opiate/heroin overdoses for first responders and even the public, as well as possible leniency for low-level heroin offenders who agree to treatment. Some of those states and at least five others also are debating legislation that would toughen sentences for major drug crimes and trafficking involving heroin.

In Massachusetts, for example, deaths from heroin and related opioid drugs spiked by more than 90 percent since 2002, leading Gov. Deval Patrick to declare a public health emergency in late March.

The declaration created new regulatory powers for public health officials. Patrick also created a $10 million trust fund to create a court diversion system for non-violent drug offenders to get them into treatment, and sunk $20 million into the state's drug treatment system.

Last year, Ohio Gov. John Kasich expanded Medicaid in his state partly because of the heroin problem. He bypassed a Republican-controlled Legislature to enroll Ohio in the Medicaid expansion allowed by the Affordable Care Act, even though he wants Obamacare repealed. Part of his reasoning: the state needed federal money for drug and addiction treatment because of heroin.

It has wreaked havoc

In the Cincinnati neighborhood of Saylor Park along the Ohio River, Erin Clark's cheeks flush from pride as she talks about her new baby on the way and being next in-line to serve as president of her two daughters' Parent Teacher Organization next year.

"I enjoy life, and I don't wake up with that anxiety and that overwhelming craving," says Clark, whose addiction to prescription opioids led her eventually to heroin in 2012.

The 31-year-old married mother has been clean for nearly two years. Getting this far has included weaning her body from her deadly addiction with Suboxone, a low-level prescription opioid that helped her through the severe withdrawals.

She stopped taking the medication last January, after her husband lost his insurance. Clark says she still had slight withdrawals, but she kept herself busy caring for her daughters, husband and attending Alcoholics Anonymous meetings.

Too many opioid and heroin addicts can't find the help they need when they finally look for it, said Clark. "We need more treatment facilities and education," she said.

Wethington, the anti-drug activist who lives across the river in Northern Kentucky agrees.

The fervor with which state and federal officials are acting now is encouraging, she says, but much delayed.

"I was trying to sound the warning bell and nobody was listening," said Wethington, who now works as an addiction and recovery counselor. "They were in denial that this could ever come to their house, and unfortunately it has wreaked havoc across our state and our nation."

Past Month Heroin Use 2007-2012 The number of people (in thousands) who are 12 years old or older and who reported using heroin in the past month in federal surveys.

People (Thousands) Year

Special Report: Heroin: Delaware's deadly crisis