An 11-year-old Haskell cowboy has gotten an invite to rodeo’s biggest stage this December.



As one of the top 20 youth ropers under 13, Kade Williams has been invited to participate in the Roy Cooper Invitational Junior Calf Roping Competition in Las Vegas. The event is being held as part of the annual festivities surrounding the National Finals Rodeo.

You may remember Williams, who we featured in 2014 as he taught the Six in the Morning crew how to rope.

Through Sunday, he will ride his horse Bucky and calf rope for the chance to win $6,000 in prize money.



Click here for the official NFR website for more information



While Williams is busy working toward his dream of stepping into the big arena, the pro cowboys and cowgirls are competing for a share of the $8.8 million purse at the Thomas & Mack Center as the rodeo takes over Sin City until Dec. 12.



The 10-day extravaganza got off to a historical start when 22-time world champion Trevor Brazile, of Montana, won the tie-down roping with a 6.8-second run -- the fastest Round 1 time in NFR history.



The first go-round of competition ended with several Oklahomans having good showings and one at the top of the leaderboard. Wade Sundell, a bronc rider from Coleman, continued his tradition of getting off to a fast start in Vegas. Sundell rode for 86.5 points on Fire Lane to win $26,231, and it was the sixth time in seven first rounds that Sundell has earned a check.

Ten Oklahomans and a team roper from Coffeyville, Kansas, are in the NFR field this year competing for gold buckles.

Sage Kimzey, of Strong City (bull riding)

Hunter Herrin, Apache (tie-down roping)

Ryan Jarrett, Comanche (tie-down roping)

Brennon Eldred, Suphur (bull riding)

Wade Sundell, Coleman (saddle bronc riding)

Travis Graves, Jay (team roping)

Kollin VonAhn, Blanchard (team roping)

Coleman Proctor, Pryor (team roping)

Jake Long, Coffeyville, Kansas (team roping)

Nick Sartain, Dover (team roping

Clay Smith, Broken Bow (team roping)

To keep up, you can watch the 57th annual Wrangler NFR live on CBS Sports Net every night through Dec. 12 from 9 p.m.-1 a.m. central time. You can see updated standings on the PRCA website.