Mike Brown/The Commercial Appeal Miguel Rosales, 41, receives dialysis at a private clinic three times per week since being diagnosed with acute kidney failure 15 years ago. Rosales, an undocumented immigrant, doesn’t qualify for government aid and is unable to purchase private insurance according to the Affordable Care Act.

By Maria Ines Zamudio of The Commercial Appeal

Luis is a 53-year-old, Mexican-born laborer who after building houses around the Mid-South for a decade needs costly medical care to stay alive.

But Luis is an undocumented immigrant with no insurance — he doesn't qualify under the Affordable Care Act and can't legally buy private insurance — so he has only one option in Memphis' massive health care network: the emergency room.

Increasingly in Memphis, and around the U.S., emergency rooms are becoming the source of specialized medical care for undocumented workers. Not only is it not the best option, medically, it's adding an expensive burden to hospitals forced to cover the cost because they can't legally turn away uninsured.

Consider the financial impact of just his case: Luis, who declined to provide his full name for fear of being deported, goes to the ER as often as three times a week for dialysis. Specific cost figures were not available, but experts estimate emergency room dialysis costs are at least triple that of private treatment centers. As a result, he's piling up unpaid charges that the hospital has very little if any chance of collecting.

It costs about $200 for each dialysis treatment at Methodist Hospital's ER, according to officials. Most patients need three dialysis treatments per week — that's a total of $600 per week plus other cost associated with the procedure.

Luis, who immigrated to the U.S. in 2003 with his family, was first rushed to the hospital with shortness of breath in October. Doctors found fluid in his lungs and told him he was suffering from acute kidney failure, the result of two decades of inadequately treated diabetes. The father of two was hospitalized for almost two weeks as he was stabilized and as the hospital — he won't say which hospital for fear of losing his care — tried to locate a private treatment facility that would accept him. But when that search failed, doctors instructed Luis to return to the ER each time he required dialysis. After complications from diabetes, Luis stopped working. Luis lives with his married daughter and his wife cleans houses to support him.

With each trip, the bills pile up.

Without those trips to the ER, he'll die within a week, doctors told him.

"This is inhumane," Luis said in Spanish. "Our right to live is being denied."

The practice of receiving dialysis in the ER is called "emergent dialysis" and it happens regularly across the country. In Memphis, Methodist Hospital reports having only five such patients in 2010, but the number climbed to 18 by 2014.

The newspaper was unable to obtain similar data from other area hospitals.

Dr. Scott Morris, CEO of Church Health Center, said hospitals are doing what they can to treat the population, but the issue remains a serious frustration because most of the dialysis in Memphis is performed at private treatment centers where the uninsured are typically not served. Morris said he treated a 40-year-old man needing dialysis who said an ER doctor told him to return to the ER each time he needed treatment.

Morris said he didn't believe it and called the director of the hospital.

"I told him what the patient told me. I said surely there's a better plan for this. This cannot be how you deal with people like this. I'm not making this up, what he said to me is: 'Is it working?,' " Morris said. " 'I guess for the short run it is working.' He said 'When it stops working, call me back.' "

There are potential solutions as evidenced by Miguel Rosales, a 41-year-old undocumented immigrant who also suffers from acute kidney failure. He has been receiving dialysis services for over 15 years but, unlike Luis, Rosales doesn't rely on the ER. He's worked out a deal with a private dialysis center. It absorbs some of the costs of his treatment and he pays the rest.

Rosales works odd jobs a few days a week to help pay some of those costs, plus buy medication which is more than $900 for a two-month supply.

"My dream is having a kidney transplant," he said.

But that's unlikely under the current system. Undocumented immigrants are allowed to donate kidneys, but there are only a few known cases in which they have received transplants in Chicago and New York.

Rosales has emerged as an activist, often taking on causes that affect the city's Latino population.

"I've dedicated a lot of time to fight for the rights of immigrants. I like helping people. That's what keeps me alive," he said.

Both Rosales and Luis live day-to-day, hoping their current arrangements hold up.

"What will I do if the hospital decides to stop providing dialysis for me?" Luis asked recently. "It feels like (Americans) have turned their backs on the Christian principals on which this country was founded."

Ira Mehlman, spokesman for the DC-based Federation for American Immigration Reform, an anti-illegal immigration organization, said that while emergency rooms should provide care to people regardless of immigration status, patients in need of dialysis should be repatriated to their countries of origin.

"Just because somebody is here doesn't mean they have to remain here and become the responsibility of the American people," Mehlman said, adding that this problem is a result of the lack of enforcement of immigration laws.

But repatriation is not always the best option for the patient, Morris said.

He said he recently had a patient illegally brought to Memphis as a child. She was taken to the emergency room in kidney failure. When the hospital wouldn't help, she turned to him.

"We got her chart from the hospital to look at the plan and literally the last line (of the file) said return to home country for dialysis."

Morris said he was unsuccessful in finding dialysis services for her in Mexico, but did connect her to someone willing to help in Memphis.

"Jesus was an undocumented immigrant. He fled to Egypt with his family," Morris said. "What would baby Jesus have done if he came to Memphis? If you care about that, then you ought to care about this."