Evanston Library Board President Michael Tannen defended the board's proposed 11 percent tax hike Monday night, while Alderman Ann Rainey attacked it as unconscionable.

Tannen told aldermen at the City Council meeting that the library has become a one-stop-shop for community education.

He said it provided space for volunteer tax preparers last tax season who prepared returns for 373 Evanston households and just last week hosted a resource night for families with special needs youngsters that drew an audience of 80.

He blamed at least part of the tax increase on President Obama and the new affordable care act, which he said required the library to provide health coverage for more of its part-time workers.

And he claimed that the Evanston library still lags far behind the spending levels of what he described as peer institutions in other suburbs.

Alderman Ann Rainey.

The proposed increase will raise the library tax rate substantially above the mandated level imposed by the state legislature, and Rainey called the increase outrageous.

"For any department that hasn't had a hurricane or some other catastrophe to ask for 11 percent is irresponsible," Rainey said, "I don't care how famous and important and good our library director is."

Rainey said that when the library board was given control over its own budget "we were told we wouldn't be seeing big increases."

A smaller increase, she suggested could be appropriate. "Three percent, maybe even five percent I could stomach, Rainey said, "but you need to go back and fix it."

The City Council is scheduled to vote on the library tax levy next Monday night.

So far, other than Rainey, only Alderman Coleen Burrus, 9th Ward, has spoken out in opposition to the library tax hike, while Mayor Elizabeth Tisdahl, who appoints the library board members, has defended it.

In other budget news, aldermen raised no objections Monday to a series of relatively minor adjustments to the proposed city budget developed by City Manager Wally Bobkiewicz in response to earlier suggestions from council members. Bobkiewicz said he'd incorporate those changes into the final version of the budget scheduled for adoption next week.