Terror raids

More than a dozen people suspected of ties with ISIS have been arrested in France, Germany and Belgium. CBS News correspondent Charlie D'Agata reports authorities were on high alert across Europe. In Belgium, authorities moved swiftly to pre-empt what they called a major impending attack.

Free speech

Although last week's killings in France launched a massive movement in defense of freedom of expression, they also launched an inevitable debate on its limits. At some schools, especially in Paris' poor suburbs with large Muslim populations, some students would not observe last week's minute's silence for the dead cartoonists who worked at Charlie Hebdo. CBS News correspondent Elizabeth Palmer reports they said what many were thinking: that the paper should have held back out of respect.

Snooping

President Obama will have more meetings Friday with British Prime Minister David Cameron. The two are expected to discuss topics ranging from international terror to Ebola. As CBS News White House correspondent Bill Plante reports, Cameron is also expected to press the president on the sensitive subject of government snooping.

Fund raising

Not long after former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush announced he was actively exploring a 2016 presidential bid, he moved to set up two fundraising vehicles named "Right to Rise." One is a leadership political action committee (PAC) and the other, a "super PAC." The cash brought in by the two can be used to support other candidates, the party, or to fund Bush's travel to engage in those activities. And it is a way for Bush to start activating his potential donor network. Federal election law will enable him to take the money his super PAC is raising right now and turn it toward the support of his yet undeclared candidacy.

Leading indicator

The U.S. economy is being buoyed by low gas prices, falling unemployment and a rebound in job creation, but for Wall Street, the real gauge of economic stability is corporate earnings.

Too young?

A hot debate is unfolding in a Washington, D.C., suburb over how much freedom is safe for young children. It all started when a 6- and a 10-year-old were taking a walk on a busy street and got picked up by police. CBS News correspondent Chip Reid reports from Silver Spring, Maryland that the parents are now in trouble with Child Protective Services.

Movie warning

The movie "Still Alice" is based on the 2007 novel of the same name by Lisa Genova, who it turns out isn't just a novelist. Before turning to writing fiction, Genova earned a PhD in neuroscience at Harvard University, and has since become an activist seeking to raise awareness about Alzheimer's disease and other neurological conditions that are too often misunderstood.

Mass deaths

Thousands of birds falling from the sky. Millions of fish washing up on the shore. Honey bee populations being decimated. Bats being overtaken by a deadly fungus. Piglets dying in droves from a mysterious disease. It was tragic stories such as those that prompted a group of researchers embark on a broad review. Their analysis revealed that not only are these events becoming more frequent, they're increasing in magnitude. Here are the causes.

L.A. landmark?

A commission in Los Angeles is considering landmark status for Norms, a 24-hour diner beloved by fans of mid-century architecture. They're worried the iconic building could be wiped off the map. CBS News Correspondent Ben Tracy reports on the fight to preserve Southern California's disappearing post-war treasures.

Top News

World

U.S. to send more than 400 troops to train Syrian rebels

Pope Francis urges Philippines to end corruption

Homegrown terror threat higher in Europe than U.S.

Politics

Joni Ernst to deliver GOP response to State of the Union

Chris Christie's 2016 presidential message: "Relax"

Rand Paul in the land of the free

U.S.

Oklahoma puts first inmate to death since botched execution

Duke reverses plan to allow Islamic call to prayer from campus chapel

Women get chance at Army Ranger course for first time

MoneyWatch

You don't want to be in a car accident in this state

How Obamacare is affecting Americans' medical bills

Health

Lack of exercise may be twice as deadly as obesity

Red Cross nurse dies of Ebola

ADHD drug could help treat binge eating