Sister Mary Ann Walsh greets David Clohessy from the Survivors Network of Those Abused by Priests. (Juana Arias/The Washington Post)

Sister Mary Ann Walsh, a nun and journalist who helped shape and influence the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops as its media relations director, died April 28 at a hospice in Albany, N.Y. She was 68.

The death was confirmed by a friend, Sister Amy Hoey. Sister Walsh was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2010 and in 2014 learned that the cancer had metastasized to her brain, bones, liver and lungs.

Starting in 1993, she spent 21 years helping manage communications for the conference, the last seven as media relations director. She was the first woman to serve in that leadership role since the organization’s establishment in 1966.

A veteran Catholic reporter, she helped the American church rebound from the sex-abuse crisis of the early 2000s, coordinated media relations efforts surrounding the two most recent papal elections and most recently sparred with the Obama administration over the Affordable Care Act’s contraception mandate.

In July 2014, she stepped down from the conference to become the U.S. church correspondent for the weekly Jesuit-run America magazine.

“It’s the ideal job, a job of opinion, after working in an institution [the conference] that thought opinion was anathema,” she told the Catholic News Service in February.

During her time at the magazine, she profiled church leaders, openly discussed her terminal diagnosis and addressed contemporary issues facing the church in blogs and columns, including women’s leadership roles in the church.

“As the first female religious to serve on the editorial staff of America, Sr. Walsh was a trailblazer even in this last phase of her professional life,” America magazine editor in chief Matt Malone said in a statement.

Mary Ann Walsh was born in Albany on Feb. 25, 1947. The daughter of Irish immigrants, she entered the Sisters of Mercy Roman Catholic convent at 17. She received a master’s degree in English from Albany’s College of St. Rose in 1976 and a master’s degree in pastoral counseling from Baltimore’s Loyola University Maryland in 1990.

She worked as a schoolteacher in Albany before starting her journalism career at 30 at the Evangelist, a diocesan newspaper in Albany.

“I entered media because I wanted to help people,” Sister Walsh said in a Sisters of Mercy of the Americas video. “I saw people over here who had great needs, and I saw people over here who were willing to meet needs. I thought I could be the bridge. It was the time of Simon and Garfunkel’s ‘Bridge Over Troubled Waters,’ and that’s what I wanted to be: I wanted to be the bridge over troubled waters.”

She worked for the Catholic News Service’s bureau in Rome from 1983 to 1986 and later as a national desk reporter and media editor in the news service’s Washington bureau.

1 of 83 Full Screen Autoplay Close Skip Ad × Notable deaths of 2015 View Photos A look at those who have died this year. Caption A look at those who have died. From left, Swedish actress Anita Ekberg known for her role in “La Dolce Vita”; Star Trek icon Leonard Nimoy; Bobbi Kristina Brown, the only child of Whitney Houston and Bobby Brown; legendary blues guitarist B.B. King; and football player and “Monday Night Football” sportscaster Frank Gifford. From left: Mario Torrisi/AP, CBS via Getty Images, Jordan Strauss/Invision/AP, Astrid Stawiarz/Getty Images, Kathy Willens/AP Buy Photo Wait 1 second to continue.

In 1991, she was the first reporter to uncover that TV host Phil Donahue had used fake names in a widely syndicated essay, “Confessions of a Fallen Schoolboy,” about his Catholic upbringing in Cleveland in the 1940s.

Her big break came in 1993 when she was tasked to coordinate media relations for Pope John Paul II’s visit to Denver for World Youth Day. The papal visit drew an estimated 750,000 young people from more than 70 countries and became the model structure for future events. Shortly thereafter, the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops hired her.

Over the years, she edited books, produced videos and contributed articles and op-eds to publications such as The Washington Post and USA Today.

As her health declined, she left the Washington area and returned to Albany to live near her family at her old quarters, the Sisters of Mercy convent.

Survivors include two brothers.

She received honors for her contributions to Catholic journalism.

Last year, she told the Arlington Catholic Herald that at the beginning of her communications career, some questioned where her loyalties would lie — to the church or to journalism. She would tell them she was “loyal to the truth.”