Gov. Steve Beshear may have a shot as Democrats' VP nominee.

Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear, left, outlines the biennial budget Jan. 21 in Frankfort, Ky. Beshear's name has been mentioned as a possible vice presidential candidate for 2016. (Photo: Jonathan Palmer, The (Louisville, Ky.) Courier-Journal) Story Highlights Two-term Democratic governor in Republican-leaning state could bring more votes in the South

Beshear's strength could also be a con: He's a 69-year-old white male

Beshear could help defend Affordable Care Act as he had a successful rollout

CINCINNATI — No one's printing Hillary Clinton-Steve Beshear 2016 campaign materials yet, but could Kentucky's governor have a shot at making the Democrat ticket as the vice presidential nominee?

The Democratic two-term governor in a Republican-leaning state has been getting some national exposure — of the good kind.

RELATED: Potential 2016 Dem candidate: Hillary Rodham Clinton

RELATED: Potential 2016 GOP candidate: Rand Paul

Beshear's support and successful rollout of the Affordable Care Act earned him a front-row seat to the president's State of the Union address as a guest of first lady Michelle Obama.

Kentucky's job growth of 2.6% from September 2011 to September 2012 ranked second only to oil-booming North Dakota's 5.6%, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Beshear's name has already come up as a potential running mate in the 2016 election conversations among some political watchers around the country, said University of Virginia politics professor Larry Sabato.

"I've heard his name mentioned," said Sabato. "I certainly wouldn't rule it out."

Beshear, 69, whose term ends in 2015, has said he's run his last race for public office after more than 40 years in Kentucky politics. He declined to challenge U.S. Sen. Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., this year despite the encouragement from many Democrats.

“If Hillary Clinton is the Democratic nominee in '16, she might well want to try to reconstruct her party's coalition to attract more Southern and border-state whites. ” Larry Sabato, politics professor University of Virginia

Since then, though, he's been a regular on national television. Beshear has been on NBC's "Meet the Press," National Public Radio, "CBS Evening News" and other national news outlets.

Beshear himself declined to talk for this article. His spokeswoman, Kerri Richardson, said in an e-mail that Beshear has "been clear that he's not going to run for any other offices."

Beshear brings some positives to a national ticket: He's an old white guy. He also brings some negatives: He's an old white guy.

The pros:

— He could bring in more votes in the South.

President Barack Obama struggled to win southern states in 2012; only Virginia and Florida went Democratic. The last Democrat to win Kentucky was Bill Clinton in 1996.

"If Hillary Clinton is the Democratic nominee in '16, she might well want to try to reconstruct her party's coalition to attract more Southern and border-state whites," Sabato said. "For various reasons, including race, Barack Obama has hit new lows for this category of voters in states that voted for Bill Clinton."

— He could help Clinton defend Obamacare.

Roger Hickey, president of progressive public policy group Campaign for America's Future, pushed for the Affordable Care Act and thinks the long-term success of health care reform will increase the value of Beshear's stock.

"Beshear has certainly showed the other states how to do it," Hickey said. "He's also showed the other states how they're shooting themselves in the foot for their failure to expand Medicaid and failing to do their own exchange. I would love to see somebody from the South, somebody from Kentucky on the ticket."

— He brings widespread appeal as a moderate.

Beshear impressed Hamilton County Democratic Chairman Tim Burke before the health-care rollout. He said Beshear's ability to hold the governor's office in a conservative state would make him a valuable asset to a presidential ticket.

"It makes him a viable candidate," said Burke. "It puts in play electoral votes that Dems have not been able to count on in the last presidential cycles."

“We'd be getting really ahead of ourselves if we talked about VP speculation, because Hillary has not even said whether or not she is going to run.” Seth Bringman, spokesman Ready for Hillary Political Action Committee

When running for governor for the first time, Beshear told people he voted for Kentucky's constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage, which voters passed in 2004. But he's also made moves that many gay rights activists have pushed for, including vetoing a "religious rights" bill in 2013 that some feared would lead to workplace discrimination of gays.

Those in Kentucky who know him could see him on a national ticket. Kenton County Democratic Chairman Col Owens watched Beshear with pride on the national news.

"He did a great job, and I'm sure that's noticed by people," said Owens. "I think they might well look at him if they want geographical balance. He's a moderate and obviously a real Democrat. It's not inconceivable they could turn to him."

Beshear, however, wouldn't be the perfect VP candidate.

The cons:

— At age 69, he might be seen as too old.

Some believe the 66-year-old Clinton or whoever gets the Democratic nod will go with someone younger to counter what could be a younger GOP presidential candidate. Republicans could even nominate another Kentuckian, Sen. Rand Paul of Bowling Green. He's 51.

Massachusetts Gov. Deval Patrick, 57, has a good shot at a VP nod, said Northern Kentucky Democratic political strategist Kathy Groob.

"I see a younger, fresher, very diverse ticket," said Groob. "That age thing could be a balance."

— Being from Kentucky might not help.

Sabato raised some doubts about how effective Beshear or any other Democrat would be in getting more votes in the conservative South.

"The social issues will still be on the agenda, for instance, and down South, they hurt Democrats," Sabato said. "Could Beshear even carry Kentucky for the ticket? Anything's possible this far out from the election, but I'd bet against it preliminarily."

Those pushing for Hillary Clinton declined to speculate on vice presidential candidates. The Ready for Hillary Political Action Committee is still trying to recruit Clinton to run, said Seth Bringman, spokesman for the PAC.

"We'd be getting really ahead of ourselves if we talked about VP speculation, because Hillary has not even said whether or not she is going to run," Bringman told The Cincinnati Enquirer in an e-mail.

Democratic Sen. Sherrod Brown from Ohio -- a key battleground state -- wouldn't discuss Beshear's vice presidential challenges but did provide glowing praise for how he's handled Obamacare.

"Kentuckians are fortunate to have such a strong, smart and courageous voice in Gov. Steve Beshear," Brown said. "Under his leadership, Kentucky is expanding Medicaid to ensure all residents have access to affordable health insurance and the benefits they deserve. People want their leaders to get things accomplished, and that's exactly what Gov. Beshear has done."

Gov. Steve Beshear at a glance

Personal

Age: 69

Occupation: Lawyer

Wife: Jane Beshear

Politics

Kentucky attorney general: 1980-83

Kentucky lieutenant governor: 1983-87

Governor: 2007-present

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1eLr6iA