Only days after proclaiming himself "president of everybody" within international soccer, Sepp Blatter has announced his resignation as president of FIFA amid a sweeping corruption scandal.

"FIFA needs a profound overhaul," Blatter, referred to by some as "Mr. Untouchable," said in a statement Tuesday. His resignation comes after he spent 17 years at the helm of FIFA and 40 years as an employee within soccer's international governing body. "We need deep-rooted structural change."

Blatter's announcement serves as the latest chapter in one of the most bizarre and tumultuous periods FIFA has ever seen in its 111 years. More than a dozen plainclothes Swiss police officers, acting in coordination with the U.S. Justice Department, on Wednesday apprehended numerous FIFA officials who had gathered for a conference in Zurich.

The U.S. Justice Department later that day released the names of the officials as part of a 14-defendant, 47-count indictment. The soccer officials were charged with "racketeering, wire fraud and money laundering conspiracies, among other offenses," according to a Justice Department news release.

"They were expected to uphold the rules that keep soccer honest and to protect the integrity of the game," U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch said of the defendants in a news conference Wednesday. "Instead, they corrupted the business of worldwide soccer to serve their interests and to enrich themselves. This Department of Justice is determined to end these practices, to root out corruption and to bring wrongdoers to justice."

The accused allegedly participated in a "24-year scheme to enrich themselves through the corruption of international soccer" by working with sports marketing executives "who are alleged to have systematically paid and agreed to pay well over $150 million in bribes and kickbacks to obtain lucrative media and marketing rights," according to the Justice Department release. Two current FIFA vice presidents were swept up in the scandal, though Blatter was not mentioned in the indictment.

And although Swiss authorities later announced an independent investigation into whether the hosting rights to the 2018 and 2022 World Cups were doled out legitimately, they announced Tuesday that Blatter was not under investigation.

"The Office of the Attorney General of Switzerland (OAG) has taken note of the announced resignation of Joseph S. Blatter," the office said in a statement Tuesday, noting that it was investigating "persons unknown on suspicion of criminal mismanagement and of money laundering." "Therefore, Joseph S. Blatter is not under investigation by the OAG. His announced resignation will have no influence on the ongoing criminal proceedings."

However, The New York Times on Monday suggested federal officials believe Blatter’s second-in-command helped orchestrate a $10 million bribe in connection to the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa.

Unnamed U.S. officials were cited as saying FIFA Secretary General Jerome Valcke is believed to have helped transfer funds into bank accounts controlled by Jack Warner, a former FIFA vice president cited in the Justice Department’s 47-count indictment.

A 2008 letter addressed to Valcke from Molefi Oliphant, the former president of the South African Football Association, was published by the SABC Monday. Oliphant in the letter asked Valcke that a $10 million sum be withheld from World Cup allocations and instead go to the “Diaspora Legacy Programme," which was to be overseen by Warner, who is suspected of being paid for his vote for South Africa to host the 2010 World Cup.

Valcke has maintained his innocence, but canceled his Saturday trip to the Women’s World Cup in Canada “due to the current situation,” according to a FIFA statement cited by The Associated Press. The organization has defended Valcke, saying instead that former finance committee chairman Julio Grondona approved the payments back in 2007. Grondona died last year.

“We would like to reiterate that neither the Secretary General Jerome Valcke nor any other member of FIFA’s senior management were involved in the initiation, approval and implementation of the Diaspora project,” FIFA said in a statement sent to the U.K.’s Daily Mail.

Should the 2010 bribery allegations against FIFA’s No. 2 hold water, they would deflate Blatter’s much-championed accomplishment of bringing Africa its first World Cup tournament. They would also place corruption precariously close to FIFA’s commander-in-chief.

The probes already have tainted the public perception of Blatter. Greg Dyke, chairman of England's The Football Association, last week said a European boycott of Russia’s 2018 World Cup “should be discussed” if Blatter was to win the election

“During his period in charge, the level of corruption has been unacceptable,” Dyke said. “It’s just frightening.”

Even British Prime Minister David Cameron called for Blatter’s head last week at an event with German Chancellor Angela Merkel.

“In my view, he should go,” he said. “The sooner, the better.”

Blatter won a closer-than-expected election to FIFA's presidency on Friday in a contest that was nearly forced to enter a second round of voting. Instead, rival candidate Prince Ali bin Al-Hussein conceded shortly after the first round concluded.

According to FIFA bylaws, a second round of voting is mandatory if neither candidate garners two-thirds of the total votes cast by the representatives of 209 international soccer federations. Prince Ali managed to force an unexpected second round, but seeing that his 73 votes were ultimately dwarfed by Blatter's 133, he withdrew his name from the election and automatically granted Blatter a fifth term in office.

"[Blatter] is responsible, and I hope that at some stage he actually does take responsibility for actions," Prince Ali said in an interview with CNN on Monday. "The genuine feeling among member associations and among the footballing world is that for sure, there needs to be a change."

That change came less than 24 hours later, when Blatter announced his resignation, effective whenever the FIFA Executive Committee schedules another presidential election.

FIFA bylaws mandate that a four-month notice period be given for any presidential election, which means October would be the earliest any such process could take place. Considering FIFA also needs time to vet potential candidates, it is expected Blatter will remain in office for most, if not all, of 2015.

Domenico Scala, chairman of FIFA's Audit and Compliance Committee, said in a statement Wednesday that "the expectation is that this could take place anytime from December of this year to March of next year."

"By making this announcement, he has created an opportunity for us to go further than FIFA has before – to fundamentally change the way in which FIFA is structured."

Scala will reportedly help oversee the implementation of a series of structural reforms to FIFA and its executive committee. He said in his statement that it would be "premature to speculate on the outcomes of this work," but "nothing will be off the table."

"I have fought for these changes before and, as everyone knows, my efforts have been blocked. This time, I will succeed," Blatter said in his statement. "What matters to me more than anything is that when all of this is over, football is the winner."



Updated on June 2, 2015: This story has been updated to include new information about FIFA Secretary General Jerome Valcke.