Brent Leggitt makes a tackle during the Florence Huskies' playoff game on Saturday in Strasburg. (Brandon Hopper/Daily Record)

Strasburg -- It took them a few drives, but the Strasburg Indians made sure to show Florence why they're undefeated.

The Indians moved the ball on the ground, through the air ... however they wanted.

The same problems that plagued the Huskies late in the regular season followed them on their three-hour bus ride to Strasburg, as the third-ranked Indians won a 48-6 first-round playoff game against the 14th-ranked Huskies on Saturday.

Florence's defense did well in the first half on first and second down, but even when the Indians were backed up on long third- and fourth-down plays, they found a way to stay on the field.

Lane Masar during the Florence Huskies' playoff game on Saturday in Strasburg. (Brandon Hopper/Daily Record)

"I don't have an answer. ... They capitalized when they needed to capitalize," Huskies head coach Jeremy Nix said. "That's why they're undefeated. They make the plays when they need to make the plays. (Defensively), that's kind of been our story."

The beginning of the game looked like the contest might stay close. Each team was forced into two three-and-outs by the opposing defense. On the Huskies' third possession, two plays after finally converting for a first down, quarterback Alec Lucero threw an interception to Jonnie Wallace who returned it to the Huskies' 23-yard line.

"Our defense did a great job of giving us time to calm down, and then once we finally got going we took control."

That was the only spark the Indians needed. On the next play, Jacob Smith scored on a 23-yard run and the route was on.

The Indians scored on six of their next seven possessions and eventually forced the running clock, a mercy-rule of sort that happens when a team gets up by 40 or more points.

The Huskies' loss ends their season at 5-5. They were marred by a 4-game losing streak to end the season including Saturday's loss.

"This will sit with us for a year and make us a lot more hungry, make us work harder."

The highlight of the season came in Week 2 when they beat the number one ranked Faith Christian Eagles.

Strasburg got revenge after the Huskies beat the Indians to end their season in the first round of last year's playoffs. That game was played in Florence, and then-junior Erikk Wollman intercepted a game-winning pass attempt in the endzone with less than 10 seconds left to seal the win.