The visual record of the year is full-to-buffering. These were the eye-popping images and media events that signaled change in 2015: change in the ways we watch TV, in who was represented on TV, and significant events of the year covered by the media.

An infusion of diversity yielded an entertainment culture more reflective of the people watching, not least “How to Get Away With Murder” and “Transparent.” Viola Davis gave a memorable acceptance speech after becoming the first African-American to win an Emmy for best actress in a drama for “HTGAWM.” Quoting Harriet Tubman, Davis thanked the network execs, the producers, writers and actors who have “redefined what it means to be beautiful, to be sexy, to be a leading woman, to be black.”

In his Emmy acceptance speech for his role in “Transparent,” Jeffrey Tambor thanked the transgender community.

Jon Stewart signed off of “The Daily Show” after 16 years of speaking truth and silliness to power. His departure was a blow to liberals who felt it as a personal loss. His final show cemented his status as most valuable irreverent political player with the parting advice: “If you smell something, say something.”

Images from the April death of Freddie Gray while in the custody of Baltimore police and the Charleston church shooting in June were painful to watch. Yet it was the stark Walter Scott video that seemed most shocking, most prominent on every news channel: On April 4, a white South Carolina police officer gunned down an unarmed black man, firing eight times as Scott ran away. Graphic video was recorded by a bystander and replayed until it almost felt like a scene from a drama. The sight of an actual homicide, dissected frame by frame by analysts and ingrained in memory by viewers, was sickening.

Civil unrest, affirming “black lives matter,” caused the media to confront the usual dilemma as 24-hour cable news practically salivated at the potential for rioting: cameras and lights draw crowds and influence behavior, but coverage is important and necessary.

Internationally, November’s Paris attacks drew round-the-clock coverage plus introspection about the meaning of terrorism, security, refugees and anti-immigrant rhetoric.

The Bruce Jenner sit-down with Diane Sawyer and subsequent bow of Caitlyn Jenner (complete with reality show) was an amazing combination of educational and titillating television. The ABC special was confusing: beyond the clarification of terms amid expert commentary, the celebrity angle complicated everything. Thankfully, there was more to it than the Kardashian connection. This was a landmark television moment.

Bill Cosby’s reputation finally imploded. The moral authority the star exerted as the fictional Cliff Huxtable ended as his real-life persona came into focus: 35 women told their stories of being raped by Cosby in a New York magazine article in July. Saturation coverage ensued with multiple women taking to CNN to accuse Cosby.

NBC’s curious crisis management style was in evidence. The network let Brian Williams move to sister network MSNBC as a way to rehabilitate the admitted fabricator, suspended in February. The result: he’s still smooth and likable on camera, but it may always feel like a corporate manipulation. (Lester Holt is doing just fine in the ratings since taking over “NBC Nightly News” in June.) Donald Trump’s hate speech resulted in his firing by NBC only after the network first issued a polite, distancing statement. It’s not about ethics for NBC; it’s about focus groups and PR.

Fox’s “Empire” maintained a stunning ratings climb, the clever “Mad Men” finale (“It’s the real thing!”) closed out an uneven but notable AMC drama in May. NBC’s pleasing “The Wiz Live!” redeemed the network after lesser live TV attempts “Peter Pan” and “The Sound of Music.”

A year of proliferating podcasts, in the wake of the phenom that was “Serial,” brought digital talk shows on a wide range of topics. Consider “Fresh Air,” “This American Life,” “Men in Blazers,” “Freakonomics,” “WTF with Marc Maron” and more (see this list of 30: http://www.complex.com/pop-culture/the-30-best-podcasts-right-now).

The real loser of the GOP debate from the University of Colorado in October was CNBC. CNBC’s John Harwood, Becky Quick, and Carl Quintanilla lost control from the start. Too long, too sloppy, too many candidates engaging in crosstalk.

Politics found a home in late-night TV. “Saturday Night Live’s” Kate McKinnon continued a fun run as Hillary Clinton. “SNL” reprised Tina Fey as Sarah Palin along with Amy Poehler as Hillary 2008. Donald Trump’s appearance on the show was protested by Hispanics. Darrell Hammond returned to the show with his Trump impersonation. In the real world, the nearly 11-hour marathon Benghazi hearings in October were surprisingly riveting. The analysts’ takeaway: “Marathon Benghazi hearing leaves Hillary Clinton largely unscathed.”

May’s David Letterman sendoff after 33 years between NBC and CBS was a teary, significant endpoint for a man who changed the tone of TV comedy. Stephen Colbert’s takeover of the CBS “Late Show” in September generated more heat before he debuted than since. It’s been a smooth, if not ratings-rich transition.

The rise of streaming services continued to delight cord-cutters. Netflix, Amazon Prime, Hulu, Crackle, Yahoo … there’s no sense comparing them, because each offers different content. A lot of it. We hit “peak TV” at 409 scripted series.

To cap the year, Steve Harvey mistakenly crowned the wrong Miss Universe contestant on live TV. The crown was removed from Miss Colombia and placed atop the actual winner, Miss Philippines. Harvey apologized on the air and, afterward, on Twitter, misspelling both Colombia and Philippines. The tweet has since been deleted.

Joanne Ostrow: 303-954-1830, jostrow@denverpost.com or @ostrowdp