Health care ministries rely on community to share costs

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Richard and Jaime Wilson didn't have health insurance when the second of their three children was born in 2011, so the couple had to come up with $13,000 in cash to cover the delivery.

But several months later, when the couple had moved to Pittsburgh from North Carolina, checks from people across the country started arriving in the mail.

Accompanying the checks, which eventually added up to $13,000, were letters and cards letting the Wilsons know they were in the donors' prayers.

It was no miracle, but religion and faith played a part.

The Wilsons, who are both 37 and live in McKees Rocks, belong to Samaritan Healthcare Ministries, a Peoria, Ill.-based Christian organization in which members agree to contribute toward each other's medical bills.

“Health care sharing ministries are an organized way of passing the hat after church,” said James Lansberry, executive vice president of Samaritan. With about 140,000 members, Samaritan is among the largest of such groups in the country.

Christian sharing ministries are experiencing a spike in membership as people look for alternatives to government-mandated health insurance under the federal Affordable Care Act, which was passed in 2010.

There are three national ministries that have about 425,000 members, said Joel Noble, vice president of the Alliance of Health Care Sharing Ministries, a Washington, Ill.-based advocacy group.

Small church-based ministries add another 25,000 members, bringing total membership this year to about 450,000, he said. That's more than double the 200,000 total ministry members in 2013.

Health law exemption

Some people go to sharing ministries looking for a better deal than traditional carriers offer. Others are motivated to avoid the law's requirements that insurers cover contraception and abortions.

While not insurance, health care sharing ministries qualify as coverage under the federal law, an exemption that was carved out for them as a result of lobbying by the alliance.

“We have seen pretty significant growth since 2010,” said Tony Meggs, CEO of Christian Care Ministry, a Melbourne, Fla.-based organization that runs Medi-Share, one of the three national ministries.

Medi-Share's membership has more than tripled since the law passed, and stands at about 106,000 members as of this year.

The exemption for sharing ministries is key because it means members meet the law's individual mandate — and can't be penalized for not having health insurance.

The health law has driven membership gains at Samaritan, Lansberry said. The organization has seen its ranks increase by 30 percent in each of the past three years, he said.

While a sharing ministry may count as coverage under federal law, experts warn that people considering membership in one need to be aware that they aren't buying insurance, and they won't have the same financial protections, or robust coverage requirements, of a health plan.

“Clearly, if they run out of money there's no money to back it up,” said Gary Claxton, a vice president at Kaiser Family Foundation, a California nonprofit health care research organization.

Moral commitments

The ministries hold no money in reserve to cover unexpected claims. In fact, they aren't allowed to do so without being under the scrutiny of state insurance regulators, Claxton said. They rely solely on the continued monthly payments of members to cover costs.

“It's something that's always been a concern ... because there are no financial protections,” he said.

Meggs doesn't shy away from financial questions, calling them a “valid concern.”

“There's no guarantee that your medical bills are going to be paid,” he said. “However, our members know that since 1993, every medical bill that we've ever published through the network has been paid. (Members) are simply placing their faith in the community that has the collective moral commitment to share their resources on a monthly basis.”

Some states aren't interested in moral commitments.

Meggs said Medi-Share doesn't operate in Montana because of a dispute with the state over insurance regulations.

The state in 2007 ordered Medi-Share to deposit a minimum of $1.5 million to cover pending claims when a state court found the organization was “an insurer acting in Montana without authority,” according to a statement from the state.

The state of Kentucky fought a 10-year legal battle with Medi-Share, which culminated with a 2012 state Supreme Court ruling that the organization was an insurer and wasn't exempt from oversight, said Ronda Sloan, a spokeswoman for the Department of Insurance.

The decision was negated by a 2013 state law that exempted health care sharing ministries from insurance regulations.

Lower costs

Ministries are exempt from regulation in Pennsylvania so long as they don't represent themselves as insurance, said Alison Fogarty, a spokeswoman for the state Department of Insurance.

Regulation aside, health care ministries are popular because monthly sharing payments are typically less than insurance premiums.

Lisa Letonek and her husband pay $460 a month for family coverage that includes a 17-year-old son. Letonek, 55, of Dutch Hill in Clarion County, said when she last priced insurance premiums for family coverage they were more than twice the amount.

“We've had no problems with it. We show a card when we go to a doctor,” she said. “It works pretty much like insurance.”

But Letonek hasn't shopped on the federal marketplace set under the health reform law, HealthCare.gov, where some working families can receive tax credits that offset part of the cost of insurance.

For that reason, Meggs said health sharing ministries savings are now most pronounced among families with higher incomes that don't qualify for federal subsidies.

“Our membership would probably skew upper middle class,” he said.

Jaime Wilson said she and her husband pay $405 a month for a family of five through Samaritan.

“It's not going to some corporate office,” she said, referring to one of the reasons she prefers a health care ministry over traditional insurance. “It's going straight to a Christian family that has a need.”

The groups keep costs low by not paying for some procedures, not offering dental or vision coverage, and requiring their members to live a “Christian” lifestyle in which they don't smoke or do drugs, limit alcohol and don't have sex outside of marriage.

Samaritan and Medi-Share require members to prove they are active in a Christian church, typically by having a pastor sign off on an application form.

Lansberry argues faith produces savings.

“Our members are praying for one another,” he said. “We believe that helps keep the cost down.”

Alex Nixon is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. He can be reached at 412-320-7928 or anixon@tribweb.com.