Getty Images

Prices of bonds issued by low-rated energy companies tumbled on Monday, despite a rebound in oil prices, amid worries that this year’s slump in oil markets will lead to a cash crunch.

Oil and natural-gas producers have been among the most prolific issuers of risky “junk” bonds, and debt investors in recent years have piled in, lured by relatively high interest payments. Energy companies accounted for 18% of all bonds sold this year with the lowest possible triple-C credit rating, according to Dealogic.

Many investors are concerned that a prolonged slump in oil prices, which had fallen 37% year-to-date through Friday, will translate into falling revenues. That would make it more difficult for some companies to make interest and principal payments on their debt.

Oil prices have bounced back on Monday, but many analysts say there’s little on the horizon to curtail global supplies, which outstrip demand due to rising production in the U.S. and parts of the Middle East. The last leg of oil’s selloff came late last week after the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries decided to maintain its target oil-production level.

The most actively traded junk bonds midday Monday were Linn Energy’s two single-B-rated notes due 2019, which fell 9% to 82 cents on the dollar, pushing yields up to about 11.5%, according to data provider MarketAxess. Trading volume was about $90 million.

Halcon Resources’s 2021 bond, which started weakening Friday, dropped 10% on Monday to 69 cents on the dollar, according to MarketAxess. That selloff pushed up the bond’s yield to 17%. Bond prices and yields move in opposite directions.

In June, the Houston company, rated triple-C, raised $150 million by selling shares in gas fields it owns in Mississippi and Louisiana to distressed debt specialist Apollo Global Management.

Shares of these oil producers have also taken a hit in recent days amid plunging crude prices. Many hedge-fund managers had parked money in energy-company shares for the short term, and were quick to pull money out as the fall in oil prices accelerated.

Shares of Energy XXI recently were down 17% to $3.29, marking a 48% decline in the past two trading days. The offshore oil driller’s debt, which matures in 2017, recently was trading 85 cents on the dollar to yield 15.5%. That’s down from 90 cents on the dollar on Nov. 26.

Some analysts are recommending that investors begin looking for bargains. “We believe the opportunity is now growing to benefit from the near-term distress of energy producers and potentially add to positions as the price stress plays out,” Steven Wieting, global chief investment strategist with Citigroup Private Bank, wrote in a note to clients on Monday.

Quicksilver Resources’s $350 million bond, which pays interest of 7.125% and is due 2016, rebounded slightly this morning but still trades around 22 cents on the dollar. The company has hired Houlihan Lokey Inc. to explore strategic alternatives and bondholders are preparing to take a haircut, a person involved in the matter said.