Melissa Murray is a professor of law at the University of California, Berkeley School of Law.

Chief Justice John Roberts famously asserted that a justice’s role was to simply “call balls and strikes.” However, judicial interpretation is more complicated than Roberts’s baseball analogy admits. In many cases, constitutional and statutory text is imprecise or opaque, admitting multiple interpretations. In such cases, judges consider many variables, including the real-world consequences of their decisions.

Consequences of decisions have always affected justices' thinking. It is part of the difficult business of calling balls and strikes

Brown v. Board of Education is a paradigmatic example. There, the justices did not limit their inquiry to the scope of the 14th Amendment or the application of past precedents, like Plessy v. Ferguson. Instead, they considered a range of things, including social science data suggesting that racial segregation had detrimental psychological effects on the black children consigned to Jim Crow’s under-resourced public schools.

In addition to these domestic concerns, the Brown court also confronted segregation’s effects on American diplomacy abroad. In an amicus brief, the Justice Department noted that racial segregation had “an adverse effect upon our relations with other countries,” furnishing grist for Communist propaganda mills and jeopardizing the nation’s “moral leadership” around the globe. Thus, when the court voted unanimously to overrule “separate but equal,” it knew that its decision would not only dismantle de jure segregation in the South, it would rehabilitate America’s image around the world.

Of course, the consideration of a decision’s consequences does not always lead to landmark decisions like Brown. More often, the court’s attention to real world practicalities is more prosaic. In City of Chicago v. Morales, the court invalidated a Chicago anti-loitering ordinance aimed at reducing gang violence. In doing so, the court focused on practical matters, including the difficulty of enforcing the ordinance. Poorly drafted, the ordinance offered police officers little guidance for appropriate enforcement, and its imprecise terms deterred ordinary citizens from otherwise lawful conduct. Even the dissent grappled with the practical effects of the ordinance and the court’s decision to strike it down. Justice Antonin Scalia had no trouble with the ordinance, which he pronounced a “small price to pay” to secure Chicago’s streets. Justice Clarence Thomas worried that the decision would sentence “law-abiding citizens to lives of terror and misery.”

This term, the court will hear challenges to the Affordable Care Act and state-level bans on same-sex marriage. The outcomes in these cases will affect the lives of millions of Americans in ways both prosaic and profound. Because these cases involve constitutional and statutory provisions that are subject to multiple interpretations, practical considerations will, at some level, inform the court’s decision-making. This realization may prompt claims of judicial activism. But attention to the real-world consequences of its decisions has always played a role in the court’s work. It is simply part of the difficult business of calling balls and strikes.



Join Opinion on Facebook and follow updates on twitter.com/roomfordebate.