Folsom Field refreshments delivery rallies after poor showing for Hawaii game

Oregon State fans, Gary Tharpe, left, and Gary Anderson get some barbecue from Teresa Tran, right, on saturday at Folsom Field. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

Michael Marez, a University of Colorado alumnus and a diehard for Buffaloes football, has a horror story to tell.

The date was Sept. 20, and the setting Folsom Field. The opponent was the University of Hawaii. CU would down the non-contiguous foes, 21-12, for its first home win of the year.

The victory delighted Marez.

The long, slow-moving concession lines did not. His belly had longed for the soft embrace 'twixt tooth and pulled pork. He wanted desperately to reconnect the old friends, and was thwarted time and again in that most righteous and savory of pursuits.

"I was really hoping to get the prime barbecue. The well known stuff," Marez recalled Saturday. "The line was so long that I just couldn't. I went for the inferior barbecue, just to avoid the line."

CU fan Michelle Ledwich, of Golden, met a similar fate. At the Hawaii game, all she wanted was a meal from Motions burger stand.

"But it was way too busy," she said, eyes welled with regret. "We had chicken sandwiches instead."

These are the kind of tales that nag at Athletic Director Rick George, hired last summer to revive a department with a football program barely a shell of its once nationally vaunted self. George knows his legacy will hinge largely on whether the football team can turn around, but he says he takes fan relations just as seriously.

In response to the concession stand inefficiencies, the school ordered up 18 more points of sale for Saturday's Oregon State game, bringing the stadium total just above 100. They've also brought on 34 mobile vendors, known in the business as "hawkers."

"At Hawaii, we did not perform well off the field," George said in an interview Friday. "What it looked like to me was that the long lines didn't go well. And our goal is always to provide the best experience, with time that it takes people to get inside the gates, the quality of our food, what we're doing with our video board, our speaker system, our in-game promotions.

"All those things add to the fan experience."

'We're always looking to improve'

The many fan complaints post-Hawaii also nagged at Joseph Smith, director of Levy Restaurants' Boulder office. Levy replaced Centerplate food services seven months ago, signing a 10-year contract to provide catering and concessions at Folsom Field and the Coors Events Center on game days and all non-game athletic events.

"Obviously, taking over a new account presents its own set of challenges," Smith said. "I think the best thing we can do is learn from game to game and move forward.

"We're always looking to improve, so I don't know that we wouldn't have added points of sale, anyway," Smith said. "It's matter of getting to know the facility and the flow of the business. We're getting to know our fans and the flow a little bit better."

In an effort to upgrade the fan experience at CU home games, Levy and the school's athletic department have joined forces on several new amenities, most notably two beer gardens that, starting three weeks ago, allowed all of-age fans to enjoy alcohol at Folsom for the first time in two decades.

Levy — which also caters at Denver's Pepsi Center and for the athletic departments at Ohio State, Wisconsin and Texas A&M — sought immediately to bring a slightly more gourmet flavor to Folsom.

"Our number-one selling items are always going to be hot dogs, soda and popcorn," Smith said. "But we added green chili mayo, house-made chips, brisket smoked in-house overnight, Red Rock Taco, all house-made carnitas and chicken."

Gameplan: Get people off couches, into Folsom Field

The fans are taking note.

"With the changeover this year, I know in the first couple of weeks there were a lot of lines at halftime and whatnot," said Buffs fan Sue Myers, of Louisville. "But it seems like they've kind of figured it out and gotten it down. I love the variety this year. We used to have typical stadium-type food, and this year there's a lot of really great choices."

Added CU fan Rick Savagian: "It's been great parking, and concessions here were no problem. We wanted beer and wings, and there was no wait at all today."

Positive reviews are priceless for George, whose office is tasked with convincing fans to get off their oh-so-comfortable couches and turn off their HD screens, in favor of the real deal.

"We've got to look creatively at what we're doing, and how we're doing it," George said. "When people come into our stadium and basketball area, they've got to experience it."

George said he hopes to make wireless Internet available at home games soon, allowing for fans to interact more on social media through the stadium's video board. The school has also revamped Folsom's outdoor Buff Plaza, and added screens in the fieldhouse.

As for the new beer gardens, George said, it's so far, so good.

"We wanted to go into it slowly, which we have," he added. "We like how we're working those areas and the way it's working for our fans. I'd say it's going as well as we expect at this point."

For fans like Savagian, basic luxuries like a beer garden or a short concession stand wait make the game-day decision easy.

"If you like college football — or football, period— then you want to be with the crowd," he said. "You don't get that at home. Yeah, you can watch hi-def TV, order pizza, have a steak if you want. But this is memories. These are stories. If you don't have a story, you haven't lived life very long."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Alex Burness at burnessa@dailycamera.com or follow him at twitter.com/alex_burness