In the weeks leading up to the 2014 midterm elections, Red Alert Politics will be profiling select candidates that are either a part of the so-called millennial generation or have a strong connection and inclination toward policies that will primarily impact Gen Y.

We’ll be talking about student loan debt, the high unemployment and underemployment rates for this age group, and just how important it is for the largest generation in history to be represented by its elected officials.

–

Niraj Antani has already accomplished a lot, and now the 23-year-old is running as a Republican candidate for Ohio state representative.

Specifically, Antani is running for the seat in the 42nd district of Ohio, and he deems it his duty to bring a young voice to the Ohio House in order for it to be fully “reflective of the population of Ohio.”

Born and raised in Miami Township, Ohio, Antani attended college at Ohio State University and earned his bachelor’s degree in political science before beginning his current study of law at the University of Dayton.

The young candidate’s resume boasts incredible experience: an internship with the Ohio State Director and Senior Adviser to the Romney campaign in 2012, a job with Florida Rep. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen in Washington, D.C., in 2010, an internship with former Ohio representative and current Senator Peggy Lehner in 2009, and an internship with Ohio Rep. Mike Turner in 2007.

While attending law school, Antani is currently clerking for Judge Jeffrey Welbaum in an Ohio appeals court.

As he campaigns, Antani is focused on the issues of the economy and education reform. He emphasizes the need for job creation and particularly that in the manufacturing field. He also wants to spotlight jobs in flourishing new industries like technology, labeling himself ideal for such a task because, as a Millennial, he has “grown up with technology.”

Having knocked on many doors in Ohio’s 42nd district to communicate his message, Antani described individuals he has engaged with as “absolutely” receptive to his message. He also said his potential constituents have “energy and enthusiasm” for a young candidate like himself in the House.

“Our generation deserves a voice in the Ohio House,” said Antani.

Antani encourages other young individuals from the Republican party to run for roles in government in order to multiply the number of Millennial voices and also to demonstrate to young people that the Republican party has their interests in mind.

“I believe the Republican party is the party of opportunity … and the American dream,” asserted Antani. Conversly, he labeled Democrats the party of “dependents.”

To those young people that are considering roles in government, Antani urged them not to be discouraged by judgement.

“People told me not to run because I didn’t have enough experience and I was too young,” he detailed, a fact that only incentivized him to continue to press on for the job.

Antani has several honors to his name, including the 2012 Ohio College Republican Federation’s “College Republican of the Year,” the Montgomery County Republican Party’s “Republican Man of the Year” and one of Red Alert Politics’ “30 under 30” awards in 2013.

He is also a member of the National Rifle Association and chairman of the Ohio Republican Party Asian Pacific American Advisory Council.

Antani is an Indian-American, his parents having migrated to the United States in 1978.