SPRINGFIELD - Peter Straley, CEO of Springfield health insurer Health New England has often referenced his mother's health care plan: eat fruits and vegetables, play outside every day and do common-sense things like wearing a seat belt and brushing your teeth.

But now, heading into his retirement from Health New England April 4, he references camping advice from his father: you have to leave the campsite better than you found it.

"Gather more firewood than you need in case it's raining when the next people come and they need a fire right away," Straley, who is turning 60, said this week during a long interview at Health New England's offices in the Monarch Place office tower downtown. "I think I'm leaving the campsite in very good shape."

His replacement, current chief operating officer Maura McCaffrey, has been preparing for years, Straley said. A pharmacist, McCaffrey will bring a health-care practitioner's eye to the job. Straley's background was running another company owned, like Health New England, by Baystate Health and before that being a business consultant to Baystate and as an information technology professional.

But only a man about to retire could look at today's health-care marketplace, still adjusting to the impact of the federal Affordable Care Act and buffeted by the lingering bad economy, and see a tidy campsite with a ready pile of firewood.

And Straley doesn't, saying that adjusting to reams of new regulations, often in conflict with the old Massachusetts rules, has been tough. So tough, Health New England had to delay adding product lines and geographic expansions into Berkshire County and Hartford County, Conn., with some products.

Straley said he was naive to think that since Massachusetts had a health insurance exchange before the Affordable Care Act, that instituting the new exchanges would work.

"It doesn't work," he said. "It hasn't worked."

Health New England is back to enrolling people with pen and paper, then transfer that to giant Excel spreadsheets, with all the incumbent possibility for error that entails.

"It's been a huge amount of work," he said.

Massachusetts should have been able to keep its reformed health insurance market, he said.

"We had the concepts included in the Affordable Care Act," he said. "But the devil is in the details."

For example, under the old Massachusetts system, when an insurer was figuring the cost of coverage for a husband, the insurer could assume the wife was about the same age and assume they had 2.1 kids.

"Because that's what most people have," he said.

Today, under the federal system, the company has to use the wife's real age and the real number of kids in the family to fit the federal formula.

Also, Health New England has had to figure out how to pay a 1 percent to 2 percent federal tax on health care coverage in an environment where income is limited. The state caps the profit margin on small-group plans, those with fewer than 50 employees, at 1.9 percent. For every dollar in premiums on those plans, 90 cents must be spent on health care.

Income for larger-group plans is not capped, but that market is so competitive margins are often even slimmer, Straley said.

"So you can believe that if there is a cost to be cut, we cut it," Straley said.