This is "Eve of Estes" shaking hands with Enos Mills. This was part of an elaborate publicity stunt by Al Birch, assistant city editor for the Denver Post. "Eve" left barefoot with no food or shelter for a week of survival in Wild Basin on her own. Birch was able to keep his readers hooked on the story for well over a month. ( Courtesy of Lulabeth and Jack Melton, YMCA of the Rockies )

Enos Mills, always nicely dressed for public appearances and recognized as the "Father of Rocky Mountain National Park," seemed out of character when he became a party to a hoax designed to bolster the readership of the Denver Post.

Al Birch, assistant city editor at the paper, carefully planned an elaborate scheme. Birch was also a part-time resident of Estes Park and knew what strings to pull.

The idea was to send an attractive young woman into the wilderness to live off the land for a week. By doing this, Birch could generate headlines for his newspaper by reporting on the young woman's progress in a series of stories. It would also give readers some comic relief from the events in Europe leading up to World War I.

Birch discovered a young woman by the name of Hazel Eighmy working as a receptionist at a Denver photographer's studio. She assumed the fictitious role of Agnes Lowe, a student on vacation from the University of Michigan.

On July 29, 1917, Agnes Lowe, a.k.a. Hazel Eighmy, was introduced to the readers of the Denver Post. She was accompanied into the park by her mother and brother, other actors cast by Birch to lend credibility to the story.

Dressed in a primitive leopard skin robe and barefoot, she was sent off into Wild Basin by Enos Mills and other park officials. The photographic opportunity was carefully orchestrated by Birch.

Advertisement

She was to travel without food or shelter using her wilderness survival skills she learned from her fictitious lumberjack father. Birch propped up her motivation as common person — not an actress, a writer or a candidate for a movie deal.

As carefully planned, a tearful "Eve of Estes" emerged from the wilderness just 36 hours later allegedly hungry, wet and cold from an ordeal in freezing rain near Thunder Lake. She arrived at a cabin near the Longs Peak Inn pleading for help and for remedies to prevent her from coming down with pneumonia.

What must have seemed suspicious is that "Eve" immediately started a local speaking engagement about her "ordeal."

In an Aug. 1, 1917, issue of the Denver Post and milking the story for all it was worth, she related details of her story and how the rain had prevented her from starting a fire. Louis Claude Way, chief ranger, was on hand at park headquarters to welcome her return along with her make-believe mother.

"Eve" was treated to dinner at the Stanley Hotel, a dance at another lodge and a welcome ceremony that included the mayor of Estes Park.

Now it was time for Birch to have "Eve" make a second attempt and to stretch this publicity stunt. After having been presumably taught survival skills by Enos Mills, "Eve" departed once again into the wilderness. The well publicized send off drew a crowd of 2,000.

Birch was not finished. What could be more appropriate for "Eve" than to have an "Adam" go after her?

He introduced George Desouris, "Adam the Apostle," to his readers who were now hooked on this soap opera-like series of stories.

In a letter crafted by Birch, the new fictional character had a vision to go and rescue "Eve," forcing himself past park police. To add detail to the story, Birch fabricated a comment by the National Park Service that they would not allow "Eve" to be molested. In addition, if they captured "Adam," he would be arrested and thrown out of the park.

This story spread across the United States and found its way into other newspapers elevating the stature of Birch and delighting the Denver Post owners.

Birch reminded his readers that this had generated more advertising for Estes Park than all other previous sources combined. This was probably one of the few true statements made by Birch.

Although the story faded from the front page, Birch kept it alive with reports from "Eve." A message written on pieces of aspen bark in charcoal was discovered by tourists. "Eve" reported that she nearly froze, but was able to build a fire.

As for "Adam," the character selected by Birch for the role was hauled into Estes Park by park officials after what was reported as an intense struggle. Birch added to the story with even more exaggerated claims all the way into September of 1917.

Kenneth Jessen has been a Loveland resident since 1965. He is an author of 20 books and more than 1,600 articles. He served on several Loveland boards and was an engineer for Hewlett-Packard for 33 years. This year his columns will focus mainly on the history of Rocky Mountain National Park.