Since Obamacare was passed and signed by President Barack Obama on March 23, 2010, about 2,000 American doctors have committed suicide, according to physicians Tuesday.

Almost 2,000 doctors have committed suicide since Barack Obama signed Obamacare into law. Photo by Matt Cardy/Getty Images View all 6 photos Photo by Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

Various studies between 2000 and 2008 confirmed the rate for suicide among female doctors ranged from 200 to 400 percent higher than the national average for women. Male doctor rates were 50 to 70 percent higher. The trends have been increasing recently according to Texas doctors, new medical profession data, and news stories released the last few days.

This coincides with data from the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health and American Journal of Preventive Medicine information about national trends. Rates for suicides on the job were 1.2 per million at the end of the George W. Bush administration. By 2010, the rate jumped up to 1.8 per million.

Causes and opinions vary among experts, but doctors who will talk about it are fairly certain they know why the rates are increasing.

“The burdens and stresses of dealing with “fragmented” and “assembly-line medicine,” the harsh demands of being on call day and night, programming demands, and the over growing and changing battles with the insurance companies are more than enough to depress anyone in any discipline,” one Corpus Christi, Texas doctor, who, with two other physicians, agreed to talk about the subject Tuesday, explained. “It was difficult enough, and it is difficult to talk about it publicly, but the mounting regulations, control over coding by the government or their co-harts, they are just growing."

“The one common denominator of why this is becoming more stressful is the Affordable Care Act,” the doctor emphasized. “It’s no wonder we lose at least a doctor a day.”

"This fast expanding knowledge in the medicine and science world, the demands of taking continuous education on topics we don’t even deal with--so we are forced to pay for the literature to keep up to speed--and the consistent worries of covering our asses because of malpractice suits always hangs over our heads,” a second doctor added.

Obamacare has caused most doctors in America to be outraged about the changing laws and adjustments in health care. Startling information coming from the nation’s physicians are showing a pessimistic trend. Many are beginning to unite against the “politically driven government takeover of our healthcare, passed by overt bribery and coercion.”

The Obama Administration has used “half-truths and misleading statements disparaging physicians and our American health care system,” says San Antonio, Texas physician Dr. Kristin Story Held, and “now that we have seen what is in the law, we know it is not the right solution.”

The United Physicians and Surgeons of America (UPSA) have founded the movement “Let My Doctor Practice” to “restore the voice of the doctor to the practice of medicine.”

Physician members of UPSA say they “believe in the sanctity of the doctor-patient relationship, the autonomy to practice medicine without restraint imposed by overreaching government and corporate entities, and, above all, that patient care and safety should never be compromised.”

UPSA are uniting to “restore the practice of medicine to those who actually practice medicine” and has planned a major “Summit at the Summit Conference and Interactive Webcast–A National Grand Rounds on the State of American Medicine” on July 20-26, 2015 in Keystone, Colorado.

"It's important to realize that even though a high percentage, compared to the average American, of doctors commit suicide, don't forget there are still 96 to 98 percent out there working every day, doing a fine job, and being very professional," the third doctor added. "Some doctors feel they can't get the help they should if they are suffering depression or stress because of time constraints, or things like worrying about their license and ability to practice."

The following alarming facts represent the state of the medical profession, according to American doctors:

Only 13 percent of the nation’s 400,000 licensed physicians are still members of the American Medical Association (AMA). AMA was long the advocate for the nation’s doctors and “abandoned the needs of the physician years ago and has its own agenda,” states Dr. John Tedeschi, a primary-family care doctor in Robbinsville, New Jersey. The AMA spends about $22 million a year since 2010 lobbying for Obamacare.

Over 84% of doctors believe the medical profession is in decline. “Doctoring just isn’t the same,” say Dr. Tedeschi. “The practice of medicine, its costs and medical policies, are now dictated and controlled by groups that don’t know the first thing about medicine, nor the people it serves.”

82% of doctors think physicians have very little ability to change the healthcare system. “We’re moving away from the mission of medicine and more towards the business of healthcare, and these two endeavors are not the same thing,” Twila Brase, President of the Citizens’ Council For Health Freedom states. “We’re moving in the wrong direction.”

57% of physicians would not recommend a career in medicine to their children or other young people. “When other people hold the dollars, the mission of medicine is compromised,” Brase reminds people frequently. “Whether it’s the government, or an insurance company, the agendas of the people with the money ultimately take precedence over the needs of the patient.”

Almost 60% of doctors will strongly consider retiring by 2019 because of the destructive health plan changes of the last few years, and the known changes coming up. “We are now told how much time we can spend with each patient,” Dr. Tedeschi explains. Doctor are mandated “what tests we can and cannot request. We are now forced to re-certify more frequently and answer questions, in many cases, unethically, just to serve their (Obamacare) financial needs.”

Millions of Americans will lose their doctors to suicide each year. The average caseload for family practitioners is close to 2,300 patients in the US. With over 500 doctors dying annually, then about a million patients lose their doctor with each death.