Donald Trump speaks during a campaign event in Rome, N.Y., on April 12. (Jabin Botsford/The Washington Post)

Elites’ fetish with postmodernism — the negation of objective truth in favor of subjective emotions — shares its disdain for facts with authoritarian leaders. The latter insist that you adopt their views as “truth,” no matter the evidence before your eyes; left-wing elites posit that people are entitled not only to their own opinions, but their own facts. The result is the same in many instances — reason goes by the wayside as emotions dominate.

Donald Trump, either intentionally or as a result of his own breath-taking ignorance, would elevate such a mind-set to the presidency. In Trump’s view, Mike Tyson is not a convicted rapist, thousands of Muslims celebrated in the street over 9/11, and he opposed the Iraq War from the start. These things are factually, provably false. He does not care; he believes these things to be true (or it would be convenient if they were true), so he insists they are.

In the policy realm, he creates his own reality. Contrary to his assertions, thousands of jobs have not been lost because of the North American Free Trade Agreement; there is no way to eliminate the debt in eight years; illegal immigrants are no longer flooding into the United States from Mexico; South Korea and Japan do help pay for their own defense; and Social Security cannot be made solvent by eliminating “waste, fraud and abuse,” etc. In other words, virtually every policy position that Trump takes is based on an exaggeration or outright falsification of reality. It does not matter to his supporters, for he expresses how they feel about these issues. He gives them easy targets to blame for big problems and personal failures.

Donald Trump said after the April 26 primaries that he sees no reason to change his personality, despite receiving criticism for not "acting presidential." (Peter Stevenson/The Washington Post)

The mistake too many Trump rivals have made is in condemning him for being liberal. In fact, he’s just a liar, a man who preys upon the fears and ignorance of the crowd and who is willing to cast blame on immigrants and foreigners for the mob’s problems. He’s not the first one to adopt convenient falsehoods to further political positions, and in fact right-wing talk radio has made a cottage industry of it, plowing the way for an impresario of lies like Trump.

The problem was most acute in communist countries:

In its fight to defeat the Communist Party in 1989, the Polish Solidarity Movement adopted the slogan “for Poland to be Poland, 2 + 2 must always = 4.” For 44 years of communist rule, the Poles had been lied to, in effect told that 2+2=5. To challenge the authority of the communists and prosper as a free society, Solidarity chose this slogan because they knew they had to be grounded in truth and reality. Unlike communist-era Poland, Americans live in a free society. But our government is not being honest with us. For 20 years, politicians told us there was no problem with putting people who couldn’t afford to buy homes, into homes they couldn’t afford. This was a failure of 2+2=4, and every day we’re seeing the consequences.

(That, ironically, comes from Newt Gingrich, who now supports the man who tells us over and over again 2+2=5. Go figure.)

The implications for putting someone like Trump into a position of great power are frightful. Once objective truth is gone, exploitation of the citizenry is unfettered. Enemies are created out of whole cloth. Bizarre and extreme policies are devised to combat invented problems. Real problems are denied and therefore go unaddressed.

Trump imagines that China and other trading partners are “stealing from us,” so he sets up huge tariffs that throw us into a real recession. He sees 11 million illegal immigrants as a threat to our economic well-being and safety; he therefore creates a police state to root them out and kick them out, creating human misery and more economic dislocation. (Eleven million fewer customers, workers and taxpayers are another recipe for recession.) He sees Vladimir Putin as a kindred soul, so he cedes not only Ukraine but other swaths of Europe and the Middle East to him, which puts free people once again under the boot of a Russian empire. He thinks the way for Asian allies to be secure is to have their own nukes; he therefore become a nuclear proliferator in violation of international law and to the severe detriment of peace and security.

Ironically, it has been President Obama’s disconnect from reality in foreign policy that has led to some of his gravest errors (e.g. letting genocide play out in Syria, abandoning Iraq in 2011, allowing desperation to push us into an awful deal with Iran). That would be nothing compared with the calamities in store with a president for whom facts are entirely beside the point and who manipulates the public’s emotions to suit his own ends.

It is unfortunate that Trump’s opponents spent so much time arguing that he wasn’t conservative. Voters, unlike talk radio hosts and purists on the right, do not care much about ideology. We would like to think they do care about the truth. (After all, they were quite upset when the president told them many things that were not so, including assuring them that they could keep their doctor under Obamacare and that the Islamic State was the JV team.) It is a measure perhaps of their own penchant for playing fast and loose with facts (especially in their opposition to trade deals and immigration and pandering to isolationists) that too few Republicans called him out and fewer still explained the consequences of operating in a fact-free environment.

In a general election, we could find ourselves with a choice between one candidate who repeatedly tells us untrue things about her own conduct and another who tells us untrue things about the world. You would think that in a country of this size we could find someone who inhabits reality and stays within spitting distance of the truth.