Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share An abandoned home at 136 Park Ave. razed by Mount Vernon on Jan. 31, 2016. The home was in imminent danger of collapse after the Jan. 23 blizzard tilted it. Video by Ernie Garcia/The Journal News

ALBANY - Bank-owned, foreclosed properties in Westchester, Dutchess and Putnam counties have decreased property values by $2 million in the region, according to a new report.

The report by the Senate Independent Democratic Conference and Sen. Terrence Murphy, R-Yorktown, examines zombie and bank-owned properties in the 40th Senate District, which Murphy represents and includes parts of Westchester, Dutchess and Putnam counties.

DATABASE: Lower Hudson Valley real estate transactions

MOUNT VERNON: Zombie lots could become pocket parks

MORE: 'Zombie' homes still haunting local communities

VIDEO: Mt. Vernon urged 'zombie' home owner to act for years

Within the district, there were 49 bank-owned properties as well as 91 zombie properties, which are abandoned properties not yet foreclosed upon by banks. Overall, in Dutchess and Putnam counties, the report contends that zombie properties contributed to a decline of $3.3 million in property values.

Buy Photo The foreclosed home at 69 Springbrook Rd in Nanuet on June 16, 2014. The property yard is overgrown, The roof seems to be in disrepair and one of the window is covered with plywood. The neighbors seem to be using the driveway because of the street parking ordinance. (Photo: Ricky Flores/The Journal News)

“All communities and all areas of the state are subject to foreclosures,” Sen. Jeff Klein, D-Bronx, who covers parts of lower Westchester, said. “Unfortunately, even towns and villages outside of [New York City] are also footing the bill and forcing homeowners to lose property value because of foreclosure prices,” he added.



The conference then issued its first report in a series titled, “The Next American Bank Robbery,” which looked at issues arising from zombie and bank-owned properties in Westchester County.The IDC first looked at problems arising from zombie and bank-owned properties in New York City.

The second report in the series specifically looks at Murphy’s district and is slated to be released Monday at a press conference in Carmel, Putnam County. Klein heads the IDC, which has a working relationship with Senate Republicans. Murphy is a freshman Republican senator seeking a second term in November.

The examination of property values is intended to see if banks are following a 2009 law sponsored by Klein that requires banks to maintain foreclosed properties.

But banks are still not tending to the foreclosed properties they own, Klein charged.

Independent Democratic Conference Leader Jeff Klein, D-Bronx, listens as Senate Majority Leader John Flanagan, R-Smithtown, talks to media members outside Gov. Andrew Cuomo's office at the state Capitol, Tuesday, March 29, 2016, (Photo: Mike Groll, AP)

There were 31 bank-owned properties in Putnam County in Murphy’s district. The properties are located in Brewster, Carmel, Mahopac and Patterson and resulted in surrounding property value to drop by $367,888, according to the report.

In Murphy’s portion of Westchester, there are 15 bank-owned properties decreasing the value of surrounding properties by $464,939. The properties are in Mount Kisco, Peekskill, Cortlandt, Tarrytown and Yorktown Heights.

The analysis showed that 177 privately owned homes within a 300-foot radius of a bank-owned property in Murphy’s Senate district saw a depreciation of $846,033.

Dutchess County has seven zombie properties all located in Pawling resulting in $30,814 in property value depreciation.

These zombie properties located in Murphy’s Senate district resulted in a total property value deprecation of $1.38 million in the district and a $2.6 million drop in property values throughout Dutchess County.

Buy Photo The former home of ex- basketball player Latrell Sprewell which in is the middle of a long foreclosure at 4340 Purchase Street in Harrison on June 16, 2014. (Photo: Ricky Flores/The Journal News)

To further ensure banks take care of foreclosed properties, the IDC and Murphy are recommending the state Department of Financial Services create a registry of bank owned-properties to share with municipalities as well as with non-government entities through Freedom of Information Law requests.

They also recommend that the attorney general should be able to impose fines of up to $1,000 if banks fail to maintain properties.

The IDC and Murphy also propose the creation of a community reinvestment program, financed from the fines issued to banks, to allow mortgage holders to refinance their mortgages to keep them in their properties.

The money would also be used to acquire properties from federal distressed asset stabilization programs and convert them to affordable housing.

As for zombie properties, the IDC and Murphy are urging the state Legislature to pass Klein’s zombie property legislation, which would require all banks and loan servicing companies to maintain properties as soon as they are discovered abandoned.

“I think what’s happening is banks clearly don’t want to completely foreclose because they know they’re going to be responsible to maintain these properties,” Klein explained. “I think they don’t actually foreclose as quickly as they should and they turn these properties into zombie properties.”

The bill would also create a registry of zombie properties and a hotline for community members to report any properties they believe to be abandoned to the attorney general.

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/26H6uWS