NASHVILLE, Tenn. -- It's the information that can make or break us: our birth date, where we live and our social security number.

It's kept on file by the federal government through the IRS, Department of Homeland Security and in health documents through the VA, Medicaid, Medicare or Obamacare.

But Fox 17 has found that information isn't exactly locked tight.

In fact, though we're paying taxes to protect that information, only five out of the government's 23 agencies required to use it are actually making an effort.

One of the most targeted systems in the world, the federal government's network, is now considered at "high risk."

Congressman Marsha Blackburn (R-TN, 7th District) says, "There is no valid excuse for this. They will say 'Well, we're taking steps. We are protecting people's information. But that is just not true."

The Government Accountability Office reports between 2006 and 2014, the number of threats or attacks to our federal information system has gone up by more than a thousand percent.

This report shows the most recent hacks compromising our personal information, starting with the IRS in June 2015.

Taxpayers birthdates, social security numbers and addresses have been accessed from almost 400,000 tax accounts.

We've already seen two breaches at the Office of Personnel Management starting in June 2015.

Altogether, more than 25 million Americans' personal information have been stolen from this one agency within two months.

According to Congressman Blackburn, these cyber attacks for that one agency cost the federal government about $350 million dollars.

"That is taxpayer money out of your pocket that had to be used to clean up a mistake that they've already gotten the money for so that there wouldn't be a problem. And guess what, they're using the money for other things."

More than a billion of our tax dollars have been spent beefing up our nation's cyber security since 2009.

That spending is expected to jump to nearly $6 billion by 2018.

A January 2016 Government Accountability Office report calls out almost all of 23 federal agencies for not protecting our information.

Just five agencies are using prevention services.

Only one of them is fully implementing intrusion prevention for its email though they're all taking our money to do so.

With every day, the amount of information obtained and held by the federal government grows.

Nashville Computer Guru Victor O'Rourke says, "We just have a lot of information that's vulnerable and it keeps on growing. And without us attacking it, we're gonna get attacked."

Veterans Affairs, national intelligence and the postal service have all been breached in recent months.

And there have been more than 300 attempts to hack healthcare.gov in the past year.

LogicForce Consultant Jim KempVanEe says, "Once those people have that information that it's out there, they really -- they own you."

KempVanEe says the only way to really protect yourself is with strong passwords.

Change those passwords often and make them things that no one could easily learn about you.

Meanwhile, the GAO continues to investigate these government agencies and has found these attacks not only becoming more common but also more damaging and disruptive.

Congressman Blackburn, who serves on the Privacy and Data Security Task Force, says there is legislation she hopes to get passed this year requiring these agencies to keep our information safe.