According to the doctrine of constitutional avoidance, the court should seek to interpret a statute in order to avoid a constitutional question.

According to the doctrine of constitutional avoidance, the court should seek to interpret a statute in order to avoid a constitutional question.

In my previous posts on, I addressed the statutory interpretation of the text of the Affordable Care Act and the impact of Chevron deference on the case. In this post, I will review what may be the argument that is most appealing to the conservative justices of the court which would lead to a favorable result for the government, the doctrine of constitutional avoidance to avoid a federalism issue—specifically the

The argument is well presented in the amicus brief (PDF) of 22 states urging the upholding of the IRS rule that provides that the tax credit subsidies of Section 36(b) of the tax code, promulgated by ACA, are available on the federal exchanges. Let's start with the doctrine of constitutional avoidance. The State amici argue:



“A statute should be interpreted in a way that avoids placing its constitutionality in doubt.”[cite omitted] The constitutional-doubt canon “militates against not only those interpretations that would render the statute unconstitutional but also those that would even raise serious questions of constitutionality.” [cite omitted]

When Congress enacts cooperative-federalism programs, the States are entitled to clear notice about the conditions to which they have agreed. [cite omitted] The Court in Pennhurst State School & Hospital v. Halderman [cite omitted] described that clear-statement rule this way: [L]egislation enacted pursuant to the spending power is much in the nature of a contract: in return for federal funds, the States agree to comply with federally imposed conditions. The legitimacy of Congress’ power to legislate under the spending power thus rests on whether the State voluntarily and knowingly accepts the terms of the “contract.” There can, of course, be no knowing acceptance if a State is unaware of the conditions or is unable to ascertain what is expected of it. Accordingly, if Congress intends to impose a condition on the grant of federal moneys, it must do so unambiguously. By insisting that Congress speak with a clear voice, we enable the States to exercise their choice knowingly, cognizant of the consequences of their participation. [Cite omitted.]

This is an uncontroversial observation. So what is the "constitutional infirmity" that the challengers' argument presents? It is the. Theexplain:So there are the doctrines of constitutional avoidance and the constitutional infirmity that are implicated in. Where do the arguments take us? I'll explore on the flip.